The Oldest Book with the Newest Message.
AN ADDRESS: Delivered by the Right Honourable the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. R. G. Menzies, at the Town Hall, Melbourne, on the occasion of/the Centenary Thanksgiving Meeting of the British and Foreign Bible Society, Victoria, on the 15 July, 1940. RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES&nbsp; M.P.
I just want to occupy your time very, very briefly in telling you, in my own fashion two or three reasons why I regard it as a great privilege to be here on this Centenary occasion, why I regard it as a great privilege to be associated with your celebration of the work of the Society which, in the last 100 odd years, has done work for the world of the most distinctive and indeed unique character. And all my reasons, of course like yours, must go back not so much to the day we celebrate as to the Book we celebrate. I believe that I can say to you and that I can say it for you and for many hundreds of thousands of people that the minds of men have gone back to this great Book more in these last few months than they have for many years past.
I am able to stand here tonight and say this is no mere formality that I should come here, but it is the genuine expression of a genuine sharing with you of thankfulness and enthusiasm for this occasion. There are good reasons that one might give for one's interest in this Book. Ii I just want to mention, very briefly, three of them and I do not want to it mention them in their order of importance.
The first of these reasons is that I believe that this English Bible of ours properly read, properly understood, is the greatest fountain of enthusiasm –which one could discover. I never read it without feeling stirred by it, and I s; never read it without feeling that my imagination has been stirred by it. There is, I believe, no book printed which has such an amazing sweep, which can t take you back so rapidly in such an illuminating way over centuries, over generations of mankind, over almost the entire history of mankind. It is a great thing, you know, to be able to extract from the printed word just that kind of enthusiasm. I remember, and I thought of it tonight when His Grace t) made some reference to Cambridge, the last time I visited Cambridge I went td into a place he knows very well, the Fitzwilliam, and there, wandering around this great museum of treasures, I found under a little cover in a glass frame the manuscript of Keats's "Ode to a Nightingale," the manuscript written in a fair hand on a sheet of notepaper. And, as I looked at it and saw that immortal a couplet of his;
"hathCharmed magic casements, opening on the foam of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn."&nbsp;
and saw a little alteration in it in Keats's own handwriting. &nbsp;I, who had read it all the poetry of Keats, felt, for the first time, that I had come near to him as a man, I had seen his very handwriting just the same sort of stirring in your mind and heart that you get if you go as I have been privileged to go, and see hanging in a frame on one of the walls of "Chequers," the residence of the Prime Ministers of England, that letter from Oliver Cromwell in which he said, you remember, "The Lord made them as chaff before our swords." And I get just that kind of quickening of the imagination when I look back over those pages of history which are the pages of the Bible that we are discussing tonight.
My second reason for being glad to be here tonight is that this great Book has given to us, more than any other book and more than any man, the language that we speak. True it is that Tyndale and Coverdale, and the waters, the editors, the translators of the authorised version know none of r these fancy Latin words we use today. They had never heard of "de-contaminate- nation:" they had certainly never heard of "re-decanted in at ion;" they had never heard of a thing being "finalised;" they had never heard any of these abominations that we make in these days of ours. They spoke and they understood just that sturdy Anglo-Saxon speech that Shakespeare understood and spoke. Ai and yet,-with all the simplicity of their language, they had a capacity to stir the pulse in a few sentences that no other writers have ever had since. This is the great repository of our tongue, and, if this world by some melancholy mischance, became a world of black and gloomy atheists tomorrow, they would a still need to read the Bible if they wanted to understand the speech of the English people.
My third reason, and my greatest reason, is that, with all the influence that &nbsp;this Book has had upon the imagination of our race, upon the speech of our race, its supreme influence has been upon the character of our race. It must indeed have been very seldom in the history of man that a speech should of itself have been the instrument for moulding character, but, just as the Bible taught the English their own English so it wove into the fabric of the English character that profound realisation of the existence of God, that profound belief in -the value of the moral judgment that has made our race the greatest race in the world, and that alone can keep our race a great race. I am not going to say nor would you believe me if I said it that we are without blemish in our history, that we have never as a nation done mean things or dishonest things. Of course we have; many times have we fallen short of a standard, but we have always set the standard for ourselves and we have always made that standard high. We may occasionally have disappointed those to whom we had given our word. We have never, I believe, wilfully broken our word. To us the international contract, the promise given, have their ultimate sanction in the moral depths of our nature. Our international obligations have never been mere obligations of law; they have been obligations binding upon the conscience. We have on all occasions endeavoured to act as decent and straight and honourable people should act. Our judgment has been a judgment founded upon an appreciation of the moral nature of man, and not merely a judgment of expediency founded upon the strength or the weakness of our opponents. That is a big thing to say: I say it without any form of boasting: I hope rather to understate it as I say it. But I believe that if there is one thing that has informed and coloured the policy of the British people throughout the centuries it has been that beating in upon their consciences, upon their hearts, that has been wrought by the Great Book, the centenary of whose publication in this State we are celebrating tonight.
I think that it was Matthew Arnold who, in discussing the difference between the Greeks and the Hebrews, pointed out what is indeed true, that to the Greeks knowledge was the thing, clearness of thought was the thing. They loved dialectics for their own sake. They loved the crystal quality of a clear mind. But to the Hebrews the quality of thought was never so important as the quality of action, the quality of conduct. And we British people, standing today at a time of great trial in our history may, I believe, say with all humility that confused as we may have been, muddled as we may have been, we have always attached supreme importance to the quality of a man's conduct rather than the mere quality of a man's mind. If that is true, then we did not derive it simply from some strange atmosphere that existed over the British Isles; I believe we derived it from a Book which, crystal clear as it is except to those who seek to confuse it by straw-splitting, has at the same time elevated to a supreme place in life the test of what a man does rather than the test of what he says or how he thinks, the test of conduct, and, by that test at this hour, we shall stand or fall.
None of us has any doubt that in this war the character of the world is at issue, and that issue will be determined by the character of us, I cannot put somebody else's character into the scale today and so let that weigh down the scale for virtue. I must put my own, and you must put your own, into the scale, and unless the sum of our character today justifies us in saying that the character of the world is at issue in this war then we do not deserve to win the war. But, if the sum does justify that claim, then I have no doubt that we shall win the war because, in that event, God will be on our side. Now, I just want to conclude by saying this to you. I said something just now about reading the Book. The other night I was reading it, and reading it, as you may very well imagine, with more than half a mind on the troubles of these days which are perhaps in a special sense troubles of mine because I have great responsibilities, and in reading it I came across a passage which contained, I suppose, the oldest story of the boyhood of any of us, the story of David and Goliath so well known that we hardly bother to go back and read it. But I went back and read it, and, for the rest of this war, it is my text. As I think of almost all Europe armed at this moment to attack the little green country of Great Britain, and when I think of all that is at stake in it, I think you will-agree with me that this old story will bear repetition. I wonder if I might just read a few words of it? I shall not read it all, although I have always loved the description of the Philistine with his lance like a weaver's beam. But will read this:
"And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in the shepherd's bag which he had, even in his scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near to the Philistine. And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man that bare the shield went before him. And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and withal of a fair countenance. And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comes to me with staves And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field.
Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comes to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a javelin: but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou has defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hand; and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel.
It is a great privilege, ladies and gentlemen, for a Prime Minister of a Christian country engaged in what, strangely enough, it is bound to believe a Christian war, to come along on an occasion like this and say a few words to himself and to you about the oldest Book with the newest message in it for the sons of men.


“The British Commonwealth of Nations in International Affairs."
By the Rt. Hon. R.G. Menzies
Roy Milne Memorial Lecture, Adelaide, June 26th, 1950.
To deal adequately with this tremendous subject is a task alike beyond my powers and your patience. What I propose to do, therefore, is to select a few important questions and to offer some answers to them. In both question and answer I will speak for myself, and perhaps for many others. I am not here to make some party pronouncement; nor will I attempt to deal with certain current matters which are in the trusted hands of my colleague, the Minister for External Affairs. But it may be of value to expose to you my own basic ideas, not as briefly as either you or I would desire, but at any rate as clearly as possible.
WHAT IS THE PRESENT STRUCTURE OF THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH OF NATIONS?
It is not useful to discuss the merits or otherwise of the Constitutional Declaration made by the Prime Ministers in 1948, a declaration having particular reference to the position of India, and by which the Republic of India was recognised as a member of a Commonwealth in which the King was "the head."
Such discussions may be fruitful for the historian, and are not without interest to the constitutional theorist, but when they are retrospective they can contribute little to the work of statesmanship.
But at least we should not do as we so frequently do-look the other way and pretend that nothing has happened. Our celebrated British hostility to deductive logic has its uses. We have, unlike some Continental peoples, much preferred to establish our general principles inductively, that is, by taking one practical step at a time until the pattern of our-action becomes clear.
It is vastly important that we should understand this characteristic, which is to be seen clearly in the development of the English common law and in the development of Parliamentary responsible government. It is because of our instinctively inductive approach that we have resisted in large measure the codification of the law.
The Continental mind runs much more easily to the deductive process; it is disposed to fit events into a pre-determined pattern; it has a feeling for codification. It is, if I may engage in an aside, one of my own personal anxieties that in the course of this century we have ourselves become more and more involved in a series of highly-complicated and elaborate paper arrangements which cut right across the habits of our own minds and indeed- the genius of our own history.
If it were not for the inductive character of our minds there would have been no Empire and certainly no British Commonwealth, for each was a growth from precedent to precedent and in no sense represented a logical conclusion from fixed premises.
Still in spite of all this it is a good thing that every now and then we should look at the pattern so that we may at least realise how far we have gone.
There was a time-and only a few years ago-when His Majesty the King presided over an Empire which included the British Commonwealth (the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and. South Africa), the Empire of India, and an extensive colonial Empire, together with Eire in a transitional stage. This Empire had racial diversity but structural unity under the Crown. The King-one King-was the head of each State for all purposes, external or internal. The British Empire could as recently at 1944 be described by both Lord Halifax and. General Smuts as one of the four "great powers." This, I have always thought, represented a sound interpretation of the famous Balfour formula of 1926 which described the Dominions as "autonomous communities within the British Empire, equal in status, in no way subordinate one to another in any aspect of their domestic or external affairs though united by a common allegiance to the Crown and freely associated as members of the British Commonwealth of Nations.
Three of the phrases in this celebrated statement are occasionally forgotten. They are:-
"within the British Empire”;
“a common allegiance to the Crown"; and
“British Commonwealth of Nations.”
After all, though the phrase "British Commonwealth" has come into widespread use, it was, as we see, declared in 1926 to be a Commonwealth within an Empire. The formula thus made it clear that in spite of the legal independence of the major portions of the structure, it was still a structure possessing an integral character and that whatever diversity existed was not consistent with the unity of the whole for major international purposes.
But great changes have occurred. 
There are some enviable people to whom a formula represents finality. But the truth is that for better or for worse (and I will raise no controversy about it) the old structural integrity of the Empire has gone. It has been succeeded by structural variety. It may, if the process goes on, give place to a purely functional association based upon friendship and common interest but necessarily lacking the old high instincts and instantaneous cohesion which sprang from the fact that we were, all over the British world, as indeed we remain in the old Dominions, the King's subjects and the King's men. The King is in relation to the Republic of India, no longer possessed of internal juristic significance. As the citizens of India now enter upon Republican self-government with a President and under the Parliamentary leadership of their own distinguished statesman, Pandit Nehru, they are for all internal purposes severed from allegiance to the Crown. There is no King in India. But for purposes of external association India remains a member the British Commonwealth of Nations of which the King is, since the 1948 decision, declared to be "the head."
We may compare the position of Pakistan where the King is still represented by a Governor-General and is still through him the head of the Government.
Come nearer home to Australia. With us the King is not merely the symbol and head of an external association but is himself a real presence in our local self-government. The Governor-General is his personal representative. The King, makes our statutes by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Representatives. I am His Majesty's Australian Prime Minister. Mr. Chifley is His Majesty's Leader of the Opposition. The courts are the King's courts and it is the King's writ which issues from them. We have an appeal to His Majesty in Council from certain decisions of our own courts. Our National Anthem is still (peace to the broadcasters) "God Save The King." Every Member of Parliament takes the Oath of Allegiance. We are royal, not republican; British, wherever we may be.
Here then we have a new diversity indeed. Our Australian relationship to the United Kingdom, to Canada, to New Zealand, to most of the British Commonwealth countries, is structural or organic. The keystone of the structure is a common allegiance to a common King. The relationship of India to the United. Kingdom is in large measure functional; an operative friendship based upon powerful elements, sincerely valued by the Indian people, but not identical with our own.
Doubtless this development which I have sought to describe was inevitable. It is the duty of those of us who help to guide public thinking not to spend our days in vain regrets, but to do all we can to preserve the many good things that are left and carefully nurture those new associations which can and must be of such service to the world.
HAS THE BRITISH COMMONWEALTH BEEN OUT-MODED BY THE UNITED NATIONS?
In considering whether our sincere support for the United Nations, its Charter and its agencies, renders the British Commonwealth association less significant, it is as well to look back for a moment.
At the end of the first world war the League of Nations was devised as a means for keeping the peace. It failed. There were many reasons for this, which time will not permit me to discuss. One, however, was so important as to deserve special mention. Whenever the strain came on, as in the case of Abyssinia, the League of Nations failed because, though its paper obligations were vast, its resources were practically non-existent. The League failed, not because it tried to do too little but because it tried to do too much. It was established upon the basis of contract between independent sovereignties. But the truth is that the only effectiveness which an international contract possesses is either that which arises from the goodwill or sense of honest obligation of the contracting parties, or that which can be physically enforced. And the means of physical enforcement are to be found only in the strength of those parties against whose will the contract has been broken.
I believe that it is clear that in the few years before the second war an almost fatal illusion about the strength of the League of Nations was permeating the democratic mind. At the same time the so-called intellectuals of the world began to insert into the heads of too many people an utterly false dichotomy. “Are you for power politics?" they said, "Or are you for collective security?" When some realistic person spoke up for armaments behind the Covenant he was promptly told that the talk must be of disarmament, and that those who spoke otherwise were mere war-mongers. Yet the truth was that an unarmed League of Nations was not only impotent against but also an invitation to an armed aggressor.
Once again, at the end, of the second world war, there was and is a powerful world feeling against its repetition and an earnest desire to find some effective instrument of peace. An attempt to forge such an instrument was made at San Francisco. Remembering the powerlessness of the League of Nations in grave affairs, the draftsman at San Francisco determined that in the new Charter the United Nations should, as one advocate said, be given "teeth." Accordingly they inserted Article 43 of the Charter, under which all members of the United Nations undertake to make available to the Security Council, on its call and in accordance with a special agreement or agreements, armed forces and other facilities for the purpose of maintaining international peace and security. The agreement or agreements; are to govern the numbers and types of forces, their degree of readiness and general location, and the nature of the facilities to be provided. This scheme, it will be seen, amounts to no more than a "contract to make a contract," and in fact no steps have yet been taken under it. It remains to be seen whether member nations will in fact stand up to this potential obligation if the circumstances at any given moment render it politically unpalatable. The real difficulty about a provision of this kind, to give armed force to the United Nations, is that the membership is so extensive, and the obligations which may be incurred can therefore vary so greatly in both time and place, that it will be in very many instances difficult or even impossible to arouse effective national support for the international action planned. It is quite true that, with a clear realisation of this defect, the Western European powers and the United States of America have more recently put forward great efforts and shown both imagination and realism by formulating the Atlantic Pact and arranging defensive co-operation in Western Europe. But, though such arrangements are usually, for the sake of conformity, described as "regional arrangements within the structure of the Charter," they can be much more accurately described as groupings of power by a limited number of nations for mutual defensive purposes.
In brief, they are not in any real sense built upon the foundation of the Charter, but are a recognition of the inadequacy of the machinery provided by the Charter.
Let me turn to another aspect of this vitally important problem.
It is conceded, even by those who are most willing to claim that the Security Council has great achievements to its credit, that it has been heavily crippled by the existence and misuse of the veto; that is, the provision in Article 27 of the Charter which says that decisions of the Security Council on non-procedural matters shall be made by an affirmative vote of seven members, including the concurring votes of the permanent members-one of which is, of course, the Soviet Union. But I feel strongly that, while there is no doubt that this veto power has been abused, it is a blunder to think of this abuse as something which is merely related to an Article in the Charter or which could be simply remedied by an alteration in the language of the Charter. If there were no veto provision in the Charter at all, there would still be one in fact.
Let us suppose that the Security Council met, with a plain provision for a majority decision, whatever the subject might be. And let us suppose that, upon a matter of grave international importance which might lead to war, most of the members of the Security Council were inclined to make a decision and to authorise or institute measures of enforcement in support of it. Would they be disposed to carry the matter to a vote and therefore to action if, say, the Soviet Union were in opposition? 
Or take another case:
Let us assume that the important matter involved a majority decision by the Security Council that one of the great powers was guilty of an act of aggression or of a grave breach of international law. Would, the Security Council, even if free to do so, make a majority decision and set about enforcing it against that great power?
If the answer to this question is in the affirmative, then it represents a notable advance. But at the same time it must be pointed out that under such circumstances the forces to be employed would be the national forces of the great powers concerned, and not the international force of the United Nations, for no such force is as yet available--or even in, distant sight.
I find it very difficult to believe that the great powers (and, after all, the small ones have little to say to this question of enforcement) are as yet within measurable distance of entering into an arrangement under which any one of them may be declared at fault by the others and, forced into a course of action contrary to its own will.
This of course is basically the reason why the great powers insisted upon the veto provisions as a condition of their participating in the Charter.
We will do better to think of the veto problem as evidence of the continued existence of a strong nationalist state of mind than as some defect in a written document.
One authoritative statement has been made “that Australia was prepared to accept the veto in respect of enforcement- action, but could see no reason whatever why it should be applied in respect of the peaceful settlement of disputes."
This is an extremely significant statement, because the acceptance of the veto in respect of enforcement action (an acceptance which is, I entirely agree, in line with what we may call the real facts of international life) means two things.
In the first place, it means that no great power, that is, no permanent member of the Security Council, can be restrained from: aggression by the United Nations, because no decision in relation to that aggression will ever be given by the Security Council at all.
This means that the force someday to be placed at the disposal of the Security Council under the Article to which I have referred need not be a great one, for a great “police force” would be needed only to restrain a great power, and. the restraint of the great power is, ex hypothesi, not within the jurisdiction of the United Nations at all.
In the second place, it means, by inevitable consequence, that aggressive action by-a great power must, if it is to be restrained at all, be restrained by some other great power or powers acting not under the Charter but independent of it. This, of course, involves the conclusion that the great powers will and must continue to maintain armed forces of a purely national character and for purely national purposes.
It may be that the day will come when all the nations of the world, meeting in a General Assembly of the United Nations, will elect and control a Security Council as an executive; will act upon the decisions of that Council; will accept a body of international law with that substantial obedience which we now accord to the law in our own lands; will have alleged breaches of that law adjudicated upon by the permanent Court; and will treat as commonplace the enforcement of the Court's decision by the international policeman.
In that state of the world, aggressive and independent nationalism will have come to an end; national sovereignties will have subsided into world citizenships; and national groupings of whatever kind will be both antiquated and irrelevant.
But that day is not yet, nor, if we are to be frank with ourselves, can we pretend that we even see it approaching.
It can be said with confidence that in the last two years we have seen nationalistic movements come into powerful development in many countries which were previously content to be dependent or controlled.
Thus, in the brief period that has elapsed, since the cessation of fighting we have seen India and Pakistan come into independent existence, with a great and at times violent upsurge of national and racial feeling; we have seen a similar development in Burma; we in Australia have been the not very neutral witnesses of a similar movement conducted for the formation of an Indonesian Republic. All over the world there is a stirring among races and peoples.
So far from that stirring representing an agitation to create an international state, to reduce national sovereignty, and to accept the authority of international bodies, it has represented nothing so much as an old-fashioned-though newly expressed-determination to insist upon the prerogative of each race and community to govern its own affairs and, where necessary, to throw off the yoke of the foreigner.
These unquestionable facts are no very happy augury for the oncoming of the international era.
Let us now turn to consider whether the United Nations, representing a lofty idealism on the part of many of its creators, but handicapped and. limited as it is by the other matters to which I have referred, reduces in any way the urgent importance of the British Empire to British people.
Perhaps it will aid clarity of thought and expression on this urgent matter if I set out what appear to me to be three convincing reasons why the British Empire must remain our chief international preoccupation:

I have already discussed the vexed question of the veto on the Security Council and of the striking limitation which it imposes upon either the need or the capacity of the United Nations to maintain substantial international military forces. 

The stark result of these considerations can be set down in a few sentences. 
History has shown that great wars which threaten mankind are wars which involve great powers. If a great power is once again to assume the role of aggressor, an international law-breaker, resistance to that power must be provided by the strength of some other great power or powers. 
As that resistance cannot, by reason of the Charter, be organised or controlled by the Security Council, it must be organised or controlled outside the Council. In other words, the matter must go as though there were no United Nations at all. This being so, a strong, well-knit and well-armed British Empire is just as essential to-day as far-seeing men believed it was in 1938.

The San Francisco Conference deliberately separated the United Nations from the Peace Settlements necessary to liquidate the world war. 

If I may quote Dr. Evatt's words:
“It was never intended that the United. Nations should be charged with the responsibility for negotiating and concluding Peace Settlements with Germany, Austria, Japan, Italy, or the allied German satellites …. The Charter was designed to create an international organisation which could maintain peace in the future; not an organisation to finish off the war or to make the Peace Settlements.”
This enormously important consideration has been tragically overlooked, not only by some extravagant critics of the United Nations, but also by most of its more extravagant champions. There has been a widespread disposition to say that the United, Nations has failed because both in Europe and in East Asia the just settlement of the problems of Germany and of Japan has not yet really been approached.
I point out that while there are grave defects in the United Nations' conception and structure, the blame for the state of affairs in Europe and in East Asia cannot properly be attached to it.
The extravagant friends of the United Nations have themselves contributed to this misapprehension by their single-minded attempts to concentrate public interest upon the doings of the United Nations as if it were the one instrument for the pacification of the world and as if we therefore owed to it our first thought and presumably our first loyalty.
The simple truth is that if the Peace Settlements are not the function of the United Nations, those Settlements must be negotiated and achieved outside the United Nations. This in turn means that the Settlement of Europe and the Settlement of Japan must be a matter between the victorious belligerents on the one hand (all of them, not some of them!) and the defeated powers on the other.
Once we rid our minds of the rather confused notion that the Security Council or the General Assembly of the United Nations has something to do with the re-settlement of Europe and of East Asia, we will see much more vividly the elementary truth that, to take the settlement of Europe as an example, that settlement cannot be achieved with either the speed or justice which it merits unless both the United States and the British Empire are able to go into the negotiations with the maximum of strength and authority.
It is useless to think that we solve problems by ignoring them. If the British Empire is to be regarded merely as a series of separate even if respectable fragments, then inevitably the settlement of Europe will tend- to become a contest between the Soviet Union on the one hand and the United States on the other, with the European powers little more than pawns in the game, and with Great Britain acting more or less precariously as an intermediary.
But if the British Empire in truth acts as a great power, then it can not only alter the character of the contest, but it can make an immense contribution to European peace.
It is, I believe, essential to the welfare of Europe and therefore of mankind that the British Empire voice in the European Settlement should be both strong and clear. For if the United Kingdom is to speak only for itself, if it is to go to the conference table weakened to that extent, absorbed by the domestic problems of its own economic crisis, it will suffer inevitably from what Kipling called "the webbed and inward-turning eye," and what should- be a settlement will tend to become an old-fashioned bilateral contest between the Communist autocracy of Russia and the democratic Capitalism of the United States.
I would not be thought to deprecate in any way the immense interest and the crucial importance of the United States in these matters. That amazing country has twice in our lifetimes come to the rescue of freedom in Europe and therefore has, in relation to Europe, a vital interest and a noble mission. But she is not a European country in the sense that France is, or in the sense that the United Kingdom is. Britain, steeped in European history and politics, wise and experienced over the centuries, can contribute, as perhaps no other power can, to a just settlement.
Indeed, it seems unlikely that there will be a good and lasting European settlement without a vital and powerful contribution from her. If that contribution is to be made, it is quite clear that there must be the maximum integration of Empire effort, so that not only may her internal economic problems be relieved but her strength in the Council Chamber undoubted.
Politics, whether international or national, is an intensely practical business. 
We should constantly remind ourselves of Burke's celebrated, dictum that we need "to model our principles to our duties and our situation; to be fully persuaded that all virtue which is impracticable is spurious."
And, practical politics, I dare assert, is concerned with the problem of how to cope with the next ten or twenty years so strongly and wisely that there will be a real foundation of peace upon which a genuine international organisation can be built.
I return to my earlier statement that a false dichotomy has been set up between collective security and power politics. The truth is that in relation to the making of the Peace Settlements, power politics will be just as necessary as it was for the winning of the war. If we understand it aright we will realise that so far from being an element hostile to the United Nations, it may turn out to be the most effective guarantee of the true interests of that infant body.

To concentrate completely upon the affairs of the United Nations to the exclusion of those other urgent interests which we have in the British Empire may well lead us to regard ourselves in our various parts of the Empire as quite separate. The moment we do this, the moment we accustom ourselves to that complete independence of action which appears to be postulated by the United Nations structure, we will more and more find ourselves afraid of acting as an Empire group for fear of provoking other groups and so rendering the United Nations unworkable.

After all, if we are to be told that such national groupings are inconsistent with the United Nations, our choice becomes the grim one of abandoning those national groupings or of abandoning the United Nations. If this be really the choice, then British people can have little doubt as to how they will resolve it-unless they are really existing in that strange ecstasy of illusion in which they are prepared to drop the substance for the shadow.
A splendid illustration of this matter can be found in the present position in Malaya, where the British Government and Forces are seeking to deal with a species of insurrection which is not nationalist but Communist and draws its inspiration and direction from Chinese Communism. Australia has decided, as you know, to render certain Air Force assistance. Now, if it were a foreign power which held Malaya, would we assist? Our interest would in one respect be identical, for Malaya and Singapore lie across the path of Communist expansion in South-East Asia whether they are British or not. Yet everybody will concede that what would have been a difficult and epoch-making decision if Malaya were non-British was, in the present circumstances, regarded universally in Australia as not only right but inevitable.
In all these considerations we can perceive a clear warning based upon the most practical of considerations, that we must not allow either the existence or the particular structure of the United Nations to run counter to our basic need, never greater than it Is to-day, for a strong, well-knit and mutually supporting British Empire.
IS A CONCERTED BRITISH FOREIGN POLICY POSSIBLE?
This question cannot be answered with any satisfaction unless we clear our minds on the problem of what are the products of a foreign policy.
I will not attempt an exhaustive answer, but I would without hesitation say that the business of foreign policy certainly includes making and cultivating international friendships, avoiding war without sacrificing vital principles, and last but not least, taking every possible step to see that, if war should come, we enter it with powerful friends and with some reasonable human assurance of victory. It is indeed, almost an academic question to ask whether on great matters the countries of the British Empire should have a common policy. The simple military truth is that there can be no security for the democratic world unless not only all the British countries, but also the United States of America and the nations of Western Europe are at one in their defensive arrangements and in the policies to which those arrangements give expression. In other words, my proposition is not that it is desirable to have common policies, but that it is vital to have them.
It is true that we should distinguish between those policies which affect all the world and those which are purely regional in their character. For example, I should be the last to deny, since my own Government has affirmed it, that Australia has a perfect right to announce its views on the future of New Guinea and to back those views by all rational means within its power. This is in no sense inconsistent with our belief that in relation to great world issues we are a part of the British family and believe that we must all act as members of that family.
Again, we in Australia have particular interests in South East Asia and in the South West Pacific, and upon these our views are bound to be strongly held and are entitled to be vigorously expressed. But nobody need assume from these facts that we are cutting ourselves adrift from the main currents of world affairs, or that we regard ourselves as uninfluenced by them.
In the big matters we are, and must be, and. are proud to be, intimately associated with Great Britain, with our sister Dominions, with the United States and with the democratic powers of Western Europe. There is perhaps some natural disposition on the part of people so remote from the affairs of Europe to suppose that we have no vital interest in them. The strongest corrective to this point of view is to recall that twice in this century we have been involved in world wars, each of which began in Europe. To-day the only real threat to a third world war comes from the politics, the point of view and the aggressive actions of the Soviet Union. Europe therefore still remains a matter of vital concern to us. Again, it is worth recalling that when the 1914/18 war broke out, the Emperor of Germany was shocked to discover with what unanimity the countries of the British Empire came together to resist his attack. Hitler fell into the same error. Unaware as he was of the psychology and spirit of his possible opponents he did not realise that, whatever the Constitutional lawyers might be saying, there is an instinctive unity of feeling among the British peoples which displays itself instantly in times of trial.
Once again I am disposed to believe, or to fear, that the rulers of the Soviet Union may mistake our political differences in our own lands for some spirit of separatism. There could be no greater blunder. We have lived long enough as a nation to know that the peace of the world is indivisible
Obviously I cannot within the necessary limits of one lecture cover the ground, but there are two points of significance that I would like to make:- 
One, there could be no greater danger for a country than to allow its foreign policy and its defence policy to get out of harmony. We, for example, in Australia are and have been for many years committed, to Empire defence co-operation. It is an open secret that our defence planning is based upon close consultation with the other British countries, and that in the preparations we make we always have regard to the preparations being made by the other British countries. This has been so under Governments of various colours. The Rocket Range project, for example, established under the Chifley administration, represents a pooling of knowledge and executive cooperation between Great Britain and Australia.
But Empire defence co-operation seems to me to become comparatively pointless if we have not, on the major matters, a common Empire foreign policy.
We hear a great deal in these days about rights of neutrality. But how could Australia, for example, co-ordinate her defence plans with another country if, when the time of crisis came, that other country stayed neutral.
I regret to say that for some years up to and including, 1949 there was a dangerous divorce in Australia between foreign policy and defence policy. Foreign policy was based, first and foremost, upon the Charter of the United Nations and, as I believe, only in a secondary sense upon the British Empire. Yet our defence policy has had no real connection with the United Nations, which has no military strength anyhow. It has, on the contrary, been strictly related to those particular countries in the world who can be expected to be allies in the unhappy event of a third world war.
Two, the other matter which I would like to emphasise relates to the problem of the machinery of consultation between the British nations. This is a necessary consideration, because we cannot hope to have on great matters common policies without the closest and most realistic consultation.
Nobody in Australia wants British foreign policy to be solely controlled by Whitehall, though, after proper exchange of views, it may well be announced from Whitehall with the greatest practical effect.
It would be foolish for us to suppose that Great Britain does not possess a vital interest in South East Asia and the South West Pacific. Ours may be more direct, more immediate in point of space or time, but hers is at the same time real and abiding
Similarly, it is a mistake (into which some statesmen at Westminster occasionally fall) to assume that Australia has no real interest in Europe, in the German Peace Settlement, in dealings with the Soviet Union. The more I think about these matters the more satisfied I am that we ought to come back hard to the central truth that wherever we are in the world we are one people, with one set of vital interests.
It might be useful for me to point out that there has been in recent years a remarkable development of international thought in Australia on this point. You may recall that, when the Lyons Government in 1935 put through the Commonwealth Parliament an Act to impose sanctions against Italy in respect to the Abyssinian affair, there was vigorous opposition by leading members of the then Opposition-broadly upon the ground that Australia should not become entangled in overseas affairs. It was said that although we were parties to the Covenant of the League of Nations, that Covenant had become largely a dead letter and, in any event, our best service to peace was to look after our own business.
This was, as I thought, and still think, a curiously isolationist view. Yet, in 1943, before the war ended-, the same party's Minister for External Affairs made a statement to the House of Representatives in which he said:
"Australia cannot safely limit her interests even to the gigantic area of the Pacific. Twice Australia has taken a prominent part in a world war that commenced because of European questions. With Britain vitally involved so at once were we. Our concern with Europe cannot be limited to the waging of wars. We must have some say in taking steps to prevent wars and in changing the conditions which are likely to cause wars. In short, we cannot contract out of Europe. The reason is plain. The centre of the British Commonwealth and Empire is in Europe. From Europe have come all our immigrants. In peace-time much of our trade was with Europe. Our culture is European. European colonies are our neighbours in the Pacific and one of the three great powers of Continental Europe, the Soviet Union, is also a world power and will be a great force in the Pacific of to-morrow. Therefore the peace, order and good government of Europe are vital to us. We are greatly concerned in the European settlement of the future. We are firmly of opinion that the time has passed when either the peace or prosperity of mankind can be regarded as divisible or one continent or one nation can be treated in isolation from another."
Now to some people these words point to the new mechanism of the United Nations. To me, for reasons discussed elsewhere in this address, they point first and. foremost to the concerting of policies and plans first with British Empire countries, and second with the other western democracies.
At this stage it is usually said that, good as it may be to aim at one Empire foreign policy, the aim is impracticable. For, it is said-, the difficulties of consultation are so great and the local susceptibilities of the various Dominions so acute, that effectively unitary action is not possible. Speaking as one with some knowledge of theory and practice on this question, I reject this gloomy argument out of hand.
There is at present a good deal of machinery through which views are exchanged- between the Dominions and the United Kingdom. Most Dominions maintain High Commissioners in the other Dominions and in Great Britain, and these appointments are reciprocated. An able High- Commissioner will, not only ex officio but by virtue of his own personality, establish close and' confidential communication with the Government to which he is accredited.
Great masses of cables are exchanged between what is now the Commonwealth Relations Office in London and the various Dominions, though in my past experience these communications tended to be so excessively diplomatic in form that they lost some of their reality and nervous strength.
Australia has for many years maintained in London a Liaison Officer between its External Affairs Department and the Foreign Office.
Between the two wars, first class work was done by the Committee of Imperial Defence on Empire defence problems, the normal representative of any Dominion being its High Commissioner, with the occasional addition of a visiting Prime Minister or Minister from his own Dominion.
Occasionally, but irregularly, there are meetings of Prime Ministers.
Between times, Dominions Ministers visit London on matters of urgent importance.
Occasionally, but, alas, all too rarely, some Minister from the United Kingdom will visit a Dominion. But even when this has happened, his return to London has on occasion been shortly followed by his translation to some other sphere of usefulness.
All these matters add up to a substantial amount of communication
Yet I remain convinced that no system of consultation can be regarded as adequate which has left many people in Australia, including myself, satisfied that decisions of great moment In this country have occasionally been presented to the Australian Government and to the Australian people as faits accomplis.
In 1946 there was a partial meeting of Prime Ministers in London which produced a statement which expressed, with modified, rapture, a general approval of the existing methods of consultation. The statement included a significant observation that-
"While all are willing to consider and adopt practical proposals for developing the existing system it is agreed that the methods now practised are preferable to any rigid centralised machinery."
In this reference to “centralised machinery" one sees the traditional opposition to anything that might even appear to involve control from Downing Street.
It is a point of view which I must respect, since it is advanced by men of great service and eminence. But I find it very difficult to appreciate. If six Australian Premiers meet with the Prime Minister of Australia at Canberra to discuss matters of common interest which do not fall exclusively either -within the Commonwealth or the States' sphere, nobody reasonably suggests that the fact that the meeting occurs in Canberra involves of itself Canberra control. But if there is a real fear, why not hold- Imperial Conferences in turn in the various Dominions as well as in London?
However, the argument for a permanent Empire secretariat, an argument which in the case of Australia goes back at least to Alfred Deakin's presentation of it in 1907, may, having regard to the 1946 conversations, be treated as temporarily out of Court.
Is there, then, no alternative? I believe that there is such an alternative, and that it can concurrently take several forms. I suggest that, just as before the war, we had. a Committee of Imperial Defence so we could, with great usefulness, set up a Committee on Imperial Foreign Policy, to sit in London and to be attended by the Foreign Secretary representing the United Kingdom Government and by the High Commissioners or visiting Ministers representing each Dominion.
It should sit regularly, and its work should be regarded as of major importance. I suggest also that as the 1946 fear was of "rigid centralised machinery" we should adopt the alternative and go for flexible localised machinery or, in brief, the establishment of a small British Empire secretariat in each Dominions capital.
What I have suggested on this point is very much in line with suggestions made by Mr. Paul McGuire in his recent brilliant book "Experiment in World Order." He was good enough before writing this book to discuss his proposals on this matter with me, and they command my warm approval. After all, we will best understand how to attack the problem of consultation if we first ask ourselves-“What is consultation designed to do?"
Let me endeavour to answer this question in a few sentences. Consultation is designed to produce complete mutual understanding and a community of ideas leading to common policies and concerted action. If consultation is to do this-, it must occur at the right time, that is, before decisions are made or even half-crystallised. There is nothing more irritating, as I know from- my own earlier experiences, than to be presented with some almost adopted conclusion, with a request for concurrence and, in effect, a hint that negotiations have proceeded so far that a failure to concur may prove embarrassing. If consultation is to occur early enough to be effective it is quite obvious, having regard to the state of flux in which human affairs exist, that it must possess continuity. The work of collating and exchanging facts and ideas must therefore not be merely done ad hoc but with permanency.
I know that there exists in some minds a grave fear that this integration of the Empire mind and the Empire effort, which I unhesitatingly advocate, will give rise to hostilities in other countries, and that therefore we must at all times avoid creating the impression that there is "an Empire bloc." This view seems to me to be so pusillanimous and so basically wrong that I can with difficulty discuss it with patience.
The problem is not one of lining up the countries of the British Empire against the world but of associating the countries of the British Empire in the world. My plea is not for some half-baked notion of the British Empire beating the drum and throwing out its chest and telling the rest of the world to "come on." It is a much graver and more rational notion than that. It is, in brief, that we have gone on long enough emphasising our points of difference and insisting upon our utter independence. If we devote too much of our energy much longer to this constant assertion that we are adult nations, people will merely begin to doubt whether we are grown up at all.
What we need, for all the compelling reasons which I have indicated earlier, is a re-integration of our thought and of our effort, a new vision of Empire.
IS EMPIRE UNITY INCONSISTENT WITH AMERICAN CO-OPERATION?
It is clear that a closely-knit British Commonwealth, though it will have great strength, cannot for very long stand alone. This simple but cogent truth has been demonstrated in both of the great wars in this century. We must therefore consider what is our greatest practical international problem, that of our relations with the United States. We do badly to think this problem is a simple one. There are those who seem to feel that America's colossal unitary strength makes British Empire corporate strength less important.
"The centre of gravity of democracy," they say, "has moved west. Let us accordingly re-arrange not only our policies but our point of view. Great Britain is vulnerable and economically hard-pressed. Canada is in the American orbit. South Africa is troubled and internally uneasy. The new nations of the Indian sub-continent are moving away from us. We are on the defensive in South-East Asia. Australia and New Zealand are isolated and, not rich in numbers. Let us be realistic, think less of our old Empire associations and move as far as possible into the American hemisphere." That is one view, not without some currency. It is in my opinion a pessimistic and distorted, and, therefore, unreal view.
To me it seems fantastic to suppose that a British Commonwealth which has performed such prodigies twice in the last 35 years should be as casually discarded as worn-out or purposeless. It is perhaps not an inappropriate occasion to say that, in the two great testing periods of this century, the British family of nations has demonstrated its strength and its vitality, not its weakness or its decadence.
A second view goes to the other extreme. It has been unconsciously influenced by the subtle and pervasive Communist propaganda about "American Imperialism." It says in effect that we should avoid American involvement and retain our character as a third power, independently placed, taking no sides hastily, acting as the honest broker in the disputes between the totalitarian east and the democratic West. This view, which I have encountered in some places, is a form of isolationism which has no relation to modern international life. The truth, as I see it, can be put into a few sentences. We, the British peoples of the world, need the Americans. The Americans need us. America has on two historic occasions learned that the peace of the world is not divisible. On two occasions, in a war which many of her people thought no business of theirs, she has become a belligerent and has in the final result weighed down the scales in favour of freedom. It is, therefore, idle to say to any enlightened American that what happens in Europe is no concern of his, or that what happens to Australia or New Zealand is no concern of his. He knows that predominant power means predominant responsibility. He knows that the overthrow of Great Britain would mean that domination of Europe by the common enemy and would lead to an American isolation which would be for the American people not merely ominous, but disastrous. He, therefore, knows that Great. Britain is a bastion of liberty, and Western Europe the frontier in any crucial fight. I do not for one moment believe that any responsible American leader wants to have a weak Great Britain or a weak British Empire. The best support for this view is to be found in the magnificent post-war battle by the United States, through Marshall Aid and other means, for the restoration of the other Western democracies and for the drawing of a clear line against Imperialist aggression.
Correspondingly, it is impossible to believe that there is among our own people any jealousy or resentment of America's activities. After all, America has not become our friend and defender simply for love of the countries we inhabit. On the contrary, she knows that, in the most real sense, we are the same kind of people, with the same ideas, with the same ideals, with the same high faith, with the same basic belief that governments exist for the people, that they are the servants and not the masters. It is a tragedy that the world should be divided at all; but if it is, we may at least be comforted by the recollection that it is divided between those who believe in the spirit and significance of man and those who believe in power for its own sake.
It follows from all this that the American and the British peoples have strong bonds not only of common interest but of common spiritual values. The case for our co-operation is therefore complete. That there is much work to be done before we arrive at a complete mutual understanding nobody can doubt. The special arrangements between the British peoples which found their expression in the Ottawa Agreements may sometimes seem to the American citizen to represent a policy of exclusion and almost of superiority. Yet we know that such arrangements were designed merely to develop our internal strength and give expression to our belief that prosperity within the British family must tend to-reflect itself in prosperity for the rest of the world. We, in our turn, must recognise that our British Commonwealth policies should not be pursued in such a fashion as to give rise to a feeling that we regard America as a potential enemy, either economic or military. Enmity between the British Commonwealth and the United States would indeed be disastrous to the freedom of man. While we preserve our British character, therefore, we must be assiduous in the task of establishing not only understanding but co-operation with the United States. We need each other.
This may all be well illustrated by reference to the current movement for Western Europe unity in which Great Britain must obviously play so great a part.
When I was last in the United States a little more than eighteen months ago, I encountered a disposition in some quarters to think that Great Britain must make her choice between her own Commonwealth and Western European union. This seemed and seems to me to be a false choice. It seems to assume that the British Dominions have no vital concern with Europe, and that Great Britain herself, therefore, is in the classical position of saying, "'How happy could I be with either, were t’other fair charmer away." But once it is understood that we of the King's Dominions have an interest in Europe, out of which the two great wars of our history have come, it becomes clear that the real task is not to make a choice but to make a reconciliation. That Great Britain, now that the old days of keeping the balance of power in Europe have gone, should accept direct and primary European responsibilities is inevitable. The practical task of statesmanship is to see that whatever she does in that sphere should be done not only in consultation with the other British countries but with their co-operation. Provided consultation exists not only on the highest level but with the most complete permanent means of mutual exchange on facts and views, there is no reason why British participation in Western European stability should not be in the widest and best sense of the term “British" and not merely that of the United Kingdom.
The wider the interest, the wider should be the co-operation; the more vital the interest, the more vital should be the participation of all concerned. I for one am confident that with sensible and sensitive statesmanship the United States, the United Kingdom and all the British Commonwealth countries will find themselves working together and, if necessary, fighting together to preserve freedom in a world which knows so much about it in theory and in so many places practises it so little.
CONCLUSION.
Let me return, in conclusion, to the nature of the British Commonwealth. It is more than a group of friendly powers.
It is more than a series of concerted economic interests.
It is and must be a living thing-not a corpse under the knives of the constitutional dissectors.
It would be the tragedy of our history if what began as a splendid adventure and grew into a proud brotherhood should end up as a lawyer's exercise. When the Empire ceases to be an inner feeling as well as an external association, virtue will have gone out of it.
In every war the fires of patriotism burn high. After every victory they seem to dwindle and smoulder. Sometimes they seem dead. True sentiment becomes condemned as mere sentimentality, and we become the victims of a curious reluctance to show abroad our love for and our pride in the land of our birth and those other lands to which our fathers of old went with light and liberty. Yet we have much matter for honest pride. When we suddenly realise that a great country like India has at a stroke achieved Parliamentary self-government as a Republic, let us waste no time in melancholy yearnings after the past.
Let us, on the contrary, remember that Parliamentary government, democratic public administration, the rule of law, the justice of right and not of privilege, were our peculiar British gifts to India. That the people of India should have proved apt pupils is no matter for regret; it was, on the contrary, the end purpose of our presence. I would like to be able to say to all the British people of the world, if they cared to listen to so small a voice, that our true brotherhood must be a matter of feeling and not merely a matter of thought; no vain glory, no arrogant sense of power, no jingoism, but an unquenchable sense of common destiny and common duty and, common instinct. To many people the British Empire is a curious machine that has worked; looking to the outsider rather like a Heath Robinson invention; but relied upon by mankind twice during this century, to their great deliverance. But what does it mean to you? I think I know what it means to me. May I break through our usual polite reticence and tell you?
To me the British Empire means (and here you will find curious jumble in both time and place) a cottage in the wheat lands of the North West of the State of Victoria, with the Bible and Henry Drummond and Jerome K. Jerome and “The Scottish Chiefs" and Burns on the shelves. It means the cool green waters of the Coln as they glide past the church at Fairford; the long sweep of the Wye Valley above Tintern, with a Wordsworth in my pocket; looking north across the dim Northumbrian moors from the Roman Wall, with the rowan trees on the slope before me, and two thousand years of history behind; old colour and light and soaring stone in York Mister. It means King George and Queen Mary coming to their Jubilee in Westminster Hall as Big Ben chimed out and Lords and Commons bowed, and, as they bowed, saw beyond the form of things to a man and a woman greatly loved. It means Chequers, and, from the crest beyond, that microcosm of history in which you may, with one sweeping glance, see the marks of British trenches, the "Roman Road to Wendover," the broad Oxford plains, and. (by the merest twist) the plumed figure of John Hampden walking through the fields to the church whose spire is just to be seen, at Great Kimble, to address the gentlemen of Buckinghamshire on Shipmoney. It means, at Chequers, Winston Churchill, courage and confidence radiating from him, the authentic note of the British lion in his voice, the listening world marvelling at how such triumph could be built upon such disaster. It means the Royal Mile at Edinburgh, and a toast from kilted clansmen in the Valley of the Tay, and a sudden cold wind as I came one day up from a Yorkshire dale. It means laughter in Lancashire; Jack Hulbert and Cicely Courtneidge. It means Australian boys in tired but triumphant groups at Tobruk and Benghazi; Cunningham at Alexandria, with his flashing blue eyes, talking to me of the Australian, Waller; Australian airmen in Canada, in Great Britain, all over the world. It means, at Canberra, at Wellington, at Ottawa, at Pretoria, the men of Parliament meeting as those met at Westminster seven hundred years ago; at Melbourne the lawyers practising the Common Law first forged at Westminster. It means Hammond at Sydney, and Bradman at Lords, and McCabe at Trent Bridge, with the ghosts of Grace and Trumble looking on. It means a tang in the air; a touch of salt on the lips; a little pulse that beats and shall beat; a decent pride; the sense of a continuing city. It means the past ever rising in its strength to forge the future.
Is all this madness? Should I have said, as clever, modern men are wont to do, that the British Empire means an integral association of free and equal nations, whose mutual rights and obligations you will find set out in the Balfour Formula and the Statute of Westminster? Or should I have watered it down, as some would have us do, and define the British Empire in terms of friendship, or alliance, or pact, as if we were discussing an Anglo-Portuguese treaty?
A plague take such notions. Unless the British Empire is to British people all over the world a spirit, a proud memory, a confident prayer, courage for the future, it is nothing. 
"It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:
&nbsp;It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles 
&nbsp;And see the great Achilles, whom we know.
&nbsp;Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho' 
&nbsp; We are not now that strength which in old days 
&nbsp; Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are; 
&nbsp; One equal temper of heroic hearts, 
&nbsp; Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will 
&nbsp;To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.”
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


The SPEAKER. The Chair declares the House in recess at this time subject to the call of the Chair.
Accordingly (at 12 o'clock and 5 minutes p. m.). the House stood in recess, subject to the call of the Chair.
RECEPTION OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT GORDON MENZIES, PRIME MINISTER Of AUSTRALIA
During the recess the following occurred:
The Prime Minister of Australia, the Right Honorable Robert Gordon Menzies, entered the Hall of the House of Representatives at 12 o'clock and 13 minutes p. m., and was escorted to the Speaker's rostrum by the committee appointed for that purpose.
The SPEAKER. Members of the House of Representatives, it is my great pleasure, and I deem it a high priVilege, to present to you the representative of a great. a free, and a friendly commonwealth. I present to you the Right Hon• orable Robert Gordon MenZies, Prime :P.1i:1ister of Australia. [Applause, Members:rising]
Mr. MENZIES. Mr. Speaker, oddly enough it does not seem strange to me today because this is only one of, I suppose, a thousand speeches in the course of my lifetime, but you have received me with rnch warmth that I must tell you, at once I feel at home. Of course, Mr, Speaker, I am a House of Representatives man myself of 16 years' standing. Indeed if you will excuse a little autobiography, half of the 16 years have been devoted to assisting the government of my country and the other half to assisting some other gentlemen to run the government of my country by giving them the benefit of my critical advice.
One other thing, sir, I would like to say to you at once is occasioned by your reference to my country as a great and friendly country. The truth is that when we Australians think about the other people of the world we think of some of them as foreigners and some of them as not. I want to tell you at once that except In the jaundiced eye of the law, Americans are not foreigners In Australia.
Third, I have this very great honor o fspeaking to you this morning not only as a representative of Australia, but also,if I may assert that right, as the representative of the British Commonwealth of Nations, a commonwealth which is your greatest group associate and friend in all the things that matter in thisworld.
So far as Australia ls concerned we of course have the closet possible association with you. One has only to go back to the early days of 1942 to recall the impact of the first American troops to arrive in Australia. "Impact" is perhaps the right word because they swept in on us almost like an invading force. If I can reveal one of their secrets, their company was not always strictly masculine. But they came with almost delightful and refreshing courage and optimism. From the very time they arrived, whatever doubts may have existed in some minds disappeared. We knew that with these magnificent allies and these imperishable friends that there could be one end and one end only to the war. I believe the association in this war has done something which will endure forever In the relations between your country and mine.
Once again, sir, we have a small, but I hope significant and growing association In the campaign in Korea. The campaign In Korea Is something that is giving us all cause for anxiety. I know that. But I would like to say to you as an onlooker for this purpose that the onlooker who has any discernment in his eye will recognize in this hastily improvised campaign in South Korea, a campaign hastily brought up against deliberate and organized aggression a really brilliant feat of arms, and its value will be more appreciated as the succeeding stages of this combat unfold.
We, as you know, in Australia are not rich in manpower. We feel that our people when they go to war are first class fighters. But we are not rich in manpower. We are not rich in standing armies or immediately available resources. We have already some commitments in Malaya where for a long time now operations of a defensive kind have had to be carried on against Communist bandits. But already, as you know, in the case of Korea, indeed within the first few hours after your own decision, we placed at your disposal a. fighter air force and certain vessels of the Royal Australian Navy. As far as ground forces are concerned, I think I can say this to you: Our capacity is very limited. We have no substantial standing army, and troops for service abroad must therefore, in the normal course, be specially enlisted, trained, and equipped. But in my talks with your leaders here it has been completely agreed that the time factor is so important in Korea that a comparatively small force, speedily trained, equipped. and dispatched, is better than a larger force postponed for many months.
In the light or these considerations, and after full consultation, and I think I can say agreement with the United Stat€s authorities, the Australian Government will, on the basis of the army component of the British Commonwealth occupation force in Japan, and further recruitment of men with battle experience, organize and dispatch within as few weeks as possible a. force which, cooperating, as I hope and believe it will, with the New Zealand force, would serve to make up a. first-class combat group. [Applause.]
I would like to see these troops and others made available by the United Kingdom, and other British Commonwealth countries, brought together sooner or later, and I would hope sooner, into a British Commonwealth division. serving alongside your own men.
Now, sir, I am not to delay you too long. I have already noticed with warm approval that there is a clock opposite the Speaker, as there is in my Parliament, but I would like to say a few words to you, if I may, about my own country . in relation to the problem which goes · outside and after Korea. Korea, after all. is a symptom. It is a symptom of a. very widespread disease in this world, ' and it behooves all of us, in our own way' in our own lands, to do what we can to develop our strength; our moral ' strength, our physical strength, in order' that we may at all times be fit to resist aggression, and fit to drive out fear.
As far as my country is concerned, we, therefore, have been addressing ourselves to what I will call a triple problem.
The first is the problem of getting' more people. When I was a very small boy there was much talk in Australia.: about American immigration, about the vast class of people who came to this continent from the Old World. It is only . recently that I began to have a. look at that matter in statistical terms, and I would like you to know that at the present time our immigration program in Australia is at least as great as any undertaken by your country in the whole course of its history. You must remember that we are a community of 8,000,00. people. You might think we are more, because occasionally we make quite a bit of noise, but we are a community of 8,000,000 people.
We are now taking In year after year 200,COO immigrants from the Old World which, after all, is, 11 one may venture on a proportion sum, just as 11 you were undertaking now to bring in with your vast population the better part of four millions every year. Two hundred thousand immigrants coming into a community of 8,000.000. And that presents us, of course, with tremendous problems. But we have accepted those problems because we believe that the time is overdue when all of the countries that love freedom should determine to develop their strength and not to float along and fail to develop their strength. But we shall have no proper strength for so great a problem until we have a great population.
The second thing that we are endeavoring to do goes hand in hand with that; you cannot have a free world as it ought to be unless you encourage all around it an expanding economy. We must have an expanding economy in Australia; we must, as you have done in your time, set out, and we are indeed now setting out on it, we must set out on a new era of development. Here is a great contin2nt like Australia that needs water. 'The water falls, but it runs away. It needs storage; it needs irrigation; it needs more industrial horsepower; it needs more land cleared; it needs a greater production of the wealth from the soil; it needs these things, and it needs them quickly. I want to tell you that so far as my own Government is concerned we are determined to exercise every ounce of energy that we have to bring in to Australia in the next 10 years such an amount of development, such an amount of new wealth, such a basis for new industry, such a high living standard for new and expanding populations that we shall in due course be able to look at all our friends around all the world and say: "Not only are we your friends, but we have power to serve you and to serve ourselves, and to serve with you." (Applause.)
The third thing, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps these are merely illustrative, but I am talking about my own country-the third thing to which we are devoting our attention is the preparation of man. power not only for industry but for the defense of the country, not only for the defense of the country, but for the defense of freedom wherever freedom Is challenged. We this year-I cannot go back too far because at the moment we are a 6 or 7 months' Government-we are this year introducing for the first time in peace in Australia a complete ·system of national service training calculated to produce year by year under a draft system a substantial number of trained men and to build a substantial reserve over the years to come.[lApplause. ]
Now, sir, I shall elaborate on those matters. I do not want to elaborate on them. Whenever a politician speaks out of his own bailiwick, somebody is bound to think that he is criticizing somebody in the other bailiwick, and I do not want to do that. All I want to do is to express my own faith and the faith of my own country that we all have laid on us today the duty to be prepared, to be strong-, not with the strength of a bully but with the strength of a deliverer.
The world needs the United States of America: the world needs the British people of the world: the world needs every scrap of democratic strength that can be found in it, because nobody, however optimistic. need underestimate the measure or the character of the danger that always confronts us. It is not merely our privilege to be strong; it is our duty to be strong.
Sir, we in Australia occupy a vast continent as big as the United States but with a population, as I have said, no greater than yours was In the early days of the nineteenth century. But what of It? The power and the significance of the United States are not the creation of a few modern years. They are a growth of centuries. The spirit of America was not breathed into you day before yesterday. Some of it goes back, I am proud to say, to the Shakespeares and the Raleighs and the Drakes and a common heritage. It found its most eloquent expression in the Declaration of Independence right back in the eighteenth century. It was guided into new and noble paths by the immortal Washington through the lives and words and deeds of countless famous or obscure men and women. It has been built into the character of your people right up to the day when a noble declaration by an American President, and an epoch-making vote by an American Congress, can bring light to dark places, and, let us not forget, hope to many people about to despair.
History, sir, is continuous, It Is dynamic, and never more so than when a nation has pride, when it has courage, when it has responsibility. Sir, those are the reasons why the Prime Minister of a numerically small people may speak quite frankly to the Representatives of an enormous world power in brotherhood and with, as I believe, high mutual respect.
Mr. Speaker, In the name of Australia, I salute you and your great people. May all that you stand for and that we stand for be preserved under the providence of God for the happiness of mankind •
[Applause, the Members rising.)
At 12 oclock and 33 minutes p m., the Prime Minister of Australia retired from the Hall of the House of Representatives


The Budget's Attack On Inflation

A speech on the 1951 Budget and the Government's economic policy by the Prime Minister of Australia, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, C.H.,.K.C., M.P,,in the House of Representatives on October 3, 1951.
"Every argument used by the Leader of the Opposition was an argument against anti-inflationary measures and an argument for inflation. The one thing to which the Leader of the Opposition and, presumably, his Party, are not opposed is inflation. They are not opposed to inflation because the Right Honourable gentleman himself recognises inflation as the substance of his political stock-in-trade.

"The more our people get to know this Budget and see its effects the more will they reject the Opposition and the more will they rally in firm support of the action taken by the Government." –
The Prime Minister in his speech on the Budget.
Economic Policy and the Budget
In my speech to-night I want to deal with one or two special features of the Budget, and then make some statement on the Government's economic policy generally, fitting the Budget into the pattern. But before I do that I should refer to one or two of the special features.
There has been an onslaught on this Budget in some quarters on the ground that it increases taxation, as it undoubtedly does. There are, therefore, two questions to which I want to address myself on behalf of the Government.
The first is: Should taxation be increased? If it should, are the increases fairly distributed? I will undertake to demonstrate that the answer to both these questions ought to be: "Yes."
In the first place, those who say that taxation should not be increased are, in effect, advocating a deficit budget- that is to say, an inflationary budget. The most cursory examination of the figures laid before the Committee by the Treasurer, Sir Arthur Fadden will show that apart from any increases in taxes there would be, on this Budget, a deficit of £46,000,000. That is a large deficit.
Somebody may say that expenditure could be cut to eliminate the deficit. To that I reply that anyone who will trouble himself to look at the items of expenditure appended to the Budget speech will see at once that very few of those items lend themselves to a reduction at all.
Nobody would pretend that the Defence vote ought to be reduced. Some might be heard to say-as they have, indeed, already-that it ought to be greater. Nobody would say that the Social Services vote should be reduced. On the contrary, there have been, and there will be, those who say that it ought to be even greater. If Honourable Members looked through all the items of expenditure they would come to two items, one of them Public Works, the other General Administrative Expenditure- which, as an item, is substantially smaller than the deficit to which I have referred. Members will not find any item that lends itself to reduction in any real sense.
What has happened about works? The fact is that the works programme of the Commonwealth, which we agreed we would carry entirely on revenue (for reasons which I will give in a moment), will this year be only £3,000,000 or £4,000,000 greater than last year. This year it will be of the order of £106,000,000. Last year it was of the order of £102,000,000.
In brief, our works programme appears practically static in terms of money. Therefore, having regard to increased cost, our works programme has been cut in volume.
This has not applied to any of the complainant States-and there are some complainant States at present.
It applies to the Commonwealth.
The first question that the critic has to answer for himself is: Would he be prepared to make a substantial further cut in the Commonwealth works programme? Would he be prepared to cut out the Snowy? Mountains hydro-electric project? Would he be prepared? to bring to a stone end any further development of any description in the postal services? The answer is perfectly clear. Nobody in this House, and I do not believe any student out of it, will say there is any further room for reduction of expenditure on the public works account.
That leaves, as the one allegedly reducible item, general administrative costs, which, after all, amount to somewhere between £30,000,000 and £40,000,000, and are in themselves substantially less than the deficit which the Treasurer contemplated when he began to compile this Budget.
I do not need to remind Honourable Members of probable repercussions because, in an another capacity in full House, they have heard the discussion about the Government's attempt-its successful attempt-to introduce an economy in general administrative costs. I do not suppose that I will hear anybody opposite say that there should be a further cut in the general administrative cost, which we do not control in terms of money and can control only in terms of manpower.
Deficit Would Be a Scandal
The moment it is established that this Budget represents the end result of a sincere attempt to reduce the reducible expenditures of the Commonwealth we are confronted by the fact that either revenue must be increased or a deficit of £46,000,000 incurred. A deficit Budget in an inflationary period like this would be a scandal. It would expose any Government to the accusation that it did not care about inflation because it was prepared to pour £50,000,000 of new money into the existing supplies and so aggravate the inflation.
Therefore, I answer the first question: "Yes." There must be increased taxation unless we are to have an inflationary deficit budget. How have we secured the increased revenue? We have secured it by proposals which bear justly on all sections. It could hardly be said by any Honourable Member-and certainly by no Honourable Member opposite-that in distributing the additional burden of taxes we have favoured the rich. The whole trouble is that Honourable Members opposite felt grievously baulked when they read the Budget because they realised how heavy a burden would be placed on the richer sections of the community. They have, for example, complained very bitterly that at a time of inflation something ought to be done to impose some kind of ceiling on dividends of great corporations. I have heard that suggestion time after time. We cannot impose a ceiling on dividends under our powers. But what we have done in this Budget is to raise substantially the taxation on the distributable profits of companies with the result that the new rates of taxes will put a severe check upon the increasing of dividends. In the second place, the increased revenue has been obtained by curtailing the demand for capital equipment- a demand which, as everybody who has studied this matter knows, is a demand far too great for the supply.
There is no greater element in the present inflation than the exorbitant demand for capital equipment and the inadequate supply of it. Therefore, the Treasurer has made provision for alterations of the existing law in relation to special initial depreciation. We have reversed a policy that was originally devised to encourage investment in capital equipment. That policy must now be reversed because we have too little capital equipment to meet the demand.
Some Comparisons on Income Tax Rates
The taxation proposals in the Budget affect the demand for luxury and less essential goods. That has been achieved-very justly but not very popularly in some instances-by sales tax and excise increases and by the increase of individual income tax. But this increase still leaves the rate of income tax on all relevant rates of income in Australia most favourable when compared with the rates in operation in our sister countries of the United Kingdom and New Zealand.
The Budget has affected the purchasing demand of large rural income-earners, not because it is desired to penalise them but because it is desired to remove an advantage that has been and is being enjoyed by income earners in that group. That has been achieved by the partial abolition of averaging. I do not expect to hear anything from the other side of the Chamber about this "rich man's Government" pandering to large income-earners in the country!
Next, this Budget by its taxation proposals has provided for the modern valuation of land for land tax purposes. No one can deny the justice of that in a time of high and rising land prices.
Finally-and there has been some clamour about this-the Budget provides for a substantial increase in the fees payable by broadcast listeners. If Honourable Members will take the trouble to look at the figures of revenue and expenditure in relation to broadcasting, they will find that all the increase does is to reduce the loss on broadcasting, which is now being carried by general revenue. It does not entirely c-laminate the loss; but reduces it and prevents a new element of deficit from coming along, with all its inflationary effect.
.I now invite Honourable Members .to observe the effect upon the Budget of Capital Works programmes and of payments to the States. I go further and invite the attention of some outside critics (who are diminishing in number as time goes on) to this matter.
*In normal financial times, Capital Works both State and Federal-would be carried on Loan. That is one of the truisms of public finance. To-day, under inflationary circumstances, there is a movement away from loans and from fixed interest-bearing securities. That is inevitably so when prices and costs are rising and when the value of money is falling. One expects to see that kind of movement at such a time As the rise in costs and prices begins to flatten out the movement away from gilt-edged investment will tend to disappear
Against the background of that simple truth, let us face the f act that at this inflationary time in. Australia's history, with all that ought to be done in Australia, with our enormous arrears on the transport side, with our arrears of power, with our shortages of coal and with our defence preparations, we cannot expect to finance all of our works on loan.
Revenue For Works Programme
Look at the figures. This year the States have a Liar programme of £22 5m. And the Commonwealth of f£106m.-or a total of £33 in. Last year, the loan market yielded £151m. If we got as much from the loan market this year as last year, we should still, on those figures, have to find film. From sources other than the loan market. Alternatively, not finding the £18l1m., we should have to cut the whole programme back to £150m. For both the Commonwealth and the States. That would create chaos in all programmes and instantly involve damaging and wide-spread repudiation of contracts and of obligations.
It is clear, therefore, that until inflation is arrested or is in process of being arrested we must have enough revenue to find large sums for Works. The effect of all those things has been completely overlooked by the critics. Out of a total of £927m. Expenditure in the Budget, payments to the States are at the record figure of £161m. What I shall call our underwriting liability to the States in respect of their Works programmes (which is the difference between what the loan market will yield and the £225m. expenditure that has been approved) may be anything between £75m. And lO0m. Neither the Treasurer nor I knows what it will be exactly In addition, because we have remained out of the loan market and left that market with its limited resources to the States, we have to carry £l00m. of&nbsp; Commonwealth works on the Budget.
Let nobody pretend he is grappling with this problem unless he decides whether we should have cut payments to the States. Does he challenge paying 0161m. To the States? Does he challenge us? Standing behind the States in this underwriting senses" Does he challenge us doing £lO0m? Worth of Commonwealth Works this year?
Unless he challenges one or other or all of those things, the result is that from £336m. To £361m. Or more than one-third of the entire Budget-is made up of items of that kind. When people say in a rather broad, easy and sweeping fashion that we must not increase taxation but must cut something, let them face up to the real truth of the matter If we cut those three things out, turn our backs upon our partners in the Federation, and if we adhere to the whole of our revenue and make no tax or other reimbursements to the States, we can have a high, wide and handsome surplus without raising an extra penny piece by way of taxes.
But all of those items are entirely significant and are not to be avoided merely by the process of not looking at them.
Government's Anti-inflation Programme
I turn from those two matters to say something about the anti-inflation programme of the Government, because one of the things that is most glibly repeated is that the Government has no programme about inflation. it is said particularly-not in this House, I agree, but outside-by those to whom an anti-inflation programmer means altering the exchange rate and nothing else. The people who advocate such an alteration of the exchange rate never have anything to put alongside it, in my experience. The Government's programme is designed to deal with the real causes of inflation as far, of course, as they are internal to Australia. External causes are not matters that are within our jurisdiction, but as far as they are internal to Australia this is what the Government is seeking to do: to deal with real causes. Therefore, we have directed our programme, and have been directing it for a long time. to five elements.
I do not wish to be tedious on this matter, but I take leave to state those five elements to the committee and to the country. The first is to increase production; the second, to increase procurement of goods from overseas; the third, the limitation of excessive capital demand by governments; the fourth, the limitation of excessive consumer demand for non-essentials, a demand which attracts too many resources to non-essential production; and the fifth, the diversion of resources of manpower and materials to enterprises of productive and defence importance. I shall take those five matters in their order.
First, positive measures to increase production. It was very gratifying to my colleagues and to those who sit behind us in this chamber to hear the Leader of the Opposition (Dr. Evatt) last night at the penitence stool about production. His conversion to advocacy of production is tardy but welcome. After all, it is never too late to mend on such matters. But although it is tardy and although we hope that from now on we shall have his support in encouraging people to understand that you produce your way out of inflation far more than by any other technique, I desire in passing to recall that the communists are production's greatest enemies in this country and that so far the Leader of the Opposition has done nothing but protect them.
Positive Methods to Increase Production
With that slight recollection, I now wish to turn to the positive measures to increase pi-education. The first of them was the 100,000,000 dollar loan we were told at one stage that it was impossible or undesirable. The object of the loan which this Government negotiated was to bring, here essential capital equipment which could not be obtained from non-dollar sources. The Australian Government is not, for the most part, the buyer of the commodities that arc imported. State Governments and public instrumentalities are, for the most part, the authorities to whom the dollars are made available under this loan. Honourable Members will be interested to know that under that loan we have made available in dollars for agricultural practice and other agricultural equipment 29 million dollars; for heavy industrial crawler tractors and earth-moving equipment, 24 million dollars; for transport equipment. Including locomotives, 15 million dollars; for electricity generation and transmission, 26 million dollars; and the balance is made up of plant and equipment for mining and manufacturing. This is a pretty good list of articles, every one of which has to do with production and vital transportation in Australia.
As the second element of a positive production programme I wish to refer to immigration, because there is applause of our immigration policy as well as criticism of it. Of course, there is always room for criticism of any policy so great in its scope, but we have specifically directed the immigration policy towards aiding the basic industries. Honourable Members will be interested to know that 19,000 contract immigrants are now working in national undertakings such as rail, road, water storage and power projects, while 2,600 contract migrants have been placed in the steel industry. Accommodation for Commonwealth-sponsored immigrants has been located to meet the labour needs of basic industries and of basic services. For example, prefabricated houses from overseas are being erected on the South Coast of New South Wales for British immigrant miners who will produce coking coal for the Port Kembla Steel Works.
Flow of Imported Scarce Materials
The third element in this positive policy of production is that this Government has encouraged the flow of imported scarce materials because a great deal of production in any country depends upon how it can obtain the product of another country's enterprise to use as its own material for its own production. We have encouraged the flow of imported scarce materials by relaxing import duties on essential materials, and on prefabricated houses, by subsidising the importation of coal and of houses, and by negotiating favourable allocations of scarce materials and equipment. I do not wish to weary the committee with a mass of figures, but I shall quote three items in order to indicate how fruitful and constructive this policy has been. For instance, let us take iron and steel.
This country imported 160,000 tons of iron and steel in 1948-49, 425,000 tons in 1949-50, and 685,000 tons in 1950-51. That is constructive talk, because steel has been one of the great basic shortages in Australia. Now let us take timber. In 1948-49 Australia imparted 222,000,000 super feet; in 1949-50, 240,000,000 super feet; and in 1950-51, 375,000-000 super feet. In the case of Mach winery, taking it in is. The figure has risen over the same period from £E41 000,000 to £86,000,000.
I refer to these matters because they are conclusive evidence that under the policy which we have consistently applied we have been able to produce first-class results in adding to the instruments of production in this country. Only the instruments of production, mechanical and human, will in the long run answer this problem for us.
Now I take the next item in our production programme, which is coal and steel production. We have subsidised the importation of coal in hundreds of thousands of tons. Orders for a further 1,000,000 tons of coal have been placed abroad, but there is difficulty in securing shipping at reasonable rates. Therefore, the Government is at this very moment taking steps, some of which are complete, to secure needed shipping by both charter and purchase for the bringing of this coal to Australia. We have subsidised coal production at Callide. I do not mean that we have made a direct subsidy to the Queensland Government, but we have entered into an obligation to subsidise the two principal purchasers of Callide coal-the States of Victoria and South Australia. We have under way, and are vigorously pursuing with all the resources we have, a large open cut development which, when completed in a few years, will have added about 5,000,000 tons of coal a year to our supply in Australia.
Coal Production Has Increased
Coal production actually increased by more than 1,000,000 tons in the financial year that has just ended. It ought to increase by another 1,000,000 tons in the financial year that has now begun. Ingot steel production in Australia in 1950-51 was 1,400,000 tons, which was 200,000 tons more than in the previous financial year. I am not going to labour these figures, but in all of these things there is proof that to the extent that production is the answer to inflation we have fruitfully concentrated our efforts on stimulating it.
Apart from basic materials, which might be described by economists as capital goods, we have deliberately as a counter-inflationary measure encouraged the increased procurement of goods. The Government is of the opinion that Australian industries, at a time of the greatest under-supply, are in no danger of fatal competition from goods imported from overseas. We must, if we are going to meet inflation, have a large flow of goods coming into this country. In 1949 the imports of merchandise f.o.b. amounted to £414,000.000; in 1949-50 to E536, 000,000; and in 1950-5 1 to £742,000,000. On the present rate of flow of imports of merchandise into Australian the figure this financial year may actually exceed £.900, 000,000.
That is all I want to say of that particular aspect of this problem. Anti-inflation programme Item No. 1 is to stimulate production. Item No. 2 is to stimulate increased supply of goods. I have dealt with both of these, and I venture to say we have shown, very practical results. The third item in an anti-inflationary programme is the limitation of excessive capital demands by governments, and that sentence raises the whole issue so violently discussed by the Premier of Victoria. In recent weeks.
Facts about Public Works Expenditure
First of all, I shall give some figures in relation to public works' expenditure in the last complete financial year before the war. In 1938-39 the public works of the whole of Australia, including public housing construction, amounted to £57,000,000. In 1950-51 that figure has risen to 312,000,000. Honourable Members will see that when you multiply the demand for capital investment can works by between five and six times in that period of time and you have a population not so enormously greater, then the strain put on the economy is tremendous. If we add to that a rise in private capital investment over the same period from £109,000,000 to £405,000,000, then we see the consequences and none of us need to ignore them.
The consequences are an excessive demand for labour, plant and materials, bottle-necks and high competition for available resources. All of these things are acutely inflationary in their effect. We, in short, believe that Australian Governments-and I use the plural are trying to do too many jobs at the same time. The result is delays, high costs and acute inflationary pressure.
At the last meeting of the Loan Council, my colleague the Treasurer and I dealt with this problem. The States had brought in a works programme. They had, so they informed us, vetted this programme with great care. But the programme amounted to over £300,000,000 and the whole of the loan market in the financial year just ended produced only one-half of that amount. In other words, the States presented a loan programme double the established capacity of the loan market at that time. They had already agreed at a former special Loan Council meeting that works ought not to be financed out of Treasury bills-that is to say, that you ought not to create new money out of the central bank in a time of inflation to carry out public works. We also agreed to that principle. There is no economist in the country who would deny the correctness of the principle. The States accepted that proposition. They said in effect: "All right then, we must not have recourse to the Central Bank to create new money to add to the flow of purchasing power at a time like this." We all agreed at the same time that the loan market would not yield anything like £300,000,000. The Commonwealth said-and I still say that it was the proper thing for us to say-that in order to ease the reduction that was obviously coming in the States' works' programmes we would finance our own works out of revenue and we would leave the loan market to the* States
. It is very curious to remember, in the light of these facts that I am reciting, that the Premier of Victoria (whether speaking his own mind or somebody else's I do not know) is now denouncing us for injustice and harshness towards Victoria. All I can say is that we agreed to finance the whole of the Commonwealth works' programme from revenue and that the States could have the whole of the loan market to themselves for whatever It might produce.
What the Loan Council Decided
Faced with those facts, the Loan Council, by a majority of four States to two, approved of the reduction of the States' programmes to £225,000,000-a reduction in their programmes of £75,000,000, a reduction of an unprecedented order. That was agreed to by a majority of the States, one of the majority beating the State of Victoria. So the programme was fit to £225,000,000, an amount which nobody believed the market would yield.
Nobody believes it now. No one can see any reason why, in the present economic circumstances, we should expect to get from the market £225,000,000 instead of the £150,000,000 we got last year
To prevent confusion and chaos, the Commonwealth agreed to guarantee the amount of £225,000,000. To those who study the history of Commonwealth and State financial relations that decision represents an important landmark. This is the first time that the Commonwealth has, in effect, guaranteed the loan works programme of the States. The guarantee means that, to the extent that loan raisings fall short whether by £75,000,000 or £100,000,000 the Commonwealth will find the money and, let me add, will find it by non-inflationary means.
It will find the money, not by discounting Treasury bills with the Commonwealth Bank, but by subtracting money which would otherwise be available for spending -that is, by taxation. No one was more eloquent in expressing his appreciation of what was being done than was the Premier of Victoria.
I do not quite know on what flank we are being attacked. One section of the press declares that we should have clamped down still harder, that we should have said: "Not a bean do you get beyond what the loan market provides." If that had been done the Premier of Victoria would not have been standing alone. There would have been a chorus of protests from one end of Australia to the other, and public works programmes would have folded up all over the place. We did the reasonable thing. We said, in effect, that we would not underwrite what we regarded as extravagant programmes that were beyond practical realisation. On the other hand, we would not cut the States down suddenly to what the market would yield. In order to give an illustration of how fantastic some of the statements on this matter have been, I point out that in Victoria the Government is trying to spend on public works in one year an amount equal to half the figure at which the public debt of that State stood in 1954, ninety-four years after the inauguration of the State. Honourable members can see how reckless has been the approach of some people to this question.
Meeting With the States Next Year
Having explained the nature of our underwriting obligation, I now say -and I wish this to be noted in certain quarters -that it is not to be assumed that the Commonwealth will necessarily repeat its underwriting. We propose to call the States together in the New Year to discuss their works' programmes. We are not prepared to encourage States to enter into capital commitments indefinitely-as some might like to do-in excess of the amount of money which the public will entrust to them by loan. We are not prepared to accept as a practice the burden and obloquy of imposing extra taxation in order to provide funds for State works' programmes in excess of the savings of the people. It is in the light of these warnings that we propose to meet the representatives of the States early next year and to say to them that the kind of thing which was inevitable this year should be avoided in the future
The next point is the limitation of excessive consumer demand for non-essentials--a demand which attracts too many resources to non-essential production. To this end the Government has taken certain steps which I could not have believed would be seriously challenged by Honourable Members opposite, because in their own day every one of them has enjoyed at least the vocal support of those Honourable Members. The steps
Actually taken to date are-
1.-Limitation of inflationary demand by special account procedures under the Banking Act.
2.-General tightening of bank advances policy to produce selectivity in credit policy.
3.-Reintroduction of capital issues control to give priority in the capital market to those concerns which deal with basic production, development and defence.
The tightening up effect of these measures has been very considerable. Many honourable members are well aware of this, and of the influence which the measures have had in discounting demand. Because the procedures are selective, they reduce demand-or we expect that they will reduce demand-in the right places. There may be some errors of judgement here or there, but we expect the effect to be such as I have stated.
National Security Resources Board
The last item is the diversion of resources of manpower and materials to enterprises of productive and defence importance. Apart from what I have said on government and private capital investment programmes, we have created three principal instruments. The first is a National Security Resources Board, about which I should like to say a few words. It is a widely representative body which includes leaders of heavy industry, as well as the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. It also includes civil servants, some of them with administrative training, and others with economic training. The Board has done a great deal of work, and has submitted valuable reports and recomendations to the Government. It has examined the whole subject of capital issues control, and has tendered certain advice. It has also reported on the migration programme and, as the Minister for Immigration (Mr. Holt) will agree, a most valuable analysis was made in conjunction with another committee which has been dealing with the problem. The Board has also reported on the creation of Commonwealth-State consultative machinery, on the rendering of assistance to basic industries such as coal and steel on the Defence Forces' equipment programme, and on the marshalling of our resources for defence preparations generally. On all these matters the Government has been put into possession of most useful views.
Do not let us be schoolboys in considering this matter. I suggest that the Honourable Member for East Sydney (Mr. Ward) in particular should not be too hasty in alleging that the Government is endeavouring to introduce industrial conscription. Industrial conscription was not provided for in the Defence Preparations Act, and this Government is not talking about introducing industrial conscription. It is talking about diverting resources from the non-essential industries to the essential industries. If Honourable Members are not in favour of the plan, let them tell the people that they are in favour of inflation going on and on indefinitely. I have already referred to the second instrument the Defence Preparations Act. The third instrument is the Commonwealth-States joint Consultative Committees which are meeting by concurrence of the seven Governments of Australia. There is a committee on power, a committee on transport, a committee on materials, and a committee on agriculture already functioning It is anticipated that they will make reports containing lists of priorities which will go far to enable resources to be properly directed and concentrated, If basic materials can be concentrated for basic jobs, people will work with those materials on those jobs instead of wasting them in jobs that do not matter. That is the whole principle of a diversionary process.
Some Facts about the Surplus
I shall now turn to one or two special arguments that have been used in this debate. It has been stated that the surplus of £114m. Disclosed in this Budget is not a true surplus because it will be spent on State Works. Again, one hardly knows from what angle to anticipate the attack. One gathers from the Right Honourable gentleman who addressed this House last night that he thought the surplus would be much bigger -more than the figure stated-but the critic to whom I now refer has said that there will not be a surplus. The argument has been put forward not by people who believe in having a deficit, but by people who think they believe there ought to be a surplus in the Budget at a time like this for sound economic reasons.
I have shown that reductions of controllable expenditure have gone as far as they can under the present circumstances. Therefore, the surplus could be made a nett surplus of £114m. With no charge against it for State works only by one of two means. The Government could pay no Works money to the States beyond what the market will provide. Or it could increase taxes still further to make the surplus not £114m. But £214m., so that it might then pay £100m. to the States and have a nett surplus of £114m.
Taking the second idea first-a further increase in taxation-the Government did not believe that it could reasonably ask the people to accept such a burden. As to the first idea of reducing the amount to be paid to the States and repudiating our obligations to them under the Loan Council Agreement, the Government will not repudiate its arrangements. Nor does it believe that it could reasonably ask the States to accept such a burden so suddenly in this financial year.
Having regard to the amount of their commitments for firm orders for plant which has been ordered overseas, there is no doubt that to reduce the State programmes at once to £125m. Or £150m. Would have wrecked their plans and practically brought their Works' programmes in terms of labour to a standstill.
Budget Is "Realistic and Moderate"
In this respect, as in every other respect, this Budget is both realistic and moderate. It has been said by the Leader of the Opposition, who is much more apt to produce a phrase than an idea, that this Budget is a sort of "blue print for depression." That statement is dangerous nonsense. The Opposition really ought to make up its mind, if it has a mind to make up, on any problem that involves the economic state of the country. Its modern opposition to the Premiers' Plan I have noticed with great interest. I have thought it courteous to forget that there would have been no Premiers' Plan without the consent of a majority of Labour Premiers and a Labour Prime Minister. It is now the modern idiom of the Honourable Gentlemen opposite to say that the Premiers' Plan was wrong and that in a depression the Government ought to budget for a deficit that it ought to use Central Bank Credit for works that it ought to extend its works programme to the limit of practicability. There is great force in that view, but one cannot have two inconsistent views at one and the same time. If the Honourable Gentlemen opposite believe that in a depression the Government should budget for a deficit and use Central Bank Credit-that is to say, create new money and expand the Public Works programmes to the limit of its physical capacity-then will they tell the people that they regard the same medicine as appropriate for an inflationary boom? Let us compare the circumstances of 1930 and 1951 while the Honourable Gentlemen opposite are chewing over their ultimate answer to that grim question, in order that once and for all it may be quite plain that this talk about a "blueprint for depression" is wicked and dangerous nonsense.
There was large unemployment in this country in 1930, while to-day there are far more jobs than men. In terms of employment, the positions are at the poles.
In 1930 Australia had international reserves (London' funds in particular) of £58m. It now has international Reserves of £843m.
Our export income in 1930 (1 am leaving out gold because it is not material for the purposes of this comparison) was f90.5m. In 1951 -)or export income was £983.9m.
In 1930 the sum total of the personal income of Australians was £557m. In 1951 it was £2,916m. The money in the hands of the public (I speak of Notes and Bank deposits) in 1930 was £567m. In 1951 it was £2,447m.
Mischievous Nonsense A bout "Depression"
I have only to refer to those figures, and I invite every Honourable Member to look at them when they are recorded in Hansard, to show that the only people who have talked mischievous nonsense about a depression in 1951 are those who want to see one come about.
The last matter I want to say something about- I have saved the best for the last-is the speech that fell from the Leader of the Opposition last night. I think it was Lord Randolph Churchill who once said that it was the first duty of the Opposition to oppose, and as a former Opposition Leader myself I am not unfamiliar with that duty and its performance. But I am bound to say that the present Leader of the Opposition must be regarded as the greatest "oppose" of all time. Let me prove that statement before I sit down.
In the first place, I gather-though I may be wrong -that he was opposed to Sir Douglas Copland. That may be doing the Fight Honourable Gentleman an injustice. Anyhow, I may say with perfect courtesy that the Leader of the Opposition, in relation to his debate on this matter, shunned the company of Sir Douglas Copland, who is a very distinguished Australian and a distinguished man from many points of view. He was, in point of fact, Prices' Commissioner under my own Government in 1939. He was, may I recall to Honourable Members opposite, Economic Adviser as well as Prices' Commissioner to the late Mr. Curtin and the late Mr. Chifley, and I venture to say that he enjoyed the confidence of both of them.
Dr. Evatt's "Fascinating Logic"
The Leader of the Opposition, with the fascinating logic that has puzzled me for many years, says in what logicians would call a curious syllogism: "I do not like Professor Copland. Professor Copland supports this Budget. Professor Copland, because I do not like him, must be wrong. Therefore the Budget is wrong." That is a pretty fair summary of half of the rambling and meandering obscurities we have listened to from the Right Honourable Gentleman.
In the second place the Leader of the Opposition is opposed to a reduction of Commonwealth administrative expenditure. He has made that abundantly clear. In other words, he agrees that we cannot balance the Budget by reducing expenditure. I do not do him an injustice when I say that I thought that that was clearly what he meant to convey. Indeed, on the contrary, he thought that administrative expenditure should be increased-because, he said, there should be bigger subsidies, bigger social services,. And more civil servants. On those three items he is all for an expansion of expenditure under the Budget. But although he is opposed to any reduction of expenditure (and in favour of an increase), he is also opposed to any incur. Ace of taxation. Indeed, he thinks that taxes should be reduced. So he cannot balance the Budget by reducing expenditure and he is unwilling to balance it by increasing revenue. How then does he propose? to balance the Budget? It is elementary when one looks at these figures that the Right Honourable Gentleman favours a budget deficit. And the only way we can finance a budget deficit to-day is by raising the wind, through the Central Bank, by the issue of Treasury Bills. He favours increasing the supply of money as a cure for inflation!
In the next place he opposes the reduction of the State Works programmes-unless, of course, he is quarrelling with Mr. McGuire and Mr. Cain. If he is to be at all logical in his approach to this matter, he favours the financing of a deficit by the Commonwealth Bank by means of Treasury Bills. This gentleman who talks about inflation makes it abundantly clear that, in respect of revenue and loan deficits, he is all for going to the Commonwealth Bank and raising the wind by the issue of Treasury Bills.
Finally, I gather that the Leader of the Opposition is opposed to the recent rise in the bond interest rate. I trust that I am not distorting what he has said on that subject. I take his silence to signify his consent to the accuracy of my statement. I gather his reference to the recent rise in the bond interest rate to mean that he expects either to use Central Bank Credits on a grand scale to support the bond market and force down the interest rate, or that he would like the loan to fail, because if it failed we could then put the whole responsibility on to the Central Bank with the greatest of ease.
Every argument used by the Leader of the Opposition was an argument against anti-inflationary measures and an argument for inflation. The one thing to which the Leader of the Opposition and, presumably, his Party, are not opposed is inflation. They are not opposed to inflation because the Right Honourable gentleman himself recognises inflation as the substance of his political stock-intrude.
The more our people get to know this Budget and see its effects, the more will they reject the Opposition and the more will they rally in firm support of the action taken by the Government.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
R. G. Menzies, M. P.,
reports to the Australian people
on the work of the London
Economic Conference. By Authority:
L F. Johnston. Commonwealth Government Printer. Canberra.
(Printed in Australia.)
WHAT CONVERTIBILITY MEANS
“Full convertibility," says Mr. Menzies, "will exist when the pound can be freely converted into other currencies at whatever may be the prevailing rate of exchange.
“It clearly cannot be reached in one stride. There must be intermediate stages as our trading position and our reserves grow stronger. What we have done is to agree, in some detail, on the procedures to be followed to reach an intermediate stage.
“They depend, not only on the success of our own efforts, but also on close and specific co-operation with European nations and the United States of America.
“You will understand at once that delicate negotiations will be required, and that meanwhile it would be quite impossible to publish the precise terms or even the outline of our proposals.
“But I can assure you that they are clear cut and constructive, and that if success is attained we will be much nearer to that full trade, commerce and intercourse between the nations which was once a refreshing and stimulating aspect of our lives, and which we all hope to restore."
"What strengthens sterling will strengthen all of us in the Commonwealth. It will increase the flow of goods. It will help the international investment. It will help to get us out of the atmosphere of emergency and restrictions, and serve to add to the prosperity and raise the living standards of the peoples of the world.
"We are all proud to think that we have between us immense resources, not only in material things but also in courage, patience and resolution. With these rich endowments, and common friendship and understanding, we can not only deserve success, but command it."
The London Economic Conference in November-December, 1952, was the most important of its kind for twenty years. There, the member nations of the British Commonwealth pooled their expert knowledge and experience and agreed on lines of policy designed to restore the convertibility of sterling and promote the trade and prestige of the Commonwealth in world affairs. 
Despite illness, the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, led the Australian delegation to the Conference. Afterwards, he took prompt steps to inform the Australian people what he had done in their name. This booklet contains the essence of what he said in broadcasts and statements immediately the Conference had ended.
NOT A "CRISIS CONFERENCE”
The London Conference was not a "crisis conference”. It was convened for four purposes, each of them related to long-term policy and designed to ensure steady progress towards the development of resources, the promotion of production and trade, and the ultimate achievement of convertibility of currencies.
The attainment of this goal will, by widening markets and stimulating the flow of international investment, vitally assist further development, production and trade. In other words, the nations represented at the Conference were seeking positive policies, moving away from artificial restrictions and towards greater freedom in the movement of goods and money. 
The four purposes were:
(a) A frank and full interchange of ideas, policies, and experience, enabling each of the eight governments represented to review their own internal policies and to learn what the other governments were themselves doing in the financial and economic field.
(b) The formulation of a set of principles action upon which would assist in the gradual elimination of restrictions by the promotion of development and trade.
(c) The discovery of ways and means of increasing public and private investment calculated to assist adequate trade and payments balances.
(d) The preparation of specific plans for achieving convertibility, limited at first, but ultimately complete, so as to break down the exchange barriers which now cause a serious interference in trade between the dollar and sterling areas.
AUSTRALIAN MANUFACTURERS REASSURED
The countries represented were seeking common policies, not entering into legal commitments, secret or otherwise. Nor did any country give undertakings as to how it should handle its internal problems of development.
For example, any suggestion that Australian manufacturing is to be cut back, or that the search for improving living standards is to be modified or abandoned, is quite untrue. On the contrary, each government represented saw in the overall design the real and valuable means of increasing production all round and so earning and saving dollars as to make convertibility, when it comes, a permanent thing and not a precarious step depending on precarious reserves.
The interchange of ideas, policy, and experience was both detailed and valuable. Budget policies, aiming at balance or surplus, were remarkably similar in all countries. The need for a careful control of credit as an anti-inflationary measure was accepted by all.
You will not need to be told by me that all forms of anti-inflationary action such as taxation, credit controls, and import controls, tend to be unpopular. Sometimes, in our own countries, people are tempted to believe that in such matters governments are either heartless or capricious. It is for this reason that I want to point out, at this Conference, all the Commonwealth countries not only agreed that counter-inflationary measures should be resolutely pursued, but also agreed that unless this was done it was idle to think that more active international trade and the convertibility of sterling could be achieved.
All governments were concerned about the burden of taxes but the obligation of defence expenditure, especially since Korea, and the need to resort to tax revenues for some portion of public works has in all cases limited capacity to reduce taxes.
In each one of the eight countries represented, problems like our own are being encountered and there is a close similarity in the methods which are being employed.
The long-range principles evolved by the Conference were unanimously agreed upon. Briefly, they were:

A resolute continuation of anti-inflationary policies, including control of credit, with of course such flexibility of application as new circumstances may require.
Investment policies designed to secure a sound balance of payments position by encouraging the movement of Capital into industries producing additional exports or reducing the demand for dollar imports in particular.
Development policies giving high priority to works calculated to increase production, strengthen competitive power in overseas markets, maintain employment and so provide a real foundation for increased living standards.

These principles are not a mere form of words. They are completely opposed to the foolish notion that needed Capital can be secured by an inflationary use of central bank credit. The Conference states plainly that: 
"Inflationary conditions frustrate the progress of sound development, both by increasing its cost and by destroying the savings necessary to finance it. Moreover, they damage the external balance by stimulating excessive imports and by diverting to internal use goods which would otherwise be available for export".
POLITICS MUST BE FORGOTTEN
Great emphasis must be placed on the special character of the development to be aimed at. In Australia this presents great difficulties, for, while the Commonwealth has voluntarily accepted great financial responsibilities, including huge budget liabilities, the works programmes are largely under the exclusive control of the States. I will take an early opportunity of inviting the States into conference on this vital point.
Politics must be forgotten. Special local interests must give way to the national need for improving our section of the sterling area's balance of payments. Unless we can really concentrate on works of the indicated character, we will hinder the accomplishment of an overall scheme which is of such immense importance for our future.
Ways and means of increasing public and private investment were considered from two angles. First, it was recognised that our domestic savings are our first and principal asset. Increased savings will result from stability in the value of money (anti-inflationary action), increased production and improved overseas balances, and fiscal policies which encourage savings.
We have here a challenge to the national conscience and good sense. There can be no easy promise of sudden results. We must, following the example of some foreign countries, make a vigorous effort for production. The increased individual production which has been noted during the past twelve months is proof that it can be done.
Increased production will tend to reduce costs and to stabilise prices and money values. With the arrest of rising costs, tax reductions will become more practicable. With stable prices and lowering taxes, savings will be encouraged. 
But to use central bank credit, not increased production, as a means of reducing taxes would be simply to aggravate inflation and so destroy the whole foundation upon which improved trade and convertibility of currencies clearly rest.

COMMONWEALTH-STATE CO-OPERATION VITAL
Discussion also occurred upon how overseas Capital could be secured. Australia's greatest periods of development have been appreciably financed from overseas. Eight million people can scarcely hope to finance the development of a huge continent. 

Two new sources of overseas finance were evolved. The United Kingdom Government will make sterling available to the International Bank for sterling loans to British Commonwealth countries. Whether this will offer any benefit to Australia will depend entirely upon whole-hearted Commonwealth-States co-operation. For the International Bank will lend only upon projects which answer to the test of improving the balance of payments. Even then, it will lend only the overseas exchange content of any project, leaving a large proportion-representing local expenditure - to be financed in Australia. We must therefore marshal our resources and deal with public works on their merits.

&nbsp;

The other new source of finance is the new Finance Corporation which is being formed in London. We do not yet know how much new money this may mean, or on what terms, but we do know that it will not find money except for works which possess the necessary character and significance.

All of this can be summed up by saying that we may, in due course, be able to get outside assistance for public works. But we will get none unless we are prepared to put first things first, and prefer some irrigation scheme which will produce more food for export rather than some suburban railway.
Specific plans for moving towards convertibility were prepared. Their formulation in fact occupied a large proportion of our time. They will require full co-operation by the nations of Western Europe and by the United States of America. Until discussions have occurred on the highest level, these plans obviously cannot be published. We all thought that they held great promise of reaching a new era in international trade. Even in what must be at first a limited form, they will hold great advantages, for directly or indirectly they will tend to increase our earnings of convertible currencies and so strengthen our international trading position.
AUSTRALIAN POLICIES SOUND
A fair summing up of all this is that eight Commonwealth Governments met, in a non-party atmosphere, without pressure from any sectional interest, to work out ways and means of moving away from restriction of production and trade and towards freedom and expansion, which are what the world needs.
We agreed that freedom cannot be got without effort, effort by governments, by employers, by employees. We agreed that vast defence expenditures and the maintenance of what has been called the welfare State make such demands upon public revenues that we are all confronted by high taxation or galloping inflation (itself the harshest of all taxes) unless production and trade can be tremendously increased.
It was to the means of securing that increase that we devoted our minds and secured a notable measure of agreement.
If I have not come back home with a series of cut-and-dried proposals for Australia to carry out, it is for the very good reason that our plans and efforts inside Australia are our responsibility, and not for others to decide. But unless we are prepared to play our part in positive measures for world prosperity, we will let down our friends, and we will damage ourselves. The London Conference made it clear that our own financial and economic policies have been both appropriate and sound. But we must do better. We must earn and save more capital. We must not waste capital, for it is scarce. Sound and developing manufacturing will save us imports. Expanding primary industries will give us more exports, will save dollar expenditure by other Commonwealth countries, and will help to build up those international reserves which will help the convertibility of the pound and encourage the trade of the world. There is nothing either spectacular or easy about all this. But it is good common sense; the common sense of eight British nations; and I am sure that Australia will respond to it.
COMMONWEALTH ECONOMIC CONFERENCE COMMUNIQUE
1. The Commonwealth Economic Conference, which ended today, was convened with the aim of concerting measures for increasing the economic strength of the Commonwealth countries, including the Colonial territories, and creating conditions in which their &nbsp;peoples can play their part in securing prosperity and contentment for themselves and for the world.
2. In recent years the sterling area has been faced with recurrent economic crises which have forced its members to take emergency measures of trade and exchange restriction. These measures were necessary but they have inevitably tended to frustrate the long-term economic expansion on which our hopes and opportunities for the future are founded. This was recognised at the January meeting of Commonwealth Finance Ministers. The measures taken in accordance with the conclusions of that meeting have, however, enabled the present Conference to decide that a more positive policy can now be adopted, both by the Commonwealth countries themselves and in concert with other friendly countries, to promote the expansion of world production and trade.
3. The Conference agreed that Commonwealth countries would work together to achieve certain broad common objectives. They have no intention of seeking the creation of a discriminatory economic bloc rather, their object is, by strengthening themselves, to benefit the world economy generally. Accordingly the following principles were agreed upon as governing the approach to the whole range of subjects under discussion.
(a) Internal economic policies designed to curb inflation and rises in the cost of living should be steadily followed.
(b) Sound economic development should be encouraged with the object of increasing productive strength and competitive power, providing employment and raising the standards of life.
(c) A multilateral trade and payment system should be extended over the widest possible area.
4. The application of these principles will require individual action by Commonwealth
Governments, co-operation among them and international action with other trading nations and existing international organisations.
INTERNAL MEASURES
All Commonwealth Governments have agreed to persevere in their efforts to curb inflation. Inflationary conditions frustrate the progress of sound development, both by increasing its cost and by destroying the savings necessary to finance it. Moreover, they damage the external balance by stimulating excessive imports and by diverting to internal use goods which would otherwise be available for export.
6. An adequate and stable external balance must be a first objective for all governments. Failure to achieve this means repeated crises, a continuously rising cost of living, a constant threat to employment and failure to develop resources effectively. The Conference welcomed the improvement which had taken place in the balance of payments both of the individual sterling area countries and of the sterling area as a whole, following upon the conclusions reached by Commonwealth Finance Ministers at their meeting in January, 1952. It noted with satisfaction that the sterling area would achieve balance with the rest of the world in the second half of this year. It was agreed, however, that this achievement, while reassuring, was only the first step towards a stable balance for the sterling area. Policies were agreed upon for 1953 which, it is hoped, will lead to further improvement in the reserves during that year. Nevertheless, while there has been steady improvement, the level of the reserves is as yet too low to warrant any substantial relaxation of the restrictions on imports from outside the sterling area.
7. The Conference considered the extensive restrictions which some countries of the sterling Commonwealth have needed to impose upon imports from the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth sources. There was agreement that restrictions imposed because of balance of payments problems should be relaxed as the external financial position of countries improved. In considering the whole problem the governments concerned would have clearly in mind the difficulties which the restrictions have raised for the export industries affected.
8. The economic and social objectives of the Commonwealth countries, individually and in association, depend upon their ability to produce and supply under competitive conditions an expanding flow of exports. There was therefore general agreement in the Conference on the vital need to expand the earning power of all sterling countries.
9. Development Policy - Throughout the Commonwealth there is wide scope for expanding the production of the essential supplies which the whole world needs - food and agricultural products, minerals and engineering products – and improving the means for transporting them. This development of the basic essentials has on occasion been impeded by other development of a less sound and permanent kind, which has overtaxed the countries' resources and has failed to contribute to the building of economic strength. The Conference agreed that in sterling area countries development should be concentrated on projects which directly or indirectly contribute to the improvement of the area's balance of payments with the rest of the world. Such projects should strengthen the economy of the countries concerned and increase their competitive power in world markets and so, by improving their balance of payments, bring increasing prosperity to their peoples. In some countries of the area, however, development plans have been or are being made to provide for some basic improvement in the standards of living, which is a necessary foundation for further economic development. Some social investment is also urgently needed in the more developed countries, certain of which have rapidly increasing populations. The Conference recognised the need in such cases for these types of investment.
10. To enable development to go forward a sufficient flow of savings must be provided in the countries undertaking the development and also in other countries which are ready to invest their savings there. The amount of savings which will be available from external sources will at best be small in relation to the size of the development programmes of countries of the sterling Commonwealth, and it is therefore essential that these countries should themselves adopt policies which increase the flow of savings-although this is inevitably a slow process for countries with low incomes and little margin above the basic needs for existence. The process of development will itself increase income and increase the flow of savings. 
11. The United Kingdom is the traditional source of external capital for Commonwealth investment and has special responsibilities in the Colonial territories. The United Kingdom Government are determined that the flow of capital from London for sound development throughout the Commonwealth shall be maintained and increased. This will only be possible if the United Kingdom can sustain the necessary level of internal savings and can achieve a surplus on overseas account additional to that required to meet its heavy existing commitments.
12 The United Kingdom Government have, however, undertaken to make a special effort to provide additional capital for Commonwealth development by facilitating the financing of schemes in other Commonwealth countries which will contribute to the improvement of the sterling area's balance payments. The Conference took note that the United Kingdom Government would wish, before making any of this additional finance available for Commonwealth development, to be sure that the country concerned was itself devoting an adequate part of its resources to investment designed to improve the sterling area's balance of payments and was ready to make a sufficient contribution towards the particular scheme in question, to ensure that both countries had an interest in seeing that it was carried through as efficiently and economically as possible.
13. The Conference welcomed the proposal by a group of important financial, industrial and commercial concerns in the United Kingdom to form a company to further development in other countries of the Commonwealth and the Colonial Empire. It was pleased to note that an announcement by this group is being issued today. The Conference also welcomed a statement by the United Kingdom representatives that the United Kingdom Government intend to discuss with the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development arrangements to give effect to their decision to make sterling available for lending by the Bank for Projects designed to improve the sterling area's balance of payments.
14. The Conference recognised the important contribution which investors, outside the sterling area, particularly in the United States, can make to economic development in the sterling area and agreed that every effort should be made to create conditions which would encourage such investment. It further agreed that all sterling area governments should strive to attain this by reducing such obstacles as controls over the movements of capital across the exchanges. The United Kingdom Government have reviewed the right, which is now enjoyed by residents outside the sterling area who have invested capital in approved projects in the United Kingdom and Colonial Empire since 1st January. 1950, to transfer their capital across the exchanges. At present this right only extends to the sterling equivalent of the initial investment. The United Kingdom Government informed the Conference that they have decided that henceforth it shall extend also to capital profits. 
15. Commodity Policy - The Conference recognised that there was no one universal remedy for the problem of instability of prices for primary commodities. Each commodity must be considered on its merits, in the light of the conditions prevailing at the time and the circumstances must determine what form of arrangements would be appropriate. The Conference agreed that violent fluctuations and an uneconomic level of prices for primary commodities were against the interests of consumers as well as producers.
All Commonwealth Governments are therefore ready to co-operate in considering, commodity by commodity, international schemes designed to ensure stability of demand and prices at an economic level. They also recognise the need for an agreed procedure for calling together the governments concerned to consider emergency action in the event of rapidly developing conditions of surplus or shortage of commodities entering into international trade.
16. Imperial Preference - There was general recognition at the Conference of the value of existing preferences. 
On the initiative of the United Kingdom a discussion took place on a proposal that all Commonwealth countries should join in seeking release from the “no new preference” rule in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (G.A.T.T.) and this United Kingdom proposal was supported by the representatives of some countries. The representatives of other countries felt that such an approach would not advance the agreed objective of restoring multilateral world trade and the Conference was therefore unable to support it.
All Commonwealth Governments agreed, however, to co-operate with the United Kingdom Government in an approach to the other contracting parties to the G.A.T.T. to meet particular difficulties arising on the United Kingdom tariff. The object would be to enable the United Kingdom, consistently with the basic provisions of the GA.T.T., to continue the duty-free entry for Commonwealth goods notwithstanding any increases that might from time to time become necessary in duties designed to protect domestic industry and agriculture in the United Kingdom. The Commonwealth Governments also agreed to consider sympathetically certain special tariff problems affecting the Colonies.
INTERNATIONAL ACTION
17. Resolute action in accordance with the conclusions recorded above will in itself do much to strengthen the economies of the sterling Commonwealth countries. But this is not enough. Action in a wider sphere is also necessary. The Conference therefore agreed to seek the co-operation of other countries in a plan to create the conditions for expanding world production and trade. The aim is to secure international agreement on the adoption of policies, by creditor and debtor countries, which will restore balance in the world economy on the lines of Trade not Aid and will, by progressive stages and within reasonable time, create an effective multilateral trade and payments system covering the widest possible area.
18. Trade - The plan envisages positive international action for the progressive removal,
as circumstances permit, of import restrictions imposed for the purpose of bringing a country's external accounts into balance. Action will be required by both creditor and debtor countries. The rate of progress in removing discrimination will depend upon the advance towards equilibrium between the United States and the rest of the world.
19. The sterling Commonwealth countries will not all be able to remove restrictions at the same time. In particular, the representatives of some countries have emphasised that they must continue to use their exchange resources in the manner which enables them to carry out their planned development programmes most effectively, and that they are likely to continue to need import restrictions for this purpose.
20. Finance - The Conference agreed that it is important, not only for the United Kingdom and the sterling area but also for the world, that sterling should resume its full role as a medium of world trade and exchange. An integral part of any effective multilateral system is the restoration of the convertibility of sterling but it can only be reached by progressive stages. The achievement of convertibility will depend fundamentally upon three conditions: 
(a) the continuing success of the action by sterling Commonwealth countries themselves, as outlined above;
(b) the prospect that trading nations will adopt trade policies which are conducive to the expansion of world trade;
(c) the availability of adequate financial support, through the International Monetary Fund or otherwise.
21. Procedure - It is proposed to seek acceptance of this plan by the Governments of the United States and of European countries, whose co-operation is essential, and to work as far as possible through existing international institutions dealing with finance and trade.
22. The timing of the successive stages of this plan cannot be decided at present. This can only be judged as the necessary conditions are satisfactorily fulfilled. 
23. Conclusion - The Conference is happy to be able to present this account of the confident understanding which exists between members of the Commonwealth and the wide measure of agreement which they have been able to achieve over the whole range of economic policy. The aims of their co-operation are entirely consistent with their close ties with the United States and the members of the Organization for European Economic Co-operation. The Commonwealth countries look outward to similar co-operation with other countries, not inward to a closed association. It is their common purpose, by their own efforts and together with others, to increase world trade for the mutual benefit of all peoples.
London, December, 1952.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


The First
WILLIAM QUEALE
MEMORIAL
LECTURE
&nbsp;
THE AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
ADELAIDE DIVISION
The William Queale Lecture has been established by the Adelaide Division of the Australian Institute of Management to honour the memory of their foundation president, who died on December 25, 1951.
William Queale was a prominent figure in the business world and public life of South Australia and was well known and active beyond the borders of this State.
From 1941 to 1944 he was president of the South Australian Chamber of Manufactures and later president of the federal body, the Associated Chambers of Manufacturers of Australia.
During the war he served on a number of boards and committees engaged in promoting and maintaining the war effort and for many years he was a member of the South Australian Industries Advisory Committee.
One of his major interests was of course the better application of management principles and the development of managers, and he was keenly interested in the Institute which was originally formed in Melbourne in 1941.
Ten years ago he was instrumental in promoting the Institute of Industrial Management in South Australia which was formed in 1944 and became part of the federal body which was formed in 1944 and became part of the Federal body – The Australian Institute of Management – on its establishment in 1949. At the time of his death he was president of the Federal Council of the Institute as well as President of the Adelaide Division.
To commemorate his name and work a group of friends and associates have subscribed a fund which has been applied in two ways. One–to establish the William Queale Library which is located at the Institute headquarters in Adelaide and two–to endow the William Queale Lecture which will be delivered annually by a citizen of distinction on a topic related to management.
The first William Queale Lecture was delivered by the Right Honourable the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. R. G. Menzies, C.H., Q.C., M.P., in the Bonython Hall in the University of Adelaide on Friday, October 22, 1954.
&nbsp;
THE FIRST 
WILLIAM QUEALE MEMORIAL LECTURE
delivered by
The Right Honourable R. G. Menzies, C.H., Q.C., M.P.,
Prime Minister,
in the Bonython Hall, Adelaide
on Friday, 22nd October, 1954
&nbsp;
The William Queale Memorial Lecture has been established by the Australian Institute of Management to honour the work and memory of a man whose friendship many of us enjoyed, and whose doggedness of character was in the great Australian pioneering tradition. For me it is indeed a distinction to be named as the inaugural lecturer.
“Bill” Queale's unspoken motto was, 'There is nothing I can't do if I try hard enough!” Taken as his own motto by every Australian, that simple but dynamic truth could make our country, in a few generations, a great nation in its own right and one of the most significant contributors to the wellbeing of mankind.
Much of the great constructive work in Australia has been done by men who, like the man whose memory we now honour, started from the “grass-roots,” without privilege and without any assets except courage, ability and vision. Such men, whom professing democrats occasionally criticise for their very success, are in fact the fine flower of -democracy. For democracy's true glory is not the achievement of a uniform mediocrity or of a spirit of dependence upon Government, but the encouragement of talent and initiative, the elevation of the individual, the giving of opportunity to all who have the inherent quality to seize it.
Democracy is the greatest system of government yet devised by man; but it has its weaknesses and its dangers. So far from lessening the responsibilities of the individual, it magnifies them. When one man was the ruler, it was no doubt a matter for thankfulness that he should be wise and honest and competent. But now that we are all rulers, we must all seek to be as wise and honest and competent as honest effort can make us.
Democracy, as it develops, steadily widens the social responsibilities of government. The organised community accepts growing burdens in the interests of the individual; the burdens of industrial welfare, of economic leadership, of social services, of high and stable employment. The weightier the burdens we accept, the greater must be our capacity and our strength, our skill and our production. For to accept, with popular applause, burdens that we are incapable of sustaining, is to involve others in our own ruin. As the great Radical, Thomas Paine, one said, “Those who expect to reap the blessings of freedom must, like men, undergo the fatigue of supporting it.” These reflections emphasise the point of danger. 
Demagogy is a poor substitute for democracy. Attempts to create “class” hatred in a nation whose only true classes are the active and the idle are in truth attacks upon democracy. A vehement concentration upon “rights” obscures the vital fact that unless duties are accepted and performed by each of us, not only our rights but the rights of others will die for want of nourishment. If we were all tired democrats, eager beneficiaries but reluctant contributors, democracy would collapse under its own weight. There are far too many who desert the Queale motto and adopt that other which says–”There is nothing I can't have if other people try hard enough!” 
It may be a quaint survival of earlier historical systems–absolute Monarchy, or despotic aristocracy, or a narrow oligarchy–that we should so easily fall into the habit of claiming upon “the government” as if it were somebody else, with infinite resources and power; instead of which, of course, it is ourselves, with no more resources and power than we, by our efforts, have created and made available.
I make these trite observations about frequently forgotten things without apology, for I want to remind you that, because he was first and foremost a contributor, William Queale was a good democrat.
Your Institute, of which he was one of the founding fathers, is an Institute of Management. Its very name is a reminder that in a democracy we need not only effort and skill, but well-directed effort and skill. And here again I am reminded of one of the temporary ills of democracy-the quaint illusion that self-government and discipline are mutually exclusive; that obedience to orders subtracts from human dignity and freedom. This illusion, though not uncommon, is so crude that, in a sense, it needs only to be stated to be destroyed. Yet, with your permission, I will dwell on it a little.
“Each for himself, and the devil take the hindmost” is the slogan not of freedom, but of anarchy. In a civilised community, not one of us can live to himself. In the immortal phrase of St. Paul, “we are members one of another.” My freedom must be limited if I am to live at peace with my neighbour and his freedom. The whole history of civilization, as mankind emerged from primitive tribal warfare and nomadic man gathered into ordered societies, was and is a history of limitations upon individual freedom. The growing mass of laws and the growing precision of law enforcement have produced an effect upon almost everything we do. The more robust our democracy becomes, the less do we &nbsp;claim an unfettered freedom to drive where we like and at what speed we fancy, to write or say what we like about other people, to redress our grievances by physical violence. Never in the history of the world have men and women moved from day to day in such a vast network of laws and regulations, orders and prohibitions, as under modern democracy. The thing to remember is that we wear our chains lightly because they are of our own forging; that the giving up of the little freedoms involved in the social compact has raised the quality and assured the continuity of those great freedoms of the mind and of the spirit which democracy is destined to serve. As Edmund Burke said at Bristol in 1774, “The only liberty I mean, is a liberty connected with order; that not only exists along with order and virtue, but which cannot exist at all without them.”
We see, therefore, that sensible discipline cheerfully accepted and public laws scrupulously obeyed are not the enemies of freedom, but its essential friends.
Good management is therefore vital to good democracy. Good management is your daily concern. It is my daily concern. I hope you will allow me to say a few things about it. For though I am a political manager (if the phrase is permitted), and you are business managers, the principles upon which we must work have much in common; more, indeed, than unthinking observers commonly concede.
I have not had all my years of Ministerial office without learning quite clearly one of the delightful oddities of human society. I will put it in this way. There is something fascinating about telling the other man how to run his business. Naturally, the less we know of the details and difficulties and headaches of that business, and the less encumbered we are with training and experience in that business, the more dogmatic we can be. Dogma is a comfortable thing; it saves thought. Yet no man can reach a general conclusion of any value unless he has first studied and mastered the relevant details. Nevertheless this sober reflection deters street-corner political philosophers and newspaper commentators not one whit. The field we are not in continues to look greener. The only wisdom I can claim to have achieved is that I never tell a manufacturer how to make his goods better or cheaper; though truth compels me to say that not infrequently he is quite willing to give me five minutes of his time in which to solve the problems which have vexed me, in the study or the Cabinet Room, for years. Having offered these mild observations to those who may care to consider them, I make bold to say that the principles of management are of universal validity; they are the principles of industrial and business and political government. Let me set down and expound a few of them, partly for your guidance, but even more, I cheerfully admit, for my own.
The first principle of management is that the manager should know what he wants to do or to get done. Infirmity of purpose at the top will breed indifference, frustration, and confusion lower down. It is agreeable, in works of fiction or in the selectively edited autobiographies of what the Americans call “tycoons,” to read of the man who succeeded by making a long series of split-second decisions. But great enterprises are not made by split-second decisions. The great decisions are the fruit of research and labour and skill and imagination. The port of destination must be selected, the charts laid out, the crew engaged, the supplies taken aboard. If storms come, there will be plenty of room for quick decisions, but after the storm the observations must be taken and the steady course resumed. Here we have the supreme difficulty of political management. There are so many side-currents; the clamour of the moment may indicate some other port, where, it is said, the seas are calm and the customers eager. The long view is never as spectacular as the day-to-day diversion. Yet without long views democracy becomes a mere squabble for bread and circuses; statesmanship disappears, and the adroit manoeuvres of evanescent politics prevail. In the lengthening history of self-government too many lofty conceptions have been set aside or postponed by the cynical comment-“There are no votes in that!” Yet in every generation there has been enough resolute statesmanship to produce a line of progress, sometimes distorted by passion or prejudice or sheer greed, yet tending always towards a wider and better life. So, you see, we have our first principle in common; for you, the soundest establishment and long-range development of an enterprise; for a Prime Minister, some day, the memory not so much of a debate won or an electoral victory gained as of a nation advanced in prosperity and justice. 
The second principle of management is that the manager must do his best with the materials he has. Management is not a matter of detached theory, but of theory applied in practice. Every manager has his team of human beings, fast, slow, strong, weak. He is not to cry for the moon, or bite his nails at night, saying, “If only old Brown or Jones were back with us again!” Now, in seeking for perfection, we can, if we are not careful, waste much time and energy. It was Cicero who said that everything splendid is rare, and that nothing is harder to find than perfection. So let us use the materials we have, with the best team that you can; train it; encourage it; lead it. You will find, as many a captain has, that a team of champions will always be beaten by a champion team.
The third principle of management is that we should remember that we are not conducting affairs in a vacuum. We are not dealing on paper with abstract ideas, but in a hard world with ideas in relation to men-a very different matter. Alexander Pope said that, “The proper study of mankind is man.” He could have elaborated by saying that the most difficult study of mankind is man. It is much easier to be mathematically accurate than to give another man a sensible direction. For men have at their best that queer mixture of bad logic and good sense, of courage when cold reason says “surrender,” of vigour when, in reason, exhaustion should have arrived, which makes history by getting things done. This, you may say, puts a premium on the practical man, and puts the theorist in his place. But to say that would be to tell only half the truth. Theory without practice can begin as a divine essence but end as a mere vapour. Practice without theory can become so narrow and so ignorant that it loses the sense of direction and of purpose. 
Let me develop this. The manager uses men. To use them effectively he must understand them. Men are distinguished from machines because they have ideas and personalities. The strong “practical” man may drive a chain gang along, but he will never handle men without understanding and imagination. 
The business manager must realise that his is not the only business; that his business is unlikely to succeed in a bankrupt community; and that he should, therefore, always seek to see his business in the setting of the business of the nation. The modem complexity of life involves a growing interaction between business and business, between business and government, between national and international economics. You can, in the short run, make money quickly, as Dick Turpin did. But in the long run you cannot be a good business manager without being a good and wise and informed and responsible citizen. Governments must fit themselves to see economics in the broad. Since a business manager cannot run his business and the government at the same time - oddly enough each is a full-time and absorbing task - he cannot be blamed if, like the cobbler, he sticks to his last. But I do beg of him that he should struggle to see the particular against the background of the general; so that the sense of profit and the sense of community, each of them so good, should co-exist and derive strength one from the other. Morally and intellectually, the curse of the world is narrow and exclusive specialism. It is supremely dangerous, whether it be the specialism of the manufacturer of milking machines or of the nuclear physicist. 
The fourth principle of management-in order of importance it should be first - is to establish a sense of community of interest between manager and managed. Where there is no underlying sense of unity, differences become exaggerated and war becomes the normal. This is true of both politics and industry. 
Take politics. Most of us at Canberra enjoy the friendliest personal relations. We have great matters in 'common. We are all Australians, of common race, language, literature, traditions, and religious faith. With few exceptions, we began life with no advantages of wealth or social position. We believe in the equal rule of law and in the dignity of self-government. We are British through and through. We are for the Crown. We are the Queen's men and women. We all believe in progress, in development, in social justice. What a wealth of agreement we have here! We disagree; of course; about socialism; about the limits of functions of government; about financial policies; about the principles of administration; about foreign policy; about many things. But the truth remains that, if we concentrate on our differences and forget our unities, politics will sound and be like civil war. The one thing that the bitter and narrow partisans forget is that continuity of national security and growth requires, on great matters, a certain continuity of policy. We secure that by remembering our unities; we destroy it by thinking only of our differences. I, as you may have gathered, am a Liberal, with deep and strong convictions. My opponents, including men of great ability, are Socialists. So let the fight go on. But whoever wins between us, may Australia win always. 
So much for the political managers. What about the industrial managers? As one who once had a great deal of first-hand knowledge of industrial arbitration, I am conscious of its central weakness. Over 50 years ago, the new Commonwealth was given power to deal with certain classes of industrial dispute. No dispute, no jurisdiction. Fight first, and go to court afterwards. The inevitable result has been that industrial warfare has tended to become the condition precedent to industrial peace. This has infected an already difficult problem, the relation between employer and employee. Too frequently the question has been, “How much can I get out of the other fellow?” when it should have been “How much can we all get, if we work together?” 
There are certain simple truths which become obscured by the dust of conflict. One of them is that there can be no permanent and progressive employment in an unprofitable business; good profits are the only guarantee of good wages, and vice versa. The other is that good-will is vital to efficient service, and that the employer who performs only his legal and compulsory duty cannot sensibly demand from his employee a loftier standard than he himself upholds. 
Year by year, we are, as a people, vexed by foolish industrial disputes from which there emerge hardships in wage-earners' homes, losses in trading accounts, a fall in national production and anger in the public mind. In most cases, these disputes have occurred because the simple truths to which I have referred have been forgotten. 
Politically and industrially, we have major interests in common, and others on which some disagreement is necessary and healthy. One of the great tasks of management is to make these things clear. To work out, even by dispute, the terms of partnership is one thing; to forget or deny partnership is both foolish and suicidal. 
The fifth principle of management is, in a democracy, the hardest to practise. It is, in brief, to achieve the highest possible measure of self-help and self-reliance before asking somebody else to carry the burden. The ancient question, “Am I my brother's keeper?” has in modem times been distorted into, “Is not my brother my keeper?” That mystical creature, the Government, which nobody has ever seen, has come to be regarded as the Universal Provider. On great national issues, Government may well be the port of ultimate resort; but it should not be the first port of call. Not so long ago, the Tariff Board had something to say on this matter. 
That Board, let me remind you, has over a long period of years, established a remarkable degree of authority, and of service to Australia. That it is occassionally criticised I admit, yet, by and large, its methods, its principles, and its reports have enjoyed the respect of industry and of the community at large. Its high reputation has helped Australia in many international trade and financial negotiations both before and since the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The striking fact is that over the period of existence of the Tariff Board, that is, since 1921, employment in secondary industries has increased from 435,000, or 8% of a total population of 5,500,000 to 983,000 or 11% of a total population of 9,000,000. This is strong evidence that the work of the Board has, to say the least, not hindered the sound growth of secondary industry in Australia. Yet the Board has repeatedly noted that too many manufacturers, when meeting competition, think first of added protection as the quick answer. 
In its 1950 Report, the Board said, “Tariff protection should be a last resource and not a sole or even inevitable method of securing relief from overseas competition.” And again, in its 1953 Report-“The Board does not subscribe to the view that the Tariff should be used in anticipation of difficulties ahead, neither does it believe that the Tariff barrier should be the first line of defence against overseas competition.” In the same report it spoke of industry's “capacity for self-help.” These statements were not attacks on the policy of protection, which indeed needs no defence; they were designed merely to put things in perspective. Honest work, good plant, and efficient management remain the prime weapons against a burdensome cost structure and competitive disadvantage. 
The sixth principle is that every good manager is a pioneer. I began this lecture by referring to William Queale as one who was in the Australian pioneering tradition. Many times I have said, and I repeat it tonight, that we do badly to think of the pioneers as grandfathers, with beards and bowyangs; dead and gone, their labours completed. For the truth is that when a nation gives up pioneering, it goes back. A pioneer is, quite simply, one who breaks new ground or sets out on new adventures. His essence is that he is willing to tackle a new problem, and has a sense of responsibility for the future. Such qualities are not common, and therefore we cannot all be managers. But unless in every generation we have an adequate supply of pioneers, future generations will not call us blessed. Flashy policies, get-rich-quick schemes, the preferring of big current dividends to solid reserves for future development; these are the negation of the pioneering spirit, for they deny or ignore responsibility for the future. Great enterprises cannot stand still in a growing community; when they do, it is a sign that they are marked for death. The sad thing, which we have all noted and which we should all do our best to dislodge, is that there is such a widespread popular disposition to be critical of big men or ideas or enterprises, and particularly of great and growing enterprises, as if in some ways their success is inimical to social justice or rather literal notions of democratic equality. In truth, they merely show the pioneering spirit at work; their success is a proof of the opportunity which democracy gives, and must continue to give, to talent and character and energy. In a slave community, the only great enterprise is despotic government itself. It is in free communities that the citizen gets his chance. His growth is the proof of his freedom. 
Before I conclude, let me recapitulate. I have, it would seem, stated some principles of management. The manager should mow his own mind and purpose. He should work with the materials he has, and not with those he would have liked. He must remember that he is dealing with men and not abstractions. He must foster a sense of community of interest among ill those who are engaged in his enterprise. He is to practise self-help to the limit before appealing to Government or other people. He must never lose his capacity for pioneering. 
You may dismiss my theme and exposition by saying that it is all perfectly obvious, and did not need to be said at all. In a way I hope that you can say this, and say it truthfully. Nothing could be a more splendid proof of the success of the Institute and of the splendid men who founded and inspired it. 
On the whole, however, I think that the criticism is much more likely to take this form-”Oh yes: it's all very well to make some academic analysis and produce some counsel of perfection; but business is a tough practical business, which has to be learned the hard way, and there's no room in it for these pretty-pretty theories.” So, before I conclude, I will say something about “tough practical men.” 
A man may be a tough, concentrated, successful money-maker and never contribute to his country anything more than a horrible example. A manager may be tough and practical, squeezing out, while the going is good, the last ounce of profit and dividend, and may leave behind him an exhausted industry and a legacy of industrial hatred. A tough manager may never look outside his own factory walls or be conscious of his partnership in a wider world. I often wonder what strange cud such men sit chewing when their working days are over, and the accumulating riches of the mind have eluded them. 
The truth is that if the second half of the 20th century is to see a restoration of civilisation and peace, a new marriage must occur between theory and practice; between the skill of the hand and the wisdom of the mind; between the spirit of humanity and the talent of the individual. If we are not just to blunder along, from crisis to crisis, from expedient to expedient, we must have in this world a revival in all spheres of activity, of the human soul and the human intellect. Each needs cultivating. Each need exercise. 
It is worse than foolish, it is dangerous, to regard the spiritual nature of man as irrelevant to secular enterprise, or to treat a broad philosophy of life as an intellectual matter fit only for the university class-room. The basic malaise of our brilliantly clever century is that we have tended to divide our lives into water-tight compartments. The enormous and dynamic energies of business and productive and commercial enterprise will reach their fullest and most useful expression when pure learning ceases to be a thing apart, when our knowledge of men catches up with our knowledge of machines, when industrial statesmanship becomes recognised as just one branch of a universal statesmanship, of which the statesmanship of government will be but a particular expression. &nbsp;



THE PILGRIMS
OF THE UNITED STATES
SPEECHES AT A DINNER
IN HONOR OF
THE RIGHT HONORABLE
ROBERT GORDON MENZIES, M. P.
Prime Minister of Australia
THE WALDORF-ASTORIA
SATURDAY, FIFTH, MARCH
NINETEEN FIFTY-FIVE 
OFFICERS OF
The Pilgrims of the United States
Honorary President
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER
President
JOHN W. DAVIS, G. B. E.
Vice-Presidents
MYRON C. TAYLOR
FREDERIC R. COUDERT
LEWIS W. DOUGLAS
WALTER S. GIFFORD, M. M.
Hon. Secretary
EDWARD K. WARREN, O. St. J.
Hon. Treasurer
C. G. MICHALIS
Executive Committee
HUGH BULLOCK, Chairman
WINTHrop W. ALDICH, G. B. E. GRAYSON KIRK
FENWICK BEEKMAN LANDON P. MARVIN
LINDSAY BRADFORD WALTER S. MARVIN
ELmHU C. CHURCH C. G. MICHALIS
PERPONT V. DAVIS WILLIA D. MrrCHELL
HORACE W. B. DONEGAN DOUGLAS M. MOFFAT
THOMAS K. FINLET mr IRVING S. OLDS, C. B. E.
WILLIAM F. HALSEY, F. B. A. RUNDALL, O. B. E.
K. B. E. WILLIAM SHIELDS
JoNm G. JACKSON JOHN MORTIMER SCHmI
HARRY E. WARD
Dinner Committee
WILLIAM SHIELDS, Chairman
FENWICK BEEKMAN C. G. MIcaALIs
LINDSAY BRADFORD C. B. ORMEROD, C. B. E.
EDWARD LAROCQUE TINKER 
Contents PAGE
OPENING REMARKS BY HUGH BULLOCK, CHAIRMAN
OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 3
ADDRESS BY THE HONORABLE THOMAS E. DEWEY 6
ADDRESS BY THE HONORABLE SINCLAIR WEEKS 14
ADDRESS BY THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT G.
M ENZIES, M 22
SEATING LIST 37 
The Pilgrims
A Dinner to honor The Right Honorable Robert G.
vfenzies, Prime Minister of Australia, was given by The Pil-
, rims of the United States on Saturday evening, March
955, at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, New York, Mr. Hugh
3ullock, Chairman of the Executive Committee of The Pil-
' rims of the United States, presiding. The Right Reverend
he Bishop of New York gave the invocation.
CHAIRMAN BULLOCK: Ladies and Gentlemen, will you
ise and drink with me The Pilgrims' loyal toast: To Her
dfajesty The Queen!
( The audience stood and toasted the health of Her
dajesty the Queen, while the orchestra played the British
Jational Anthem.)
PRIME MINISTER MENZIES: Sir, To The President!
( The audience toasted the health of The President of
he United States, while the orchestra played the American
' ational Anthem.)
CHAIRMAN BULLOCK: Mr. Prime Minister, Your Ex-
! llencies, Mr. Secretary, Governor Dewey, Very Distinguished
; uests and Fellow Pilgrims:
For over half a century The Pilgrims Society has provided
ie most distinguished platform from which a speaker could
iscuss matters of common interest to citizens of the United
Page 3 
States and citizens of the British Commonwealth of Nations.
While most of our guests of honor have come from the
United Kingdom, nevertheless, over the years, we have been
privileged to entertain prime ministers of Canada, New
Zealand and, on two previous occasions, prime ministers of
Australia. This evening, once again, we have as our honored guest
another Prime Minister of Australia. I am just as disappointed
as you are that our President, Mr. Davis, is not here to welcome
him. No one could do so with equal eloquence. I only hope
that our loss is Mr. Davis' gain and that he is benefitting
from a warm South Carolina sun-although an Australian
sun is more reliable this particular time of year. Not that
I have ever been privileged to be in Australia, but there will
succeed me shortly at this rostrum three gentlemen who have.
But first I want to read to you two messages. The first
is from our sister society in Great Britain:
" THE PILGRIMS OF THE UNITED STATES:
" The Pilgrims of Great Britain join with The Pilgrims
of the United States in the welcome you extend tonight
to one of the most distinguished citizens of the Commonwealth
who has just been visitifig these shores. Mr.
Menzies with his wide knowledge of world affairs and
his gift of expression is a welcome guest at every feast,
and we will think of you and him on this happy Saturday
evening. " HALIFAX CAMPBELL STUART
President Chairman
[ Applause
I have a second message that I hope you will listen to
carefully. It reads:
Page 4 
" Dear Mr. Bullock:
" Please extend my greetings to the Right Honorable
Robert G. Menzies and to those who honor him at the
March fifth dinner given by the Pilgrims of the United
States. " In two World Wars Australia contributed valiantly to
the Allied cause. And recent years have given continuing
demonstrations of the interest and effort which our two
nations share in the preservation of freedom and security.
I need only cite our mutual support of the United Nations
in its efforts to repel aggression, our participation in the
Colombo Plan, and our common membership in the
ANZUS Treaty and the Manila Pact.
" I trust the visit of Prime Minister Menzies will reenforce
the close and friendly relationship which exists
between our two countries.
" To all of you I send best wishes for a most enjoyable
meeting." That message comes from the Honorary President of
The Pilgrims of the United States. The signature is " Dwight
D. Eisenhower". [ Applause)
Across the pages of history of every city and state and
nation there comes, none too often, a brave and able crusading
spirit whose touchstone is integrity and whose aim is dear
for all to see-good government.
And even before his election as District Attorney of New
York County in 1937 at the age of 35, and certainly after his
elevation to Chief Executive of the greatest state of our Union,
integrity and good government have been synonymous with the
name of Thomas E. Dewey. [ Applause] During his three
terms as Governor he has given New York State a splendid
administration. Page 
Governor Dewey admires our guest of honor as much as
I do. I have heard him evaluate Mr. Menzies in the highest
terms as an administrator and statesman. Before this eminent
Australian addresses us, however, it is my privilege to present
to you an American administrator, an American statesman,
who has made our city, our state, our country a better place
to live in: The Honorable Thomas E. Dewey. [ The audience
rose and applauded.)
THE HONORABLE THOMAS E. DEWEY: Mr. Chairman, Mr.
Prime Minister, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen:
" It is a little over five years ago that Mrs. Dewey and I were in
Berlin, and I was somewhat surprised that the Mayor of Berlin
had made a rather insistent request that I visit City Hall. We
were not in Berlin for political purposes, nor were we there for
the purpose of visiting City Hall. But the Army, which was in
charge, " suggested" that we go, so, of course, I said, " Wherever
I am, I do as I am told," and we went. [ Laughter]
The Mayor, as you will remember, was Ernst Reuter,
who was one of the extraordinary people of our time. He
was imprisoned because he was a Communist, allegedly, and
he was imprisoned because he was not a Communist. He
was one of Hitler's victims who escaped from a concentration
camp to Britain where an honest man with a free conscience
has always been able to find asylum. Then he went to Turkey.
He learned the language, and for six years taught economics
in Turkish. After the war, he returned to Berlin, and, in due
course, he became the first elected Mayor of West Berlin. He
was one of the great souls of our time, and his recent death
was one of the tragedies of our time, at the age of
Having got to the City Hall, we sat down with the other
six members of the City Government. Mayor Reuter said,
Page 6 
" Governor, I suppose you are a little curious as to why I
urged you to come to City H-all."
I said, " Well, Mr. Mayor, I was interested in the reason."
He said, " Did you see the three thousand people who
were on the steps of City Hall as you came in?"
I said, " Yes."
He said, " Do you know why they were there?"
I said, " No, Mr. Mayor. I don't and I was interested."
He said, " Do you realize that you are the only man they
have even seen who ran for the highest office of his land, was
defeated, and survived? [ Laughter] You are the most important
object lesson to the people of Germany that I ever
saw." [ Laughter)
I have cherished that lesson and I'm grateful for it, I
might say. It is comforting to live in a country where you
can disagree with 51 per cent of the people and still be
allowed peaceably to practice your profession. [ Laughter)
It is nicer to have 5 1, but sometimes you have to settle for 49.
[ Laughter] I remember back in the days when there was less, shall
I say, intense personal partisanship at the Executive Mansion
in Albany, when Al Smith was Governor. Al Smith was a
Democrat, but he had retained a Republican as Conservation
Commissioner. A member of the Assembly said to him at a
reception one night, " Governor, I am interested in the fact that
you have kept on all this time a Republican Commissioner of
Conservation." Governor Smith responded, " Well, I will tell you about it,
Pete. He is a nice guy and he is a good Conservation Commissioner.
I told him that I had a collection of monkeys in
the zoo back of the house and so long as he kept those monkeys
in good health he could be Conservation Commissioner, and
Page 7 
they are the healthiest monkeys in America." [ Laughter
It must have been nice to have lived in the days when
partisanship didn't exceed good taste. Maybe those times
will come back again. I do not know any particular portion of
the world where that pleasant and nostalgic condition prevails,
but it may still be said that there are portions of the world,
and particularly of the English-speaking world, where, when
all the chips are down, there is no voice of authority who fails
to put the welfare of his country and the peace of the world
ahead of partisanship or the interest of his particular political
party. I am at a peculiar disadvantage tonight. For a great many
years I have been Governor of New York, for so long that
the memory of man runneth not to the contrary. [ Laughter
The difficulty is that you fall into slovenly habits if you are
Governor of New York, perhaps even if you are a prime
minister-I wouldn't know; I never have been one. The
difficulty is that you get so that you come to dinners with an
idea or two, but your real purpose is to scavenge on the people
who speak before you, and so long as you are Governor, you
have a right to speak last. [ Laughter] Now that I have
voluntarily surrendered that exclusive privilege, I am no
longer a successful scavenger. [ Laughter I leave that to my
betters on my left and on my right.
There are too few of us who have had the privilege of
visiting the great nation whose Chief Executive Officer we
honor tonight. I was horrified to find three and a half years
ago when I visited Australia that no prime minister of Britain,
no king or queen had even been there, no president or vice
president of the United States-maybe some cabinet officer,
but nobody remembered it. And there is a land mass larger
than the United States of America. There is a nation with
Page 8 
the vigor that can only come from the peculiar liberties enjoyed
by English-speaking people, and a variety of climate
extending from the north, which is tropical, to the south, which
compares with the northern part of the United States, where
in March it is delightfully warm, I am told, and where in
August, as it was when I was there, it can be fairly cold and
miserable, just as it is here in New York right now. The
central heating is not in accordance with our standards but
I venture to say that it produces a much healthier people. I
found very little central heating, but I didn't find very many
people complaining about it. Moreover, they didn't seem to
bother about whether the temperature was 65 or 72 degrees,
as we do, and I heard nobody complain about it except the
newspaper men who were traveling along with me-and me.
[ Laughter) I did have to dig out my winter underwear that
I had shipped out, and I felt a little bit like a weakling
because my Australian friends weren't wearing any. I thought
perhaps they were producing a sturdier race. We had better
look to our laurels.
I spent some time, I have forgotten quite how long, at
a sheep station-in American that is a sheep " ranch," but in
Australia it is a " station." It was the largest sheep station in
Australia, and it is called Boonoke. They have produced the
finest line of Merino sheep in Australia. If you don't think
that is important, you ought to live in Australia and you would
find out how important it is. I was cold from the minute I
got there until the time I left, but I learned more about sheep
shearing, how magnificently sheep shearers can work, and what
an important thing it is to produce a fine line of sheep with
the right kind of wool, than I had in my preceding 49 years of
existence. Page 9 
There are some remarkable differences as well as similarities
between Australia and this country. They have now and
have had for some years a shortage of manpower. As a result,
you don't have to stay at your job if you don't like it. You
can walk down one block and get a different one. The result
is that in one shop which employs 500 people they had 2,000
people employed in that year, never more than 500 at a time.
This must be wonderful for the people who work in it and
terrible for the boss.
They have a tax system which is not unrelated to ours,
and no more attractive than ours. They have a system of
treating their guests which is rather different from ours, too.
When I was there, the Prime Minister then and now, out of the
generosity of his heart, made available an airplane which the
government provided. In fact, in addition to that, there was
a brilliant and charming young man named Arthur Allen who
can eat orange juice, steak, potatoes and pie for breakfast, and
I know very few Americans outside of Boston who can do that.
When I got there, I found that my clothing had been lying in
the airplane office for five weeks, and looked like it. My
secretary, Paul Lockwood's clothes had been there the same
length of time. He is 6 feet 4 and weighs 240 pounds. His
looked even worse than mine. Allen apologetically said, "~ I
am so sorry that I did not bring my iron. When we get to
Canberra I will take care of it."
They really produce some remarkable civil servants in
Australia. I never saw one in this country who would say that.
Well, anyway, in the time I was there, I had this delight.
ful schedule: it simply called for visiting a large number of
Australian cities, each of which is more charming than its
predecessor, and we were always the guests of the Prime
Minister. So that, unlike this country, I suspect that unless
Page 
he has a unique and special privilege, the State Department
has assigned somebody to accompany him, and, beyond that,
he is on his own, he has no military aide, no political aide,
no presidential secretary, no cars, chauffeurs, no airplanes.
I enjoyed the hospitality of the Australian Government
for the entire time, and the only counterbalancing factor was
that each place I went, from Deniliquin, population 1,500,
to Sydney, I found a radio in front of my face, a wonderfully
cordial welcome, speeches of welcome, and I, who had gone
on this trip never expecting to make but two speeches, made,
think to my embarrassment, four speeches a day minimum the
entire time I was in Australia, and every one of them on the
nationally owned radio service. If the people of Australia
ever hear of me again, I am sure they will throw me out, but
it was all beyond my control.
When the Prime Minister of Australia comes to this
country, he receives the usual inadequate American welcome,
but he doesn't have a radio and television set thrust before him
every day. [ Laughter and applause]
I am sure that all of you would be delighted if the Prime
Minister were in a position to throw away the thoughts that
he has gathered and tell you more about this fabulous land,
larger than the United States, with a population of about 9
million, a great continent lying with the shadow of a long
island above it, held in divided and disputed authority. From
that island, the Japanese attack on Australia was in a position
to be launched but was frustrated, partly because almost a
million American troops went to Australia.
One of the extroardinary events of modern history was
that invasion of almost a million young men from a nation as
far away from home as they could be ( you can't get any further
away from New York than Australia). There they were,
Page 11 
lonesome and on the loose, full of vigor, many of them partially
trained, dumped on Brisbane and the surrounding area.
And the incredible thing is that the people of Brisbane and
Australia were able to open not only their homes, their purses,
but their hearts, and they took in this almost a million Americans,
so that as a result there was not only a minimum of that
dreadful friction which occurs when a community is inundated
by the youth of a strange nation in uniform to fight a war,
but there has been erected a monument to the Americans who
came. I suggest, ladies and gentlemen, that the monument
should have been to the people who welcomed them with
all their hearts and souls and made them feel at home.
[ Applause] It may be true that they saved Australia. It may be true
that the vast naval engagements destroyed the power of the
attacking force, but this was one of the most memorable of
all invasions, which resulted in a grand total of good will
which will last for a century.
It is good to know that there are such wonderful people
as far away from this country as they can be, with the kind
of leadership that every American admires, with the kind of
purpose that we admire. It is especially valuable that in these
difficult times where there is the sharpest disagreement as to
policy, not only among the English-speaking peoples but
among others, as to the degrees and gradations of our defense
of existing free areas, that we have not only stout friendship
but also the brilliant intellectual companionship of the people
of Australia, and I should also add of New Zealand and
Malaya and Singapore, who are their near neighbors, in dealing
with the most delicate and explosive problems of the free
world at this moment. They are the finest of allies that the
free world has ever known. I should like to say to you to-
Page 12 
night that of all the leaders of the free world whom I have
known over the last 20 years, and I have known practically
all of them, none has ever stood higher, and there is none
today with more powerful intellectual capacity, a purer flame
of patriotism, a more brilliant capacity to serve the cause of
human freedom, than the gentleman we have the honor to be
with tonight. [ Applause)
CHAIRMAN BULLOCK: About a month ago Governor
Dewey and I were at a small luncheon together, and he talked
somewhat along these lines about Australia and about our
guest of honor. I said, " Governor, you are elected." When he
looked a bit puzzled, I said, " I urge you to speak at The Pilgrims
dinner which we are giving early in March in honor
of Prime Miftister Menzies." And, Governor, whether you
speak first or last, you speak superbly, as always! [ Applause]
Earlier this century a President of the United States wrote
a book entitled " Have Faith in Massachusetts." This country
does have faith because of the kind of men Massachusetts
produces three Presidents, a host of Cabinet members, a
legion of fine public servants.
You know I am sure that Weeks is an honored name in
Massachusetts. Secretary Weeks' father before him was United
States Representative, United States Senator, and a member of
two Presidential Cabinets. Secretary Weeks himself typifies
the best of Massachusetts traditions. He was Harvard, 1914
it couldn't have been any other college, could it? ( Laughter)
He is an Overseer today. In World War I he commanded a
Battery attached to the Rainbow Division and saw his full
share of action. His son commanded the same Battery in
World War II. Page 13 
He has been banker as well as manufacturer, with many
years of public service. He has been United States Senator
from Massachusetts. He worked diligently to put a great President
in the White House. And since January, 1953, he has
been our very able Secretary of Commerce.
I present to you a Massachusetts man and an outstanding
American public servant: The Honorable Sinclair Weeks.
[ The audience rose and applauded.]
SECRETARY WEEKS: Mr. Chairman, Mr. Prime Minister,
your Excellencies, Governor Dewey and Pilgrim guests; I am
very happy to be with you this evening. I appreciate very
much the friendly introduction I have received. When they lay
it on quite as thick as that, I think of a dear old lady from my
part of the country in New England who passed away and on
her tombstone she was one of the great characters of her
small community she had done every good work and been
a wonderful citizen on her tombstone they put this epitaph,
" She averaged well for these parts." [ Laughter] Mr. Chairman,
that is all I ever hope to do to average well for what
I may say is the best part of the United States, New England.
I may also correct you, Mr. Chairman. I hesitate to do
this because I would hardly want to be ungrateful for your
reference, but I cannot have myself allied with the Rainbow
Division. My division was the best division, the Twenty-Sixth
Division. [ Laughter]
It is indeed a pleasure to join with you in welcoming your
distinguished guest, the Right Honorable Robert Gordon
Menzies, the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia.
I am glad to have the opportunity of talking to the
Pilgrims. Your Society, which for over fifty years has been
Page 14 
strengthening the bonds between the United Kingdom and the
United States, together with your sister organization in the
British Isles, have fostered a better appreciation on both sides
of the Atlantic of our common heritage, in such fundamentals
as language, literature, law and government, and have facilitated
a two-way exchange of ideas and cultural achievement
which has brought a better understanding between the two
oldest English-speaking peoples of the community of nations.
With better understanding has come unity of purpose,
strengthening our common devotion to freedom and our determination
to help each other preserve it. So I congratulate you,
The Pilgrims of the United States and of Great Britain on this
great achievement.
It seems to all of us highly appropriate that from time to
time you welcome the representatives of the other Englishspeaking
nations, and when such a representative is from the
Commonwealth of Australia, which in war and peace has made
contributions to international freedom and progress out of all
proportion to its population and wealth, we do honor to ourselves
as we honor him. [ Applause]
I think it is rather interesting that the two who have
been asked to talk to you this evening with the Prime Minister
have both had some experience with Australia. My first
experience was in 1917 when I had a good look at the soldiers
of Australia and New Zealand, and I can say to you without
any throwing off on the soldiers of our own or any other
nation, that we all thought that the men of the Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps were about as fine fighting men as
there were on the Western Front. [ Applause]
Somewhat later, the business with which I was associated
in my previous existence till 1953, set up a subsidiary in
Australia, in Adelaide, and it has been very successful, if I
Page 
may say so apologetically. I won't mention names, so there
will be no danger of a plug here, but between ' 29 and the
opening of the second World War, we multiplied the business
four times as far as volume of sales, and since that date, in
' 39, we have multiplied it ten times, and it is going along all
right. We like it. I say " we" -you understand I have disassociated
myself from the business. We like it, and we think
it is the kind of an operation at least we hope it is the kind
of an operation that our friends in Australia like.
I went out there some time before the second World
War. Tom has stolen some of my thunder as far as Australia
is concerned. I could talk on it for hours. I went out on a
ship they didn't fly in those days, and I read everything in
the world I could about Australia and, ladies and gentlemen,
the next trip you take, go to Australia. It is a great
country. You see things there that other places in the world
you only see in fossil form. I am speaking of the vegetable
life. [ Laughter] The animals and I'll see how many of you
can follow me now the animals are all marsupials. Is that
correct, Mr. Prime Minister? But a little more seriously, go
out there and if you don't do anything else go and see the
koala bear and if you want to see the worst part of Australia
go to one of those sheep stations that Tom was talking about,
and experience Australian flies.
The tea is marvellous. Seven times a day I had it. I
cannot say as much for the coffee. At least I could not in those
days. I guess it is a lot better now.
Australia is a country that always steps up and meets its
responsibilities. It is doing so again today. It has realized
the danger to the free world of Communist aggression in Asia,
and is doing something about it. The recent meeting at Bangkok
of the Council of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization
Page 16 
reminds us of our joint interest in the Far East. There the
Foreign Ministers of Australia and the United Kingdom and
the United States, New Zealand, Pakistan, the Philippines,
Thailand, a representative of France, have just forged dcloser the
ties of defense. In particular they recognize the insidious
threat of Communist subversion and infiltration to the peace
and security of the area, and henceforth we think that the eight
governments will carry on continuing consultations and mutual
assistance, each drawing upon the experience of the others in
dealing with this danger.
No less important in preserving the integrity and authority
of the freely constituted governments of Southeast Asia are
their economic strength and the social well-being of their
citizens. At Bangkok the member states inaugurated steps to
increase economic cooperation and to promote economic
progress. Of course, the Bangkok meeting is merely the latest
of many successful steps free governments have taken in the
past few years to deter aggression and preserve peace. I need
not recite for this audience the long list of accomplishments
in mutual help and firm solidarity. You and I know that today
free nations are collectively stronger than at any time in recent
years, and perhaps we may pray that this be so, that the utter
futility of modern warfare may become more evident as time
goes on. But in any event, whatever happens, the United
States and Australia not only will but must continue to stand
shoulder to shoulder. [ Applause]
With respect to business relations, and this is my particular
field, of course, the relations that we have in this
country with Australia have been excellent. 475 business establishments
in the United States have placed their investments in
Australia in the form of companies that they have established
there, and they find a ready welcome on the mat. Companies Page 17 
that you know all about the Standard of New Jersey, Ford,
Chrysler, General Motors, Goodyear, General Electric, Swift-
I could go on indefinitely our investments in Australia have
just doubled in total dollar value in the last four years. In
connection with the investment of American capital in Australia,
it is interesting to me to recall the words of Acting
Prime Minister Sir Arthur Fadden at the opening of the new
Philip Morris plant in Melbourne in January this year when
he referred to Australia's policy of welcoming foreign capital
from abroad in these words, " The policy of the present Commonwealth
Government is therefore to welcome overseas capital
to Australia, particularly if it is intended for permanent
investments, and if it is likely to contribute to the desirable
development of Australian resources." And I say our experience
in 25 years has demonstrated that all of that is true, in
trade back and forth. We are accustomed up there to think
of wool as one of the leading exports to this country, and we
need it and use it in our woolen and worsted industry. But
many people do not realize what a change has come of recent
years. Back in ' 37, when I went to Australia, 2 per cent of
our imports from that country were in metals and minerals,
and today they are 33 per cent of what we take from Australia,
and we think that our trade with Australia can be and will be
increased in both directions, and we hope that that is what
will happen. They are the economic counterpart of that mutual cooperation
between the English-speaking peoples of the world
which your organization has fostered so successfully over these
many years.
The importance of this common interest cannot be overstressed.
With it goes the interchange of not only goods but
of our people and our cultures, and what better way on earth
Page 18 
is there to develop friendship and peace between the nations
for the common good of all.
Personally, I think that there is a bright economic future
in store for Australia and the United States if we do some
things which will promote economic growth. And here I want
to make a point. Because of some conversations that have
been indulged in recently, there are many steps we can take
to attain prosperity, and what I say here applies to Australia
as it does to this country.
One of them is to encourage the advancement of technology.
The industrial revolution's machinery released man
from muscular slavery and is supplying him with a wealth of
new goods and new jobs. Today is the dawning age of truly
automatic machines, which we describe by a new word " automation."
Automation is providing man with mechanical senses
of feeling and hearing and sight, in some cases even with
electronic brains. The result of this fresh surge in productivity
must be a higher standard of living for everyone. Yet, my
friends, there are some Doubting Thomases that have arisen
in both countries who seem afraid to take a full advantage of
the new technology with its self-regulating machinery, its automatic
memories and other labor-saving innovations.
Some apprehension stems from a lack of knowledge, some
from misleading propaganda.
Recently a new rash of opposition to and fear of new
technological progress has been voiced in some circles in this
country, and some unscrupulous demagogues and economic
illiterates are trying to scare people into the belief that this
automation is a vicious frankenstein devouring their jobs. I
am certain that this is the most stupid and the most cruel misguidance
that can be given to the free workers of the free
world. Page 19 
Such a dread of progress, however, is not new in history.
Years ago a mob invaded Hargreaves' home and smashed his
spinning jennies. Quill penmen rose in anger against the
introduction of the printing press. Paris workers rioted against
the sewing machine. English hand knitters used sledgehammers
to smash Cartwright's power loom. Supposing these
people had been able to stop progress. Millions of new jobs
would never have been created. Untold numbers of new products
would never have been manufactured for the pleasure and
well-being of mankind.
Karl Marx, whose false doctrines have brought limitless
misery to his dupes, bitterly condemned the machine as the
soul of capitalist exploitation.
Now, let us not permit those doctrines to prevail. It is
my job as Secretary of Commerce to study the economy and
to determine what is happening in this field, and the jobs
that have been increased over the years have been something
beyond belief.
I will just give you one example. In the automobile
field, where some scaremongers at the moment are attempting
in particular to frighten workers with the bogey man of automation,
the record shows that the industry, a pacemaker in
technological advancement, employed a million workers in
1953 as against just half that number in 1939.
The late Philip Murray, the American labor leader, said,
when president of the CIO, " I do not know of a single solitary
instance where a great technological gain has taken place in
the United States of America that it has ultimately thrown
people out of work. I do not know of it. I am not aware of
it, because the industrial revolution that has taken place in the
United States in the past 25 years has brought into the employment
field an additional 20 million people."
Page 
Automation is the modern term for what is known as
labor-saving machinery, but it is labor-saving not from the
standpoint of throwing people out of jobs but from the
standpoint of taking the backbreaking work off of the backs
of the people of the world.
Now, I would like in conclusion to reaffirm my trust in
the partnership of Australia and the United States. We have
in common a colonial background from which have grown
two proud, great nations, united by fond memories and ties of
warm friendship amongst ourselves and the United Kingdom,
and nothing can ever sever that bond. We cherish similar
ideals and spiritual values, and twice as allies we have mingled
the blood of our sons in battle. Our mutual desire is only
for good will among the peoples of the earth, but in any grave
emergency, in the Pacific or elsewhere, the United States and
Australia not only will but must stand resolutely side by side,
and we shall not shrink in fear from encouraging further
industrialization and technological progress, because we know
that on the expanding economic strength of the free world is
based mankind's best assurance of freedom and the deepest
hope of a just and a lasting peace. Thank you.
[ Applause]
CHAIRMAN BULLOCK: Thank you, Mr. Secretary. I am
sure you will agree with this: automation can perform material
miracles, but it never can produce the greatest miracle of all
a leader of men.
And that brings us to our guest of honor, from a continent
in the South Pacific as Governor Dewey said, a land
mass larger than the United States -from a British cornmunity
whose Queen is the same as England's Queen, from a
Pacific power to which Asia is not the Far East but the Near
Page 21 
North, from our gallant ally in two world wars and in Korea,
our partner in the ANZUS Treaty and the Manila Pact, that
sunny, friendly, admirable nation whose inspirational national
motto is " Advance Australia"! [ Applause]
And Australia's first citizen is a sterling product of his
stalwart country. Born in Victoria, with degrees from Grenville
and Wesley Colleges and Melbourne University, a brilliant
scholar, a barrister at law, called to the High Court of
Australia in 1918, made a King's Counsel in 1929, a Privy
Counsellor in 1937, he holds a host of Honorary Degrees. He
has the Freedom of the City of Edinburgh, the City of Oxford,
the City of London. He has addressed both our Houses of
Congress. He has been awarded our Legion of Merit. He
was made a Companion of Honor in 1951.
From the time he entered public life in 1928, he has
had a remarkably distinguished career. He has held the same
legislative seat since 1934. He was Attorney General from
' 34 to ' 39, Prime Minister from ' 39 to ' 41, and, from 1949
on, Prime Minister again. I ask you to rise and drink to the
health of the man who has been Prime Minister of Australia
longer than any other man in Australia's history, one of the
most eloquent speakers you will ever hear, one of the ablest
statesmen in the world today, a very great Australian: The
Right Honorable Robert G. Menzies.
To the Prime Minister of Australia!
[ The audience rose, applauded, and drank the health of
the Prime Minister of Australia.]
THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT GORDON MENZIES:
Sir, the only undenied remark you made was at the very end
when you said that I was an eloquent speaker. And having
said that, you introduced me to a rostrum which so far as I
Page 22 
can see represents the new technological age about which
Secretary Weeks spoke. How can I make a speech to you
when there is a red light in front of me which says, " Time,"
and another one saying--in which there is no light at all,
and another formidable looking gadget which says, " Set for
length of speech," [ Laughter] and another one which, so far
as I can tell, merely tells you what day of the week it is.
[ Laughter] And then something down here where you might
lean in the middle of a speech, not realizing that you might
press the button marked, " Raise", or the button marked
" Lower," or a much more mysterious button marked " Angle."
[ Laughter] I think I ought to begin by saying to you that I am not
an " Angle." I lost my angles long since. [ Laughter] Nor am
I a Saxon. In fact, I am pure Celt, born in Australia. Now,
Sir, I have listened with all proper embarrassment to the speech
made by you, to the speech made by my young friend, who
is still an old friend, Thomas Dewey, who has a curious sense
of humor about me, and, of course, to the speech made by
the Secretary from the highbrow state of the United States.
[ Laughter] If I had to rely on all these things I confess that I would
stand up, shut up, and sit down. [ Laughter] But two delightful
things happened when I came here tonight. One was that
the orchestra played " Waltzing Matilda," which is unquestionably
Australia's national song, with a nice lilt in it, and
the words which describe the activities of a sheep stealer,
[ Laughter] but on all counts I like " Waltzing Matilda."
Only a few days ago I was in Paris and to the intense
astonishment of the denizens of Paris, who still haven't discovered
whether it was Haile Selassie or the President of
Nicaragua who was visiting them, [ Laughter] the red carpet
Page 23 
was laid down and there was a guard of honor and a band,
and the band played with all the verve in the world, " God
Save the Queen," and then it played the Marseillaise, and then,
as I walked along, it played " Waltzing Matilda." ( Laughter)
I liked that enormously because it reminded me that a few
years ago when I had been attending a conference in London
and was not very well, the medical men said to me, " You must
leave London, where the sun has not shone in the memory
of man, and you must have a week in the sun before you go
home." [ Laughter) As we went down to the hotel, my wife
and I and my daughter, a hotel that was so exclusive and so
expensive that when I looked over the cash register, I found
that only film stars had stayed there in the last year or two.
[ Laughter] They had a small orchestra in the best French
manner, and the leader played the violin, and somebody had
said to him, " This is an Australian." He therefore conducted
some researches, and he got the score of " Waltzing Matilda,"
and each night as we sat there in almost solitary state because
it was out of season, he came along and he played " Waltzing
Matilda,"' with so many roulades, so many crescendos, that it
sounded like love song. [ Laughter] I have never forgotten
it. So when I came in here tonight, I felt completely at home
and then of course, for good measure, you have placed on
the tables, wattle; and I must say that that is a touch which
every Australian here tonight appreciates to the full, because
though we are broadmninded and had to be when your Army
occupied us during the War [ Laughter], we are at the same
time bigoted. We are bigoted in favor of some of our own
emblems. Sir, there is one other preliminary thing that I ought to
say and it is this: that I had lunch yesterday in Rome and then
I committed myself to the tender care of an American airline
Page 24 
which I must say seemed to me to be highly efficient. We
proceeded via Madrid and Lisbon to the Azores, which I discovered
from my American friends should be called the
A-zores I am not going to argue about that at all. [ Laughter]
As we left the Azores the skipper made a rather cryptic
remark to me about the weather. He said, " Head winds might
be indicated," and at once, with long and bitter experience ( I
wanted to raise no inter-Commonwealth argument over this
matter) [ Laughter] I said, " Yes, I know what that means, we
are going to Gander."
He said, " Well, I hope not," but you won't be surprised
when I tell you that, at some unearthly hour that morning at
about 3 o'clock, the engines began to slow down. It obviously
was many, many hundreds of miles from New York. I had
read a little booklet that they put in the planes for our
encouragement, " Prepare to Ditch without a Hitch," and I
felt instinctively for my life belt, and the air hostess said to
me, " We are landing at Gander." [ Laughter Gander-I
must not quarrel with the authorities in Newfoundland-but
Gander lacks charm. [ Laughter I thought, " Well, I am
getting out of this plane. I must have a look at old Gander."
[ Laughter] I don't think I ever crossed the Atlantic without
visiting Gander. Gander wouldn't feel the same without me.
And as I stepped out ( it was, I think they said, 2 degrees below
zero) I met a distinguished Australian civil servant inside
the as usual overheated waiting room, and I said to him, with
all that air of gaiety that a man fobs up at 3 o'dock in the
morning ( Laughter], " My dear fellow, how delightful to see
you. Let's have a touch of brandy." I hope no teetotalers
society will take exception to this, but I have my answer, because
he said very brightly, " I'd love one, thank you very
much." And we went along to the bar, but the gentleman in
Page 
charge was otherwise occupied and, just as he was about to
arrive to give us our brandy, they said, " Your plane is ready
to depart," and I left my friend from Australia without his
brandy and without even a dollar to pay for one himself.
[ Laughter] So I don't care for Gander.
Now, Sir, there is one other thing I ought to say about
my friend, Governor Dewey's remarks. He said something
about the celebrated Reuter of Berlin, whom I had the great
pleasure of meeting myself in 1948, and who was indeed a
very remarkable man; but remarkable as I thought him to be,
I had never thought or said anything as bad about him as I
heard tonieht. To accuse a man of lecturing on economics is,
I think, serious, but to accuse a man of lecturing on economics
in Turkish seems to me to be about as uncivil a remark as you
could make about any human being. [ Laughter] Then, Sir,
references have been made, and very properly made to the
comradeship which exists between the United States and
Australia, and it is a very profound one.
References have been made to this great comradeship.
I very well remember before the war being here. I was then
an eminently respectable Attorney General of Australia, and
talking with the late President Roosevelt about Australia, and
from time to time on the East Coast and the West Coast
talking to ordinary private citizens, and there is no doubt
about it that at that time this country was all compact of good
will, as it always has been. Australia was a very remote speck
in the world, and this last war seems to me to have changed
all that. Too many hundreds of thousands of young Americans
were in Australia, received into Australian homes, seen in their
uniforms, heard of in their joint battles with Australian
troops, for our countries-my country and the United States
of America-to remain as merely distant communities. I
Page 26 
venture to believe that those experiences brought about an
intimacy, a sense of neighborhood, a sense of closeness, which
could not have happened under any other circumstances.
I would not like you to think that there was uniform
satisfaction in Australia. Of course there was not. Whenever
an Australian went into a restaurant and said he would like
a grilled steak, he was as likely as not in those days to be told,
" I am sorry, sir, but the Americans were here this morning."
[ Laughter] When an Australian of sufficient youth and romantic
spirit looked around to see what had become of his girl
friend, he was as likely as not to be told, " I am sorry but the
Marines arrived this afternoon." [ Laughter] But putting all
these trifling inconveniences aside, there can be no doubt about
it that no two nations, one very great and one very small,
could ever have come closer together with more mutual respect
and more profound affection than the United States and Australia
in those crucial years. [ Applause)
One other what I am fond of calling preliminary remark
-and I will then say something else but I did hear a
reference this evening to the great problems of tea and coffee.
[ Laughter] I think it was the Secretary of Commerce who
referred to this problem, and if so, I must say to him now,
" Infidel, I have you on the hip," because we complained very
bitterly in Australia about the rapidly rising price of tea, and
when we inquired as to why tea costs so much now, the answer
is, " Well, there is. a much greater demand for tea in the
Ceylon auction sales, or wherever they may be." And when
we say, " How does that come about?" the answer is, " The
Americans are drinking tea." [ Laughter) That is a pretty
solemn thought, because whatever you say and very properly
about the quality of the coffee that one may get in this
country, there is not one good word to be said for the quality
Page 27 
of the tea one gets in this country. [ Laughter) And yet you
have decided, perversely, to drink less coffee and to drink
more tea, and the result is that on many an honest sheep station
in Australia, the honest workingman has to wash his boiled
mutton down with only 3 cups of tea, instead of 4, because he
cannot afford the fourth. [ Laughter And all due to American
perverse activity in the tea market! [ Laughter) I could not
resist telling you that, because it is a matter no doubt to which
you will desire to pay some attention. But do let me say
this, because this, after all, is the Pilgrims.
This is a Society devoted for many years to the cultivation
of good relations, of mutual understanding between first of all,
the United Kingdom and the United States, and in the broad
sense, between the English-speaking people all over the world;
and because I am the spokesman of one section of the Englishspeaking
people of the world, and because I am fresh from a
conference in London in which all the people of the British
Commonwealth have been represented by the leaders of their
governments, I just would like to say a word or two about that
kind of problem.
The first thing, Sir, that I would like to say is this: In
the nineteenth century Great Britain was the dominating power
in the world, and Great Britain had about her all her colonies,
her own dominions, as they grew to be; and in the twentieth
century Great Britain has about her countries like my own,
British, as British as they could be no question of severance,
no question of lack of unity, still believing as I do, and as I
have said time after time, that we are one people. But in the
twentieth century, in the inexorable course of history, the
United States of America, once not only a colony but a series
of colonies itself, the perfect product of what colonies can
grow to be, has become the great and dominating power in
Page 28 
the world. And that process, as men of imagination and sense
looked at it, posed a great problem. Would the United States
of America become a great power withdrawn from the affairs
of the world, or would it become a great power accepting the
price of power, which is responsibility and understanding of
other people in the world? And to me the great revolution in
the world in the last quarter of a century has been that this
marvelous country has not only taken its power and made its
power, but has accepted its responsibility with a humanity and
a generosity and a warmth of understanding which I believe
are not to be surpassed in human history. [ Applause
Every now and then, you, who are American citizens will
be told, and there will always be some scribbler who will be at
pains to write it for you, that there is resentment about this
development in the United Kingdom itself, or somewhere or
other in the British world. I beg of you to forget about it.
Battered Britain and Britain is still of all countries who took
the shock of war, the most battered in the sense that it still has
the toughest problems in battered Britain I never failed to
find in the highest places and in the humblest a warm appreciation
of the position of the United States and of the spirit
of the American people. [ Applause And therefore I say to
you, if I may arrogate to myself the right to speak for the
people of the entire British Commonwealth, that your position,
your spirit, your record, all these things, are perfectly understood
and deeply appreciated by us, all Communist propaganda
and neo-Communist propaganda to the contrary notwithstanding.
[ Applause)
The second thing, Sir, that I want to say, which I may
need to elaborate a little more on, is this: we need not pretend
to ourselves the world is not today sharply divided--not
divided by our will, but by the will of others-sharply divided
Page 29 
between those who, like ourselves, believe in the free life of the
individual, and those who, like the other great group in the
world, believe in the disciplined service of masses of people to
whom freedom is denied. And this presents mankind with its
greatest problem, the most terrible problem, in a sense, that
the world has ever seen, and it presents problems to us, some
of which, occasionally, we fail to perceive.
We assume, don't we, the unity of the Communist world.
We assume a unity of opinion and of force in the Soviet Union.
We assume some dose community between the Soviet Union
and Communist China. We assume this unity of the Communist
world wherever it is, because wherever it is, it follows
the Communist line. It does not speak with twenty voices.
It speaks with one. The one voice may be the voice of a man
or of ten men or of a hundred men, because whenever you get
a multitude of voices, you can get them only by having a
multitude of free people, and therefore there is one voice, the
Communist line.
We of the Democratic world try to follow the Democratic
line, but the Democratic line is not one line but three hundred,
and that is something we need to have in mind, because the
whole object of an aggressive, genuinely imperialistic force
like world Communism is to divide and conquer. It says, if
we speak with one voice and we can get the other people to
speak with two, or twenty, or forty, we may then get them to
disagree with each other, and if we can get them to disagree
with each other, we will have divided them, and if we divide
them, we conquer them.
In a sense, we play that game for them. In a sense we
lend ourselves around the world to this kind of misunderstanding.
So that one may encounter a perfectly normal, intelligent
citizen of the United States who will say, " I don't like
Page 
what's going on in England," and in London one may hear
somebody say, " You know, the Americans are behaving very
badly over so-and-so," and so it gets whipped up. And what
is the material on which all this whipping up of differences
occurs? It is material selected by people, not as a majority
opinion, but as an opinion loud enough to be heard. And the
result is that I constantly find myself being told that because
Jones or Brown or Robinson or the Blunderbuss, or the
Free Times, or the Messenger, in the newspaper
world has said so-and-so, that this represents the opinion of
the people of the United States.
What I am saying to you is simple enough. The whole
glory of Democracy is that each man may speak his piece, and
every newspaper may write what it cares to write. That is the
glory of a Democracy. But we must always remember that this
lends itself to the grossest misunderstanding in other Democratic
countries.
If I may take the simplest example: England has been
playing Australia cricket with, I regret to say, the most devastating
success. [ Laughter] We have had a first-class thrashing.
But whenever a cricket tour of an English team in Australia
begins, you don't suppose that we in Australia read in
the cabled news what the nice things are that are being written
by the visiting team, or about the Australian or about the
Australian public. Not at all. You are given a carefully compiled
selection of all the rather rude remarks that are being
written by two or three people out of twenty or thirty. And
the effect of this, of course, on people who do not know, is
devastating. They say, " Don't you think the English press is
behaving very badly?" " Don't you think the English people
are being rather tiresome about these matches?" And in the
same way they are being persuaded that, out in Australia, we
Page 31 
are just a miserable lot of bowlers and squealers, [ Laughter]
though we are not, because I can assure you that when your
magnificent Davis Cup team so superbly defeated us for the
Davis Cup in Sydney, on its merits, with no equivocation, I Y
don't think any team ever had a greater reception from the t
people of Australia who watched all the play. [ Applause] p
We must never abandon Democracy in order to preserve t
it. But by misunderstanding in each other's countries the a
effect of what is being said I therefore take it as a great f
opportunity to tell you that I believe that both in Great Britain g
and in Australia, and I am sure in all the other British coun-t
tries in the world, there is a supremely dear and warm understanding
of the view in the United States. I am perfectly 0
certain that I may hope that in the United States it is well il
understood that on all great things that matter in the world 1
a this moment we are united as any two groups of people d
could have been in the entire history of mankind. [ Applause) d
Could I, Sir, just trespass on your time for a minute or V
two longer to say this. References have been made to median-n
ical matters. It would not be a bad study some day for some-I
body to work out the effect of mechanical matters on public c
opinion and on the history of nations. For example, I happend
to be one of those people who believe that if, in the Republic
of France, it were possible for a prime minister who thought
he commanded public support and who was about to be defeated
on a vote in the Assembly, if it were possible for him
to say, " I ask you to dissolve the Assembly; let us go to the
people," that the history of France would have been one of I
immeasurably more political stability than we have seen. C
[ Applause) C
I must say, speaking as a prime minister, an ex-prime t
minister and opposition leader, and a prime minister whoc
Page 32 
will undoubtedly some day be an ex-prime minister again,
[ Laughter] that there is much to be said in a time of difficulty
when you are doing something that you believe in and that
you think you could get the people to agree with you about,
to be able to say, " Very well, let's have an election. Let the
people decide this matter." The absence of any genuine power
to dissolve in France is, I believe, one of the things that has
affected the history of that country. I don't say that merely
for myself, for I have discussed it with half a dozen distinguished
French political leaders, all of whom have agreed with
that view. Similarly, we in the British communities are in the habit
of discussing policy, international policy matters of this kind,
in such secrecy as can be got in a Cabinet meeting. You know
what I mean by that. [ Laughter] At any rate, we do close the
door and we discuss these matters. Sometimes, of course,
there is speculation, and sometimes there is not, but on the
whole, nobody can ever say that is the policy of the government
until it is announced by the head of the government.
That is important, because in the long run governments of any
country ought to be judged not by speculations, but by their
deeds. It is international deeds that give effect to international
policy. Here in the United States, if I may say so, you are much
more addicted to the hammering out of public policies by public
discussion. It may be a very good thing to do. I admit
that I have sometimes shuddered to think what I would do if
I were in charge of foreign policy and had to go before a
committee and be cross-examined. The committee would no
doubt get great benefit from it. [ Laughter] But this happens
to be your method. Just as we have a parliamentary executive
called the Cabinet, so in the United States there is the divi-
Page 33 
sion of power, and what I would call1 the nonparliamrentary t
executive. V
I don't sit down and argue about these things and want tok
tell the United States it is wrong, or want to have the United a
States tell us that we are wrong. All I am saying is, do let us e
understand that there are these enormous technical differences t
in the system of government, but the effect, of course, is that t
while some policy is being heatedly debated in public, the
citizen of Minneapolis may be perfectly certain that he will beC
told that the voice of some opposition member at Westminster C
is the voice of England, just as certainly as that the citizen of C
Colchester or Whitstable I picked two oyster places in
England [ Laughter] -is pretty sure to be told that what has
happened in some newspaper in Chicago represents the con-C
sidered public opinion of the people of the United States.
Now, please, I say to you, do not let us fall for thesec
things. The oldest truth since men achieved some right of C
self-expression, the oldest truth since men achieved some capac-s
ity for converting the affairs of the spirit into the affairs of
expression is this: that amongst decent people around the world
the elements of unity are immeasurably greater than the elements
of disunity. Does anybody in his five wits suppose that
if, in the wisdom of God, another great disaster came on
the world, the people of the United States and the British people
of the world would not be together, side by side, slugging
it out? [ Applause) It is not to be contemplated. All I want
to say is that when people know that if disaster comes, they are
beside each other, with no arguments, [ Applause] they need to C
be at some pains not to be misled by the devices of those who
would divide and conquer. They need to remember that it
takes a lot of work to maintain understanding. It takes a lot of s
prudence, a lot of shrewd judgment, a lot of dry intelligence
Page 34 
to get rid of the nonsense that will be put up by those who
want to separate us. Look in all these matters that have been
going on in the last few months. Haven't we all seen how
anxious the enemy, whether he is abroad or at home, is to
exacerbate whatever differences he may think he sees between
the British view and the American view? Let us beware of
this thing. I have just come from London, from a Prime Ministers'
Conference, and a Prime Ministers' Conference is an odd sort
of thing according to the onlooker, because we don't take decisions
and we don't have votes, and many of our discussions,
if you like, are inconclusive. But I do say this to you, that it
is one of the most marvelous things in the world for seven
or eight or nine men from all around the seven seas to sit
down together with different backgrounds, with peoples of
different colors, with peoples of different remote historical
cultures, for them to sit down together all under the leadership
of Her Majesty, the Queen, and to meet as heads of
governments and to talk to each other, to argue with each
other, if you like, but always as friends, exposing their differences,
seeking their unities, but always refreshing their
common faith in the great things that move men and women
all over the world. If only we could extend this, if only we
could feel that every now and then all these Prime Ministers
could sit down with their American counterparts, what a good
thing it would be; not reading a newspaper, not listening to
a mob orator, not listening to somebody who seeks to create
dissension, but sitting down as men and as brothers with the
greatest responsibility among them for the peace and good
living of mankind that any group of people have ever had
since the world began. [ The audience rose and there was
prolonged applause.] Page 
CHAIRMAN BULLOCK: When you return to your wonderful
country, Mr. Prime Minister, I hope you will remind your
countrymen how much we like and admire them. They will be
familiar with the tremendous admiration of every citizen of
the United States for their great Prime Minister. Thank you
for honoring The Pilgrims by being our guest this evening.
[ Prolonged applause)
[ The dinner ended at ten fifty-five o'clock.]
Page 36 
MRt. FLOYD G. BLAIR,
President, American Australian Association
THE HONORABLE ARTHUR S. LALL,
Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations
LIEUTENANT GENERAL THOMAS W. HERREN, USA,
Commanding General First Army
VICE ADMIRAL LAURANCE T. DUBOSE, USN,
Commander Eastern Sea Frontier
THE HONORABLE JOHN F. SIMMONS,
Chief of Protocol of the United States
HIS EXCELLENCY MOHAMMAD MIR KHAN, C. B. E.,
Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations
FLEET ADMIRAL WILLIAM F. HALSEY, USN( RET.),
Executive Committee, The Pilgrims of the United States
His EXCELLENCY SIR ROGER MAKINS, K. C. B.,
Her Britannic Majesty's Ambassador to the United States
His EXCELLENCY SIR PERCY C. SPENDER, Q. C.,
Her Majesty's Australian Ambassador to the United States
THE HONORABLE THOMAS E. DEWEY
Cl) THE RIGHT HON. ROBERT GORDON MENZIES, M. P.,
Prime Minister of Australia
MR. HUGH BULLOCK, O. B. E.,
Chairman, Executive Committee, The Pilgrims of the United States
THE HONORABLE SINCLAIR WEEKS,
The Secretary of Commerce
THE RIGHT REVEREND THE BISHOP OF NEW YORK,
Executive Committee, The Pilgrims of the United States
His EXCELLENCY SIR LESLIE MUNRO, K. C. M. G.,
Ambassador of New Zealand to the United States
THE HONORABLE A. G. TOWNLEY,
Australisn Minister for Air and Civil Aviation
His EXCELLENCY DAVID M. JOHNSON,
Permanent Representative of Canada to the United Nations
His EXCELLENCY SIR PIERSON DIXON, C. B.,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations
VICE ADMIRAL ARTHUR D. STRUBLE, USN,
Chairman United States Delegation, United Nations
Military Staff Committee
LIEUTENANT GENERAL LEON W. JOHNSON, USAF,
Commander, Continental Air Command
THE HONORABLE W. D. FORSYTH,
Permanent Representative of Australia to the United Nations
THE HONORABLE H. S. BARNETT,
Acting Copsul General of Australia at New York Page 37 
Attendance
A
Ansley, M. L.
Ansley, Mrs. M. L.
Appleby, Sir Robert, K. B. E.
Aulph, C. T.
Aulph, Mrs. C. T. B
Bagby, George
Baker, Richard
Bancroft, Frederic M. D.
Bancroft, Mrs. Frederic W.
Barnett, The Honorable H. S.,
Acting Australian Consul General
at New York
Barnett, Mrs. H. S.
Beale, Sir Louis, K. C. M. G.,
LLD.
Lady Beale
Beck, Edward Lancelot
Bingham, Charles C.
Binns, Joseph P.
Birks, Herbert A.
Blair, Floyd President,
American Australian Association
Blair, Henry T.
Blair, Paxton
Blair, Mrs. Paxton
Blyde, L. J. N.
Boardman, A. Jr.
Boardman, Mrs. A. Jr.
Booth, Willis H.
Booth, Mrs. Willis H.
Braden, The Hon. Spruille
Braden, Mrs. Spruille
Bradford, Lindsay
Bradford, Mrs. Lindsay
Bradford, Lindsay, Jr.
Bradley, Philip H.
Page 38 Bradley, Mrs. Philip H.
Brown, H. Clifford
Brown, Mrs. H. Clifford
Brown, Gen. Julian P.
Brown, Mrs. Julian P.
Brown, Mrs. Wylie
Bullock, Hugh, Chairman
of the Executive Committee,
The Pilgrims of the U. S.
Bullock, Mrs. Hugh
Bunkley, Admiral J. W.
Bunkley, Mrs. J. W.
Burbank, Dr. Reginald
Burbank, Mrs. Reginald
Burdick, Winfield N.
Burdick, Mrs. Winfield N.
Burgevin, Frederick H.
Burgevin, Mrs. Frederick H.
Burke, Miss Martha
Bury, L. H. E.
Bury, Mrs. L. H. E. C
Carroll, Mitchell B.
Carroll, Mrs. Mitchell B.
Casey, Major Gen. Hugh J.
Casey, Mrs. Hugh J.
Cates, Dudley F.
Cates, Mrs. Dudley F.
Cecil, William Amherst Vanderbilt
Clark, Robert E.
Clark, Mrs. Robert E.
Clarke, Gilmore N. A.
Clarke, Mrs. Gilmore D.
Clarke, Lewis Latham
Clarke, Mrs. Lewis Latham
Colbern, Brig. Gen. William H.
Colbern, Mrs. William H.
Colwell, Kent G.
Colwell, Mrs. Kent G. 
Cooper, A. E.
Cooper, Mrs. A. E.
Craig, Miss L. H.
Crawford, David M.
Crawford, Mrs. David M.
Crittenberger, Lt. Gen.
Willis C. B.
Crittenberger, Mrs. Willis D.
D
Darlington, The Rev. Dr. Henry
Darlington, Mrs. Henry
Dash, Hugh, Press Secretary
to Australian Prime Minister
Daubek, George
Daubek, Mrs. George
Davies, J. Australian
Consolidated Press
Davis, Shelby Cullom
Davis, Mrs. Shelby Cullom
Deering, Henri
Dewey, The Hon. Thomas E.
Dewey, Mrs. Thomas E.
Disston, Col. Harry
Dixon, H. E. Sir Pierson, K. C. M. G.,
Permanent Representative
of the United Kingdom to the
United Nations
Lady Dixon
Dixon, Piers
Dodge, Col. John D. S. O.,
M. C.
Donegan, The Rt. Rev. H. W. B.,
The Bishop of Executive
Committee of the Pilgrims of
the United States
DuBose, Vice Admiral L. N. C.,
USN, Commander Eastern Sea
Frontier
DuBose, Mrs. L. T. E
Eastman, Norman F.
Eastman, Mrs. Norman F.
Edwards, R. P.
Edwards, Mrs. R. P. Edmonds, Dean S.
Eells, Richard, S. F.
Emmet, Christopher F
Forgie, James
Forgie, Mrs. James
Forsyth, The Honorable W. D.,
Permanent Representative of
Australia to the United Nations
Forsyth, Mrs. W. D.
Foye, Arthur B.
Foye, Mrs. Arthur
French, J. H.
French, Mrs. J. H. G
Godwin, Harold
Godwin, Mrs. Harold
Grant, Clinton F.
Grant, Mrs. Clinton F.
Grewcock, Derek, M. B. E.
Grewcock, Mrs. Derek
Grimm, Peter
Grimm, Mrs. Peter
Gullick, F. Australian
Government Trade Commissioner
Guyer, David L.
Guyer, Mrs. David L.
H
Hall, Melville W.
Halsey, Fleet Admiral William F.,
USN ( Ret.)
Executive Committee, The
Pilgrims of the United States
Hardy, Brig. John H.
Hardy, Mrs. John H.
Harwood, Douglas
Harwood, Mrs. Douglas
Hawley, Edmond S.
Herren, Lt. Gen. Thomas D. S. M.,
Page 39 
USA, Commanding General First
Army
Herren, Mrs. Thomas W.
Hicks, E. Secretary Department
for Air, Australia
Hiscoe, Reginald V.
Hiscoe, Mrs. Reginald V.
Hohaus, Reinhard A.
Hohaus, Mrs. Reinhard A.
Hopkins, L. O. B. E.
Hopkins, Mrs. L. M.
Hudson, Lionel, Reuters Ltd.
and Australian Associated
Press
Hurry, Rutgers Ives
Hurry, Mrs. Rutgers Ives
I
Irving, Major Gen. Frederick
Irving, Mrs. Frederick J
Johnson, H. E. David M.,
Permanent Rep. of Canada
to the United Nations
Johnson, Lt. General Leon W.,
USAF,
Commanding General, Continental
Air Command
Johnson, Mrs. Leon W.
Jones, Gilbert E.
Jones, Mrs. Gilbert E.
K
Kane, L. A.
Kane, Mrs. L. A.
Keenan, Walter
Kennedy, William Walker
Kennedy, Mrs. William Walker
Kildea, York
Kildea, Mrs. York
Kortlucke, Dr. F. F.
Kortlucke, Mrs. F. F.
Page Koyle, Frederic T.
Koyle, Mrs. Frederic T.
L
Laing, W. J. Scott, Deputy British
Consul General
Laing, Mrs. W. J. Scott
Lake, Lauriston C.
Lake, Mrs. Lauriston C.
Lall, The Hon. Arthur Permanent
Representative of India to the
United Nations
Lall, Mrs. Arthur S.
Landau, S.
Lauren, Charles B.
Lauren, Mrs. Charles B.
Lawrence, Justus Baldwin, O. B. E.
Lawrence, Mrs. Justus Baldwin
Leach, Henry Goddard
Leach, Mrs. Henry Goddard
Legg, George Albert
Letcher, H. J. 0.
Lichine, Alexis
Lockwood, Manice de Forest
Lockwood, Mrs. Manice de Forest
Lockwood, Manice de Forest III
Lockwood, Mrs. Manice de Forest
III
Lyon, Professor John Henry Hobart
M
McAdoo, Mrs. Mollie Tackaberry
McBride, Robert M.
McCanliss, Lee
McCollester, Roger S.
McCollester, Mrs. Rogers S.
Mclnnerney, Mrs. Thomas H.
McKnight, A. Secretary, Dept. of
the Army, Australia
McMurtry, Major R. M. C.
McPherson, John
McPherson, Mrs. John
MacDonald, George
MacDonald, Henry 
MacDonald, Australian
Newspapers Service
MacPherson, Arthur W.
MacPherson, Mrs. Arthur W.
Makins, H. E. Sir Roger, G. C. M. G.,
H. B. M.' s Ambassador
to the United States
Marpenet, Edwin
Marpenet, Mrs. Edwin
Martin, Luther III
Martin, R. W.
Martineau, Mrs. Hubert
Massey, B. P.
Massey, Mrs. B. P.
Mathews, Hiram A.
Mathews, Mrs. Hiram A.
Maynard, A. Rogers
Maynard, Mrs. A. Rogers
Menzies, The Rt. Hon. Robert
Gordon, M. P.,
Prime Minister of Australia
Michalis, C. G.
Michalis, Mrs. C. G.
Michalopoulos, Hon. Andre
Michelmore, Peter, Sydney Morning
Herald
Mir Khan, H. E. Mohammad, C. B. E.,
Permanent Rep. of Pakistan to the
United Nations
Moffat, Douglas M.
Moffat, Mrs. Douglas M.
Mogabgab, A.
Mogabgab, Mrs. A.
Morawetz, Mrs. Victor
Montague, Gilbert H.
Munro, J. A.
Munro, Mrs. J. A.
Munro, H. E. Sir Leslie, K. C. M. G.,
New Zealand Ambassador to the
United States
Munro, Lady
Myrick, Julian S.
Myrick, Mrs. Julian S.
0
Oneal, Mrs. Benjamin P. O'Neil, A.
Ormerod, Major C. C. B. E.
P
Parsons, Jr., M. C.
Pennoyer, A. Sheldon
Peak, William
Phillips, John G.
Poor, Alfred Eastman
Poor, Mrs. Alfred Eastman
Pryor, Samuel F.
Pryor, Mrs. Samuel F.
R
Randolph, Francis F.
Resor, Miss Ann
Revillon, Mrs. Theodore
Revill, Mr., Associated Newspapers
of Australia
Richter, Charles M.
Richter, Mrs. Charles M.
Ridgeway, George L.
Ridgeway, Mrs. George L.
Rogers, Glenn E.
Rogers, Mrs. Glenn E.
Rowland, B. Allen, Special Assistant
to Secretary of Commerce Weeks
Rowland, Mrs. B. Allen S
Schoales, Douglas N.
Schoales, Mrs. Douglas N.
Scott, H. D.
Scott, Mrs. H. D.
Shaw, Dr. Alfred
Shaw, Mrs. Alfred
Shedden, Sir Frederick, K. C. M. G.,
Secretary, Department of
Defense, Australia
Sheldon, James
Shepard, Dr. William P.
Shepard, Mrs. William P. Page 41 
Shields, William
Shields, Mrs. William
Simmons, The Hon. John Chief
of Protocol of the United States
Smith, Miss G. Robinson
Smith, Miss Jessie
Spender, H. E. Sir Percy K. B. E.,
Australian Ambassador to
the United States
Stetson, Eugene W.
Stetson, Mrs. Eugene W.
Stewart, Harold
Stout, James M.
Stuart-Linton, Charles
Stuart-Linton, Mrs. Charles
Stuart, Mrs. David
Struble, Vice Admiral Arthur D.,
USN, Chairman,
U. S. Delegation, United Nations
Military Staff Committee
Struble, Mrs. Arthur D.
T
Tange, A. Secretary
Department of External Affairs
Australia
Thomas, Mrs. Clara Fargo
Tinker, Edward Lacroque
Tinker, Mrs. Edward Lacroque
Tomlinson, Carl P.
Townley, The Hon. A. Australian
Minister for Air and Civil
Aviation
Townley, Mrs. A. G. V
Van Alstyne, William T.
Van Alstyne, Mrs. William T.
Vivian, Norman C. W
Walker, F. British
Broadcasting Corp.
Wallace, Bryan
Wallace, Mrs. Bryan
Ward, Thomas E.
Warner, R. Miles
Warner, Mrs. R. Miles
Weeks, The Honorable Sinclair,
The Secretary of Commerce
Weeks, Mrs. Sinclair
Wellman, Allen G.
Wilds, Walter
Wilds, Mrs. Walter
Willkie, Mrs. Wendell L.
Witherell, Randall
Wynn, James 0. x
Xydis, Stephen y
Young, Philip
Young, Mrs. Philip
Page 42 



Fax sent by 612 62733051OPA CANBERRA 06/ 85/ 8S 12: 2S pg: 2/ 7
L Q-VA rg; Z
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD SENATE
lecislazi in that case was; 6 to 3. Ive
nembers of the Court held one ' way;
hrec IveMbgrs held the other way.
So if the Bricker amendment were
. dopted, 5 Inember of the Supreme
: ouit might interpret it in 1 way, while
memnbers ight say it meamrt 3ometltg
else. Thertfore, what five inambers
xy is = otroing. That is why the
uestlou af the confirmation ot this
oination Is So imaortazit.
Ur. EASTLAND. The Senator 1s carlet.
Mdr. President, I shall now discuss the
twU. dcision. which In reported in 2s3
3w% 147. 60 N. W. ( 2d) 110. The wife
rthe deceased, Sgt. John Itict. an
. even -sixteenths Winnabago Inias.
itered irto a contr'act with the cametry
for a burial lot. The contract in.
uded a clause which stated that " burial
ivileges ac= re only to Membert of the
suoslan rame." A funeral was held,
it the cemetery refused to haVe the
) dy lowere Into the grave and bad it
moved from the grave site. Mrs. Ris
as a Cbaizab, izd the cemetr
ainmed It did noat know when the eonact
wsentfted, Into thM? the husband
Ls elevan-sixteentha Winebago Mnan.
Mrs. Ric Wed suit In a district woart.
s the opinion of the lower court
at the cause of action was originally
eited upon a breach of contract with
-allegation of d2a aes based on the
in11latlon and mantal. dIstress ocacad
by. 3Mat the removal of the body
the grave site; and, second. a tamlet
published by the cemetery which
ight to jusftify its aCtlon. The Case
a not tried an the merit#. on mtion
both parties fow an adj udication an
9 Points of law. the dijtrict $ udge
and for the e'meter7 gad Mgs. Rice
pealed. Cite Supreme Court of Iowa %" oeld the
dings of the lower court. The district
trt had held that the Uratitd Neelenae
arter had no effect on the legality or
RulitY oPTTh e -c1ause1 or Int the rights
the parties under the contract The
reine CoUrt of Iowa upheld this pod-
A with tba following Statement:
6) A VWi su~ ncm to say that that teewy
no aLp 414a146n to the Private eunamot at
ieldU&amp; l ita" Mn Of the UM~ ed State&amp; IS
rue a pnlsciple Was enluncisted 11n That
Xy bus Claims or rears; za atst lawm
6 been ShOegat by m9a pev ana or Sb.
rter of ths United i9atkma. have mean
OIVed by the flornai Led liebIan
11 509Me V. MUSs ( B1g lack. 614.
1-W. 2d 6M). a cass WaIWme by thee
Ad ststen sapmau * Dun. inure was a laa,
as emswttbana pounas but no antiiof
the State couM tsSreenln as to the
allaw telatisaltogdauie Thexanh~ gan
T, said: 1W do not uncerstand it to be
Lncip1e of law that a Uesty petwaen govra
naunnee in aW1Itable to the asafmrights
beeeen, dumun cc tha Unized
-whan a detemnuon Or theme riags
Waht In rho aurts. so for as ta insCaw
a concernft, theme weouoMe..
Sn ( art. 50. so. Vaited iAtien a aheter)
ruezely Indl1carlte or a edshwe * 11la
I mad an objective devaully t, be " derd
I veU-t" atg peoples.-With tbis
meet ve a.
r. JOHNSON of T
Vawil the Senator
EASTLAM4. II Lft&amp; W. Freadyied?
Idd. W. JOHNSON of Tenas. I ask una-
Ittous cousens that the Senatror from
MissRissppi may yield to me for the purpose
of * y suggesting the ahsene of a
Quorum, with the understanding that
floinrg the quorum call and a brief
rfees in order to receive the Prime Min-
Isae of auartralia. the Senator trom Misslastppi.
will again have the ft" o..
The PRE8E) XNO O'ftCEf. Is thet%
objection to te request of the geneear
from Texas? The Chair bears none, anfd
It is so ordered.
Mr. JOHNSON of Texas I suggest
the absence of a quorum.
The PRMIDENO OMCER. The
clerk Will call the roll.
The legislative clerk called the roll.
and the follown Senators answered to
their " Mam-s
Anderkin Dmthiq BEam
3-,, a
Bute DWI&amp; cae.. J.
Caves 0O1aoats mcat
01111 Deal" n
Dirk&amp; a=
229inii R~ aman elawer
Ofene ZBayer
Reusewoamla. m80 ueafthy agceuas. S1W111af Miomaner
Ifund, Mealy M~ o aine
ftaw X a
Puuteda 5chslank
. seen
The PRUSIING OFFICZR
Baimmz in the chair). A Quortmi is
. BZCESB
Mr. B~ iE. Mr.' Presidetit. I ask
unanimnous consent that the sonae
stand In recess, subject to the call of the
Chair. The PRES= Mqo OMFCER. without
objectlon. It is so orderedl.
TherettPon ( at 3 o'clock Bad 5 in.
utes p. the at. took a recess,
subject to the call of the Chair.
ROBERT-GORlDONIWS1
( PIWIE ~ iBiiiU OF AUSTR. MI&amp;
The VICE PFrANT. The Senate
Will be In order, The Chair appoints
the) Majority leader, the Senator from
Tems8 ( Mr. Jomena] mail the minority
leader, the Seator trom California ( Mr.
Kitowimn), as a conmmttee to ascort
the Prime dIntitr of Ausbralia Into the
The Honorable Roebert Gordon Men-
Sim, Printe MAIster of Australia. escorted
by the committee appointed by
the -Vice President. entered the Chambet
and took the meat assigned to him
lmm~ de y in front of the via President.
Thze VICE FPENTD. Memubae at
the Senate, it J2 UWy grat privilege to present to you the prime Minister of
Australia. ( Applause. Senators rising.]
, Prime Minister BCqM Mir, It to a
very remarkables experience for we to be
allowed to speak in this viac= for the
second time. As I said somewhaere
about, a silar matter, It is rather flattaering,
because the nrt-t time the Invitatiors
might have been atcldenWa, but the
second time It must be deliberate.
I also. air, remember that on a formoer
occasion When It spoke hera. in 1950, r
felt that I had had a busy day, because.
in my Invocence. I thought I would maske
one speech; but then I discovered, 4tMl
in my innocence, that I wouild hae" to
make two. And then I wa&amp; taken off
by Senator Connally to a lunicteon of the
Foreign Mfairn andi/ or Foreign Relations
Comittee, and I found I had to make
three Speeches.
But. sli'. I welcome this opportunity.
not because I want to Inflict a speech
upon Senators. but beecase I think it
sagords a splendid occasicin to say to the
Berrate of the United Stsites somesthing
from Australia-
I do not suppose that amy parliamentary
amibly In the world hus had Such
responiblldtez to carry In the part
years as has this one-You bae" bad
the privilege and the responullltS of
accepting toward other portions of the
tree world the most remarkable obligations;
anid to accept those, you have bad
to exhibit a willinguess to placep burdens-
heavy burdens.-on your own people.
I an politiclan enough, after * I)
MY yeas of politics, to kow that Is not
the asiest thing Ina the world. but you
have done it.
One of the stonishing ttftgs. one of
the cynical thinga, perhaps. in the world
i that every now and then theft are encountered
people who have reeived benefits
who rather resent It. who rater
resent having some feeling of oblgaton
to someoone ese. That must. as it ctones
back to you occaclonally. make you fead
somewhat Irritated. But 1 Should like
to say, on behalf of AustrmiaB. that we
have no1thidg but admiremdon, nothing
but gratitude. for the magnificent
magnanimity gad leadeiaalv which you
have given to thre world. [ Applause.]
Sir, thwe is oam othor thing I should
lik to eay-we are free people. We etgags
in political Conmlits. Promn a close
Perusal ot the newspapers in the pea
few dams I bae gathered that they are
iot ukno0wn, even here. ELahgter. l
But we ina Australls carry them on with
what Winstofi Churchill oncet dexcribed
as a Lane 1ath century far; and your
polltlclaw, too. can strike blows anad receive
blows with gusto. But the point
about It all is that we do all these things
within the framework of freedom; and
because we attach importance to that
freedom, It is of the cance that we look
Zrallad the world so that we may have
great, friends or email friends in thte
defense of freedom in the defense of the
right to disaree without elIution.
[ Applause.] ln the ease of Australia. We have great
friends. We are, in tertis of population.
a Smtall country-a" smal am you onoe
were--and With a continen% in front of
us to develop somewhat larger than pour
own. Therfce, no one else is so wel
. trs~ s
SMar'ch. 16fi 1 OttI tic:. 701 fin do dnI go: ILI 
Fax by 62673.0PACID. A8/ 5/ 5 Aen1 : 5 P
1955 litte to underst
the cw. of 70
you halve solVed
find yourselves
only is the worl
do or say. but I
world depends
dSY will no daubl
some future P
may steud In t
pie. but for 50
ale free peopliea
ble to coe
mee~ t friends.
One thing. h
i hope I do nt
hospitaity of yo
shagl rnot need d
niciu of dod
Is Very satot
of difference
free countries.
bemng point, of
areas of coefi
way be Will
produtee dii
cover at to
unaccepta mast so ebat
very time when
Of unity. I
other people
watch thIn.
ships in repair.
to be destroye
techniaue of di
Leve that thep
the free people
so trivial that
templtuto aEoi % it
mans-f
world--wan
woula~,
Oreat Drti
free world we
an be nt
Siat 1is
ksiowl. i e
stand, togetli
lenge, then I
oar are to be tog
fis tolerant,
that our am
May be disa
underlyingt Now, or.
final aoeerva
about % heo
Vide 510cn
2ganda Ia go
We hear It, y
free world in
than pro i
States 01 AM
matters, as
03 the Chiefa
YOUeis; b
chif off end
" What are th
PIig up Me o
Credited eyGrYrfhere; say to pe , l
Mand It emz
that hns II CONGRESSIONAL RECORD SENATE
n4 us and our aspirablems
as yoa are. for in
CAwn zttO&amp; n4 history
our problems, aid now
a Position where not
affected by what you
a large degree the free
tal Oon you. The
come wkwn same other.
Minister Of Australia.
very roam end find
* not for 9 million peaad
Vrovided they
sound People, he will
here as a friend arid
disturbs me, and
too much on the
time. The enemxy-I
that expression with
a superb tech.
d conquer. The enemy
3m uqpo eveny point
eng the goverrnentt of
ndmagnify them from
fferenoc into being vast
thoping that in that
lre misunderstandings
Induce some great
dpt Irrevocably a poliq7
mnother mm$ s governewill
be divided at the
Weought to be In a state
rconstantly saying to
Ato myself, " We = Ms
must keep our friend-
We Must not allow them
Ior dIsspated by this
Ids and conquer." I be-
Ants of diff arence among
of the world are tvialwill
venture to day, not
is. that If we were eonwe
all are, but hoping
couree by honorable
recontemplat1ng agrett
defense of froedom,. you
eudknow; everyone In
auld know, all around the
Mid know, that we would
them. ae vital fact; Lad It we
he, that we Must all
If we come % o that chat.
ukwe should moanduct all
an the footing that if we
ie. we must be together
derstadi friends, so
mowhe looked at.
150 and the mezrveloqa,
eaemphaslze&amp;,
Iyour permisson, mne
o. I said something,
munlst technique of dir.
Nio more subtle prop-
On In the wrl todaybea
it. all awound the
travel. I have heard It.-
da against the United
cabcuse In all these
know, you awe regarded
Sender. Thanlc heaven
you ame regarded as the
The Commumists say.
doing? They are Proprtwin
regime. same dis-
' oet. 0 I bear this
4 1 find IT necsar To
pad I think we shall all
7to say to people, " Put
uat your minds. Wbnk We ame defendinig in our various countries
and under our various agreecmts
is not some man, not somne government,
but the freedom of the people of that
country. Uf they are to change their
government they ist be allowed % o
change It In their own wray. If they awe
to adopt new Philosophies, they must
adopt them in their own way. But we
are not going to accept a Position i=
which, by force from without, these Peopie
are converted into being the slaves
of some new tyranny. It is freedom for
which We stanld-not some Man or some
administration." I think that needs to be* known. needs
to be proehed, and needs to be clearly
understood all over the world.
Sir, so far as we in Australia are caneernod-&amp;
iisit as we an. miad prouad
m&amp; mber of the British Commonwealth
AS we ale-we hatve with your great
Country, as aL result of wear; a well as of
Peace, a tie which I believe to be unbreakable;
Ra profound sense of gritttude
tor all you have so splendidly done
for the world; ad-If! I may add it, aira
degre of affectidnate. simple. understanding
whichI do not believe can be
surpassed between any two countries of
the world. [ Prolonged applause. Sonsto"
e rislax.)
The VICE PRisaENDT The Chao&amp;
reognim the majority leader [ Mr.
JOmUNoW of Tezas] to respond on behalf
of the maority to the remarks of the
Prime Minister.
Mr. JOI3N8ON of Texan. President,
Mr. Prime Minister, and my colleagme
In the Senate, Is is a very great
pleasure to welcome to this historic
Chamber today a great leader of a Valln1t,
aQl &amp; n World War IL. Australians
endeared themnselves So all Amterias
when they received our boys In the dark
day%, the early day. af World War 31. an
thWi land and in their home.. and when
they stood side by side with them in
fighting a ruthless foe
Mr. Printe Minister, We are erateful
for Your stimulating and Inspiring state.
merts to us We hopethat you myen-
Jay Your Visit to our country. we All are
looking fOrwOAr to Another visit with
you. Itf a rmits referens may be pardoned.
I had the very great pleasure of
spending the fiMs 4 or 6 Months of World
War 11 In yotu country, and on a-Islan
adjoining your Country. I always felt
that it I could not return to Texas. I
knew where I wanted to go. That was
Australia. We hope YOU will, say to your people
that We ape1reclak their friendship. we
realisea that In unity there is strength.
and so far as Australia and hmsriea are
conerned, we know that'the bonds of
unity bind us together. ( Applause]-
The VICE PRME. The minarity
leader ( Mr. Krrowm]= is recognized
to rospond for the minmority.
11r. ENOWLJtI. Mr. President, Mr.
Prime linister, ad Moy colieauee I
think you can see, Slr, by the warmth
Of tha greeting which comes to you from
both aOdes of the aisle, that your we= 9
here Is Indeed bipartisan in character,
and represents the leeling not only of the
Members of this body, but also of the
Amumicam people as a whola, 3331
You have mentioned the cloe ties
which bind our two Nations together.
We welcome you is the repressnetve ot
a great People and a great government
from ' Mown Under." In the early' days
of our own life as a free nation we had
an expression, a sentiment was uttered
to the eiffect that we would either hung
together or we would hang separately.
I believe that is Meeting the challenge
which confronts the free world today.
the nations whichi believe in human freedam--
nations in the far Pacific. In Europe,
in the Middle ZastL ad In the
America%-must recognize that In facing
the Menace of global cftomism we sil
must hang together or hang eepately.
I think -e eshall find no stouter ally
than the great people of Australia and
the British Comamonwealth-. I hope that
a= r ties of friendship may endure for a
thousand yeaze. ( Applause.]
Tire VICE PEISWZNT The Chair
known that mee of the Senate
would like to meet the Prime MnlsteT
personally. and opaertunlty will be
afforded for tJhem to do so.
The Chair would like to state Diat a
little more than a year ago It was his
Privilege to visit the Parliament in Canberm
and to be entrtained at a parliamentary
lanchean
Many ties bind together the People of
Australia and than of the United States,
One of thong, which Is h true Is
our common belief In the Pu'llamentary
system of government. However, there
are some diferences. Today we had the
privieg oft f hearIng the Prime Minister
of Australla speak-I had the privilege
of hearing him partiripate in the questios
Peiod In ? arliament I wish our
rules were such that we could observe
him under questioning from Members of
this body. I amre Senator. that he revpends
to questions with an aptitude
which Is worthy at prae.
senator. who wish personally to agot
the Prinme Minister. an Perhaps put
questions to him privately. way do so at
this time.
The Pime Minister of Australisadvanced
to the area-In front of the Vise
President's dent, accompaniled by Mr.
Jourueow of Tcxao and Mr. Mroiwam.
ilan was greeted by Members of the aenats
as they were Introduced to him.
The Prime minister Of Australia a" d
the distinguished visitors soamomy-
Ing htim wer then escorted from the
Chamber. At 3 o'olack and 30 minutes p. in.,
the Senate reassembled. In executive
sessio, when called to order by the
Presiding 02= ce 04r. BULB in the
chair). lasaAloE PROM TH HOUSE
A message from, the Nouse of Reprosertatives
by Chaffee. Its reading
clerk announcved that the House had
disagreed to the amendments of the
Senate to rte bill X. 4259) to Proide
a 1-year asterinm of the existing
corporate normal-taz rate and of certainu
existing excise-tag rated. and to pro-
Vide a 820 credit agins the Ind~ iVdual
incoe tax for each personal ezemptios:
asked a conference with the Senate oni
the da eeing vates Of the 2 Ho0use
I
Fax sent bg 612 627330SIOPA CAMBERRA06/ BS/ SS 12: 25 Pg: 3/ 7 
Fax sent bq 612 62733851
84A Irt, O. L V&amp; OMbi
1 955 DzSIOWATION 01
' Me SPRAMM. The
as nNb Onl Mhe Part
, SCArt~ our digtingishel
Criamber. thle gentlemi
ejUSts fEr. mcoomm
.' lA from Massachawt
the gentlemenf &amp; am Sou
RXWcURDj. and the Bent
gpr VORV31.
The Rouge will stand
to the Cell Of the Chair
Accordingly ( at 3 o'cl
utsp n) the Zoome
tN hA jcce ll ot lb
During the re t
eurrod: VwSI OF RIGH NO
ERT GOMMO
The Doorkepe amn
Honorable' Robert C
Primle Ministar of Aust
2ey. wesles, osate
tee at Repreentatlies
of the House of Beg
stood at the CICTka
the Membn rislng. l.
The 8FEABZ&amp;
Eo" s of Repteeetati
pleasure. and I dean I
to be able to preceni
tire of to great and a
free commonwealth. t
of Australia. ( Applal
1place. I &amp; banl never
escorted in by four
Members. There we,
urnlmt. people wer
and making frmeviedoi
tgra pains to make
reinarha. I put them
I1 could not wee them.
I knew there were MWz
1 aou14 hear them-%
them. iAnd. apart ha
the only souvenIr I ha
which shows mes nm
MY eyes shut sad
lean0ing back with
( Laughter.] But. air, I would M
that that wag the on
carrted away with m
meutary assemblage
hariar within its Cut I
U90a0 revresentstive
to be present. to whI
infinte courtesy JIn t
land, 04d the privj
Ipeech. which I am
LA Something we hai
Atastrala But for
Austria to be here
abLe aeeo, and
tor the seonad UiM
is th 11= UicAl of 8
of the Ouaverame
nDttn vwch eta
w" Ii and the tand
teaes of theA 06/ 85/ 8S 12: 25
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD -HI
uSCOaT I am dr. within. the limits of ty.
capacity, a constant asponeh of the
CW mmn s ned for pers na1 contact among ROD-
.1he House. to ples f th world, particularly aons
viior to the toewoiv rson0utbLlty. Thberefrom
MIs&amp;_ a m I ' ealwgrietaht pleasure the
I he visit oator than one Member of this
t~ r. MsaurlMumandof the Senate to AnIdrSiS.
Caoi Mr. ADMuch In that the Came that this anoer-
L fro Ohionoon I nave bad the fascinating apofromOhiorimince
of being able to greet quite a few
ream subject wel-kwn man in this place on terms
im o~ ofd riendship established in my awn
countm. I very wail remember that beoe the
war it vga possible to encounter soe-e
body In the United States who did not
6k ad 22 Ini-know wheze Australi ' was A gentlaNi
sto In ze~ m In Ban Francisco ance assured Me that
Chair. lie undsimstaod quite, plainly It wuas n
following 00-the east mast of the United States: is
. orotf off-shoe Island.. But those " aia
have gona. The war did mn terile
RO-things, and It created dangers which
O~ hM~ ROB-have not yet pased.. but it 411 some
wonerful things. I do not th'Ik scythe
fligt bod wiR eve be able to. esimate the
W= 21108-Impact upon the Ausralian mind. and
It I may may so. upon youMw,. f the existby
the coMmit-once in and ground Austraia for a long
entered the Banl period of time of hundreds at thoutativee
and sands Of young Americans. So that
LthPWauss. wherever we li -my party go in the
United Stas = w we are bound to amet
Nobers Of Me seameiniY who says: -1 was out there
W. It IU my ret With lou. or: " Ury son wam out there
A high FrIvileg, wit 7oM' at: ' My nephew," or as the
* the repr~ eflent-earn may be. And this, I believe has
wod people of a create a distinctIve desm of under.
APrime Minister stnading which, as far ea. I am uath
5md cmned. always makes it. so cosy to gei
*.. along w" t the Veople with Whom, I haye
Speaker. t Il-to condluct disoussiow in the United
ast &amp; oad In this states. in fact. I regret to tell you, wr
forget Mt .1 was speae. that-it zmakes me feed so Imuck
powerful1-looking . at home that I amn liable to # peak Wo
I a ] at Of lights lonm when I am an my feet amnoug Poo
taking picture Wie whom I feel to be Mny friends.
I haid gone to n Is a ver godthing. air. UI ft
afew Intelligible engage In a msaD hamily. which is aI
dwn and 1 found Ml reward for your kindness. it Is a vYsn
I looked o. d good Otn to make new friens in rhi
here because world, and we must never regard the lis
S could not see am exhausted. we must never gMv iii
Wy memories, hope that lI time to com we will hay
veis a photograph reaohed to the true heart of people wh
ft orwozd with are nw unavailble to uas through gotm
Speaker R&amp; TWUM form Of dictatorship, and that we me
his eyes aliuL find -am frandshi with them Tb
search for new friends must always g
memory I really member that old friends must be kep
bause a parlia-and that old friends can esaiy be Ion
ha ' one supreme this world by neglect or by ladiffere
tthat 16 to-invite hy misundcrst~ ndlng. Owr Opponent I
another ountry Mhe world understands that to pert a'
honor you with tIon, and hke devoten the bulk of his tlz
somewha Wient in propaganda, in seeking to divide v
ag of making a seeking to set up. vointe of argumea
bound to tell you. seeking to establish some misisedai
Sso far reamted in standing and every now and then son
6representative of hostility between the people of Cl
twic is a remark-United States and the people of U
welcome it because British Coumnwealtlr. We must coi
ICan perfot Ia My antly be on our guard against it
I place, and that have, and you have, frm time to tin
) caking as the head in this great country of Youris led thin
of Australia. to 96 so violently antagonistic to the Britt
so high in the good that I could not conceive that anybo
istandin and the except a CoMMunist% Imperialt oCrJ
itralian peowpe. get MAY pe an It.. I have r~ R ~ 3069
London. or alawhe. oacaonalir rood
tiraodes about the Americans. and I have
had exactly the sae feeling. of couse
we eve grownup puogla. We are adult
nations. You ane MorM adul than we
are, because we are not so far along the
Journey of a deveop~ ing natIOn. But weD
awe grownup peovle. end we am &amp; Cord
tn the context of au COMM= n frtedon
axid ouk common undftVAnn to disclam.
to argu to persuade. and refute.
AnI of the thio" that vuu can engage in
in this Rouse. you sugage in undu the
common enveloping garent of a free
democzacy. of a free parlisnnarY
It is because of thes very freedom. because
we take our freeom as a whole for
mated in our u. n countries that we are
able to engage In disutes End arguments
to our hem" t cons But we lhow.
do we not, tbt if It comes to the point.
all arguments are forgotten. The anm
thing thar. cmes Uppemoast is the pride
that we have In being ca free People--
in a country of Which we one aln prou
[ Aarlauas. 2
I would lik to ltik. Air. t18t that
spirit culd pervade the whole of % he
fre world. I Would liae to led tnat in
Canberra we tild argue with WasIngaton--
And we are a WAY1 eamentative
crowd at Canberra-that we could aru
with Washington just as Tendan could
argue with Washaingto. Jut as we cauld
SUl go on arguing with ech Other. not
am It we were liable to bcme ofeemis,
1but an the teoting that otfriendship Is
tidestruclble and we nay. thesefaz
* speak frankly-with agec" onate frahkness--
to each other. Whea % hat hape
iand 1he vboln world In-that. the
Ipeopeof thefruewadd ar nots easiy
put asunder by Ommun1st propaganda.
iI believe that -Mf be the Most powerful
Ideterrent weao Mhat thu world wll.
* have preduced. bemause the enmy is
hoping all. the ama to divide us.
S A I have Just bed the honor to my In
L another piece, we kww. do we not. that
r' should this world pas down once mors
a tato the vafle of a world war, we know.
t do we not thatwe areall tlsthw in it.
P Dom anybody spose that in such a
a catastrophe Ainerian would go One way
D and Australia another? Or Oreat
9 Brtain one way and America another?
Y Nqot for one moment.
e It thene is one t~ mg of whicht I have
o the mosat complete assurance In my heart
and mind Jr. is that in the-supreme tqet
k. we will be found together, Just as wArely,
a sir. as American and Australian UVOop
a, were found together on the Kokoda trail.
n fApplausea.]
3-U we reinembu that truth, that end
to truth... that. Ultimate fraw which Is
therefore the domInatingf truth of oar
T% relationship we then merely behave like
r-Intelnt am and women. 71 we de.
Is termice that he we sAll1 be together in
that event, we shall. practice being toso
gether evcry -mot sad every year u
2-time sues on-we shall learn moan 4
1 More to understand echr other. sid the
Le. funny little dlffernes that exstn beg~
s tween. us. May 1. before I resume my
an seat, sir, mtaion one thing only? U Is
fly woriu lencloniz. in the United States
aid youa have s the bead of the Government
sn mhe pricadent. The Preddent, I admit.
It / 4jk 1ct55
OPA CAMBERRAPg: 4/ 7 
12 a I b r-
A A J, f ij I Np
14 k1
41 -4 a kid5 pl ~~ 68
itA af p1e. rsaa
3n f I 1 iI-U411 6 4i jfafS
-t a ~ J 40A a
N; I 1 9 114-11, oil i
I 1,34 1IIIiEjjIl, iI u 17; IIr
8; Igi sfif iie~~ r!
r. .1 vill4VI Dill 9
MAN v~ b da gN
h
It L,. L 6-1 m um0a p i l
to B 1141 1 1 a. B
' d110111 fi1
du 5 19 M fi 0
0 $ all aIdas
G) g
CN aj 9 js s 1
w j1 I sd
1HO PHMIAa IA
g a 4! 11 a i li j l iAll ec d
ID d 0611491 0 1 1 -$ Id~ s~
gall VIA I a XV r
j4VjjAs
i B nIbi 1j k it tj I 5vBedf i
A oill~ J 8
W eal gill dlg
\ o , Rgi s
Js 4; qd 


PRIVILEGE&nbsp;CASE
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. MENZIES.MONDAY, JUNE 13,&nbsp;1955.
TO MEMBERS: This is forwarded with the compliments of the Prime Minister. He trusts it will be helpful and that you will make use of it.
PRIVILEGE CASE
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER. MR. MENZIES PRIVILEGE CASE June 13. 1955.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, today made the following observations on the privilege case dealt with by the Commonwealth Parliament last week: --
QUESTION: Who gave Parliament the right to deal with breaches of parliamentary privileges?&nbsp;
ANSWER: The Commonwealth Constitution did, by Section 49. which reads:.- 'The powers, privileges and immunities of the Senate and of the House of Representatives, and of the members and the committees of each House, shall be such as are declared by&nbsp;the Parliament, and until declared shall be those of the Commons House of Parliament of the United Kingdom, and of its members and committees, at the establishment of the Commonwealth. Parliament has not thought it necessary to declare any new powers, privileges and immunities but has been content to rest upon those already well-established by the House of Commons over the course of centuries.
OUESTION: What is the most important of these privileges from a public point of view?-2-ANSWER: The privilege to speak freely in Parliament on behalf of the electors without fear or favour. This is the greatest of the Parliamentary privileges, for without it Parliament would become ineffective. The privilege does not exist as a sort of personal property of the individual member nor is he guilty of a selfish action when he seeks to defend it. The privilege is that of the people speaking through their institution of Parliament. It must not be forgotten that the vital conflict in the 17th century was between the power and privilege of the King and the power and privilege of the Parliament. It is only because that struggle was won by&nbsp;Parliament that modern democracy has become possible. If&nbsp;a member of Parliament can be threatened into silence on matters which, otherwise, he would think it his duty to lay before Parliament, then the most important of the people's democratic rights has been taken away and the true function of Parliament threatened.
QUESTION:&nbsp;But why should Parliament act as the judge in the matter when a breach of privilege is alleged?
ANSWER:&nbsp;In the United Kingdom and in Australia and as I believe, in all other British countries, the Parliament always has been the judge for the very good reason that it is constitutionally the expressed custodian of its own rights and privileges, which as I have said, are the rights and privileges of the electors.
QUESTION-&nbsp;Could Parliament on this occasion by&nbsp;some existing procedures have delegated its authority to a Court?-3-ANSWER: No. Assuming that it could properly make such a law (as to which I offer no opinion) Parliament would have had to legislate to define an offence and to invest some Court with the jurisdiction to investigate that offence. Clearly, any such law could not be made to apply to the case of Browne and Fitzpatrick except by retrospective operation, which would have been contrary to one of our most deeply held principles of criminal jurisprudence.
QUESTION:&nbsp;Were these men denied a fair hearing?
ANSWER: All&nbsp;the facts are to the contrary. They appeared before the Committee of Privileges - which, I stress, is an all-party Committee - and, thereafter, fully and frankly admitted what they had done and the reasons why they had done it. In a substantial sense they pleaded guilty. This is made manifest by the unanimous report of the Committee which was unanimously agreed with by the House. I do not want to re-state all the facts in the report but those who read it will see that Fitzpatrick agreed that the idea in printing the newspaper articles about Mr. Morgan was to intimidate him and to prevent him saying things in Parliament.&nbsp;
&nbsp;This statement was made by Fitzpatrick on several occasions. When asked by&nbsp;one member of the Committee whether he realised that the documents would affect Mr. Morgan's reputation very seriously. Fitzpatrick replied that that was why it was put out.
So far as Browne was concerned Fitzpatrick stated quite openly the reason why he had employed Browne 'I told him to get stuck into him (Morgan). That is what I employed him for'.
The witness, Browne, admitted to being the author of the articles and to having been paid for writing them. No attempt was made to prove the-4-charges against Mr. Morgan. In answer to the Committee, Mr. Browne said that he did not have the proof with him, nor did he possess the proof at the time the article was written. Mr. Fitzpatrick, when asked 'Have you any personal evidence of any charges against Mr. Morgan'., replied: 'No’.
The Committee found, as it was bound to find on the undisputed evidence, that a deliberate attempt had been made to misrepresent Mr. Morgan and that both Fitzpatrick and Browne had been guilty of a serious breach of privilege by publishing articles intended to influence and intimidate a member (the Honourable Member for Reid) in his conduct in the House and in deliberately attempting to impute corrupt conduct as a Member (Mr. Morgan) for the express purpose of discrediting and silencing him.
There is,&nbsp;so far as I&nbsp;know, nothing in the general principles of the law which prevents somebody accused of an offence from pleading guilty and being dealt with accordingly.
OUESTION: Did the House of&nbsp;Representatives act hastily in&nbsp;this matter?
ANSWER: It did not. The unanimous report of the Committee was tabled during the evening session on Wednesday, June 8th. Consideration of it was deferred until next day so that members might have an opportunity of reading it. I&nbsp;myself though much pressed with work devoted several hours to studying the report and past Parliamentary practice. The matter in fact did not come on for discussion until the afternoon of Thursday, June 9th, when as Prime Minister I moved that the house agree with the report of the Committee. This was discussed for some time and the motion was then unanimously carried.&nbsp;-5-I then proposed a motion that Fitzpatrick and Browne be notified to attend the House at 10&nbsp;a.m. on Friday June 10th. They attended and they were heard, one of them Browne, at considerable length. It was necessary that they should be both seen and heard in a matter of such gravity.
&nbsp;When Browne's speech was concluded I suggested a suspension of sittings so that members could consider the material put before them.
I immediately had a discussion with my Cabinet because it will be agreed that a Government should be prepared to give some lead in such a matter. I then had a meeting of a few minutes with the Government parties in which I told them what I was proposing to do. There was no question of action on party lines. Members were obviously going to exercise a judicial function and could make their own decisions. But at the same time, my general impression was that, at any rate, most Government supporters agreed with the Government's view. I understand (I may have been misinformed) that the Executive of the Opposition also had discussions.
&nbsp;The debate was resumed on a motion by myself for the imposition of a term of imprisonment and an amendment by Dr. Evatt favouring the imposition of very substantial fines. It will be observed that we both thought a serious offence had been properly proved and deserved serious punishment. The only difference was as to the nature of the penalty. The debate continued on a high and responsible level with the possible exception of one rather unfortunate and intemperate speech, with the final decision not being reached until almost the end of the afternoon session. The vote of the House was overwhelmingly in favour of imprisonment, members of all four parties forming part of the majority.-6-OUESTION: Would a reprimand have been an adequate punishment in this case?&nbsp;
ANSWER:&nbsp;Having regard to what I have explained as the nature of the offence and of the finding made by the Committee, and unanimously approved by the House, a mere reprimand would have been farcical. It would have amounted to a statement by the House of Representatives that a conspiracy to silence a member of Parliament was a trifling matter. It should not be forgotten that the freedom of Parliament and of every member in it is vital to the continuation of free self-government.&nbsp;
OUESTION: Would not a fine have been preferable to committal to orison for contempt?&nbsp;
ANSWER: Under the disclosed circumstances which indicated that Browne had been employed to do what he did. It is in the highest-degree unlikely that any fine imposed upon him would have been paid by him. Indeed, Fitzpatrick had, before the Committee, declared that he assumed full responsibility for the whole matter. To impose a fine would, therefore have meant that no punishment would have been inflicted upon Browne at all, while: so far as Fitzpatrick was concerned, even a substantial fine would not have caused him any notable inconvenience.
&nbsp;I should add that the power of the House to impose a fine is extremely doubtful, having been denied by several leading constitutional authorities. As the Constitution points out, the powers are those of the House of Commons. The House of Commons has not imposed a fine for breach of privilege since 1666 but has invariably proceeded, either by committal to custody or by reprimand: in appropriate cases. In one of the most recent cases - only a few years ago where a Member of Parliament was found guilty of a serious breach of privilege, the House of Commons actually expelled him from his seat in the House.-7-QUESTION: Are the privileges and immunities of Parliament inconsistent with, or a threat to the freedom of the Press?&nbsp;
ANSWER: No. the simple historic fact is that the modern protection of the freedom of Parliament and the equally modern freedom of the press have gone hand in hand. One cannot exist adequately without the other. Parliament makes no challenge to the right of newspapers or citizens to criticise Members of Parliament, closely or even bitterly. We are in a position to be attacked, and to accept as well as to use free speech. No Parliament seeks to restrain such freedom.
&nbsp;But the case is different when an attempt is made to prevent free speech on the part of a people's representative in Parliament. No reputable newspaper either demands or expects the right to silence a Member of Parliament speaking in his place in the House.
QUESTION: Having regard to the great public interest in this matter, should Parliament address itself to a review of the machinery for declaring and enforcing its privileges.&nbsp;
ANSWER: There could be no possible objection to this course. Indeed, I would welcome it and will promote, in co-operation with the Opposition, the fullest consideration of it during the next sittings. But it should be understood that no future law, ought to be made to operate retrospectively.
&nbsp;


SPEECH&nbsp;BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. MENZIES,&nbsp;TO 700 BUSINESSMEN AT FINNEY'S AUDITORIUM, BRISBANE,ON FRIDAY, JULY&nbsp;22, 1955.
SUPPORTED BY MR.KEN MORRIS, PARLIAMENTARY LEADER OF THE LIBERAL PARTY IN QUEENSLAND&nbsp;SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. MENZIES, TO 700 BUSINESSMEN AT FINNEY’S AUDITORIUM,&nbsp;BRISBANE, ON FRIDAY, JULY 22, 1955.
This is a very remarkable gathering because I have just been considering whether I have ever been called upon to speak to so many people at a single dinner anywhere in the world before. And with some difficulty, I have dredged up out of my memory an occasion on which, through -somebody's courteous error, I made a speech in London to a thousand people at a dinner. That is the only occasion that I can think of in a long and mis-spent life, which excels in numbers this very remarkable gathering.
Ken Morris is here tonight, and I just want to say in the simplest possible words that I am a veteran in these affairs. I don't want you to think that I am doddering into the grave, but I have reached the ripe age of 60. I want to tell you that Ken Morris pleases me beyond words. There is nothing that I can do for him that I won' t do for him, it is a splendid thing to have, particularly here and in State politics somebody who has enthusiasm, who is full of hope or - as he would say, as he has said to me full of realism, and who goes out to win. And you know, Sir: a good deal of my political life, when I've heard State politics discussed in Queensland I have heard people, actually I have heard them shrug their shoulders and say: 'Oh well, you know'. And if there is anything I&nbsp;detest it is these fellows who say: 'You know'. I have had a lot of experience of this kind of thing. May I tell you that I&nbsp;can remember as vividly as any &nbsp;living man how in 1943 we were told that Labour was in office in Canberra almost forever. And in 1949 they had the biggest defeat that any party had had for a long, long time. You&nbsp;don’t win political campaigns&nbsp;-2-By being an apologist. 'You don't win political campaigns by not being too clear about what you stand for. You don t win political campaigns by going around and joining the Prophets of Gloom, because the Prophets of Gloom politically are the largest &nbsp;religious organisation in Australia. But you win campaigns by saying, 'I am going to win’. And when the Leader says that, then it just depends on how many people can rally around and say. 'Right, and we are going to win with you'.&nbsp;
Now, I commend my friend, Mr. Morris, To you. He has been down in Canberra. I have had the benefit of a number of long discussions with him I&nbsp;want to say to you, 'I believe in this man', And if everybody in this room tonight and you are the most influential collection of men who could be brought together in this State - if everybody in this room believes in him, believes in my friend Frank Nicklin, whose absence I so much regret tonight, then they can win. I know all about the question of whether the electorates are so organised, but I hope you will allow me to say that I never come into Queensland myself without remembering that in 1949, in 1951, in 1953.and in1954, this state of Queensland was my sheet anchor.
But first of all, may I say a word or two about this great and historic meeting that is occurring in Geneva. I don't know what it is going to do any more than you do. I don't know what the result of it is going to be any more than any of those who are taking part in it, because the more responsibility you have on international affairs the less likely are you to be dogmatic in advance about what's going to occur. But I just want to put one or two thoughts into your minds about this conference.&nbsp;
The first of them is this; that one of the great troubles in our time, in modern times, is that it is almost impossible for the heads of-3-&nbsp;Governments to have genuinely private conversations with each other. That is something that is worth remembering. They decide to meet. They have scores and scores of technical advisers, The Press of the world, the wire-less of the world are all organised. The people are fascinated by it. And the result is that discussions which if they are to be for the greatest good of mankind, ought to occur quite privately, occur under the fierce glare of publicity. And that, I think is one of the unfortunate things of our time, Just imagine, the four men sitting down together nobody else present. With no agenda. And A saying to B. Now look, we are in great trouble. What are your real troubles about us? And the other one reciprocating and saying: ‘What are your real troubles about us?' And they talk as men may talk. Not to the record, not for the audience but they talk to each other as any four of us tonight might talk to each other sitting in a private room chatting about some matters about which we had disagreed.
And that unfortunately, appears nowadays to be almost completely impossible. And the tragedy of that is, that the moment you make a negotiation between nations or between men a matter of public debate you must accept the consequences of public debate.
Public debate clarifies differences, it crystallises differences but so far as I know, it never resolves differences, because when you go into a debate you go into it to win. That is the essence of debate, and you don't normally go into a debate unless you know quite clearly what you have in your own mind, what your views are and how wrong the other man's views may be, I think public debate is a useful thing in Parliament because it lets the ordinary voter know what the issues are. It may be a very useful thing on an occasion like this, because it may serve to let the world know what the differences are. So it is useful so long as we remember that public debate does not resolve differences. And I am hoping very much that when the good things that will undoubtedly come out of this meeting have come, when ice has been broken when people have become accustomed-4-to talking to each other in a friendly way, when there is more understanding and more knowledge, I am hoping that after that, there may be private discussions, quite informal discussions, with no publicity which will enable problems to be looked at from the point of view of resolving them and not from the point of view of expounding them. I hope I make my view on that matter perfectly plain.
In the meantime, ladies and gentlemen. so far as we are concerned, in this remote corner of the world, all we can do in the old words of Holy Writ is 'to watch and pray'. These talks can't produce peace nor; indeed, can they hope to resolve particular differences which require immense technical examination. But I believe they can open a door that the world has wanted to see opened. I believe that they can produce among heads of Government and among those immediately associated with them, a new spirit of friendliness - maybe that is too great a word to use - but a new spirit of understanding. And a new feeling that well I have met the other man and I know him. I have had myself, in my own very small way, a vast experience in international discussions and I have never engaged in one that was half so useful as the private talk with the head of some other Government a private talk with some Minister, the kind of talk in which you can, in the metaphorical expression; can let your hair down, and get to understand what it is and what the trouble is about. And the only things that have happened which I would regard as effective internationally in my own second term as Prime Minister have been brought about by private talks when you met as man to man and talked personally and not for the benefit of a gallery.
And, therefore, all-I-want to say to you about this great conference, and it is a great conference, this is quite historic, is that we are not to expect too much. It is a very human temptation, isn't it, to think that after a week or ten days of talks we will be given the complete recipe for-5-&nbsp;universal peace. Now don't let's have any such ideas. Peace is not produced by resolutions. Peace is not produced by some article of protocol. Peace is produced by an attitude of mind in the nation's concern. We will have peace in this world when the people of the Soviet Union, the people of China, the people wherever they may be have the same instinctive desire for peace as we have and have the power to make that desire effective in governing forces. And, therefore, don't let's be over simple in our minds on this matter and say, ‘Well, this will produce some resolution which will mean that we can beat our swords into ploughshares'. Because to expect such a thing from one meeting, from the first-meeting, would I think, be&nbsp;a fatal error.
In the second place, don't let us fall into the error, ladies and gentlemen, of thinking that if much advance is made in understanding and that is the object of the conference in Geneva, that the result may be that we will abandon our defence programmes and give ourselves a defence holiday. That, let me remind you, is something that has almost happened before. Between the two wars there were lots of people who said: 'Well, we have the League of Nations and because we have the League of Nations, all is -well. We have collective security.' And a lot of people -said: 'Well collective security is security'. Whereas collective security merely meant something that had to be backed by strength in the interests of common security. And because that wasn't understood we had in this world between the two wars the spectacle of the victors in the first World War. the British Empire: as it was, I-am happy to remember, still called, the United States of America, France. What happened? The victors in the war proceeded to disarm each other by agreement, but not the enemy. The result of this illusion, this emotional cloud cuckoo land, in which we lived for the second time in this century we went within an ace of utter defeat in a war.
Now, we must-remember these things. You may never confidently, and you certainly may never comfortably argue international problems from weakness.-6-It is our duty to be strong and I don’t want to be regarded by any of you as having a pessimistic view. I believe that this conference will do an immeasurable amount of good. But when it is over, I will be surprised if as Prime Minister of Australia, if I &nbsp;still don’t have to say to my own people: ‘We must still be strong’.
Now, Sir, that induces me to mention one other matter and I mention it merely because every now and then some echo comes down from Queensland and after all, Queensland has every right to be regarded by me as my favourite state. I wouldn’t be here but for Queensland, I know that. But every now and then somebody says: ‘Well, there is a great propaganda movement going on’. It is occasionally promoted by people with their tongues in their cheeks about the necessity for defending Queensland, and what is the Commonwealth doing about it? And, therefore, I want all of you to do a little thinking between the 18th hole and the 19th hole on this matter, and say to yourselves, ‘Where is Queensland best defended?’. Now like all of you, I am British, and British to the boot heels and I have an undying affection for the Old Country. And I, therefore, recall to your winds that Great Britain has been the principal home of liberty in the whole of the modern history of the world. Therefore, it is worth recalling that from the Battle of Hastings in 1066, from the Battle of Hastings on through the whole of modern history, Great Britain has defended her own territorial integrity in other places and not on her own soil.
The only time when an invasion was in prospect, arose when the Battle of Britain went on in the recent war. And there the Battle for Britain was won magnificently in the air over Great Britain and later on by the indomitable spirit of people confronted by new strange weapons coming from distant places. But for 900 years, the good sense of that country and of its people has indicated that you want to defend yourself as far-7-Away from yourself as you can. And therefore, when people say no Australian troops ought to go to Malaya, that we ought to leave it to the conscript youths of Great Britain; we ought to leave it to the conscript Youths of the United States; it is not our business. How terrible. How utterly out of harmony with the true Australian spirit. And yet this is the doctrine of the Evatt Labour Party, naked and unashamed.&nbsp;
Do you know, ladies and gentlemen, that at this moment when the United Kingdom has under training and under arms, boys for a period of 18 months 2 years, sent around the world, when Great Britain has a greater force, a greater military force under arms than ever she had in her peace time history, 80% of them are outside Great Britain. And we are to be told with our limited forces that we mustn’t have them anywhere except on the Queensland coast, or the Victorian coasts, or at Darwin or somewhere else. I will refer to this – I ought to apologise to you for referring to it – but it is very frequently forgotten that if aggressive Communism finally decides to sweep in our direction, it will take any steps about it, is when they are a couple of hundred miles away from out coast across the sea.
Now, Sir, the other matter that I thought I might trespass on your time about for a few minutes is our internal problems, the internal economy. I can relieve the minds of my distinguished colleagues by saying that I don’t propose to anticipate the Budget, But I always anticipate it with fear and trembling. And having fear and trembling, I then proceed to anticipate it by doing what I would recommend very warmly to many other people. I sit down and I swot over the documents. I find out what the facts are. It is a very good idea when you are settling these matters, to know the facts. That is a piece of wise advice that I merely hand out to you gratis. Though, no doubt, Leon Trout would like to charge you a shilling or two for it.&nbsp;-8-But could I venture, gentlemen, to help you on this matter by saying that there are some things that we ought to have quite clearly in our minds. One of our troubles in Australia, and indeed it goes for every country is that whereas we, who have the responsibility, must consider financial and economic policy from every point of view – because that is the essence of the whole movement for which I stand – most private people inevitably consider it from their own point of view, as it affects their business as importers or as exporters, or as farmers or whatever it may be.
Now I am not quarrelling about that, but I do think that every now and then we ought to stand back a little and say, ‘What is the position in the broad?’. Because I know that there are practical people in the world who say that politicians generalise, but believe me, to be able to see a problem in the broad, to be able to evolve general principles for its solution is the hardest exercise of the intellect. Anybody may say, ‘This is how to fix my business’. Or ‘What is the first thing to be said?’ Our troubles, and we have economic troubles in Australia are oddly enough, and for the first time probably in our history, the problems inherit in prosperity. Have that in mind, I beg of you. Most of the men here tonight have been through a period of the depression and can remember all the bitter problems of those days were the bitter problems that were inherent in depression, not in prosperity. And we have now lived long enough to know that prosperity produces its problems.
But you don’t guarantee the continuance of prosperity, and Australia is at this moment more prosperous than ever before in its history, we don’t guarantee the continuance of prosperity merely by saying ‘We will go on spending hard and we will pretend that there is no economic problem’. Because there is an economic problem. We are prosperous. We have a high purchasing power. We are short of labour. Our managerial efficiency is still not as high as that in&nbsp;-9-some other countries in the world We have at the elbow of our wage-earner a smaller supply of power than his opposite number in the United States has. In other words, we are feeling at this moment the pressure&nbsp;of high monetary demands on restricted supply of labour and &nbsp;management and materials. And, Sir, that gives rise to problems that are not to be brushed off. These problems require thought, Somebody who says, &nbsp;Well, the right way to deal with that is for the Government to let us have more of our own money seems to settle the argument.He hasn’t t necessarily settled it. Somebody says ‘Well, this is the perfect case for a great migration programme, so that we may have more and more people to be employed', I am a great supporter of a high migration programme. But please look at it both ways. A migration programme does in the short run increase the demand upon capital facilities, the demand upon factory accommodation, the demand on plant, the demand on schools, on hospitals or whatever it may be. The capital demand that is generated by 120,000 150 000' migrants coming into the country every year&nbsp;is enormous. In the long run - it may be five years; it may be eight years. &nbsp;I don't know how long in the long run the productive effort of the new population will be counter inflationary, because it will stimulate the production of goods the people want. But you can't go through a period of intense migration without understanding that that’s a period in which inflationary pressure is bound to be quite substantial.
I balance those two things, one against the other and I have come down heavily in favour of migration because I believe that what this country wants more than anything else is population more and more millions of people, but all I am talking to you about this matter for is this, don t please accept the idea that when you have said we will have more millions of people that you have solved the problem, because we will, in consequence for some time have a high pressure of demand on our resources of men and of materials and those are things that may require, occasionally, stringent financial measures. And the stringent financial measures which we took in 1951, in the short run; produced hostility and misunderstanding and criticism and, sometimes, abuse. But if you don't mind-10-abuse - and I assure you I thrive on it - then you know in the long run that if you have been right, you will find that the economic position has been improved by it and that in the long run, as now, everybody is better off.
Now Sir. I don t want to make a long sermon to you about this matter. But could I, perhaps illustrate the kind of thing I have in mind - and I have been talking rather longer than I intended to - by talking about a matter just quite shortly which most of you gentlemen here tonight have discussed privately I am sure, more than once, and that is the question as to how we get more capital into Australia from overseas. There, again, I occasionally find, Mr, Chairman that people oversimplify this matter, and They say, ‘Well. let's get capital in from overseas and everything in the garden is lovely'- Then every Premier will have what he wants, though I don t believe that day will ever come, and there will be plenty of money to do everything, well in the first place I think we ought always to remember this, that if everybody in Australia let's put it in this way, if every working man if every &nbsp;man capable of work, capable of&nbsp; employment in Australia is in fact employed, and you add £100 million of capital to the demand upon his services do you create more men? Do you make them more willing to work? My experience has been - I hope I am not entirely pessimistic that the greater certainty of a job, the more likely it is that the productive effort will tend to fall. I don't want to put it too high, that goes for you. too as well as to, the fellow who carries the bricks, it goes for me. no doubt. If somebody were foolish enough to guarantee me that I will be Prime Minister for the rest of my natural life I don't mind telling you with all shame, I would take three weeks holiday for the first time in my life.
And therefore, it isn’t just a matter of adding money to the economy. I agree that to develop Australia and Australia is in spite of its remarkable efforts, a relatively undeveloped country to develop Australia we need capital, but we also need manpower, we need skill, we need effort. We need more production-11-of the materials: that are wanted for this work. And you must never isolate one of these factors and say, ‘You can solve it for me by borrowing a £100 million.’&nbsp;
I hope I make that point quite plainly to you, because at the moment in Australia there is no unemployment. On the contrary, we have demand, an unsatisfied demand for people to be employed. There are more jobs than men. Now does that mean that we are not to concern ourselves with overseas borrowing. Not at all. I would like to tell you a simple little story about that, Because I know something about overseas borrowing.
In 1950, just after we had come back into office, and just after our distinguished opponents had said that you couldn’t borrow money, and you couldn’t borrow dollars and we must, therefore, go without the goods for which at the time there was no substitute, great earth-moving equipment, all sorts of things needed for public works, They said it can’t be done. And I sat in my room until half past one in the morning for about two months and read all the documents I could get out of all the departments on these matters, and then went into my Cabinet and said, ‘Well, we have no answer to this vital shortage of capital goods.’ You see why I mention capital goods. It is not just a matter of bringing money in and adding to monetary demands, but a matter of buying capital goods that would come in here and be producers from the time they arrive. I saw no hope of that unless we can raise a dollar loan, and I would have thought that that was impossible. And so eloquent was I on this matter – and I have moments – that all my colleagues beamed at me and said, ‘R.M., it is quite unanswerable, you had better go abroad and borrow some dollars. ‘Oh, I said, I was saying exactly the opposite’. And they said, ‘Yes, I know, but still give it a go.’ Go and see whether you can &nbsp;borrow some dollars. That was a pretty good assignment. And I went.&nbsp;
Now, you don’t borrow money anywhere in the world, and this again I want you to have in mind, unless-12-&nbsp;your country is regarded as creditworthy, unless your administration is regarded as reputable and creditworthy and unless you, yourself are regarded as a responsible person. And I don’t mind telling you that the credit of Australia when we came in at the end of 1949 was such that had it continued, nobody would have been able to borrow dollars in the United States. I wouldn’t have to put them into the dollar-sterling pool, which is very important from our point of view, because then everybody else would have a cut out of it, you see. I said: ‘I want them for myself, Stafford’. And he agreed. And then I went to the United States.
Well, I had my negotiations with the International Bank. I started being fairly long in the tooth now, with President Truman. I got him on my side. I then got Dean Acheson on my side, then got Averell Harriman on my side. There is nothing like having a few friends, you know. I have sometimes had very few, but you always want a few. And we got from the International Bank $50,000,000 in as many days as they had taken months to lend them to any other country in the world.
But every dollar, every dollar was earmarked, not just to stimulate some monetary demand in Australia, but was earmarked for the importation into Australia of capital goods of massive-working equipment needed for the development of this country. That is the whole point I am making. Don’t borrow for money, borrow for things, borrow for the things that you need. And on my last visit through there, Mr. Black, President of the World, said to me that-13-he would like me to come to the World 'Bank to sign the last borrowing we had-made. He had the whole of his directors, about 30 of them, in the room, from all the countries in the world, or a great number of the countries in the world and I signed a loan contract for $ 54 1/2 million. He pointed out to the Directors that Australia had, during our time in office, - permit me to emphasise that - Australia had secured from the World Bank $258 &amp; 1/2 million for capital goods, more dollars than had been secured by any other country in the world.
One has only to go around Australia to see the impact of this kind of thing. Well, I mention that to you to demonstrate how I&nbsp;approach this matter of public borrowing. We don't share the Labour Party s horror of borrowing; These silly statements that are made at Canberra from time to time about putting yourself into the hands of the Overseas Bankers. This is a lot of nonsense. Nobody in this room, in his five wits, can fail to understand that if we hadn't secured all this dollar finance there would be works standing half-completed all round 'Australia, which have now been done. And what you must do is not to borrow just for the fun of it, not to borrow with reckless indifference as to how you repay, because we have had all that in mind all that matter well in hand. But to borrow on the public account, not just to add to expenditure, but to add to our physical resources of plant and equipment in Australia.
And, Sir: the other aspect of the matter is, of course, private finance. There has been a fairly substantial movement of private investment capital into Australia. But there again, I point out to you, that nobody bringing $100 million into Australia can by that simple act, create another X thousand employees. If we haven’t more people, then he adds to the demand and up goes the cost of wages, up goes the price, up goes the inflationary movement. And, therefore, we ourselves have always to consider that while we encourage overseas investment, we believe in private capital. We have none of these silly ideas. I merely want you to have in mind that is private capital&nbsp;-14-coming into Australia is to be effectively employed for our benefit, and for its own legitimate benefit, then we must face up to the conditions of that kind of thing. One of these conditions is that we must justify additions to our capital supply by additions to our productive effort. And that doesn’t really mean one man or two men or three men. It means management, it means efficiency of organisation, it means technical improvement, it means genuine productive effort on the part of the employee. This goes all round. Otherwise, we will become drunk with the idea of money; we will say: 'Well there is more and more money. The turnover is greater’. &nbsp;We don’t pause to say, ‘Well it may be greater because the price level has risen’. We can easily become obsessed with the idea of money, whereas for genuine continuing prosperity in Australia, we must watch more and more purchasing power with more and more productive effort and more productive achievement. And if I might bring that to a simple single point, I would say this to you..
This country, through the Arbitration Court and various State laws has a forty-hour week. This country can afford a forty hour &nbsp;week, but only if it is forty hours work. If we are going to be such fools in the face of history as to get all the enormous leisure – if we are going to be such fools as to think, that having a forty-hour week, we can by this rule or that regulation or that practice, to whittle it away to 35 to 30 to 28 then we must be intelligent enough to face up to the consequences of that. And the consequences of any such attitude of mind as that must inevitably be that our costs will rise, that our prices will rise, and the day may well come when we price even our export industries on the land out of the world market.
If we are going to do that, then we will have reached the Last folly; because although there may be some people in the world who believe that a Government-15-with inexhaustible supplies of money can subside everybody, so that everybody remains happy. You don’t believe that. Nor do I believe that. This country’s prosperity, so great, must be a solid prosperity. I would go out of office miserable, out of politics dejected, If I thought that all I had done was to leave my own country in a state which looked like a state of prosperity and in reality, was a state of complete delusion. I am not a pessimist. I am an optimist. But if you are going to be full of hope about your country and full of confidence in its future, then it becomes necessary every now and then to say: ‘Don’t let’s forget the simple, sensible conditions of continuing prosperity. Don’t let’s abandon the ancient virtues’. Because you know, if you go around Australia and look at what has been done and what is being done, you constantly remind yourselves that this was done by the ancient pioneering virtues that made Australia, work done by simple people who worked in their day and generation, who were as honest as the day – and honesty takes many forms, just as dishonesty does – who were honest in their day and generation; God fearing people who believed in their families and in their future and in their country. God knows there is not a man here tonight who doesn’t come from some family of that kind. And, therefore, let us restore in our own minds, repair in our own minds, these great virtues, so that the happy state of affairs in which we now live will continue.
Now, Sir, I said just now that I was about to finish, but will you permit me just three minutes to mention one other matter before I have done? I haven’t except in a glancing way, referred to the impact upon Australia of the great influence against production, and against effort that we have and that is the Communist movement. That is its stock-in-trade. It believes in the strike. It believes in slowing down. It believes in getting rid of prosperity, because then it has the soil in which its doctrines may grow. I hope that everybody in Australia has observed in the last few months that the two elements which has conspired together honourably and effectively to get rid of Communist control in Unions – the secret ballot and the groups in the union who stood against Communism – have both come under violent attack by Dr. Evatt. The&nbsp;-16-attacks, so violent and so successful, partly cloaked as some bogus sectarian view, partly cloaked in other ways, have been so successful that if you open your newspapers week by&nbsp;week, you begin to read how this union which was under Communist control and came out of it, has gone back to it. Does this give pleasure to the people of Australia? This is no accident. This is deliberate. This is the price that is paid for Communist support. I never read any of the records of these things without feeling, that one of the most shocking things that has happened in my time is that the great Labour Party, which really is no more Communist than I am, as a Labour Party should have been misled into a course of conduct which is greeted with cheers in Marx House, and greeted with despair by decent trade unionists who have for years been battling against Communists.-17 -VOTE OF THANKS TO THE PRIME MINISTER MOVED BY MR. KEN&nbsp;MORRIS PARLIAMENTARY LEADER OF THE LIBERAL PARTY IN QUEENSLAND
It is my very, very proud opportunity to propose a vote of thanks to the 'Right Honourable R.G. Menzies. As I looked around the table as he was speaking, and as I heard the reception that you gave to him at the conclusion of his speech, I realised that every one of you in the room tonight would like to be doing the same thing. Because I believe that you will be with me when I say that we have got in our Prime Minister of Australia, in Robert Gordon Menzies, the greatest Australian that we have known in our generation.&nbsp;
Many of you will have heard me say that not only in the presence of the Prime Minister, but also in his absence. And I have heard you say the same thing. The proposal of a vote of thanks, of course, is usually-the formal conclusion of a gathering. But there are some exceptional occasions, when we have an exceptional guest, that it resumes somewhat greater proportions, as it does to-night. And when I think of the pages that will be written in history in the future about our Prime Minister, I believe that all the historians will most proudly put him shoulder to shoulder with that other very great leader of our generation, and of a previous one, that great Englishman, Sir Winston Churchill.
Ladies and gentlemen, we of the Liberal Party have ideals of which we are enormously proud. We&nbsp;have issued, as you know, a booklet called 'We Believe'. I think all of you have had it. But I feel that those ideals which are illustrated in that booklet, 'We Believe', are the ideals for which our Prime Minister has worked and fought and sacrificed let us not forget that and sacrificed over the past 25 years. It is because he has sacrificed himself for those ideals that he is bringing to Australia something that we could never have had, if it hadn't been for-18-his presence. I ask you to co-operate with my Parliamentary colleagues in the State sphere to give him what I believe he needs, a government in the State sphere which will.co--operate with him to bring to Queensland the real development and the real advancement that Queensland so richly deserves but is losing because of the lack of co-operation that we have from the present administration. I want you to know that every one of my Parliamentary colleagues in Queensland believes with me that they, and you, who are leaders of your industries have faced in the years that have gone by tasks that have been difficult. tasks that have been almost frightening in their difficulty. We in the State sphere face a task, not at all frightening; but a task which is admittedly difficult. But I can assure you that all of us believe that with your .co-operation we will, most definitely, win the election next year. That is not optimism, but it is based on a realistic analysis of every electorate in Queensland. And don't forget this that in the past few months, I have had the opportunity of visiting with my Leader, Mr.&nbsp;Frank Nicklin all the large areas throughout Queensland. I say to you in conclusion on that matter that if you will cooperate with us, as I know you will, if you will go out, as I think Sir Arthur Fadden said a moment ago &nbsp;if&nbsp;you will go out on a crusade and spread the gospel of the ideals of Liberalism which are the greatest political ideals which it is possible to have then you will see the change of Government in this State.
To you Sir, may I say that I am awfully proud to be the mouthpiece of those who are here now. And who heard you, we feel it is more than an honour to be associated with you. You are our Leader, and to you we give all the thanks for the work that you have done. We will show you what we think in the State election next year in 1956.


THE TWENTY-SECOND SIR RICHARD STAWELL ORATION
'CHURCHILL AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES’
Address by the Rt. Hon. R.G.&nbsp;Menzies, M.P.,
Prime Minister of Australia.
Delivered at the ARTS&nbsp;THEATRE, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE,
Saturday, 8th October 1955.
'CHURCHILL AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES'
&nbsp;
In common with all of you, I&nbsp;remember the name and life and work of the late Sir Richard Stawell with deep respect. He was a man of high character, of clear mind, and with a deep sense of justice.
Great physicians are not always well-known to the public, nor is the quality of their work always properly appreciated. It is one of the splendours of the medical profession that its greatest men have not sought public notoriety, but have without restriction devoted their talents to the service of mankind, privately, quietly, their greatest technical achievements known only to their peers and their greatest human achievements known only to their patients and their patients' families.
&nbsp;
When I was offered the honour of delivering the Stawell Lecture, I at first demurred on the intelligible grounds that there were so many more men who knew so much more about him; and that, in any event, I was not medical and could, therefore, not speak of his work with an informed and discriminating judgment. I was persuasively reassured by being told that the medical profession liked every now and then to listen to a speech by a layman, and, that I could quite readily and acceptably speak upon a topic unrelated to medicine; except that, being in commemoration of Richard Stawell, it might properly refer to men of courage, character, ability and consequence. Whether this concession to the laity was the product of that sadistic spirit which must occasionally invade the mind of even the most humane of medical men or was due to a desire to get away from 'talking shop' I am not to judge. But I have assumed the best in my own favour and have therefore undertaken to speak to you about 'Churchill and his Contemporaries'; all of them men who would have been delighted with Richard Stawell and would have found so many matters in common with him in the realm of the mind and of the spirit.&nbsp;
As you may know, I have for many years now been engaged in public life. Sometimes the people have been good enough to approve of that fact and sometimes their rapture has been modified. But by and large they have been generous to me, so that in the result I have been able, over a period of 20 years, to represent this country abroad on many occasions and to achieve the acquaintance and, in some cases, the close personal friendship of some of the great men of this era. There is a strange quirk in human nature which I commend, if that be necessary, to the consideration of the psychologist and psychiatrists among you. It is this. When we are very young, and we read our-2-history, we visualise the great men of the past as giants. Their very shadows appear to be enormous as they pass across the dim and distant landscapes of history. I have lived long enough and had sufficient experience to find that historic giants are quite human, that for the most part they are quite intelligible, that in many ways they think and behave just as we do, and that one must discern their greatness, not by standing with dumb amazement before them, but by trying to discover what special quality each of them has which marks him out for fame.
In the result, I have found both the great Churchill and his great contemporaries refreshingly human and indeed intelligible to people like myself, for the bulk of their time.&nbsp;
The idea of an incomprehensible genius which once obsessed my mind in contemplating the noble figures of the past has long since deserted me, except in the presence of eminent mathematicians, nuclear scientists, and second-year medical students. Genius in the current affairs of men usually expresses itself in the most comprehensible terms. The whole of my experience has indeed confirmed me in my very early belief that lucidity is one of the cardinal virtues and that people who understand their business can usually explain it reasonably clearly to normally educated and intelligent men. But I would not have you believe that this means that for me the romantic conceptions of youth have given place to a dry cynicism. About so many of the great I still remain in the frame of mind of Browning when he wrote that simple but moving
verse:&nbsp;
'Ah,&nbsp;did you once see Shelley plain,And did he stop and speak to you,And did you speak to him again?How strange it seems, and new!'&nbsp;
This preliminary excursus is designed to persuade you that, if in the course of my later remarks I speak in somewhat positive terms about some of the famous men of our era, you are not to assume that I do not bow before them or profoundly admire their contribution to the welfare of man. Neither praise not criticism from somebody-like myself will, I trust, be regarded as impertinent; the truth is that, unless those of us who live on the plains but have occasionally visited (strictly as guests) the slopes of Olympus are prepared to set down some human remarks about great men, contemporary history when it comes to be written will be falsified by&nbsp;the propagandists and by those frequent biographers whose picturesqueness and dogmatism are in inverse ratio to their knowledge. And so, with your permission, I begin with the great Churchill himself.-3-You already know a great deal about him. &nbsp;He has been a soldier, a turbulent and frequently unsuccessful politician, a leader of 'lost-causes and impossible loyalties', rejected at somewhat more than my own age, and ultimately the idol of the world. And all the time he has written; his books have been read across the world. His command of what I will call nervous English is unequalled in our generation. He has explained himself as few men have done. And yet his human qualities, without which his soaring imagination and command and eloquence could not have availed so much, are for most of us-a deep mystery.
If I were to say to you that as I have seen him, he has had the wisdom of venerable and-embattled statesmanship, in action like an army terrible with banners, and, off duty, and sometimes on duty, the chuckling spirit of a schoolboy, a remarkable capacity for political hostility and a much more remarkable capacity for the most endearing personal friendship and goodwill; you would begin to see that the roots of his genius are deep in a soil which produces humour and understanding and good temper and bad temper and all those oddities which go to make up the English character and occasionally, as in his case, produce the most superb genius.
I have written and said so much about him in recent years that I must avoid repeating myself, I have known him from time to time for many years. I sat with him longest in the War Cabinet in the first part of 1941, when the German raiders came over every night. And since the war, in quieter but difficult days, I am honoured to say that I have enjoyed in large measure his personal association and friendship and goodwill.&nbsp;
His political opponents have frequently felt the lash of his tongue. But it has never been a crude lash. Indeed, I have sometimes felt that his victim in the House of Commons felt that it was a singular honour to be attacked by him. That is one of those inexplicable things that perhaps only a politician can understand.&nbsp;
Could I give you one illustration of the way in which his mind and body responded to the challenge of the war?&nbsp;
I am thinking of one weekend night at Chequers in about March of 1941 when General de Gaulle was in England and when-Churchill, de Gaulle and I sat together at dinner in this famous old house in Buckinghamshire. De Gaulle was by common consent a brilliant soldier; but it is not easy for a brilliant soldier to become quite suddenly skilled in the politics of a French Resistance, in the economics that&nbsp;-4-go with politics, or in the tactful handling which, believe it or not, is one of the essentials of international relations. In brief, de Gaulle was as long as the average Frenchman is short; in place of the celebrated French esprit, he possessed a somewhat sombre appearance and smiled with difficulty. At the time of which I am speaking, his English was to say the least of it 'sketchy', on the whole, conceivably inferior to my French. The conversations occurred in French. Winston's French is magnificent, but it is not French. 'C'est magnifique mais ce n'est pas le francais'.&nbsp;
I gather from my friends in London that the celebrated Birkenhead had once said of Winston's French: 'You know, I greatly admire Winston's French. It is the only French I have ever been able to understand, and the odd thing is that the French appear to be able to understand it also!'&nbsp;
In this setting I was, I confess, being a little wickedly provocative. Every time harmony appeared to be breaking out I would throw in some vulgar observation about Dakar - a subject upon which Winston and I had exchanged cables and on which de Gaulle had somewhat turbulent views. It was a remarkable experience. We adjourned into another room. Churchill and de Gaulle walked up and down, delivering homilies at each other. I sat back with the comfortable feeling that I was witnessing a fascinating phase of history. By 2 o'clock in the morning, de Gaulle very sensibly decided to go to bed. I decided, for no reason that I can sensibly recall, to stay up.&nbsp;
The great man himself went to bed at 3&nbsp;o'clock in the morning but before he did so he went into the little corner study at Chequers and rang up Bomber Command and Fighter Command to get the reports of the day. What he had to say to them on their reports was all compact of encouragement, rebuke, fire, criticism, what-you-will. Next morning I was hugging my pillow at some rational hour and arriving for breakfast reluctantly at 9 o'clock, only to find that at 7 the Prime Minister had received his despatches, had sat up in bed with some black coffee and a large cigar, and was busy dictating the directives of the day.&nbsp;
We do not see men like this in every generation, nor indeed does the world see too many in a century. I must confess that over the years, I have never known Winston to observe any of the rules of health.
Yet his amazing mental fire must have been associated with a remarkable physical tenacity. The two things worked together, partly because they were born in him, and partly because, consciously or unconsciously, he cultivated them, using adversity to strengthen them.-5-The trite saying that 'the English lose the battles, but win the wars'; Philip Guedallas epigrammatic explanation of the great Duke of Wellington's subsequent loss of 19th Century reputation, that the English prefer their heroes to be slightly unsuccessful, to retreat gloriously to Corunna or die in the hour of victory at Trafalgar; these are not irrelevant. It is, indeed, part of the legend of our race to come from behind and to snatch victory from defeat. In my war-time association with Winston Churchill. I caught, paradoxically, a few echoes of this legend. Not that the great man was ever defeatist. Far from it. Never was there a leader more unwilling' to contemplate a defeat or acknowledge a reverse. But I have seen him and heard him discuss a current situation, building up the intensity of the problem, tearing away wishful thinking; only to proceed from there literally to fight his way through the problem to a point at which all of us who were his hearers not only believed but knew beyond peradventure that, given courage and energy and endurance, victory was ours.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
I could talk to you for a long time about him, about his charming and magnificent wife, and about his family. But I must resist this temptation because I must turn for a little to some of his &nbsp;contemporaries in order to disclose to you my deep- seated belief that great individual powers are not a freak of nature, but form part of a pattern of greatness in any country or generation. After all, even in the spacious days of great Elizabeth, Shakespeare was not a lonely figure in the superb renaissance of poetry and drama. If&nbsp;he had not lived at all, we would be reading the other Elizabethan dramatists much more than we do. Trees grow tallest in a tall forest, and so, believe me, Churchill has had great contemporaries. He has himself in a notable book written of some of them. If you go back home and re-read 'Great Contemporaries' you will find not the heartless cut and thrust of political controversy but great men written of justly, generously and affectionately.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Birkenhead's place in history is no doubt a matter of controversy. Quite plainly his talents were greater than his achievements, and yet Churchill wrote of him the most splendid epitaph that mortal man could wish:&nbsp;
'Some men when they die after busy, toilsome, successful lives leave a great stock of scrip and securities, of acres or factories or the goodwill of large undertakings. F.E. banked his treasure in the hearts of his friends, and they will cherish his memory till their time has come.'-6-But let me for a few minutes go back before Churchill.&nbsp;
I have known six Prime Ministers of Great Britain. Two of them, Mr. Attlee and Sir Anthony Eden, are still on the active political scene and, therefore, though I could speak of each of them with deep admiration and affection, it would be an impertinence for me even to appear to sit in judgment upon them.&nbsp;
But three of them preceded Churchill Ramsay Macdonald, Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain. Each in his day enjoyed wide popularity. Churchill, thank God, 'still does’. But three of them went out of office, if riot unhonoured, at least unsung.&nbsp;
Now, I entertain what some of my friends regard as the eccentric belief that Macdonald, Baldwin and Chamberlain were great men who rendered certain vital and abiding services to their people, and&nbsp;that Churchill, with all his genius to command and inspire, could not have done everything that he did, but for their work.
Each was at one time, no doubt, over-praised. But each has subsequently been over-condemned. It does little credit to our good sense that we should swing about so wildly in our judgments, treating today as mere folly our wild enthusiasms of yesterday. After all, if our superficial emotions are our only guide, we have no more assurance that we are right today than we were wrong yesterday.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
When I first met him, in 1935,&nbsp;Ramsay Macdonald was long past his best. He had become tired and old and addicted to rather vague and meaningless phrases. A&nbsp;leonine and handsome appearance, a fine poise and a rich voice, with occasional flashes of international insight, were all that seemed to remain of a man whose personality and force of character must have been great to lift him from a position of almost universal unpopularity and, indeed, opprobrium during the first world war to No. 10 Downing Street only a few years later.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
My&nbsp;own contact with him was sketchy enough; a few meetings in London, a visit to Chequers; but I count his brilliant son, Malcolm Macdonald, now British High Commissioner in India, as a warm though now a geographically distant friend. I remember Malcolm saying to me one day in London (I know he will not mind me quoting him)-7-'You did not know my father at his best. I can recall him standing on the tail of a truck, by&nbsp;torchlight, speaking to a thousand miners with such power and appeal that the tears made white furrows down their faces. As a spokesman for the under-dog, as a denouncer of social and industrial injustice, he was tremendous and unforgettable.'&nbsp;
It is easily believed. England was (and is) a traditionally conservative place. It was Ramsay Macdonald who, with fire and great political skill, brought the Labour Party from a small obscurity to the seat of government. He formed and led the first Labour Government. This (and here I state the point of my narrative) was not a mere accidental or transitory political triumph. It gave to organised Labour, for the first time, a sense of power and therefore, inevitably for sensible men, a feeling of political responsibility.
It would surprise me if the future historian, battling his way through all the partisan records, did not come to the conclusion that but for the work of Ramsay Macdonald there might have been no instant place for a Socialist Ernest Bevin as Minister for Labour in a Conservative-led War Cabinet in the Second World War. The magnificent co-operation of 1940-45 proceeded from a consciousness in the industrial unions and among politically organised wage-earners not only of the necessities of their country, which they knew clearly enough, but also of their own national powers and responsibilities. The British National Government of 1940-45 gave a lead and direction more authoritative than could have been provided by any one-Party administration.&nbsp;
Stanley Baldwin's political reputation is today surrounded by clouds and darkness. The current picture of him is that of an indolent and not very gifted man, sucking at his pipe or inspecting his pigs, oblivious of the state of Europe or the rising menace of Hitler, ignoring the eloquent warnings of Churchill, allowing his country to go on, unaware and unprepared, to the very edge of the abyss.&nbsp;
Some of the lines in this picture are, alas, true enough. Some are fantastically wrong. I saw a good deal of Baldwin in those years. He was a plain and solid Englishman, of great personal friendliness and charm, an easy and indeed magnetic talker over the breakfast table, a supreme Parliamentarian in the House of Commons.&nbsp;
He was a poet at heart, a master of that kind of simple and moving speech which best expresses the underlying passion of the Englishman for his own countryside, its history, its form, its familiar colours and smells.-8-'To me, England is the country, and the country is England. And when I ask myself what I mean by&nbsp;England, when I think of England when I am abroad, England comes to me through my various senses - through the ear, through the eye, and through certain imperishable scents. The&nbsp;sounds of England, the tinkle of the hammer on the anvil in the country smithy, the corncrake on a dewy morning, the sound of the scythe against the whetstone, and the sight of a plough team coming over the brow of a hill. And above all, most subtle, most penetrating and most moving, the smell of wood smoke coming up in an autumn evening, or the smell of the scrutch fires.'&nbsp;
At more than one period of domestic political crisis, his conduct was cool, shrewd and successful. The General Strike of 1926,&nbsp;trouble on the coal-fields, the unprecedented problems of the Abdication, were all handled by&nbsp;him with skill and a just understanding of underlying British opinion.&nbsp;
What was the secret of these successes, so sharply contrasting with his chronic failure to realise or deal with the menace arising in Europe?&nbsp;
The answer is that he was an Englishman of great character and talent, but a provincial Englishman. Europe mystified him; he was never attracted to its history or its problems; he probably illustrated to perfection the old and true proverb about the rural Englishman, that for him 'the negroes begin at Calais'. Steel master Baldwin might be, by&nbsp;force of circumstances. But at heart he was of the English country; ready to recall his people to its beauties; possessed in rare degree of the faculty of invoking a sense of national unity. It was this sense of unity which defeated the General Strike, which at one stage averted grave trouble in the coal-mines, which plucked out of the thorns of the Abdication the flower of an actually strengthened Crown.&nbsp;
The historian's balance may, for aught I know, weigh down against Stanley Baldwin. But the superb national unity with which Great Britain went to war against odds on September 3rd, 1939, owed not a little to the man who had nurtured it in the deep and simple pride of his people.&nbsp;
Neville Chamberlain succeeded him at a time when the average Englishman still did not accept the inevitability or even the real probability of war. Chamberlain was the son of the great champion of Tariff Reform and Imperial Preference. His family and-9-political background was industrial. But, as in the case of Baldwin, he was at heart a countryman. He would turn from the complexities of a Budget to a weekend whipping a remote stream, identifying obscure plants during some woodland ramble, or listening with joy&nbsp;to the song of a bird (and a bird he knew) in a hedged lane.&nbsp;
I could never understand why he was so little understood. 'He would have made a good Lord Mayor of Birmingham in a bad year!', said the mordant Birkenhead. Yet, as I shall try to show, he rendered services to&nbsp;his country certainly no less remarkable than those of Birkenhead himself.&nbsp;
'A&nbsp;mere accountant!' said another critic. Yet on two occasions I sat in the gallery of the House of Commons and heard him deliver a Budget Speech with such clarity, point, and dramatic sense that I shall always regard them as among the greatest Budget Speeches I&nbsp;ever heard.
And what of Munich?
We might as well admit (in British countries at any rate) that, when the Prime Minister who had never flown took his Homburg hat and his folded umbrella and flew to Germany to come to terms with Hitler, nine out of ten of us, with an instinctive horror of war, said 'Thank God!'.
Two years later it was hard to find a single human being who had not, so he said, disagreed with Chamberlain. The 'men of Munich' became marked men. The idol had not only turned out to have feet of clay but, oddly enough, had never, so it seemed, been an idol at all!&nbsp;
On September 3rd, 1939,&nbsp;we listened, from across the sea, to the broadcast words of a declaration of war from a Prime Minister who saw his efforts in ruin about him. An hour later I was telling the people of Australia that we, too, were at war.&nbsp;
To most people the story of Neville Chamberlain came to be a story of ignorance of danger, of unawareness of Hitler's true character, of simplicity confronted by&nbsp;guile, of weak and uncertain action, of ultimate failure. Did Chamberlain, then, contribute nothing to ultimate victory?
The answer is that he gave us time, even at the price of humiliation. There had been, under the Air Administration of Philip Swinton, a concentration upon quality in the Spitfire-10-and the Hurricane; great 'shadow' factories had been set up and equipped. The Battle for Britain had already been partly won. Let us remember that it was won not only by&nbsp;the superb dash, individuality, and courage of the pilots, but also by the superior speed, manoeuvrability, and firepower of their aircraft.&nbsp;
If Chamberlain really believed that the risk of war was ended at Munich, and if all efforts at armament then slackened, Munich was an unqualified disaster and Chamberlain must be condemned. But I&nbsp;have never quite believed this. True, Germany obtained the Skoda Works and other great resources by&nbsp;the rape of Czechoslovakia. But Chamberlain inherited (except on the Naval side and the development of fighter aircraft) a largely undefended nation. A&nbsp;year was worth a good deal. We were much stronger in 1939&nbsp;than in 1938.And, apart from all this, the twelve months after Munich, with their grim and hateful record of treachery and aggression, did much to marshal the decent moral opinion of the world, to harden the spirit of resistance to tyranny and crime.&nbsp;
That is why I believe that the historian will say that Neville Chamberlain, in spite of his undoubted disposition to appease, to seek to solve the problem by&nbsp;postponing it, made his contribution to ultimate victory.&nbsp;
And then the great blows fell, and disaster was in the air, and Churchill, who in the opinion of his critics had been, up to that time, always brilliant but mostly wrong, was sent for.&nbsp;
Ramsay Macdonald, Baldwin, Chamberlain, could never have stood in the imminent deadly breach and rallied the forces of freedom against all odds and all reason. That task was for one who understood danger and despised it, whose motto was faction, action, action!', who went down through the poetry and pride of his people into those elemental deeps of courage and defiance and sacrifice and cheerful fortitude which turned aside all attacks.&nbsp;
No English-speaking man or woman of our time will ever forget the thrill of hearing from time to time, over the radio, the voice of Churchill, and of getting from that distant voice a new fire and a renewed bravery.&nbsp;
I&nbsp;will never forget how this great warrior-statesman would enter the historic Cabinet Room in Downing Street, take his seat in dead silence, pull his truculent and tilted cigar from his mouth and say-11-'Gentlemen, we have the signal honour of being responsible for the government of our country at a time of deadly danger. We will proceed with the business.'&nbsp;
It sounds prosaic, as repeated now, but it made our hearts beat the faster. It is hard to believe that there was ever a war leader like him. &nbsp;
But no man could be a great leader without a great people. He evoked and stimulated courage; he did not create it. He himself was and is an unrivalled benefactor to posterity. But those who went before him, with all their faults, made their own contribution to victory. Ultimate justice demands that we should occasionally remember it.&nbsp;
And, of course, there are others of whom I will speak only as I have known them.&nbsp;
Lloyd George was, of course, for all practical purposes a retired and elder statesman when I first met him 20 years ago. But even in 1941, I went down to his farm at Churt and had a full day with him - to me one of intense joy.&nbsp;His silver mane blowing in the wind, his brilliant and penetrating eye, his personal charm and his mastery of language were all, even then, quite irresistible.
I am sure that his distinguished son, the Right Honourable Gwilym Lloyd-George, now Home Secretary in the United Kingdom Cabinet,
will not mind if I tell you a simple story which illustrates the whole matter. Gwilym in 1941 had invited me to lunch at one of the University Clubs in London, together with a couple of other men.
He said to me: 'I believe you have been seeing something of my father'.
I said: 'Yes, indeed I have'.&nbsp;
'What do you make of him?' said Gwilym, with a twinkle in the eye.
'Well', I said, 'in the last five or six years, I&nbsp;don't think he has made a single public speech in the House of Commons or outside it with which I&nbsp;would feel able to agree. Yet, after half an hour with him, if he said to me 'Menzies, I want you to abandon everything that you are doing and follow me' I&nbsp;think I probably would!'-12-Perhaps the right way to put this matter is to say that the two great crisis leaders of our time have been Lloyd George and Churchill, and that each of them had a magnetic quality possessing almost physical force which drew men to them and enabled them to attain their most remarkable achievements.&nbsp;
One of Winston Churchill's older contemporaries is Lord Halifax, a former Viceroy of India, a notable Foreign Secretary, and British Ambassador to the United States when I&nbsp;passed through there in 1941. Halifax is a kind of man who can perhaps be produced only in his own country - but not for export. A&nbsp;tall man of rather sombre appearance, deeply religious and scholarly in ecclesiastical matters, he was nevertheless - or because of that fact - one who brought to international relations a dignity, a clarity of mind, an innate sense of justice, which impressed the whole of his contemporaries and sustained on the highest level the greatest traditions of English public life.
A&nbsp;younger contemporary is Lord Salisbury, formerly Lord Cranborne, known to a host of his friends as 'Bobbity' Salisbury. This may seem to you to be a strange pseudonym for one who has claims (which he does not make for himself) to be one of the wisest men of our time, but it arose in a simple way.&nbsp;
His famous grandfather was Robert; in the next generation, there was another Robert which inevitably became 'Bob' - a name which I&nbsp;trust you all treat with suitable respect - and therefore, in the third generation, some distinction had to be made and 'Bob' became 'Bobbity'.&nbsp;
There used to be a somewhat cynical saying that 'There are three generations from shirt sleeves to shirt sleeves' or, as I believe they used to say in Lancashire 'from clogs to clogs' The whole point of the saying is that it is seldom that genius, or even high talent, will be transmitted for very long.&nbsp;
It is therefore a stimulating thing to recall that when the first Queen Elizabeth came to the Throne a horseman went out through the mire and slush from London to Hatfield to tell the Cecil of&nbsp;those days that there was a new Queen. Only a few years ago, on better roads and by&nbsp;more modern transport, a messenger went out from London to tell the Cecil of these days - Robert Salisbury that the second Elizabeth had come to the Throne. There is something magnificent and enduring in the Cecil blood.-13-The present holder of the family title has modesty, good sense, good judgment, high character, imagination and a sense of responsibility so completely blended in him that I would think my life well spent if I had known only him among the great contemporaries of Churchill.&nbsp;
Before I conclude you might perhaps allow me to refer to two of Winston's great American contemporaries. The first, of course, was Franklin Delano Roosevelt. It is quite likely that the historians will say that in his declining health he was deceived at Yalta and at Potsdam. Perhaps he was, for his mind was friendly and generous and, towards the end, not easily prepared for cunning or indirect motives.&nbsp;
Of his immense personal charm I can speak from conviction and experience. His courage was enormous. There can have been few men in the history of the world who came through a long and crippling disease ultimately to sit in one of the most powerful places of authority in the world.&nbsp;
It is not for people like us to attempt to estimate his ultimate place in history or the final measure of his intellectual parts. But there can be no doubt that in the very best sense of the word, he was one of the master politicians of this century. He knew his own people. He spoke intimately and easily across the wireless to his own people. He was always on our side in the war, but he knew better than anybody else how to handle his own public opinion so that his own great nation would at least not be against us; would certainly at least be the most helpful of neutrals; and would in due course be with us to the end.&nbsp;
His successor, Mr. Truman, was written down when he became President. He appeared to the superficial onlooker to be just a man who had become President by&nbsp;the accident of Roosevelt's death. He answered most of his critics when, single-handed and against all the odds, he retained the Presidency in 1948; but there will remain a perhaps vagrant idea that he was what the Americans would call a 'run-of-mine' politician who had not the personality or command of his more famous predecessor.&nbsp;
Well, I&nbsp;have had the opportunity of seeing a good deal of Mr. Truman and of thinking a good deal about what, when he was President, he was called upon to decide and to do.-14-I think, therefore, that I should tell you, without any presumption I hope, that he was and is a great man with qualities of the most essential and remarkable kind. He had many bitter decisions to take, including the crucial decision about the atomic bomb. He took his decisions and never swerved from them. And when his decisions had been taken and the political attacks followed and many newspapers assailed him, he stood to his guns, quite serenely, cheerfully, humanly. I don't think I ever met a more naturally friendly man. I don't think that I have met many men who behind their naturalness and friendliness possessed such pertinacity of mind, such determination to pursue the course seen to be the right one. I would venture to say that any man who possesses decision, courage and endurance has great claims to honour in a world in which time-serving and being all things to all men are so frequently regarded as the marks of a superior political intelligence.&nbsp;
I have named only a few of Winston Churchill's contemporaries. I could have spoken to you for another two hours about 20 or 30 more. But I have mentioned those whom I have named because it is one of my profound beliefs that the greatest men are not lonely accidents but come out of a generation of great men who provide at once their stimulus and their foil.&nbsp;
In any great man's hey-day it is fashionable to eulogise him to excess. When his day has gone, it is, I fear, fashionable to decry him and to-get some clever young man to write a book to explain he was never great at all.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
The whole purpose of my speech to you tonight has been to endeavour to restore the balance. It will be a poor day for our race when any generation arises which is not able to say with a full heart and a true mind 'Let us now praise famous men'


SPEECH by&nbsp;the RT. HON. R.G. MENZIES, C.H., O.C., M.P. on THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON ESPIONAGE delivered in&nbsp;the HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES on TUESDAY, 25th October, 1955.
ROYAL COMMISSION ON&nbsp;ESPIONAGE
When a Royal Commission sits for months to investigate matters of national security, it is not common to have the tabling of the report followed by&nbsp;the making of charges relating to the very matters enquired into. But on this occasion, Dr. Evatt has indulged himself in the luxury of once more becoming the advocate in this House of causes of which he was the professional advocate before the Royal Commission; professionally but unsuccessfully. In short, he is asking this Parliament, which has not heard the witnesses, to sit as a Court of appeal from three judges who heard every word of the evidence, who read every word of all the documents, who listened to all the cross examination and who, for some weeks, not two hours, listened to
Dr. Evatt himself. This is a state of affairs so astonishing that, if it were not for the office held by&nbsp;Dr. Evatt and his leadership in this Parliament of a great Party, I&nbsp;would invite the House and the people to treat the whole of his submissions as being either frivolous or offensive. After all; the whole purpose of appointing a Royal Commission (and this one was appointed by&nbsp;the unanimous vote of this Parliament, and with terms of reference unanimously agreed upon by this Parliament) is to transfer the business of investigation from Parliament, which is not equipped for such matters, to a trained body of investigators whose findings will carry weight with both Parliament and people.&nbsp;
But Dr. Evatt is nothing if not persistent. Before he ever appeared professionally before the Royal Commission, he had clearly made up his mind to attack it,&nbsp;to lower its reputation in the public mind and, if possible, to destroy its findings in advance. These tactics are not unknown in the world, though they are not normal in democratic countries. He&nbsp;went through the motions of appearing before the Commission as a lawyer. In reality, as the judges subsequently had to point out to him.&nbsp;He seemed to be appearing for himself, and to find it impossible to distinguish between his somewhat nominal functions as Counsel for a couple of members of his staff, and his real function as the political exponent of points of view which, before the Royal Commission, made him the instant ally of Lockwood and Hill and all the other Communists involved in the enquiry. He has now thought fit, no doubt with the approval of those who sit behind him, to develop a series of charges, all of which he made directly or indirectly before the Royal Commission, and on all of which the Commission has found against him. I&nbsp;would exceed the boundaries of time and trench upon eternity if I&nbsp;were to endeavour to follow point by&nbsp;point the erratic course of his arguments. Believing as I do that the patience of Honourable Members is already sufficiently strained, I will content myself by&nbsp;dealing with what I might loosely describe as the substance
&nbsp;-2-
of his main charges. &nbsp;I will summarise them.
Against the Judges he makes the charge that they were incompetent, that they acted without proper evidence, that they culpably failed to discover a great conspiracy, and that they have made a false report.&nbsp;
Against the A.S.I.O., which I will refer to as the Security Service - the Service set up by the late Mr. Chifley in 1949 after there had been serious leakages from the External Affairs Department between 1945 and 1948 &nbsp;Dr. Evatt unleashes a volume of hatred which I have not seen surpassed. He concentrates his venom upon Brigadier Spry, the head of that Service but, through him, he charges the Service with being corrupt, oppressive, conspiratorial and actuated by Party political motives. He even goes so far as to say that for people like Brigadier Spry, peace is a dangerous word; a strange allegation to be made against a man who has been decorated in the service of his country, and who was wounded in the service of his country on the Kokoda Trail.&nbsp;
Against Mr. Victor Windeyer. Q.C. who appeared to assist the Royal Commission, he makes the charge (which would be damaging if it came from any other quarter) that he lent himself to a conspiracy with me and with others, designed to inflict damage upon the Labour Party when an election was pending, and that he did this by accepting instructions from me, and even the phraseology which I am alleged to have submitted to him.&nbsp;
Against myself as Prime Minister of the country, he makes a bewildering variety of charges. First, he says that I 'saved up' the Petrov matter for election purposes until April, 1954 though, as he alleges, I knew all about it as far back as 1953. His witness on this matter is a book published in the name of one, Bialoguski; Bialoguski being, on his own view, a man of no credit except when he speaks against me. Second, he says that I suppressed public knowledge of the payment of £5,000 to Petrov until after polling day. Third, he says that I encouraged or directed Mr. Windeyer to exaggerate and deceive in his opening address and, if I understand his speech, that I drafted some of Mr. Windeyer's opening speech. Fourth, he says that I grossly betrayed my trust by giving wide publicity to allegations without first finding evidence in support of them and fifth he says, with a singular and imaginative effort, that I conspired against Madame Ollier. 'Spirited' her out of the country, and had her held incommunicado so that the investigation of episodes concerning her&nbsp;
-3-
could be unfairly conducted. There may be other charges against me, the chief of which is that I am Prime Minister, but I have not been able either to isolate or define them.
On the other side, Dr. Evatt has devoted no small amount of the two hours which the House granted him to defending certain people. Who are they?
First he has defended Dr. Burton, whose published political views cannot sensibly be regarded as finding favour, except with the Communists. Why&nbsp;he thought it necessary to defend Dr. Burton in a discussion on the Royal Commission report I&nbsp;do not understand, for the fact is that these incompetent and gullible Royal Commissioners (as I&nbsp;understand him to say) made no finding adverse to Dr. Burton at all.&nbsp;
Second, he has gone to some pains to defend Mr. Sharkey, the leading Australian Communist, against the well founded charge that he received from Moscow 25,000 dollars as some recompense for the costs incurred in his campaign, conducted in the closest collaboration with Dr. Evatt, against the Communist Party Dissolution Act.&nbsp;
Third, he has come to the rescue of Mr. Clayton, found by The Royal Commission, on the clearest possible evidence, to be the chief member of the Communist spy ring in Australia.&nbsp;
Confronted by&nbsp;a report which, in the view of 95%&nbsp;of&nbsp;the Australian people, is a careful but magnificent tribute to Australian judicial procedures, he has sought to destroy the authenticity of&nbsp;the Moscow papers found by&nbsp;the Judges, after many months of investigation, to be completely authentic, by&nbsp;calling as his somewhat remote witness, Mr. Molotov who, we are told, says that the papers are not genuine, and that the whole matter represented an attempt to create bad blood between this country and the Soviet Union. In brief, Dr. Evatt would have us believe that months of investigation on oath, scores of thousands of questions and answers, and the meticulous examination of documents should all be brushed aside because the nation found guilty of espionage says 'We are not guilty'.&nbsp;
What I&nbsp;have already said will, without any verbal decorations, satisfy all sane and sensible people that Dr. Evatt, suffering from persecution delusions, is introducing us into a world of sheer fantasy. But it is necessary I&nbsp;think, if only for the historical record, that I should say more about matters which could otherwise quite adequately be dismissed by the hearty laughter of a nation which possesses both good sense and humour. I therefore propose to remind the House and
-4-
the people of some of the facts which relate to those who stand indicted by Dr. Evatt. This I think necessary because a very natural query in the minds of any of us when people are charged with serious offences is 'What kind of people are these?' I start with the Judges themselves.&nbsp;
Mr. Justice Owen, who derives from one of the most celebrated judicial families in New South Wales, was, as a private soldier, a member of the A.I.F. from 1915 to 1919. He subsequently went to the Bar. He was appointed a Supreme Court Judge in 1937. His capacity and integrity are household words with every lawyer in New South Wales except, apparently, Dr. Evatt, the odd thing is that he was profoundly trusted both by Mr, Curtin and Mr. Chifley. It was on their appointment that he was Chairman of the Central Wool Committee during the War from 1942 to 1945. In 1945 Mr. Chifley sent him to London on a most important mission regarding surplus wool disposals. To challenge him as Dr. Evatt has, in his desperation, challenged him in this case, is to challenge a man who represents in his own person the highest qualities of mind and character, and the finest judicial traditions in this country. But, so that a couple of Communist agents can be brought off, and Mr. Molotov may be justified, Dr. Evatt is prepared to impeach Mr. Justice Owen's competence, judicial perception and objective honesty. &nbsp;The second Judge was&nbsp;Mr. Justice Philp, a member of the Supreme Court Bench of Queensland since 1939. Himself a member of the First A.I.F., and with a grievous family loss in this last war, this learned Judge has waited all these years to be attacked in the same way, and in the same contemptible interests. His character and work need no eulogy of mine, for his professional and personal standing are alike beyond criticism.&nbsp;
The third Judge, Mr. Justice Ligertwood, also a member of the A.I.F. in the first world war, has been a Justice of the Supreme Court of South Australia since 1945. I had thought that this lofty and splendid man might have escaped the torrent of abuse.&nbsp;
How Dr. Evatt attacks either his competence or his judicial attributes, I do not know; for it was Dr. Evatt himself who appointed him as a single Royal Commissioner to investigate charges made against, among others, Mr. Ward. His findings exonerated Mr. Ward. At that time I heard no complaint by Dr. Evatt against Mr. Justice Ligertwood. But, today, when he is a party to a unanimous report on the Petrov matters, he is exposed to condemnation which is not based upon reason, but upon a sheer passion of hatred against people who have made findings against the Communists. And then there is Mr. Windeyer, Mr. Victor Windeyer, Q.C. who appeared to assist the Royal Commission and who was, quite&nbsp;
-5-
properly, so convinced that he must be free of any influence that, from first to last with the exceptions that I will refer to, said. he did not wish to be 'instructed' by the Commonwealth Law Department as Counsel are normally instructed by solicitors. Who is Mr. Windeyer? He is a lawyer, a former distinguished lecturer in law, and a great soldier. A&nbsp;Major General, a military C.B.E., the holder of a D.S.O. and Bar, and three times mentioned in despatches; a veteran of Tobruk, of Alamein, of the capture of Finschhafen; for some years from 1950 the Citizen Forces member of the Military Board. Any New South Wales lawyer must know that the name of Windeyer, like the name of Owen, represents all that is best in New South Wales legal tradition.&nbsp;
So far I have mentioned the four lawyers who have been accused, but I must say something about the head of the Security Service, Brigadier Charles Spry, against whom a most venomous attack has been made, an attack, I do not doubt, calculated in the interests of the Communists to weaken the authority of the Security Service, to discourage good men from going into it to make its officers fearful of political victimisation, and, therefore, to give aid and comfort to our enemies. Charles Spry is a graduate of Duntroon and of the Staff College in the United Kingdom. He saw active service in India in 1936. He was with the Seventh Australian Division in the Owen Stanleys and on the Kokoda Trail. He was wounded there. He was decorated with the D.S.O. He was Director of Military Intelligence in Australia from 1946 to 1950, a period, for the bulk of which Dr. Evatt, as Attorney General and Minister for External Affairs, had the benefit of his notable services.&nbsp;
And finally, of course, there is myself. I am not here to defend myself against fantastic charges, though I will say a few temperate words about them before I finish. But I must permit myself to say that I have, for over a quarter of a century, served the Australian people in the very heat of political controversy, that for almost fifteen years those who are closest to me have unanimously maintained me as their leader, and that I am, therefore, not entirely unknown, either in character or act, to the Australian people. Yet, according to Dr. Evatt, I, last year or the year before, made myself a party to a swindle and was able to secure the collaboration of those distinguished men whom I have named in order to make that swindle effective.
Having said so much about the persons in the drama, I will now turn first to a consideration of what the Royal Commission has found, and second to a consideration of the Evatt/Molotov charges.
-6-
First, the Royal Commission found that the Petrovs left the Russian service and sought asylum- in this country of their own choice, and without pressure. Second, it found that the Petrovs are witnesses of truth, with accuracy of a high order. It arrived at this conclusion after Petrov had been in the witness&nbsp;box on thirty-seven days for approximately seventy-four hours in all (somewhat longer, it will be agreed, than Mr. Molotov) and Mrs. Petrov on twenty-one days for approximately thirty hours in all. Third, it has found that during the period which has elapsed since their defection they have been questioned on behalf of the counter espionage service of other countries with results which have been of the greatest value to those countries. This finding is confirmed by subsequent experiences to which I will refer later on. Fourth, the Royal Commission found that the Petrov papers were genuine. Dr. Evatt has adduced here, as he was indeed busy in adducing for a long time before the Royal Commission in his other capacity, arguments to show that the papers were forgeries. I was not required to listen to his arguments before the Judges, but I heard his arguments here. All I need say is that his attempt, to overthrow months of investigation both internal and external by the Judges has been pathetic and ineffective. Fifth, the Commission has found that ‘for many years’, the&nbsp;Government of the U.S.S.R. had been using its Embassy at Canberra as a cloak under which to control and operate espionage organisations in Australia.’ Sixth, it found that the only Australians who knowingly assisted this espionage were Communists. Seventh, it found that without Communism, Soviet espionage could have no hope of success in Australia and that the Existence here of Communists was the fundamental cause of the formation of our Security Service by Mr. Chifley, and necessitates its retention as being essential to the security and defence of Australia.
The commission made some particular findings about individuals, though it found that the evidence stopped short of justifying a prosecution under the existing Australian law.&nbsp;
It also made some observations about the case of one, Madame Ollier, as supporting its finding that the Soviet Embassy was engaged in espionage. It is only in this context that the case of Madame Ollier achieves any importance but, having regard to the fact that Dr.Evatt’s delusions of grandeur have led him to take the unprecedented step of offering his views of correspondence to the French Court which tried Madame Ollier, I will say a few words about that matter before I conclude.&nbsp;
Dr. Evatt’s ‘case’ against the Commissioners and their Report is completely disposed of by the Report itself. His ‘case’ against me is also, in one respect, the case against Mr. Windeyer. Dr. Evatt said that the opening by Mr. Windeyer was melodramatic – ‘Never was there such a sensational opening’. I am a little handicapped on this point because I was, at the time, in Perth and certainly found nothing exciting&nbsp;
-7-
in the press reports. But Dr. Evatt has, in his speech, not only criticized Mr. Windeyer's language but has pointedly suggested that I was its draftsman Indeed, he said that I 'must take personal responsibility for all the exaggeration and deception’.&nbsp;
The facts are that Mr. Windeyer made an opening characterized by great moderation and restraint. He made no reference that might damage one political side or the other except that he mentioned that there were names of Members of Parliament on both sides included in the documents. I am indeed reluctant to invoke the observations of Counsel on a matter of this kind but I think that I should tell the House since these charges have been &nbsp;made the relevant, substance of a recent communication from Mr. Windeyer in London. I had written to him thanking him for his work on the Council of the Australian National University and had expressed my regret that he had felt unable to continue it. He replied appropriately. He then, quite voluntarily, went on to give me his recollection of the one meeting I had with him, which was before the enquiry began, on the Saturday or Sunday in Sydney, the others present being the Solicitor General, Professor Bailey, Mr. A.S. Brown, the Secretary to the Prime Minister's Department and Mr. Spry. He confirms that I gave no directions except on four points, but said that the conduct of the enquiry should be left to the Commissioners and Counsel. Four matters were then discussed. They were: -&nbsp;


Whether there should be a press interview of the Petrovs. I decided that there should not.&nbsp;


The references in the documents to Madame Ollier, under the name 'Olga'. I said that the French Ambassador should be informed through the proper channels that her name was mentioned.&nbsp;


The payment to Petrov of £5,000. I did not know of this before. Mr. Windeyer said that to him the amount seemed small in the circumstances. I said that it was a matter to be proved and proved publicly, and that this should be done later in its proper setting when Petrov was examined.&nbsp;


The fourth matter was about an interpreter. Having heard of Mr. Birse's qualifications and his complete independence, I directed that a signal be sent to Winston Churchill asking whether Birse could come. I further said that I felt that, in the long run, it was probably advisable to take evidence in public rather than in private as had been done in Canada, but that no individual's name should be mentioned by Mr. Windeyer in opening the matter. I expressed the view with which Counsel agreed that it would not be proper to mention any names until after the Election.&nbsp;


-8-
This common recollection of Mr. Windeyer and myself is of course, a complete refutation of a suggestion of political malpractice. To have opened the £5,000 payment except in direct association with the surrounding circumstances would have been most misleading, and would have invited gross misrepresentation. But, in any event, the political allegation is manifestly absurd. Dr. Evatt's theory is that the whole of this matter from beginning to end was cooked up to defeat him at an election. Apropos of this I well remember the cynical but wise remark of a former Supreme Court Judge in my own State who said to a young Advocate, 'You may think that it is permissible to regard your opponent as a crook; but it is an elementary blunder to treat him as a fool'. Now Dr. Evatt says, putting it in homely terms, that in these matters I was a crook! But why should he also charge me with being a fool? After all, every Honourable Member will realize that when I made my announcement to the House about Petrov and a Royal Commission I would have been in the ordinary course well entitled to quote a specimen of the documents Petrov had brought with him. If I-had done this the names of O'Sullivan, Grundeman, and others, directly or indirectly associated with Dr. Evatt would have become public property. The political reaction would have been tremendous. But I did not do so. On the contrary, I gave a direction in an entirely contrary sense. I went further than this. Early in the campaign it appeared that some reference to the Petrov Matter had been made on the public platform. I at once communicated with every Government candidate in Australia and said that as this matter would receive judicial investigation, I wanted it kept out of a political campaign. I have every reason to believe that this request of mine was scrupulously observed. Why&nbsp;it should be thought that, having-cunningly schemed to produce Petrov on the eve of an election, I should then go to all sorts of trouble to defeat my own scheming, I am at a loss to understand. At an equal loss will be all Australians whose minds are not unbalanced by delusions or obsessions.&nbsp;
It will be remembered that my announcement of a Royal Commission was unanimously approved by the House. It will also be remembered that the Bill which I introduced on August 11th, 1954, to put beyond doubt the authority and powers of the Royal Commission and the protection of its proceedings, a Bill which included the names of the Royal Commissioners and the Terms of Reference, was unanimously approved by the House. In other words, the House, including Dr. Evatt, specifically authorized the three Judges to conduct their investigation into the matters assigned to them. But Dr. Evatt, for reasons of his own, was gravely disturbed by what might appear. He, therefore, on the pretext of appearing for two people, went as Counsel before the Royal Commission. It was clear from the outset to everybody, including the Communists, that his object was to destroy the authority and reputation of a Royal Commission whose creation
-9-
he had voted for. Before he had ever studied the documents in court he set out to suggest conspiracy, fraud and forgery. He was listened to with exemplary patience. He created an atmosphere entirely delightful to the Australian Communist Party. The Royal Commission therefore very properly, though expensively, devoted a great deal of time to listening to allegations, most, or all, of which he repeated last week. All I need do is to remind the House that when it made an interim report on these matters the Royal Commission said:&nbsp;
'Appendix No. 2.&nbsp;
'36. Apparently, in these circumstances, Dr. Evatt conceived the theory that he and the political party which he-leads had been made the victims of a political conspiracy and he proceeded to cross-examine the witnesses before us with that in mind. After the withdrawal of his permission to appear, his juniors continued in the same line.&nbsp;
'37. Charge followed charge with bewildering variations. Suggestions were made of blackmail, forgery, uttering, fabrication, fraud and conspiracy and upon the repeated assurances of Dr. Evatt that his examination of witnesses was directed to these matters and would prove them - we felt constrained to permit him great latitude in his questioning. This we felt bound to do, since an exhaustive inquiry by us into the authenticity of Exhibit J was part of our duty.&nbsp;
'38. Lockwood was very willing to follow and exploit the line taken on behalf of Grundeman and Dalziel.&nbsp;
'39. As day followed day and all that we heard was constant reiteration of vague charges of infamy, we demanded of counsel, on 1st September, that they formulate with some exactitude their allegations. Dr. Evatt then charged that Exhibit J had been fabricated by the Petrovs as part of a political conspiracy with the enforced aid of O'Sullivan who, he alleged, has been blackmailed into collaborating in the fabrication of the document and into inserting therein as sources the names of himself, Grundeman and Dalziel. The political conspiracy was alleged to be one to injure Dr. Evatt and the Australian Labour Party by procuring the false insertion in Exhibit J of the names of three of his secretaries as sources with the intention that the Petrovs should so nicely time their actions that Exhibit J could be produced and published on the eve of the Federal elections in 1954. He further charged that at least one senior officer of the Australian Security Intelligence Organization, Richards, had been guilty of serious derelictions of duty in that, without proper care and inquiry, he had accepted from Petrov fabricated documents, had paid him large sums of public money for them, and had 'uttered' these documents, presumably to the Prime Minister of Australia.&nbsp;
'42. Although, in the result, all the charges turned out to be fantastic and wholly unsupported by any credible evidence, they were grave and necessitated patient judicial inquiry by us.&nbsp;
’57.&nbsp;We heard the evidence of all persons who, so far as we could see, would be able to throw any light on these allegations, and there were placed in our custody and examined by us the contemporaneous Security reports and records, including wire recordings of certain significant conversations relating to Petrov's decision to leave the Soviet service and to the receipt of the documents handed by him to Richards. The evidence of these persons, supported as it is by the contemporaneous records, entirely disposes of all suggestions of improper or negligent conduct on the part of Richards or any other officer of the Security Service. Indeed, we think that these officers acted with high intelligence and complete propriety in difficult and delicate circumstances.’
But I must concede that Dr. Evatt is not easily cast down. He has indeed performed the astonishing feat, backed by Mr. Molotov's letter, of asking that an International Commission be set up to investigate the work of These three Australian Judges though he has himself said, as I understand him, that the results of their enquiry were insignificant and fruitless. I will leave it to the Australian people to decide whether they have so little faith in their own judiciary as to wish to have its work reviewed by an international body including, among others, the very people against whom the findings of the Royal Commission arc directed. At the risk of repeating myself I point out to the House that Dr. Evatt's passions, which he has with careful preparation exposed to&nbsp;the House, are against the Prime Minister of his own country and for the Foreign Secretary of the Soviet Union; against three Australian Judges of impeccable reputation and for some nebulous and hypothetical international commission; against the&nbsp;Australian Security Service headed by a distinguished and patriotic Australian and for people like Sharkey and Clayton. The truth is, of course, that the one passion animating his mind here, as before the Royal Commission, is for himself. So far as it pretends to be a passion for justice it is demonstrably false.&nbsp;
His defence of Clayton is indeed noteworthy, one of the things that proved Clayton's activities was Frances Bernie's evidence. She was a Communist employed in Dr. Evatt's own office, and deposed that she had given to Clayton documents taken from Dr. Evatt's office!
-11-
He says that I knew all about Petrov in 1953.&nbsp;
All I need to say on this matter is that I had never heard of Petrov before his defection in April of 1954. Dr. Evatt’s case to the contrary is, on analysis, quite laughable. When one looks at it one sees that it is entirely based upon what he has read in a book published under the name Bialoguski. It is perhaps worthy of note that he spoke with contempt about this man and accepted his evidence in his book only when he thought it told against me. It appears that Bialoguski did call at my office at Canberra, as I have ascertained from my then private Secretary, on October 7th, 1953.
My then Private Secretary, Mr. Yeend, who though relatively junior has a high reputation in the Civil service, saw him and disposed of his problem, as he thought, to Bialoguski’s satisfaction. There was no need for Yeend to mention the matter to me and he did not do so.
After Bialoguski published an account of the episode in the newspaper in June of this year Mr. Yeend gave me his recollection of it.&nbsp;
He states that he did not receive a ‘sealed envelope’ from Bialoguski, that Bialoguski’s chief complaint was that he was asking for higher pay and that Yeend referred this matter to Mr.Spry and that – at no stage was the name petrov mentioned nor mention made of the possibility of any diplomat’s defection. Mr. Yeend has said to me that it could be inferred from Bialoguski’s book that in October 1953 I knew of the work he was doing and knew of his visit to Canberra. Mr Yeend confirms that he certainly made no mention to me of either Bialoguski’s complaint or even his existence. It was not until after Bialoguski’s appearance before the Royal Commission that Mr. Yeend placed him as the man he had interviewed. A few days later he mentioned to me, for the first time, that the man (Bialoguski) who had just given evidence had called and seen him in 1953.&nbsp;
But Dr. Evatt’s charges do not rest there. Driven on his strange obsession he says that a plan for Petrov’s reception was communicated to the Heads of Commonwealth Departments on the 17th February, 1954. The fact is that no plan was communicated to any department. Early in February, 1954 I now learn that the Solicitor General and the Secretary of the Department of External Affairs as individuals were warned of the possibility of a defection. This warning was given orally by the Director General and was given to no other people except the Attorney General and the Minister for External Affairs. I was myself told that there was the possibility of a defection but the identity of the subject was not disclosed, not did I ask for it. The head of my Department was not informed at any stage prior to the actual defection. I repeat that I had not heard of Petrov before his actual defection in April of 1954.
-12-
Dr. Evatt, posing as the universal defender of liberty, has made the case of Madame Ollier his own. Not only has he broken all records as an Opposition Leader by communicating with the Foreign Secretary of another country in order to get a distant and uncross examined denial of charges found to be true by an Australian tribunal but he has, so he boasts, performed the remarkable act of writing to a French Court presumably to tell that court how it ought to conduct its business. Under these circumstances it is desirable that the Ollier matter which, incidentally, was publicly unknown until September 4th, 1954, should be seen quite clearly.
The Royal Commission was not concerned to find Madame Ollier guilty or innocent of an offence against French law. It has stated its attitude very plainly in Chapter 11 of its Report. What it said was that the Soviet M.V.D. had a basic design to obtain through Madame Ollier, who was an officer of the French Embassy in Canberra, the cypher and cyphering techniques used by the French Embassy and-such other secret information as might be useful to the Soviet. The Commissioner's said: (paragraph 610) 'It-appears also from-the evidence that some time prior to Pakhomov's departure from Australia in June, 1952, he had, on behalf of the given Madame Ollier a watch-costing Mrs. Petrov and Pakhomov selected the watch at a shop in Canberra; Pakhomov took the watch and later reported that he had given it to Madame Ollier. Mrs. Petrov paid the £35&nbsp;purchase price from the M.V.D. funds and accounted for it to the Moscow Centre, which did not question the payment. Neither of he Petrovs could fix the date of the purchase of the watch, nor could they swear whether or when Pakhomov had in fact handed it to Madame Ollier.' It also quoted the Moscow letter of January 2nd, 1952, relating to Madame Ollier confirming the object of the enquiries and suggesting that meetings should occur at places located at a distance of 40 to 10 miles from Canberra. The Commission went on to find that Madame Ollier had met Petrov at Cooma and also that to encourage her she had been presented with an expensive watch. The Commission went on to find that the results of what it called 'these laborious and persistent efforts of the M.V.D. were almost negligible.' It concluded by saying that: "The evidence clearly establishes that in respect of Madame Ollier espionage was conducted by two members of the Soviet Embassy in Australia, namely Sadovnikov and Petrov, and a Tass representative, namely Pakhomov, all acting as espionage agents under the specific direction of the Soviet Government.'&nbsp;
These findings excite the passionate indignation of Dr. Evatt. Yet, in fact in the recent proceedings in France I understand Madame Ollier admitted the Cooma contact and the receipt of the watch. No doubt the French Court felt that her 'indiscretions': shall I say, had been adequately punished by the fact-that she had been imprisoned for some two months before the trial. But all this is of little significance in the Petrov Enquiry. What is the charge? It will not be thought very convincing by most people that Dr. Evatt should be quite passionate about the Ollier affair being investigated in Australia in the absence of evidence by Madame Ollier, when he is so obviously pleased that Madame Ollier should
-13-
be set free in France&nbsp;in the absence of evidence of the Petrovs. The truth is that the rear charge is, I fear, against me. To use his own picturesque&nbsp;language, I am supposed to have 'spirited' Madame Ollier out of Australia and arranged to have her held incommunicado in another country. The Royal Commission has stated the facts quite accurately. I 'do not share Dr, Evatt's devotion to instructing other countries as to how they should conduct their business. As I have already indicated, all I did was to say that the French Ambassador in Canberra should be told in advance that Madame Ollier's name was going to be mentioned and that he would no doubt seek instructions from his own people. What happened then? I merely read the Royal Commission's Report:&nbsp;
'599. In view of these circumstances, shortly after the defection and before our first sittings the Department of External Affairs confidentially notified the French Ambassador of the reference to Madame Ollier contained in the Moscow Letters, and she was sent by her Ambassador to Noumea, where she would be cut off not only from access to secret communications and ciphers but also from any dangerous associations she might possibly have formed.&nbsp;
‘600. The evidence concerning Madame Ollier was heard by us in private session in Melbourne on 20th July 1954. Because of diplomatic immunity and later absence from Australia, she could not be subpoenaed to attend, and she did not attend the session. Opportunity was afforded the French Ambassador to be represented at the session, but this was not availed of. We agreed to supply him with the transcript of the proceedings and to withhold its immediate publication in order to give the French Government an opportunity of studying it and making such arrangements as it considered appropriate. Later, the French Ambassador having agreed to the date of publication, the transcript was published on 4th September 1954.&nbsp;
‘601. We assume that the transfer of Madame Ollier to Noumean and the abstention of the French Government from availing itself of the opportunity afforded it to be represented at our inquiry were partly because of its desire that any proceedings in connection with her should take place on French soil and in accordance with French legal procedure, and partly because it would not be in accordance with diplomatic practice for her Government to waive its immunity and rights under international law and permit her to give evidence. We were, of course, willing to hear her if her Government had waived its immunity, and this we made known.&nbsp;
‘602. In fact the French Government, after receiving the transcript made its own interrogation of her in Noumean, and in consequence Madame Ollier was arrested there and sent to France for further interrogation.’
-14-
In my 27 years in Parliament, I do not remember any debate so astonishing as this. I would have thought that when a democratically elected Parliament unanimously approved of a Royal Commission and by Statute unanimously approved of the names of the Judicial Commissioners, a discussion upon their Report would have concerned itself with whether dangers to the country had been revealed and whether any, and if so what, steps ought to be taken to prevent repetition of those dangers. I would certainly not have supposed that a Member of Parliament professionally employed on behalf of some of the Parties would have taken the occasion to challenge the character and capacity of the Royal Commission and to seek to invalidate its findings by the very simple expedient of selecting one or two facts out of thousands, and one or, two questions and answers out of-scores of thousands in order to discredit the Judges and the Counsel who appeared to assist them. Nor would I have thought it likely that Parliament should be invited to reopen and pursue charges already described by the Judges as fantastic and unfounded. But this is not all! It has been clearly found that there were leakages from the Department of External Affairs from 1945 to 1948 when Dr. Evatt himself was the Minister. So serious were these regarded that-the Security Organization was set up by Mr. Chifley himself. That Organization was placed under the direction of a South Australian Supreme Court Judge, Mr. Justice Reed, who was on loan from the State of South Australia. When his term ran out my own Government appointed Mr. Spry. The effective maintenance of the Service was obviously a desirable thing. A.S.I.O. is not a police force (nor, incidentally, has it ever proposed to take over any Commonwealth Police Force). It is an Intelligence Organization. It must be obvious to&nbsp;a child that in the Intelligence field there should be the closest collaboration between the civil and military arms. Is there something wicked about having an Intelligence Organization a Counter Espionage Organization? Are we to leave it to the spies to do their work unchecked? Do spies of other countries operate for our good, or our security, or our future? The business of counter espionage is a business which requires great character, great courage, great skill and considerable freedom of action. Honest Australians will be more easy in their minds to learn from this Royal Commission Report that our security organization has been so effective that in the last six years practically no information has been secured by Communist agencies. All this is so elementary and so clear that one is at a loss to understand why the Leader of the Opposition, the alternative Prime Minister of this country, should be at such patient pains to destroy the reputation and the efficacy of the Security Service. On behalf of that Service, I reject and condemn the allegations that have been made that it has acted in a political way. The men who constitute it are patriotic, skilful, and industrious men.' It will be a poor thing indeed if men in such a Service are given to understand that if their investigations are not agreeable to the Leader of the Opposition, they may expect to encounter dismissal and infamy if a change of Government occurs.
At the risk of straining the patience of the House, I add this. In the United Kingdom, Canada and the United States, the reputation of A.S.I.O. is very high. Its handling of the Petrov case has been the subject of commendation and congratulation. This is important, for, without mutual trust and confidence between the Security Services of those countries and ourselves, information will be withheld from Australia, as indeed it frequently was before 1949 and the establishment of the Security Service.
Under all these circumstances, it is a wicked thing that such a consistent campaign should have been conducted by the Communist Party outside this House, and by Dr. Evatt inside it, for the express purpose of weakening confidence in A.S.I.O., and therefore rendering it less effective for its purposes of counter espionage. I do not hesitate to say that this is one of Dr. Evatt's principal purposes in this matter. He has not concealed his violent hatred of that Service and of the people who make it up. It will be, I hope and repeat, abundantly clear that, should he become the head of the Government of this country, the present senior personnel of the Service will be dismissed and the possibility of getting adequate recruits utterly, and perhaps permanently, destroyed. This is a dreadful manoeuvre. All I can do to counter it is to state, on behalf of the Government and, I believe, on behalf of the overwhelming majority of Members, that we regard these Security Officers as men of capacity and integrity and patriotism. So far as my Government is concerned, we will do everything in our power to protect them.
It is, of course, the very fury of Dr. Evatt's obsessions against the Security Service which has led him to turn away from his consistent battle on behalf of Australian communists to make his now celebrated appeal to Mr. Molotov. This appeal would be childish if it were made by an obscure nonentity. It becomes atrocious when it is made by a leader who is an aspirant for the Prime Ministership. Could anybody have believed that a Royal Commission, sitting for many months with patient care and making findings as a result of its investigations, should have those findings curtly rejected by the very Government whose activities those findings have exposed, a government which in fact closed its Embassy here and destroyed its records. A new procedure has been invented by Dr. Evatt himself on behalf of communist espionage. It is as if, after the person in the dock has been convicted by&nbsp;the jury, Dr. Evatt springs up and says to the convicted person, 'Were you guilty?' and the person replies 'I&nbsp;was not.' Dr. Evatt then turns, denounces the Judge, denounces the jury, denounces counsel, and denounces all the witnesses who-have given evidence for the Crown. Such conduct may be novel and arresting in an ordinary court. It would be regarded-as some evidence of eccentricity and would certainly lead to a process of contempt of court. Internationally, it represents a studied insult to Australian Judges, Australian judicial procedures, and an Australian report.
-16-
Altogether too little attention has been paid to the valuable results which have proceeded from the defection and disclosures of the Petrovs. To deal with local matters first, it must be obvious to Honourable Members that, but for the disclosures and the investigations of the Royal Commission, it is reasonable to assume that Mr. O'Sullivan and Mr. Grundeman would still be with Dr. Evatt in this building, and, but for the last election result, attached to the Prime Minister, and that the espionage of the Soviet Embassy would still be both operating and unknown. But even more important is that the information provided by the Petrovs, only some of which came within the scope of the Royal Commission, has proved invaluable to other democratic countries. Petrov himself, as we know from the United Kingdom authorities is the most senior defector from any of the Soviet intelligence services since 1937. As such he has been able to supply more information than any previous single defector regarding the espionage activities of the M.V.D. Both of the Petrovs have, in fact since April 1954, been continuously supplying information, some affecting the security of Australia and, possibly more importantly, some providing general intelligence of great assistance to the Western democracies, which intelligence has not, and of course cannot, be made public.
I want to inform the House that communications with the United Kingdom Security authorities show specifically that the information obtained from Petrov is in many cases confirmed by information held abroad and, in other cases, has enabled a material addition to their information. In point of fact scores and-scores of Soviet Intelligence operatives working in democratic countries have been identified as a result of the disclosures of the Petrovs. In addition to all this, they have, of course, supplied invaluable information regarding Soviet Intelligence methods of operation and techniques of espionage.&nbsp;
I will not need to remind the House that the recent events regarding Maclean and Burgess, and the case in Sweden, were striking confirmation of the accuracy of what the Petrovs have had to say.&nbsp;
I think I should add that, under all these circumstances, Honourable Members will agree that it would indeed be astonishing if no money had been paid to the Petrovs for their protection and their maintenance. The whole idea is farcical. The Royal Commission fully investigated this matter and found it completely proper.&nbsp;
And so I come to the end of what I have to say. I have referred to those who are charged by Dr. Evatt. But honourable public opinion will acquit them, beyond question. But the same honourable public opinion will not acquit the man who made these reckless and villainous charges; nor will it acquit those who have, in this House, authorized those charges and by
17-
their presence and support countenanced them. If there is a charge to be made it is this. Dr. Evatt has, from first to last in this matter, for his own purposes, in his own interests and with the enthusiastic support of every Communist in Australia, sought to discredit the judiciary, to subvert the authority of the Security Organization of Australia, to cry down decent and patriotic Australians and build up the Fifth Column of our enemies. I am therefore, compelled to say that, in the name of all these good and honourable men, in the name of public decency, in the name of the safety of Australia, the man on trial in this debate is Dr. Evatt himself.


PLEASE FILEFOR REFERENCE: 1J AY, 1956JANUARY, 1956STATEMENTS, SPEECHES, BROADCASTS BY THEPRIME : i: INISTER. THE RT. HUN. R. G. MENZIES, C. HM. P.FEDERAL CABINET RE-CONSTRUCTIONOn January 10, the Prime Minister announced the namesof the Ministers in the new Government, together with theirdepartments. as followsPrime MinisterSRt. Hon.TreasurerRt. Hon.Vice-President of the Executive'Council; Minister for Defence.ProductionMinister for Labour andNational Service; and Minister.for ImmigrationMinister for TradeMinister for External Affairs( and in charge of C. S. I. R. O.)Minister for DefenceLeader of the Government in theSenate; and Minister forthe NavyAttorney-General; and DeputyLeader of the Government inthe SenateMinister for NationalDevelopmentMinister for Air; and Ministerfor Civil AviationMinister for Territories Robert Gordon MENZIES,C. Ho, M. P.Sir Arthur William FADDENM. P.Rt. Hon. Sir. Eric John HARRISON,M. P.Rt. Hon.Rt. Hon.Rt. Hon.Hon. Sir Harold Edward HOLT, M. P.John McEWEN, M. P.Richard Gardiner CASEY, M. P.Philip Albert MartinMcBRIDE, K. C. M. G. , M. P.Senator the Hon. Neil O'SULLIVANSenator the Hon. John ArmstrongSPICER, Q. C.Senator the Hon. William HenrySPOONER, -Mi..The Hon. Athol Gordon TOWNLEY, M. P.Hon. Paul Meernaa CaedwallaHSLUCK, ! M. P.The above will constitute THE CBINETMinister for RepatriationMinister for SupplyMinister for Primary IndustryMinister for Shipping andTransportMinister for HealthMinister for the ArrmyPostmaster-GeneralMinister for Customs and ExcisMinister for the Interior andMinister for WorksMinister for Social Services Senator the Hon. Walter JacksonCOOPER, M. B. E.Hon. Howard BEALE, M. P.SHon. William McMi HON, M. P.SSenator the Hon. Shane DunnePJLTRIDGESDr. Donald Alastair CAjERON, M. P.Mr. John Oscar CRAMER, M. P.. Mr. Charles Willimn Di. VIDSON,M. P.e. Mr. Frederick Meares OSBORNE,M. P.Mr. Allen FAIRHALL, iN. P.Mr. Hugh Stevenson ROBERTON, M. P. ml&nbsp;
It &nbsp;will &nbsp;be &nbsp;seen &nbsp;that &nbsp;certain &nbsp;very &nbsp;important &nbsp;changes &nbsp;have been &nbsp;made.
&nbsp;In &nbsp;order &nbsp;to &nbsp;secure &nbsp;more &nbsp;concentration &nbsp;of &nbsp;discussion &nbsp;and expedition &nbsp;of &nbsp;decision &nbsp;on &nbsp;policy'matters, &nbsp;the &nbsp;size &nbsp;of &nbsp;the &nbsp;Cabinet &nbsp;is being &nbsp;reduced &nbsp;to &nbsp;12. &nbsp;I &nbsp;have &nbsp;decided &nbsp;to &nbsp;adopt &nbsp;something &nbsp;like &nbsp;the United &nbsp;Kingdom &nbsp;system &nbsp;of &nbsp;having-a &nbsp;Cabinet &nbsp;which &nbsp;includes &nbsp;certain Ministers &nbsp;and &nbsp;of &nbsp;having &nbsp;other &nbsp;Ministers, &nbsp;not &nbsp;in &nbsp;Cabinet, &nbsp;who &nbsp;will &nbsp;be responsible &nbsp;for &nbsp;the &nbsp;administration &nbsp;of &nbsp;their &nbsp;ow'n &nbsp;departments. &nbsp;Minis not &nbsp;in &nbsp;Cabinet &nbsp;will &nbsp;be &nbsp;invited &nbsp;to &nbsp;attend &nbsp;and &nbsp;to &nbsp;participate &nbsp;whenever matters &nbsp;affecting &nbsp;their &nbsp;own &nbsp;department &nbsp;are &nbsp;under &nbsp;Cabinet &nbsp;consideratic I &nbsp;will &nbsp;also &nbsp;have &nbsp;the &nbsp;right &nbsp;to &nbsp;invite &nbsp;to &nbsp;a &nbsp;Cabinet &nbsp;discussion &nbsp;any non-Ci-inet &nbsp;Minister &nbsp;who &nbsp;has &nbsp;'special &nbsp;knowledge &nbsp;or &nbsp;experience &nbsp;on &nbsp;the partic-lar &nbsp;matter &nbsp;under &nbsp;consideration.
&nbsp;In &nbsp;order &nbsp;to &nbsp;render &nbsp;this &nbsp;new &nbsp;system &nbsp;fully &nbsp;effective, &nbsp;I will &nbsp;invite &nbsp;Parliament &nbsp;to &nbsp;alter &nbsp;the &nbsp;Ministers &nbsp;of &nbsp;State &nbsp;ict &nbsp;to &nbsp;provide for &nbsp;t::c &nbsp;additional ministers. &nbsp;Mr. &nbsp;Cramer &nbsp;and &nbsp;Mr. &nbsp;Roberton &nbsp;will, therefore, &nbsp;not &nbsp;be &nbsp;sworn &nbsp;as &nbsp;Ministers &nbsp;until &nbsp;the &nbsp;statutory &nbsp;amendment has &nbsp;been &nbsp;made.&nbsp;The &nbsp;practice &nbsp;of &nbsp;having &nbsp;,a &nbsp;Defence &nbsp;Preparations &nbsp;Committee will &nbsp;be &nbsp;continued. &nbsp;On &nbsp;this &nbsp;Committee &nbsp;there &nbsp;will &nbsp;continue &nbsp;to &nbsp;be present &nbsp;(interalia) &nbsp;the &nbsp;three &nbsp;Service &nbsp;Ministers &nbsp;and &nbsp;the &nbsp;three Chiefs &nbsp;of &nbsp;Staff.&nbsp;The &nbsp;principal &nbsp;departmental &nbsp;re-organisation &nbsp;is &nbsp;to &nbsp;be &nbsp;found in &nbsp;the &nbsp;creation, &nbsp;for &nbsp;urgent &nbsp;and &nbsp;obvious &nbsp;purposes, &nbsp;of &nbsp;a &nbsp;new &nbsp;Department of &nbsp;Trade &nbsp;which &nbsp;will &nbsp;not &nbsp;only &nbsp;embrace &nbsp;the &nbsp;trade &nbsp;aspects &nbsp;of &nbsp;the &nbsp;present Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;Commerce &nbsp;and &nbsp;Agriculture, &nbsp;including &nbsp;the &nbsp;work &nbsp;of &nbsp;the statotory &nbsp;marketing &nbsp;boards &nbsp;for &nbsp;certain &nbsp;primary &nbsp;industries, &nbsp;but &nbsp;will also &nbsp;be &nbsp;equipped, &nbsp;to &nbsp;ensure &nbsp;that.bo.th &nbsp;inward &nbsp;and &nbsp;outward &nbsp;trade &nbsp;are dealt &nbsp;with &nbsp;comprehensively. &nbsp;The &nbsp;new &nbsp;department &nbsp;will &nbsp;take &nbsp;over &nbsp;from Trade &nbsp;and &nbsp;Customs &nbsp;the &nbsp;administration &nbsp;of &nbsp;the &nbsp;Tariff &nbsp;Board &nbsp;and &nbsp;the Central &nbsp;Import &nbsp;Licensing &nbsp;Committee. &nbsp;The &nbsp;normal &nbsp;administration &nbsp;of import &nbsp;licensing',. &nbsp;subject &nbsp;to &nbsp;the &nbsp;rules &nbsp;laid &nbsp;down &nbsp;in &nbsp;the &nbsp;new &nbsp;departmen will &nbsp;rem'ain &nbsp;with &nbsp;Customs.&nbsp;
The &nbsp;Dep.artment &nbsp;of &nbsp;Trade &nbsp;and &nbsp;Customs &nbsp;will &nbsp;become &nbsp;the Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;Customs &nbsp;and &nbsp;Excise, &nbsp;a &nbsp;title &nbsp;which &nbsp;will more &nbsp;accurately describe &nbsp;its &nbsp;functions &nbsp;under &nbsp;the &nbsp;new organisation.
&nbsp;In &nbsp;order &nbsp;that &nbsp;the.Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;Trade &nbsp;may &nbsp;not, &nbsp;under &nbsp;thesej circumstances, &nbsp;be &nbsp;overloaded &nbsp;and &nbsp;so &nbsp;that &nbsp;it &nbsp;may &nbsp;direct &nbsp;its &nbsp;major attention &nbsp;to &nbsp;the &nbsp;stimulation &nbsp;of &nbsp;trade, &nbsp;a &nbsp;new &nbsp;Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;Primary Industry &nbsp;is &nbsp;being &nbsp;created. &nbsp;It &nbsp;will, subject &nbsp;to &nbsp;the &nbsp;activities &nbsp;of the &nbsp;Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;Trcde &nbsp;in &nbsp;respect &nbsp;of &nbsp;mcrketing boards, &nbsp;deal &nbsp;with &nbsp;the Commonwealth'd &nbsp;activities &nbsp;in &nbsp;relation &nbsp;to &nbsp;primary &nbsp;industries, including &nbsp;sugar, cotton &nbsp;and &nbsp;wine, &nbsp;which &nbsp;have &nbsp;hitherto &nbsp;been &nbsp;in &nbsp;the Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;Trade &nbsp;and &nbsp;Customs. &nbsp;It &nbsp;will &nbsp;also &nbsp;embrace &nbsp;such &nbsp;matters as &nbsp;the &nbsp;tractor &nbsp;bounty &nbsp;and &nbsp;the &nbsp;sulphur &nbsp;bounty, &nbsp;fisheries &nbsp;and &nbsp;whaling. It &nbsp;will &nbsp;have &nbsp;transferred &nbsp;to &nbsp;it &nbsp;from.the &nbsp;Department &nbsp;of &nbsp;the &nbsp;Interior, war &nbsp;service &nbsp;land &nbsp;settlement. &nbsp;There &nbsp;will &nbsp;be &nbsp;some &nbsp;other &nbsp;re-allocations of &nbsp;function &nbsp;as &nbsp;between &nbsp;departments, &nbsp;details &nbsp;of &nbsp;which &nbsp;will &nbsp;be &nbsp;announce shortly.&nbsp;These &nbsp;changes &nbsp;necessarily &nbsp;involve &nbsp;an &nbsp;additional &nbsp;Minister. I &nbsp;have &nbsp;also &nbsp;thought &nbsp;it &nbsp;undesirable &nbsp;that &nbsp;any &nbsp;one &nbsp;minister &nbsp;should administer &nbsp;two &nbsp;Service &nbsp;departments, &nbsp;since &nbsp;the &nbsp;interests &nbsp;of &nbsp;these departments &nbsp;are &nbsp;not &nbsp;always &nbsp;identical. &nbsp;To &nbsp;do &nbsp;this, &nbsp;requires &nbsp;another additional &nbsp;minister. &nbsp;These &nbsp;considerations &nbsp;hove &nbsp;led &nbsp;to &nbsp;the &nbsp;conclusion that, &nbsp;while &nbsp;it &nbsp;would &nbsp;be &nbsp;completely &nbsp;unvrkable &nbsp;to &nbsp;have &nbsp;a &nbsp;single &nbsp;Cabinet of &nbsp;22 &nbsp;Ministers, &nbsp;there &nbsp;is &nbsp;no &nbsp;reason &nbsp;vihy &nbsp;there &nbsp;should &nbsp;not &nbsp;be &nbsp;two additional &nbsp;ministers &nbsp;outside &nbsp;of &nbsp;the &nbsp;Cabinet, &nbsp;particularly &nbsp;as the Cabinet &nbsp;proper &nbsp;is &nbsp;being &nbsp;reduced &nbsp;to &nbsp;12, &nbsp;and &nbsp;should &nbsp;certainly &nbsp;be &nbsp;no larger &nbsp;if &nbsp;the &nbsp;greatest &nbsp;possible &nbsp;efficiency &nbsp;is &nbsp;to &nbsp;be &nbsp;achieved.
&nbsp;I &nbsp;sincerely &nbsp;regret'the &nbsp;loss &nbsp;of &nbsp;good &nbsp;colleagues &nbsp;who &nbsp;have &nbsp;fin records &nbsp;of &nbsp;public &nbsp;service, &nbsp;but &nbsp;I &nbsp;have &nbsp;felt &nbsp;that &nbsp;the &nbsp;circumstances &nbsp;of today &nbsp;require &nbsp;very &nbsp;wide &nbsp;reconstruction, &nbsp;the &nbsp;introduction &nbsp;of &nbsp;relatively new &nbsp;Members &nbsp;of &nbsp;Parliament &nbsp;who &nbsp;can &nbsp;contribute &nbsp;fresh &nbsp;experience &nbsp;and ….&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



e energy, and the fitting of the Government machine to cope more
effecitvely with the great economic and international problems
with which must urgently ccncern ourselves.
is
be PROFESSOR GILBERT MURRAY. O. M.
list r'r \ On January 18, the Prime Minister announced that the
itio Commonweal-h-Government, on the advice of the Historic Memorials
Comnmittee-had recently purchased in London a portrait of
S Professor -ilbert Murray, painted in 1954 by his grandson,
1: ir. L awrence Toynbee.
The portrait has now arrived in Canberra from London.
ride There are apparently very few portraits of the great
scholar in existence and the Government considered-that the
National Collection of rt Treasures should include this portrait
with those of other Australians distinguished in the fields of
art, literature and science.
and WATERFRONT STRIKE
nent
sent On January 23, the Prime Minister said:
11 " Cabinet has t oday considered the waterfront strike which
began last night. It has had before it a careful and documented
com statement of the various negotiations and steps which have recently
occurred, including the negotiation between the parties and the
V proceedings before the Arbitration Court. The urgent fact is that
tmen a strike is on and that, with certain exceptions, it has brought
about a cessation of work on the waterfront at a time when the
vital interests of " ustralia can be and are most vitally affected
ly by it. " As a Government, we are not the judges of the merits.
We have at all times strongly maintained our belief that not only
hese in the interests of the . parties but in those of the public at
large, which are of paramount importance, wages and industrial
Y conditions where the parties do not agree should be dealt with
f by the industrial tribunals.
the " In this particular matter, waterside workers claim that
their pay should be increased; shipowners claim that there are
ers restrictive practices on the waterfront which should be abolished
if the costs of transportation ( so important an element in costs
r generally) are to be kept at a level which will enable trade to
tion go on, ensure to the public the lowest possible level of transport
uncedn cost, and facilitate the prompt and profitable conduct of export
trade for Australia as a whole.
e* " It will be quite clear to hundreds of thousands of
employees in other industries that a disastrous waterfront strike
will affect their employment. Indeed, if it goes on for even a
her few weeks it will inevitably produce mass unemployment in other
usion industries. It is, therefore, my duty to point out to the public
binet generally and to those concerned in the dispute in particular
three things:
1. Whatever may be the final determination, the shipowners
have in fact made an offer of a wage increase and have asked
for the elimination of restrictive and, therefore, wasteful
Sfiu o. uractices; 


WATERFRONT STRIKE
On January 23, the Prime Minister said:
Cabinet has today considered the waterfront strike which began last night. It has had before it a careful and documented statement of the various negotiations and steps which have recently occurred, including the negotiation between the parties and the proceedings before the Arbitration Court. The urgent fact is that a strike is on and that, with certain exceptions, it has brought about a cessation of work on the waterfront at a time when the vital interests of Australia can be and are most vitally affected by it, "
As a Government, we are not the judges of the merits. We have at all times strongly maintained our belief that not only in the interests of the parties but in those of the public at large, which are of paramount importance, wages and industrial conditions where the parties do not agree should be dealt with the by the industrial tribunals.
In this particular matter, waterside workers claim that their pay should be increased; shipowners claim that there are restrictive practices on the waterfront which should be abolished if the costs of transportation ( so important an element in costs generally) are to be kept at a level which will enable trade to go on, ensure to the public the lowest possible level of transport cost, and facilitate the prompt and profitable conduct of export trade for Australia as a whole.
It will be quite clear to hundreds of thousands of employees in other industries that a disastrous waterfront strike will affect their employment. Indeed, if it goes on for even a few weeks it will inevitably produce mass unemployment in other industries. It is, therefore, my duty to point out to the public generally and to those concerned in the dispute in particular three things:

Whatever may be the final determination, the shipowners have in fact made an offer of a wage increase and have asked for the elimination of restrictive and, therefore, wasteful practices:
The fact that these practices lend themselves to impartial adjudication is conclusively established by the fact that they are not common to all ports; some at least of them do not exist in some ports but are practised in others.
The statement made by Mr Justice Ashburner on Saturday shows that the shipowners were prepared to submit the matters in issue to arbitration but that this offer was rejected by the Federation.

If this dispute is to continue its character as a conflict between arbitration and direct action, the Government will quite plainly find itself involved in the struggle and will require to take whatever steps are within its power to uphold the principle of arbitration.
"But before any final consideration can be given to the: conduct of' such a struggle, it is, I think, proper that I should on behalf of the Government, point out so something which may easily be overlooked under the present circumstances. The strike on the waterfront will have evil consequences for the Australian economy and therefore for all the people of Australia, employers or employed. if it is prolonged, those consequences can be disastrous for our balance of trade and for our overseas reserves,
Such a prolonged strike, particularly at a time like this when we are in the flush export season, can stop wool sales, can have a depressing effect upon future wool prices; can grievously injure our farm product exports and internal trade; it can inflict great damage on the sugar industry, be ruinous for the fruit industry in a State like Tasmania, can expose us A to great risks of a loss of markets for wheat, can, by impairing steel supplies, strike a deadly blow at the building and construction industries, including light engineering and motor body building. It can by transferring interstate traffic from ships to rail and road impose intolerable burdens upon these means of internal traffic. I do not need to add to these examples. The truth is that there will be few industries in Australia unaffected.
It will be clear to all Australians that in a strike of this magnitude, the consequences and destructive power are out of proportion to any gains that can possibly accrue to waterside workers when the strike ends as it inevitably will. The damage to the Australian people will be many, many times greater than any benefit which waterside workers may fondly imagine they will secure by their denial of arbitration
As the leader of a democratic government, I do not feel, nor do my colleagues, that punitive action should have first priority. On the contrary, believing as we do in the good sense and responsibility of the Australians directly or indirectly concerned in this dispute, we believe and expect that a simple statement of the material facts will restore sanity of judgment, it lead to the termination of this utterly useless dispute and bring everybody back to the traditional and sensible Australian view that where there are differences of opinion upon industrial matters, an independent judgment should be applied to them with all speed and the results of that judgment respected and obeyed.
There are many things that could be said and that can be done. But I do not propose to say or do anything at this stage which will impede the settlement of this matter or prevent the characteristic good sense of the Australian people from having its prompt and inevitable effect. Whatever the individual desires of any man or group may be, the interests of Australia must be paramount.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


On January 26, the Prime Minister received the following messages on the occasion of Australia Day:
From the Prime Minister of New Zealand 
"The Government and people of New Zealand send their best wishes and friendly greetings to the Government and people of Australia on the occasion of Australia Day"
 From the Prime Minister of India: 
"On this anniversary of Australia Day, I take pleasure in conveying to Your Excellency heartiest greetings of the Government and the people of India and my own, together with our sincere good wishes for the continued peace and prosperity of the people of Australia."
From His Excellency the High Commissioner for South Africa:
"On behalf of the Government and people of the Union of South Africa and also on behalf of all South African citizens resident in this country, I have pleasure in conveying to you and to the Government and people of Australia congratulations and best wishes on the occasion of the celebration of Australia Day."
From the Prime Minister of Ceylon 
"On the occasion of the Anniversary of Australia Day the Government and people of Ceylon join me in sending you our sincere felicitations and good wishes for the coming year."
From the Prime Minister of Indonesia 
"On the auspicious occasion the National Day of Australia I have much pleasure on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia in extending to Your Excellency my sincere congratulations and best wishes. May continuous happiness and prosperity be with the people of Australia."
From the Prime Minister of the Republic of China: 
"On the auspicious occasion of Australia Day I take great pleasure in extending to you my sincere felicitations and best wishes for continued prosperity of your great Commonwealth and your personal wellbeing."
From the Prime Minister of Malta: 
"On Anniversary of Australia Day I send on behalf of Maltese Government and people best wishes and  greetings to you and to all. Australians. May your Commonwealth and people continue to advance on the road of progress and prosperity."


LOAN COUNCIL MEETING
On January 31, the Prime Minister said:
In view of the propaganda statements that are being made in various quarters about the forthcoming Loan Council meeting and about alleged decisions of the Federal Government, I should make one or two things plain.
This Loan Council meeting has not been called because of results of the last loan. It has been called pursuant to an arrangement made with the States at the Loan Council meeting last year. At that meeting the Commonwealth agreed to advance funds to the States month by month on the basis of a borrowing program of 190m. These payments were to be made by the Commonwealth unit the end of January. As the results of the first two loans would be available by that date, it was agreed to have another Loan Council meeting by the end of January, 1956, in order to review the loan market and in order to discuss the amount of the Commonwealth special assistance, which would be made available to the States over and above market raisings, for the whole of the financial year, These matters will be discussed, I hope, in a sensible way. Certainly the Commonwealth Government will approach them without any pre-determination of any of the issues involved
The many public statements to the effect that the Commonwealth has decided upon reductions in the State Works programme are simply untrue The Loan Council will, so far as we are concerned, be able to discuss its business quite freely and without pre-judgment of any of the issues which&nbsp;will be involved."
With the compliments of The Government Public Relations Officer, Parliament House, CANBERRA. A.CT


STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
TUESDAY, 25TH SEPTEMBER, 1956,
SUEZ CANAL 
It is essential, if we are to form valid judgments on the Suez Canal issue, to begin by getting our facts right. I therefore propose to begin with the facts.
The Suez Canal was not built by Egypt. It was, as have said elsewhere, "the product of the bold vision and engineering genius of a Frenchman, de Lesseps, and the financial resources of a Company whose  shareholding was international".
The then government of Egypt (the Khedive) granted to the Company a concession not due to expire until 1968. This concession meant the construction of a Canal which had for centuries been merely dreamed about. So far from subtracting from Egypt, it made Egypt in an international sense, for it put her on one of the great cross-roads of the world.
In 1888, a convention was entered into. between the-United Kingdom, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Spain, France, Italy, The Netherlands, Russia and Turkey (under whose authority the Khedive of Egypt had granted the concession), under which the ' free use of the Suez Maritime Canal' was guaranteed.  The purpose of the Convention was to establish, by a conventional act, a definite system destined to guarantee at times and for all the Powers, the free use of the Suez Maritime Canal, and thus to complete the system under which the navigation of this canal has been placed by the firman of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, dated the 22nd February, 1866, and sanctioning the concessions of His Highness the Khedive. 
Nothing could be clearer. As the firman of 1866 had established the Canal Company's concession that concession was expressly recognised and, as it were, incorporated in the terms of the 1888 Convention. It is an abuse of language to describe the Company, merely because it was technically resident in Egypt, as anything other than an international entity, with rights recognised by an International treaty. 
It became, and is, a vital element in much of the world's trade, including the great bulk of our own. Peaceful and unimpeded traffic along its waters is, in great measure, the condition of industrial prosperity and employment in Western Europe, half of whose total oil supplies pass through the Canal. Its business is expanding. Tanker traffic alone will double and treble in a few years' time. East of Suez there are hundreds of millions of people for whose goods, bought or sold, the Suez Canal offers the shortest and cheapest route. 
The Canal Company did, and continued to do, its work, Until the Israel-Egypt question of 1951 and since, there were no politics in the Canal.  It was not the instrument of any domestic politics; it was, in the strict sense, a free and open international waterway, upon the continuance and freedom of which the trade and economy of scores of independent nations came increasingly to depend. Indeed, in a broadcast made as far back as November 17 1954, the Egyptian President, Colonel Nasser, said that there remaired 14 years until the end of the Canal Company's concession. He said that good relations existed between the Company and the Egyptian Government, which had, he said, full confidence in the attitude of the Company.
Egypt had no grievance against the Company's administration. It is another remarkable fact, too little known or remembered, that on June of this year the continuing validity of the Concession was again recognised by the present Government of Egypt. On that day that Government approved an agreement under which the Company was to invest in Egypt an amount exceeding œ 21m.
œ 10m by the end of 1956
œ 3m by the end of 1957
œ 2m, by the end of 1958,
instalments to be increased annually thereafter until the end of 1963. The whole agreement recognised that the Company's concession ran until 1968. 
This is a most significant fact. The Company was actually encouraged to continue to lay out vast sums in Egypt. Seven weeks later, the Company was, assuming the legal validity of Colonel Nasser's action, destroyed. 
On July 26th, Colonel Nasser, stung by the refusal of an American loan for the-High Dam,. Purported by a so-called Nationalisation Decree, to terminate the concession and appropriate the assets of the Company. In express terms, he made it clear that the Canal was being taken over so that financially, it should serve the special needs and interests of Egypt. While he paid lip service to the 1888 Convention, the terms of which he had, in the judgment of the United Nations, glaringly broken in the case of Israel, he made it plain, though in rhetorical terms, that in future the Canal was to be an instrument of Egyptian politics and the servant of Egypt's financial needs. This position he re-asserted in our Cairo discussions. 
This high-handed, and as I believe, illegal action, produced a world crisis. The whole future of the Canal was, and is, at stake.  It was, of course, at once said by some people who, quaintly enough, regarded the problem as a purely academic one, that Egypt, as a sovereign power, had the right to 'nationalise' an Egyptian enterprise and Company, and that therefore there was nothing to argue about. Such people ignored, and ignore, the two salient operative facts.
First, for the historical reasons to which I have' referred, the concession had an international character, recognised by an international Convention. It could not, therefore, be regarded as a merely domestic enterprise, under the sole control of the Egyptian Government, 
Second, what Egypt did was to repudiate this contractual concession 12 years before its due date, without consultation and without agreement. If such repudiation is not a breach of international law, then there is no international law.
 From the point of view of the Canal using nations, there were great and urgent issues at once created by Colonel Nasser's act of repudiation and confiscation. 
1. Such a grave breach of international law, if overlooked or condoned, would encourage further acts of lawlessness, bringing immense damage to the whole economy of the free world, 
2. It would be folly to regard the Canal seizure as a,-single act, to be dealt with in isolation. As an isolated act, it would in all truth, be dramatic and crucial enough. But  Colonel Nasser acting.in a Similar fashion to other-dictators-before him, has made no secret of his particular  ambition to be the acknowledged head of the Arab worId, to encourage confiscations of outside investments and installations, to humiliate and drive out the-foreigner. The Canal seizure is, in plain English,  the first shot in a campaign calculated, unless it is promptly and successfully resisted, to make the people and economies of Great Britain and Western Europe dependent literally from week to week, on one man' s whim. In the literal sense the Suez issue is, for millions, one of survival. 
3. As Colonel Nasser's acquisition' of the Suez Canal Company was achieved by the repudiation of a long standing contract, it was clear that Egypt's credit in the world would be, so weakened that she could not obtain or spend. The many scores or possibly hundreds of millions needed for the much-needed explosion of the Canal. The Canal would, therefore, become more and more-inadequate to cope with rapidly increasing traffic, which would accordingly need to follow longer and less economic routes.
4. Colonel Nasser had at his very first announcement made it clear that the Suez Canal, was in future to be the political-instrument of Egypt, losing its specially impressed international-and-non-political quality. 
This meant that without any formal violation of the 1888 Convention.to which Colonel Nasser professes to adhere, the interests of -the Canal and of its, users could-be. completely subordinated to the financial needs of Egypt. Thus (as I repeatedly pointed. out to Colonel Nasser in the Cairo talks)-Egypt could as the sole Canal authority and under pressure from: her own Treasury raise the Canal dues to the highest point consistent with not actually driving the traffic away. In other words, the canal dues instead of being as light as possible in the interests of international trade, would become as heavy ' as possible, in the interests of Egypt's domestic finance. 
Again, the Canal has already almost reached .traffic saturation point. Over the next comparatively few years vast sums will need to be raised and laid out on duplication, or widening and deepening, or the construction of more by-passes. Without this kind of thing, the inadequacy of the Canal will become an economic disaster for many trading nations and their people. With these improvements and an expanded capacity, Canal dues might reasonably be expected to fall. But if Egypt's internal financial position is to be the determining factor, then current earnings which should be used in part for expansion may well be drawn off into the general revenues of Egypt. 
These are but a few of the grave and critical implications of Colonel Nasser's action. It is small wonder that the reaction in the world. was so sharp, and that 22 nations came to the London Conference with such anxiety about the future. 
The reaction of the Government of the United Kingdom was both prompt and vigorous. It denounced Colonel Nasser' s action. It concerted measures with both the United States and France for the calling of a world conference of interested nations including Egypt herself put into train military measures of mobilisation and preparation.
In these steps, as I would like to remind the House, the United. Kingdom Government secured in Parliament, the swift support of all parties. The philosophic doubts which  have since assailed some minds were not present in the House of  Commons on August 2nd, when a debate occurred which deserves to be remembered. 
The Prime Minister, Sir Anthony Eden, said inter alia: 
"I think it is true to say that the cause for the anger and alarm felt, not only here but among the Governments and peoples of the democratic world, at the action of the Egyptian Government, is due to the special character of the Canal It is right, therefore, that the House should be reminded of some aspects of this.  
As the world is today, and as it is likely to be for some time to come, the industrial life of Western Europe literally depends upon the continuing free navigation of the Canal as one of the great international waterways of the world. I need give the House only one example. Last year, nearly 70 million tons of oil passed through the Canal, representing about half the oil supplies of Western Europe...Nor does this traffic affect the West alone. Australia, India, Ceylon and a large part of South-East Asia transport the major proportion of their trade; or a large proportion of their trade, through the Canal. 
Therefore, it is with these reflections, in mind that I must repeat the carefully considered sentence which I used in the House on Monday last, if I may quote it again:
"No arrangements for the future of this great international waterway could be acceptable to Her Majesty's Government which would leave it in the unfettered control of a single Power which could, as recent events have shown, exploit it purely for purposes of national policy'. 
That is still our position and it must remain so". 
The Prime Minister later referred to Colonel Nasser's broadcast of November 17th, 1954, and to the agreement of June, 10, 1956, of which I have already made mention.
When he came to the matter of military measures, the Prime Minister said: 
"Colonel Nasser's arbitrary action in breach of Egypt's solemn undertakings, many of them recently given, without previous consultation or previous notice, reveals the nature of the regime with which we have to deal, and I think that the action of the Egyptian Government in compelling the Canal Company employees to remain at their posts under threat of imprisonment is certainly, to say the least, a violation of human rights. 
In these circumstances, and in view of the uncertain situation created by the actions of the Egyptian Government, Her Majesty's Government have thought it necessary and I wanted to take this first opportunity to tell the House to take certain precautionary measures of a military nature, Their object is to strengthen our position in the Eastern Mediterranean and our ability to deal with any situation that may arise." 
That the matter was no partisan affair was clearly shown when Mr, Gaitskell spoke for the Opposition. Having stated his own view that the act of nationalisation in itself was not wrong, Mr. Gaitskell went on to state three powerful objections to what had been done. First, he said the Company was not an ordinary one conducting ordinary activities. It was a company controlling an international waterway of immense importance to the whole of the rest of the world. It was, therefore, bound to be a matter of international concern when it changed hands. He went on: 
 "Now the ownership and control of the Company is to be transferred to a single Power, to the hands of one State controlling.it and, therefore, in a position even more than before to decide how the Canal shall be run. It  may be said there is no need for anxiety because we have had these  assurances about the 1888 Convention. I am bound to say that it seems to me the strongest reason for having doubts in our minds as to whether we can accept those assurances has been the behaviour of the Egyptian Government in stopping Israeli ships from going through, and equally important  - indeed, even more important -  the clear defiance of the Resolution of the United Nations condemning: this action, passed in September,1951.
Mr. Gaitskell proceeded
"The second reason why I think we must take strong exception to this -is that any confidence we-might have had in an action of this kind was profoundly shaken by the manner-in. which it was carried out. It -was done suddenly, without negotiation, without discussion  by force, and it was done on the excuse that this was the way to finance the Aswan Dam project."
Mr. Gaitskell continued 
My third reason for thinking that we must object to this is that we cannot ignore  - and this is a matter that the Prime Minister did not touch upon no doubt for good reasons  - the political background and the repercussions. of the whole of this episode in the Middle East. We cannot forget. that Colonel Nasser has repeatedly boasted of his intention to create an Arab empire from: the Atlantic to the Persian Gulf....
 "The fact is that this episode must be recognised as part of the-struggle for the mastery of the Middle East. That is something which I do not feel that we can ignore."
Mr. Gaitskell showed a realistic approach to the matter when he said: 
"I am satisfied of these reasons that if the Western democracies and, indeed other countries in the world, had simply accepted this and done nothing about highly dangerous consequences would have followed."
When it came to the military measures which have-been-so much criticised since, he said:
"I do not myself object to the precautionary steps announced by the Prime: Minister today I think that any Government would have to do that, as we had to do it during the Persian crisis."
Mr Herbert Morrison, whose standing is so well known, made a remarkable speech. He said that 
"no country unilaterally should do something which is calculated to upset the interests of the wider world and unilaterally upset the international applecart".
In one sentence he cut through all the alleged legal arguments when he said of Colonel Nasser: 
"He is a person to be condemned, because he has acted contrary to' the law of nation of international good faith and against the principle of an institution, which, while it might be more internationally owned and held at any rate internationally owned and held in trust for the common use of all the peoples of the world"
Having condemned the Government for what he described as an "excessive policy of appeasement towards Egypt' Mr. Morrison went on to deal with the question of force.
 Having stated that he was in favour of taking the matter to the United Nations, so long as the United Nations would be expeditious and effective about it, he went on to say:
"I say to the United Nations that if it wishes  - as we would wish it -  to become the great moral authority of the world and the great decisive instrument, it must stop dodging vital international issues. If our Government and France and if possible the United States should come to the conclusion that in the circumstances the use of force would be justified, then I think that it is up to each honourable Member of this House to tell the Government whether we would support them or whether we would not.  For my own part, in principle, if, after an elaborate and proper consideration the Government and our friends come to that conclusion, I think that in the circumstances of this particular case it might well be the duty of honourable Members, including myself, to say that we would give them support." 
I think it fair to say that when honourable Members read these speeches, one made by a Prime Minister who has had an enormous experience in foreign affairs and whose name is honourably associated with the constitution of the United Nations, another by Mr. Gaitskell, the new Leader of the Labour Party in Great Britain, and the third by Mr Herbert. Morrison, a former Foreign Secretary and Minister, whose services will be long remembered and. who is a veteran socialist
in the Labour Movement, it can hardly be said that the United Kingdom's reaction was either ill-considered, partisan or hysterical
The facts were, of course, that force had already been used by Egypt, with the threat of more to come. This aspect of the matter just cannot sensibly be overlooked. 
The so-called Nationalisation Decree of July 26 went into operation on that day by the arrival at the Company's various premises and depots, of armed troops who proceeded incontinently to seize the premises and plant. Call this nationalisation if you will. It is not our conception of nationalisation. It was, in plain English, the acquisition of property - somebody else's property, by the use and threat of force. Moreover, there was a strange violence in the treatment of non-Egyptian pilots. These pilots owed no allegiance to any employer other than the Suez Canal Company. They were not chattels to be taken over by a new master, at will. Yet they were, by the terms of the ' nationalisation' decree, compelled to serve in the employ of the new Egyptian authority, on penalty of imprisonment! 
I will quote the precise words of the Canal Company Nationalisation Law, referring to the new Egyptian Board. 
ARTICLE 4 -- Said board shall retain all the employees and workers of the nationalised company. 
They will continue performing their duties and none can leave his work or give it up in any manner or for any reason except with the permission of the Authority mentioned in Article 2'. 
ARTICLE 5 Every contravention of Article 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment in addition to denying the person concerned any right to compensation, pension or end of service gratuity'. 
Is it to be, wondered at that preparatory military measures were taken on our side of this argument?
 Further, it is perhaps not adequately known that Egypt under a military dictatorship, exhibits all the normal features of the Police State, The very pilots who have been foolishly criticised for recently leaving so soon as they could, could tell a story  - of houses searched, telephones tapped, bank accounts controlled, children ostracised, and personal search when going aboard ship. Having regard to the presence in Egypt, in these circumstances and conditions of many thousands of British and French citizens, the condemnation of military preparations by Great Britain and France sounds just a little unreal, 
Suez Canal Dispute and The United Nations.
It was said by some that, when the crisis arose after Colonel Nasser's nationalisation decree, the whole matter should have at once been taken to the United Nations, Strongly as we support the Charter, I cannot accept this view. The problem was urgent.  The longer Colonel Nasser remained in possession of the field, the greater would be the temptation for people to say that we were dealing with an accomplished fact and that nothing could be done about it, It was essential that something should be done about it at once. 
The nations principally concerned, therefore, decided that they would call a conference of those countries vitally interested in the Suez Canal in order that they might evolve fair and sensible proposals for a just settlement.  Hence the London Conference. 
All this was done, not in defiance of the Charter of the United Nations, but in performance of it.  Article 33 of the Charter says: 
"1.  The parties to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security, shall, first of all, seek a solution by negotiation, enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements, or other peaceful means of their own choice." 
The whole atmosphere of the London Conference was excellent.  It is quite wrong to claim that it decided either for or against the use of force.  On the contrary it did not discuss that matter at all.
It devoted its energies to producing constructive proposals designed to seek " a peaceful solution in conformity with the purposes and principles of the United Nations."
These proposals which were presented to and elaborately explained to Colonel Nasser by a Committee of which I had the honour to be chairman,  are in the hands of Honourable Members and I will not occupy time by repeating them in full.
But it is, I think, important to recall to the public mind that our principal proposal was that, in the language of the 1888 Convention, there should be "a definite system destined to guarantee at all times, and for all the Powers, the free use of the Suez Maritime Canal'. The 18 nations went on to say - 
(a) that such a system should be established "with due regard to the sovereign rights of Egypt" ;
(b) that the system should assure the efficient and dependable operation, maintenance, and development of the Canal; 
(c) that the operation of the Canal should be ' insulated' from the influence of the politics of any nation; 
(d) that the return to Egypt, as the acknowledged owner or landlord of the Canal should be fair and should increase as the capacity and use of the Canal grew; and that in fact there should be no profits taken out of the Canal except by Egypt.
(c) that Canal dues should be as low as is consistent with what has already been stated.
These proposals were given clear substance by our major working proposition which was that there should be installed by agreement with Egypt, an operating authority, the tenant, in effect, of Egypt, constituted of members drawn from a variety of nations including Egypt herself but not subject to political direction. Such an authority would be set up, not under the law of any one country, but by the terms of an international convention, as in the well-known case of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Being thus, on anybodys view, an international body not subject to nationalisation it would enjoy world wide confidence. Being armed, under the proposed Convention, with extensive corporate and financial powers, it could readily borrow money for works of development; it could assure, in practical terms, the future freedom and efficiency of the Canal, there would be no profits for any shareholder except Egypt; and Egypt's asset would be at one and the same time mad more valuable and more productive.
I sincerely believe, with the representatives of the other 17 nations that no fairer or more generous proposal over emerged from a Conference, though that Conference was convened at a time when feelings rall high and the danger of conceding a clear victory to Colonel Nasser were (as I hope they still are) so vividly understood.
Let me repeat that, while these proposals gave adequate protection to the interests of canal users, and assured the future of the canal as a non-political waterway, and provided financial guarantees for its maintenance and expansion, there were also enormous advantages for Egypt. These were summarised in my letter to Colonel Nasser of September 7 as follows: 
(i)	Egypt's ownership of the Canal being recognised, it is to her great advantage to have the Canal maintained and improved and made more profitable as the years go on
(ii) The future financial burdens involved in such maintenance and improvement would be carried and handled by the new body and therefore Egypt would in fact be relieved of them; 
(iii) Egypt alone would draw profit from the Canal.
(iv) A just and fair method of compensating the shareholders of the Suez Canal Company would have been agreed upon.
(v) The dangerous tension now existing internationally would be relaxed on terms satisfactory to the user nations and entirely consistent with Egypt's proper dignity, independence, and ownership, and thus a world contribution would be made to the peaceful settlement of international problems.
I have no doubt whatever that what was put to Colonel Nasser represented a fair and indeed generous settlement. He rejected our proposals, not, as honourable Members will observe, by reasoned argument out by reference to what can only be described as slogans. He offered the view that the presence of any "foreign body", as he would describe it, in the Canal was a derogation from Egyptian sovereignty. There were and are two complete answers to this claim. One was that we were not imposing something upon Egypt but inviting her willing agreement; an agreement which she would make in exercise of her sovereignty and not in derogation. of it. The second was that Egypt's position as the landlord of the Canal being fully recognised what we were seeking was to have a working tenant which would at one and the same time produce increasing returns for Egypt, and for Egypt only, while creating such international confidence in the conduct of the Canal as would enable the tenant itself to provide the necessary finance and engineering skill so that the Canal might become increasingly effective as an international waterway.
At the risk of some repetition, I think that I should clear up one important aspect of this matter. For various reasons there seems to be an impression abroad that there was nothing intrinsically wrong with nationalisation and that consequently the attack upon Colonel Nasser's action is misconceived. I have even heard it suggested that the London Conference approved of the legal validity of the nationalisation of the Canal. This is not so.
The question of the validity of the nationalisation decree is in essence one of law.  The London Conference was not a judicial body and, therefore, did not attempt to make any judicial finding on this point.  What it did in effect was to say ' Let us work out some proper plan for the future. Let us work it out on the assumption that the Nationalisation is completed and that adequate provision is or will be made for compensating the shareholders. On this footing let us  evolve a series of proposals which we think both fair and acceptable.
Colonel Nasser himself, in the course of our discussions, constantly reiterated that his Nationalisation Decree was valid and that in consequence there was nothing to complain about. I therefore, while stating clearly that I for one thought his action illegal, found it necessary to tell him in direct terms that he was confusing two matters. One was the question of his power; the other was the question of the character and circumstances of its exercise. What he had actually done was to repudiate a concession which had 12 years to run. When he said ' How could anybody complain about that if it was within our power?",  my reply, on behalf of the Committee, was that if his attitude was that merely because it was within his legal  power he could repudiate a contract binding upon him, this in one blow destroyed the moral confidence that the world had in Egypt's contractual word. 
His retort was that the concession would have expired in 12 years time and that no doubt an 'uproar' would then have occurred. Our reply to this was that if he had not interfered with the concession the Company itself would no doubt have soon begun negotiations for a further concession; and if he had then said that he would not contemplate such a thing the user nations would have begun negotiations with him for some future organisation for the canal. But those negotiations would have been conducted in an atmosphere which was not one of crisis, and sensible and fair conclusions might well have been arrived at without the development of heated views on ' sovereignty' and ' collective colonialism'. 
The difference that emerged between legal validity and the justice and morality of the action taken is vital and cannot be sensibly overlooked in our consideration of this most vexing problem. 
When our proposals were rejected, a new proposal was made for the formation of a ' Canal Users' Association designed to protect the interests of the nations affected.  The nature and form of that Association, to which I will return later, have been under discussion in the second London Conference'. Is this inconsistent with the United Nations' Charter? I think not, In fact, the plan for a Users' Association having been worked out and adopted; the matter is now going to the United Nations, for we hope, expeditious treatment. 
Referring this matter to the United Nations has, to some, and very naturally, seemed the obvious course from the beginning. This point of view ignores three elements of great significance. 
One is that the Conferences and international discussions which have already occurred have at least disclosed and clarified the issues, so that an informed Security Council can deliberate with speed, 
The second is that the rules which tend to inhibit action by the Security Council ( except in the case of Korea when the Soviet Union was absent) rendered it necessary for the nations most concerned to do all they could to produce a speedy but proper settlement by direct negotiation. 
The third is that a confiscation of the Canal, achieved by force, made it both reasonable and necessary for the user nations to make it promptly clear that they were not prepared to allow their own economic sovereignties to be subordinated to the aggressive sovereignty of one nation. 
This they have done, at each of the London Conferences, the second of which has now constituted and defined the Suez Canal Users' Association by a document, the terms of which I ask leave to table. 
The scheme is not as comprehensive or as precise as one could have wished But, if sufficient shipping nations not only adhere, but pay their dues to  the new Association, the fruits which Colonel Nasser hoped for will be largely ungathered by him, and his attitude towards making the fair agreement we offered  him vastly improved. 
Before I conclude, I want to speak quite frankly about three other matters. 
One is the question of force. That question calls for a cool and clear answer. There has been a great variety of vocal opinion ranging between what I will call two extreme views. 
One view is that force should at once have been used to defeat a confiscation by force. This view is out of harmony with modern thinking at any rate, this side of the iron curtain. 
The other is that force can never be employed (except presumably in self-defence) except by and pursuant to a decision of the United Nations Security Council. This I would regard as a suicidal
doctrine for, having regard to the existence of the veto, it would mean that no force could ever be exercised against any friend of the Soviet Union except with the approval of the Soviet Union. Which is absurd.  The public exponents of this view have been much heard during the weeks of the Canal negotiations. Their opinions have enjoyed great prominence in Egypt, and profoundly and obviously influenced the current of our conferences with Colonel Nasser in Cairo. They ended by convincing the Egyptian Government (which was quite willing to be convinced) that there was no danger in rejecting our proposals,-that, force being absolutely out, Egypt could afford to sit back agree to nothing, carry off the spoils of victory and further build up its prestige. 
Each of these extreme views must. I believe, be rejected.
The truth is that, in a world not based on academic principles a world deeply affected by enlightened self-interest and the instinct of survival, but nevertheless a world struggling to make an organisation for peace effective, force (except for self-defence) is never to be the first resort, but the right to employ it cannot be completely abandoned or made subject to impossible conditions. 
Let me say, quite plainly, that the whole lively and evolving history of the British Empire and the British Commonwealth of Nations was not the product of any theory.  It has been from first to
last, a practical matter, an inductive process, like the slow-creation of the Common Law and of all the great instruments of self-government. It would be a sad day if it allowed itself to be theorised out of existence. We need not get into a timid state of mind in which the very mention of the word 'force' becomes forbidden, There is no community of nations which can say, with a clearer conscience, that it has set a great 'twentieth century example of using force only when forced into it, and then not for conquest but for resistance to aggression: 
But does this mean that we are to be helpless in the presence of an accomplished threat to our industrial and economic future? I believe not, is our task to ' patch-up' peace and no more? Surely
our task is not merely to prevent hostilities but to build up a firm order of law and decency, in which 'smash and grab' tactics do not pay. We must avoid the use of force if we can. But we should not, by theoretical reasoning in advance of the facts and circumstances, contract ourselves out of its use whatever those facts and circumstances may be. We are to seek peace at all times, but we are not bound to carry that search so far that we stand helpless before unlawful actions which, if allowed to go unchecked, can finally dissipate our own strength and deprive the world of that power and authority, both moral and physical, which reside in the free nations, and are still vital to the free world and the human interests which the free world protects. 
What, then, should be our programme of action in relation to the Suez Canal, that great international waterway, up to now non-political, which is at present the economic life-line of hundreds of millions of people, North, South, East and West of it? 
First, negotiation for a peaceful settlement by means of honourable agreement. So far, we have tried this without success.  The failure let me repeat and emphasise has not been due to any unfairness or liberality on our side, but to a dictatorial intransigence on the other. 
Should we continue to negotiate on a watered-down basis, in the spirit which says that any agreement is better than none? I cannot imagine anything more calculated to strengthen Colonel Nasser's  hand, or weaken our own, 
Second the putting on of pressure by co-operative effort on the part of the User Nations. 
Colonel Nasser must be brought to understand that his course of action is unprofitable to his country and his people, and that he is abandoning the substance for the shadow. This is one of the great merits of the Users' Association now established by the second London Conference.  The more Canal revenue that is diverted from the Egyptian Government, the less will the Egyptian people believe that it pays to repudiate, 
Third, should the United Nations, by reason of the veto, prove unable to direct any active course of positive action, we may find ourselves confronted by a choice which we cannot avoid making, I state the choice in stark terms :
(a) We can organise a full-blooded programme of economic sanctions against Egypt, or 
(b) We can use force to restore international control of the Canal, or 
(c) We can have further negotiation, provided we do not abandon vital principles, or 
(d)  We can ' call it a day', leave Egypt in command of the Canal, and resign ourselves to the total
collapse of our position and interests in the Middle East,  with all the implications for the economic strength and industrial prosperity of nations whose well-being is vital to ours. 
This is, I believe, a realistic analysis of the position. 
It has been, for me, an astonishing experience to find that there are people who reject force out of hand, reject economic action on the ground that it is provocative, and so, being opposed to action
of either kind, are prepared to accept the new tyranny, with regret perhaps, but without resistance. Such an attitude is so inconsistent with the vigorous tradition of our race that I cannot believe it commands any genuine and informed public support. 
The second matter concerns the attitude and activities of the Soviet Union. My observations in London and since have convinced me that: 
(a) The Soviet Union is not looking for a world war, but is willing to stir up and foment trouble in those regions where the strength of the Western democracies can be materially weakened 
(b) It is anxious to increase its influence in Egypt, by the provision of arms and the development of economic ties: How to reconcile this with Egypt's sovereignty is a problem it will leave to Colonel Nasser. 
(c) It has been in constant and persuasive touch with Colonel Nasser during the recent negotiations. It is of great significance that, at the first London Conference, Mr. Shepilov openly declared the argument for Egypt, in terms which I was later to hear used, word for word, by Colonel Nasser himself, at Cairo. 
The third matter concerns the impact of the Suez Canal confiscation on Australia and on the great new nations of South and South-East Asia whose interests we respect and have done something to help. 
So far as Australia is concerned, I need hardly say that an open Canal is essential to British prosperity, and that a closed Canal could mean mass unemployment in Great Britain, a financial collapse there, a grievous blow at the central power of our Commonwealth, and the crippling of our greatest market and our greatest supplier. 
We are not alone in this. The nations and peoples of South-East Asia, being nearer to Suez than we are, are even more dependent on it than we are. Further even than this, Asia contains great populations which need the developmental assistance of foreign capital and friendly co-operation. Colonel Nasser's policy of repudiation in the name of sovereignty is not calculated to help the very countries whose admiration and support he is now claiming. Indeed, it is ironical that, in the guise of their leader, he is now taking steps to deprive some of the great Middle East powers of the natural and established market for the product of their oil wells.
A final note of warning is necessary. In or out of the United Nations, there are great principles and vital interests at stake. A matter of this kind is not disposed of by being sent to the Security Council or under present procedures, to the General Assembly. Nothing could suit the Egyptian dictator better than for the free world to lose interest, or a sense of crisis and urgency. There must be both speed and realism. We must also look ahead, keep our sense of direction, and maintain our impetus. 
Should the United Nations machinery fail to produce an early settlement, are we then to wash our hands of the whole matter, saying ' Well, it is too bad but we can do nothing. Colonel Nasser must be left with his spoils; retreat in the Middle East must go on" I decline to believe it. The principle of internationally assured non-political control of the Suez Canal is vital. It cannot be watered down without being washed away. To abandon it would be suicidal. 
Therefore, if the United Nations once more frustrated by Soviet action proves ineffective if it cannot impose economic sanctions or direct any other course of effective action, we, the user nations, must in the absence of willing and proper negotiation be ready to impose sanctions ourselves. For the central and unforgettable fact in all this unhappy business is that unless Egypt's action is frustrated and the international status of the Canal assured, a score of nations great and small, will have put their fortunes into pawn.  We are, indeed, at one of the cross-roads of modern history. We will take the wrong turning at our peril.


The SITUATION in EGYPT
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME  MINISTER
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
AT 8PM  THURSDAY, 1st NOVEMBER, 1956.
THE SITUATION IN EGYPT
The facts in relation to the Middle East are not as yet completely clear though events are obviously developing very rapidly.
The movement of Israeli troops across the Egyptian frontier occurred only a few days ago, but it was preceded by events going back over some year so 12 days ago the Israeli Prime Minister made a speech in which he discussed the charges made against Israel of conducting forays across her frontiers, He countered this by saying that Israel had a perfect right to self-defence to seek redress for attacks made inside her own frontiers, He complained that the United Nations Authorities had shown a tendency to transform the armistice agreements into unilateral obligations by Israel to the United Nations and ignore breaches of them by the Arab States. He said that the helplessness of the United Nations regarding Israel's passage through the Suez Canal had been obvious for years There can be little doubt that around the Israeli frontiers the Faults have by no means been all on one side.
The plain fact is that Israel exists in a state of international tension. Egypt still claimed months ago to be technically at war with Israel and has, in fact throughout used that as the justification for her exclusion of Israeli ships from the Canal.
Following upon his recent coup in respect of the Suez Canal, the Egyptian President has increasingly felt that he can defy the great and interested nations,
It is well known that he has established military contacts with Syria and has been actively developing his own position by propaganda in the states east of Jordan.
It is not my intention at the present time to examine whether the Israeli invasion of Egypt falls within either the letter or the spirit of the relevant agreements. But it seems to be only just to point out that the geographical and political situation of Israel is such as to give the Israeli people the greatest feeling of apprehension.
However, when the invasion occurred, Egypt, as was to be expected, put in train military measures to repel it, within a relatively few hours it therefore became clear that, if the invasion were resolutely pursued and resolutely resisted, there would, almost inevitably, be fighting over and around the Suez Canal with quite probably a complete interruption of traffic, loss of ships and lives, and a high degree of danger that the Canal itself might be effectively closed for a long timeø In this state of affairs, the matter was promptly taken to the Security Council what happened there is fairly well known but I will briefly recall it.
When it first became known to us that the Security Council was meeting urgently, our instructions to our representative on the Council, Dr Walker, were that before any resolution was passed the Council should satisfy itself about the facts which, at that time, were in Canberra completely obscure; we pointed out to him that judgment by the Security Council should not be too hasty and should follow a quick ascertainment of the facts rather than precede it. The Council had placed before it by the representative of the United States a resolution in the following terms.
"Security Council noting that the armed forces of Israel have penetrated deeply into Egyptian Territory in violation of the Armistice Agreement between Egypt and Israel, expressing its
Grave concern at this violation of Armistice Agreement."
 (1) Calls upon Israel and Egypt immediately to cease fire.
(2) Calls upon Israel immediately to withdraw its armed forces behind established Armistice lines.
(3) Calls upon all members, to refrain from use of force or threat of force in the area in any manner inconsistent with the purposes of tile United Nations, to assist the United Nations in ensuring integrity of Armistice Agreements, to refrain from giving any military, economic or financial assistance to Israel so long as it has not Complied with this resolution.
(4) Requests tile Secretary General to keep the Security Council informed in compliance with this resolution and to make whatever recommendations he deems appropriate for the maintenance of international peace and security in the area by implementation of This and prior resolution.
It will be seen that this resolution called upon Israel to withdraw its armed forces behind certain Armistice lines, called upon all members to refrain from the use of force or threat of force, and to refrain from giving any military, economic or financial assistance to Israel so long as it had not complied with the resolution.
Great Britain and France voted against this resolution being plainly of opinion that it was aimed at imposing disabilities upon Israel, and Israel only. The Australian representative abstained from voting for, by the time the terms of the resolution reached us, it was too late to acid to the instructions already given and, in any event, the investigation of the facts asked for by Dr Walker had not occurred. His abstention was, therefore, the sensible and proper course. Subsequently the Soviet Union proposed a resolution in the following terms.
"Security Council noting that the armed forces of Israel have penetrated deeply in to Egyptian Territory in violation of the Armistice Agreement between Egypt and Israel, expressing its grave concern at this violation of Armistice Agreement.
(1) Calls upon Egypt and Israel immediately to Cease fire,
(2) Calls upon Israel immediately to withdraw its armed forces behind established Armisticelines.
(3) Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security Council informed in compliance with this resolution and to make whatever recommendations he deems appropriate for the maintenance of international peace and security in the area by implementation of this and prior resolution.
This was voted for by Dr.W1alker, since it appeared to embody acceptable general principles but it was, having regard to the developments which were then occurring, voted against by Great Britain and France with the United States abstaining.
The disability attending the Security Council's deliberations is not so much that there were Vetoes since these are to be expected in cases where international tension is high and where the permanent members do not find themselves all on one side. But it is, in our opinion a great misfortune that differences of view should have occurred between Great Britain and France on the one hand and the United States on the other. Such differences, which proceed from honest divergences upon matters of judgment, can easily be fanned into bitterness by intemperate statements by observers in both Continents.
We have, in these circumstances, heard with pleasure the statement made this morning by President Eisenhower, True, in that statement he has clearly maintained the American view that force in the Middle East is both unwise and improper. But he went on to say that what he had said on that point was in no way to minimise American friendship for Great Britain and France, and American determination to maintain that friendship. He added, no doubt with lively recollection of the events in August and-September, that Britain and France have been subject to repeated provocation.
To return to the narrative, we were early yesterday morning advised from our Acting High Commissioner in London that the United Kingdom had in mind calling upon both Israel and Egypt to cease fighting and to withdraw their forces from the neighbourhood of the Canal. At 1 pm. yesterday, we were advised that the matter was under most urgent consideration by the United Kingdom Cabinet at 1.30, we learned that Great Britain and France had delivered what was in effect an ultimatum to both Egypt and Israel calling for an answer within 12 hours.
The terms of that ultimatum required that both sides should stop all fighting immediately and Withdraw their forces to a distance of ten miles from the Suez Canal, Furthermore, in order to separate the belligerents and guarantee freedom of transit through the Canal, the Egyptian Government was asked to agree that Anglo French forces should move temporarily into Key positions at Port Said, Ismailia and Suez.
Immediately thereafter, we learned that Egypt had rejected the ultimatum, though Israel was prepared to act upon it if Egypt was also agreeable. It is, as yet, not clear what military operations have been instituted by Great Britain and France but the House will be informed of any developments.
.I now proceed to say something about two questions which will present themselves to the minds of Honourable Members in relation to the actions of Great Britain and France.
First is the United Kingdom at fault in not having engaged in a pre-consultation with the other British Commonwealth countries? Our answer to this question is that she was not at fault at all. The circumstances were those of great emergency. Hostile armed forces were rapidly approaching each other, and extensive combat was imminent. As I have said, in that combat vital interests in the passage of the Canal were quite likely to suffer the most serious damage. The Canal is an international waterway with a guaranteed freedom of passage for the ships of all nations; but that guarantee would cease to have much value if the Canal itself were put out of action by becoming part of a theatre of active war. There was literally no time to be lost if any action was to be taken to keep the combatants out of the Canal area, and afford it proper protection.
Effective consultation (and I say effective" because a mere "form of consultation" would have been quite useless) would plainly have occupied considerable time and the urgent position might have fallen into irretrievable disaster. In our opinion, therefore, Great Britain, whose Canal and other Middle East economic interests are so vast, was correct in proceeding upon her own judgment and accepting her own responsibility. We are not living in an academic world. The normal processes of consultation should always be followed wherever possible but there are instances like the present one in which events move too fast for normal processes 
The second great question that arises is as to the propriety of the action taken by Great Britain and France. Upon this point the Government of Australia believes that the action was proper It had already been demonstrated, in the case of the Israeli ships, that a resolution passed by the Security Council and condemning Egypt can be set at nought in the absence of strong executive action. Israel has also ignored some United Nations views. It was quite clear that the procedures of the Security Council were such that even assuming that some resolution could be carried, the Canal would have been involved in war long before any United Nations' action could become effective. Great Britain and France, therefore, decided that they would, so to speak, "hold the pass". Their purpose, as they plainly state, was to have the Israeli and Egyptian forces withdrawn from the Canal for a distance of 10 miles on either side so that the operation of the Canal would not be menaced. Their action, so considered, was a police action taken in a state of great emergency and was in fact calculated to keep the combatants apart and to enable counsels of moderation thereafter to prevail.
We see nothing sinister in all this. On the contrary, it seems to us to be quite realistic and to pay due regard to the moving and inexorable facts of life.
As I have said, it is a great misfortune that there should have arisen public differences between those great democracies whose friendly co-operation is so vital to us all and any breach between whom can give satisfaction only to the Communist powers in their continuing "cold" war.
I have myself urged upon British and American leaders that consultations should speedily occur on a high level, in order to reconcile any differences of opinion and produce a result satisfactory to all. I have a profound respect for the efforts made by both President Eisenhower and Mr. Dulles to keep the peace of the world. Mr. Dulles has, in particular, been the subject, in my opinion, of a great deal of hostile but uninformed criticism. But I would like to urge with all humility that our friends in America should understand the pressure of events upon both Great Britain and France, and the true nature of the action taken by them; action which, if both resolute and prompt, may well be the only means now existing for preventing a general conflagration in the Middle East.
I could perhaps sum this aspect of the matter up by saying that the Anglo-French action represents an emergency measure by two of the great democratic powers.
Their object is not to make war but to prevent war by separating to belligerents.
They are not seeking territorial advantage or subjugation of peoples but are aiming to assure to the whole world the treaty rights of continued free access to the international waterway by protecting its installations, the ships that use them, and the people who travel in those ships.
They are not seeking to impose an arbitrary settlement in the Egypt-Israel dispute but to discharge a limited function which will enable a settlement to be reached.
They have made it clear that they are not seeking to maintain forces permanently in Egypt but will withdraw them as soon as the immediate purpose has been achieved.
They are not seeking to usurp the right of the Security Council to attempt to settle the Egypt-Israel dispute but are determined to ensure that when choosing a method of settlement the Security Council will not have to face the fact of the prior destruction or dislocation of the Suez Canal.
Above all there is, as I believe, no desire to involve or confuse a settlement of the dispute about the operation of the Suez Canal with other Middle East disputes, but to prevent that involvement.
The practical effect of allowing hostilities between Egypt and Israel to develop over the Canal would be that, in future, efforts to obtain agreement on the vitally important Suez Canal question would be disastrously affected by the efforts of the present belligerents to use their military position as a factor in the settlement of a problem in which these considerations would be entirely out of place.
I remind the House that all the negotiations with Egypt about the Canal have been designed to produce a peaceful settlement giving effective guarantees of a non-political administration of the Canal. It would be tragic if this great matter became obscured.
I advise the House, if I may, against hasty judgments on the facts. Notwithstanding the elaborate provisions made by the Security Council for observers, there has as yet been no report from these observers; and there is still much room for doubt as to the precise nature of aggression and the identity of the people responsible.
In this statement, I am indicating the views of the Australian Government. We have not been asked to make any commitments ourselves nor have we made any. But I hope and believe that Australia will never be unwilling to offer its opinion upon a matter which so vitally concerns the United Kingdom and all those countries of the British Commonwealth to whom the Suez Canal is of vital economic importance.
May I remind the House that it is still open to Egypt, as Sir Anthony Eden has made clear to end the present military operations by accepting the proposition that, like Israel, it should withdraw its troops for 10 miles from the Canal so that great international interests will not be subordinated to what might, under other circumstances and in another place, be regarded as a purely local dispute.


ADDRESS OF WELCOME BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES,&nbsp;PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA,&nbsp;AND PRESIDENT OF THE AUSTRALIAN&nbsp;OLYMPIC FEDERATION.
By the choice of those who have organised this programme, I am the first speaker. In reality I ought to be last. For the other two speakers are His Excellency the Governor of Victoria and Mr. Avery Brundidge, the President of the International&nbsp;Olympic Committee.
His Excellency the Governor, in spite of his heavy social and representational duties, always looks to me as if he could still make a century at cricket or run a smart quarter mile on the cinders.
Mr. Brundage is not without his critics, as I occasionally gather in the press. In this respect he and I are brothers. But he has the distinction, which no critic can take away from him or would wish to take away from him, of having been a leading custodian of the international amateur spirit for a long, long time.
We have in fact become so accustomed to sporting contests that we occasionally forget that there are some to whom such Contests are a matter of business, and nothing more. I do not speak about this in a superior way, or with reproof, for under modern circumstances public entertainment cannot always be expected to be the free gift of the entertainer. But in common with all of you, I retain a special place in my affections for amateur sports, played or competed in for sheer love of what goes on.
Amateur athletics of all kinds remain, in my opinion, remarkable in this respect.
How we are all looking forward to these Games! So long as I can remember, records have been broken and wise men have promptly said: "This record will stand. Human speed or strength or skill cannot reasonably go beyond this point." Yet, before long, the new record is itself broken. Speed increases. Runners develop new techniques. By long practice, they have, like myself, learned to breathe and to relax. Swimmers pass through the water as if jet propelled. High jumpers leap from the ground so high that I would not be surprised to be told by some scientific person that the higher they go the higher they will go, since the force of gravity will be reduced, and that, with some species of muscular rocket propulsion, they may yet pass out of our sight and land somewhere else in the world only in time to discover that their new record has already been broken.
I venture to say there will be few vacant seats at these Games. For the first time in the history of Australia, we will be seeing athletes from all over the world. I believe, and know that someday there will be old men, now young, who, sitting by their firesides, will recapture the glorious beauty and rhythm of the runners and the skill of all those who will engage in these world contests. I have never been able to understand the minds of those who profess to believe that the perfect world will be one in which there will be no competition or contest; a world in which I suppose some Government will guarantee us all a four minute mile or a seven-foot leap.
The truth is, of course, that it is out of rivalry and generous emulation that the greatest development of our powers emerges. The history of the 20th Century abundantly attests that rivalry, ill-founded and basely considered, can breed envy and malice and hatred and charitableness. But an honest rivalry, a meeting on the merits, the matching of self-discipline against self-discipline, these are the salt of life. To those who see in these athletic contests a mere futile absurdity, I would say on behalf of every Australian lover of sport and contest:
"You are wrong. These things are, I repeat, of the salt of life." And as our English Bible says:
"If the salt hath lost its savour, wherewithal shall ye be salted”
Some day some philosopher will analyse the contribution which athletic contest makes to the good life and the full man. If he does he will find that he is not engaged in an academic exercise. He will, on the contrary, find that he is coming very close to the springs of human action. He will remind himself that it is significant that the Olympic Games derive from ancient Greece, where the pure and exacting cultivation of the mind went hand in hand with athletic prowess and physical discipline. Sun and shadow, rain and drought, snow and summer, storm and calm, all make their contribution to the bursting physical life of the world 'and to the production in the human mind
Of that sense of proportion which is the very definition of sanity, encourages human understanding and widens the boundaries of human nature.
Reference to boundaries brings me to another great feature of these Games. They have attracted many visitors from other lands and have, therefore, stimulated an interest in Australia, its economic growth, its people and its national future.
We are delighted that this should be so. We have a small but rapidly growing population inhabiting a great island continent. We are aware of our responsibilities. We still believe that the spirit of our pioneers is not dead. But there can be no doubt in these days that the growth of any nation can be vastly and rapidly stimulated by the friendly sentiment and practical interest of other people. Though Australia has taken a remarkable part in two world wars, it is true to say that we are by nature a peace-loving community made up of people who would sooner see the competition of peace than the grim competition of war. We hope that all our visitors will like us,
and will like our country, and will like our ways. I have in my own time been a great traveller. I have travelled long enough and far enough to discover that there is something attractive in ‘other lands and that, if we could but get to know each other
better, many of our problems would at once be seen to be artificial and would flutter away in the first wind of friendship.
To all our visitors of all nations I bid welcome, as President of the Australian Olympic Federation, and on behalf of the Government and people of Australia.
I congratulate the city of Melbourne on having secured the right to stage these Games. I congratulate all those who have laboured through every difficulty to bring them to fruition. I congratulate the Government of the State of Victoria on having interested itself with such success in this matter. I might even, if I were somebody else, congratulate the Commonwealth Government on having violated all its financial principles by coming to the financial party in a big way. But if I stop there it would be not enough. The truth is that we in our various fashions and none more than the great champions of amateur athletics in this country have busied ourselves with the mechanics of organisation and of preparation. But, when it comes to the point, the people who will make these Games and who will make them forever memorable in Australian history are the men and women who, after months and sometimes years of rigorous self-discipline, have qualified themselves for the contests which are the living reality of the Olympic Games.
&nbsp;
IADDRESS IN REPLY, BY MR. AVERY BRUNDAGE, PRESIDENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC FEDERATION.
About to open the Games which celebrate the 16th Olympiad of the modern cycle, we are here in Melbourne, Australia, almost as far as possible away from Olympia, the site of the Original Games. We are in another hemisphere and on another continent.
That in itself is a most significant thing, indicating as it does how far the Olympic Movement has travelled in the last sixty years. We are indebted to the late Sir Raymond Connelly, then Lord Mayor of Melbourne, Sir Harold Luxton, and theChairman of the then Invitation Committee, Mr. R. J. McPherson, and the others on the small committee that conceived this idea of staging the Games in the Antipodes and travelled half-way around the world six years ago to convince the International Olympic Committee, which was meeting in Rome, that it could be done.
We are indebted also to those who made this dream, which many in those days thought it was, a reality -the authorities of the City of Melbourne, the State of Victoria, and the Federal Government of Australia, who provided the funds; the Organising Committee headed by the Honourable S. Kent Hughes; the Australian Olympic Federation; and last but not least, the two Australian members of the International Olympic Committee, Messrs. Hugh Weir and Lewis Luxton, who have furnished able support at all times and especially when it was needed most. It was a huge task to organise this vast and complicated enterprise and it required the concerted efforts of all for success. It is not to be denied that we were worried and had our doubts at times, until we discovered that Australians are different -that while they do insist on doing things their own peculiar way, when they say a thing will be done they meanit. When I was here eighteen months ago, the last man I talked with was the Prime Minister, the Right Honourable R. G. Menzies, who assured me that this was the case. After that, I stopped worrying, since the Prime Minister is a man who inspires confidence. The proof is here to-day and the Games, I am sure, will create new records not only on the track and on the field but also in international friendship and understanding.
Fifteen Olympiads have passed since the Baron de Coubertin, almost single-handed at times, as a result of strenuous personal efforts, finally overcame the doubts and hesitancy of a sceptical world and succeeded in reviving the Olympic Games after a lapse of 1500 years. No other enterprise created by man has ever lasted so long. It was only after Greece was conquered by the Romans, in a new and different era, that the Games were abolished. The Olympic Movement is now three score years of age and has reached maturity. Let us review the amazing accomplishments in these last sixty years.
The ancient Games were confined to Greeks, one kind of people who thought and acted more or less alike. Others were said to be barbarians and not competent to participate. De Coubertin's idea was not to confine the modern Games to any one country or even to any one race. They were to be open to the youth of the world regardless of colour, creed, or political convictions. Owing to differences in language, in economic status, and in social development, many considered this an impossible programme, but the Olympic Movement has now been embraced by all civilised nations. In those first Games of the Modern Cycle there were but a handful of participants, mostly European. Aside from the United States, which sent a small team, hastily assembled, there were no non-Europeans except Australians no South Americans, no Africans, and no Asiatic. To-day we have representatives here from all continents and from every important country, all respecting and observing the same rules and regulations. No code, religious or civil, has ever had such universal acceptance.
Why is it that the Olympic Movement has been adopted by all the world? It is because its principles are so sound and so fundamental that they appeal to everyone, and this is the hope of the world to-day, when it is so seriously divided in other fields, that people of more than eighty different countries do believe in fair play and good sportsmanship and do support enthusiastically such an idealistic enterprise.
It is true there has been criticism because, while in the "Golden Age" there was an Olympic truce and all warfare stopped during the period of the Games, after two thousand years of civilisation, we stop the Games and continue our wars. One of the objectives of the Games is to develop international&nbsp; goodwill. Alas, the Olympic Movement has no soldiers and no money. It, therefore, cannot stop warfare, but it can and does set a good example, and only when the politicians of the world adopt those principles of fair play and good sportsmanship which prevail on the fields of amateur sport will there no longer be necessity for wars.
Lest one consider this a futile gesture because there are no guns and no dollars, one should remember that right here in Melbourne are the representatives of countries that have no diplomatic connection, mingling on the fields of sport, where Olympic rules are followed and respected by all. And further to demonstrate the great power of this wonderful Olympic idea, remember that at Cortina d'Ampezzo during the VII Olympic Winter Games, there was one German team composed of competitors from both East and West Germany, all with the same uniform, the same leaders, and the same flag. This will also be the case here in Melbourne, thanks to Dr. Karl von Halt,President of the West German Olympic Committee, and to President Heinz Schobel, of the East German Olympic Committee, who handled the delicate negotiations. Here is a most conspicuous example of Olympic power; the answer to a problem that has baffled the Chancellories of the world.
Earlier this year, I had the pleasure, at the invitation of Prince Gholam Reza Pahlavi, International Olympic Committee member for Iran, to visit that country during their annual celebration of Olympic Week. At that time I visited Isfahan and saw the impressive old Persian polo field which is now the main square in that city. When that field was used, sport was only for kings, princes, and the nobility. For the rest of humanity, the struggle for existence was a full-time job. To-day, conditions have changed and sport is for everyone. For one who participates in the Olympic Games, thousands try. It is most important, therefore, that there is a clear understanding that sport must be amateur or it is not sport at all, it is a business -a branch of the entertainment business. There is nothing wrong -with that, of course, it can be as honourable as any business, but if sport is to develop all its social, moral, ethical and educational values, it must be practised for its own sake as a vocation and not as a career. There are things more valuable than money things impossible to purchase and one such thing is an Olympic medal.
It was not just to establish champions and to break records that de Coubertin revived the Games. He had in mind, it's true, both the physical benefits and the good health that follow programmes of physical training and competitive sport. His idea, however, was far broader, because it encompassed all the other values, social, ethical, aesthetic, moral and educational, that are perhaps even more important. These values, it is true, have sometimes been overlooked. Originally, in the ancient Games, there was but one athletic event. The Games were primarily a religious festival to pay homage to the gods. It was the fine arts that were emphasised; there were odes to be composed, epics to be recited, dramas to be performed, sculpture to be viewed, music to be heard. Last of all, there was the single race in the stadium, in which grace and beauty were as much esteemed as speed and strength. All the participants were eager Lo do their very best to show their gods that they appreciated their blessings, not for any material reward, but for the joy of achievement, for the praise and applause of their peers, and for the satisfaction of accomplishment. There were no prizes, no awards, save a crown of wild olive the glory of victory was enough.
This amateur conception was something new -it belonged to the so-called "Golden Age" when civilization blossomed and flowered as never before. Alas, the Games became commercialised, excesses appeared, denounced by the scholars and philosophers of that day and age who cried out against the subsidization and proselyting of competitors, the over-emphasis and the other abuses; the "Golden Age" came to an end and the glory of Greece faded.
Baron de Coubertin had before him the history of the ancient Games, and when they were revived, he sought to surround them with safeguards to prevent the same fate. "I did not revive the Games for the journalists, the cinema, or the counting house," he said. He wanted them to be like the original Games of the Golden Age, an offering of their best efforts by contestants, officials and organisers, dedicated to the Olympic Movement, without thought of reward. No one is permitted to make a profit from the Olympic Games. They require sacrifice on the part of all, and it is an amazing thing that they have grown and prospered in these materialistic times. As a matter of fact, the Olympic Games could never exist as a commercial enterprise the costs are far too great. They must remain amateur with all participants, both athletes and officials, contributing their services, or they are finished, for there is not enough return to pay them. The public has supported the Games because they are a hallowed event, an idealistic enterprise devoted to the betterment of humanity and a more peaceful world. The prestige of the Olympic Movement and the respect in which it is held are due to universal approval of its basic philosophy.
The International Olympic Committee has striven to keep the Games dignified, pure, clean and honest, as designed by their wise and far-seeing renovator. They must not become a battleground for national ascendancy, a money-making apparatus for participants and officials, or a circus or carnival to groom participants for a professional career to line the pockets of promoters.
We are happy to be here in Australia to witness the demonstration of Olympic ideas on another continent. Australia, one of the few countries that heeded the call of Baron de Coubertin in 1896, has participated in every Games since. This early devotion to the cause, and continued loyalty, despite the huge cost in both time and money, was one of the reasons for accepting Melbourne's invitation to stage the Games. We are now assured that they will be a great success. We have received a warm&nbsp;welcome and we thank you again for all you have done.
&nbsp;
ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY, GENERAL SIR DALLAS BROOKS, K.C.M.G., K.St.J., GOVERNOR OF VICTORIA, IN DECLARING THE CONGRESS OPEN.
The Olympic Games are, of course, indissolubly linked with the glories of the civilization of Greece, the traditions of which have been the foundation stone on which the western world has been built.
From ancient Olympia to modern Melbourne is a far cry both in time and space. Australia is twelve thousand miles from Europe, has a history of only a century and a half, and a population less than that of London spread over a huge continent. Its resources are inevitably somewhat strained by the problems of rapid development. Why then should the Games come here? The answer is that they have been well earned. No other country has been keener in supporting the Olympic ideal since 1896 we have sent a team to every contest, and the record of our athletes challenges attention. In 1952, for example, Australia won six gold medals, two silver and three bronze. In the modern history of the Games, Australia has secured a total of over fifty awards no mean feat for a small population.
Melbourne is the host city for the Games. I hope you will pardon our pride in the fact that, within the British Commonwealth, London is the only other city in which the Games have been held. But Melbourne alone could not do the task. The good name of Victoria, and indeed the whole of Australia, is also at stake. Without the willing co-operation of the Commonwealth and the keen help of the President of the Australian Olympic Federation, the Right Honourable R. G. Menzies, our task would have been impossible.
We acknowledge the zealous co-operation we have received from the citizens of Melbourne, the Government. and people of Victoria and the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia.
We accept proudly our great responsibility as hosts to the world. We have worked hard in preparation and have studied the rules and conventions that govern procedure so that the Games may proceed with technical precision. We give to our guests warm greetings,- coupled with the hope that they will find comfort and happiness in the arrangements made for their recept ion.
We welcome the Games, because we love sport in all its forms. We are (so we believe, and we trust that you will find it so) a friendly people and we delight to entertain visitors. just because we are a young country, we appreciate the significance of the Games with the greater intensity. We are frankly proud of the civilization which we have built in a physical environment that is not always friendly, and we grasp the opportunity to show to you the Australian way of life. This goes far beyond an interest in athletic contests. We are building a civilization based on freedom from want, on friendliness and on equality. No other country presents more dazzling opportunities for the advancement of the young, from whatever economic class they may come. But, material comfort and geniality of spirit are not the limit of our desires. We are proud of our schools and universities and the recognition which they are now receiving from the world. Our artists and writers have won their places in the hall of fame, and the Olympic Fine Art Festival, with its wide range, will give you an introduction to this aspect of Australian life.
The National Gallery will provide a history of Australian Art, our new Wilson Hall at the University, an exhibition of Architecture and Sculpture, and the Royal Melbourne Technical College a display of ceramics and industrial design. The Festival will also comprise opera, symphony concerts and drama. Whatever your tastes, we are sure that you will find much to interest you.
Since the end of the war, we have accepted migrants in increasing numbers, and they are now making a real con- tribution to our cultural and industrial life. I hope that our visitors from overseas will recognise the enormous possibilities in this country of future economic development. There are glittering possibilities and tremendous rewards for those who are prepared to be enterprising and to give of their labours to the full. Australia is merely on the fringe of its development. We are deeply conscious that there is much to be done on every hand and that we are too small a population to undertake the whole task successfully. We, therefore, welcome those citizens of other lands, who are able to do so, and who may wish to make their homes in our midst. Thus they can share with us the trials and tribulations, and also the happiness and sense of achievement, that come from living in a country at its most vital period of development.
I hope that all our visitors will retain happy memories of their stay in our midst. I hope, too, that you will have time to see something of the grandeur of our countryside, as well as the bustle of our cities. Australia provides a wide range of interests as a tourist resort. There is a great diversity of climate ranging from the sub-tropical north to the snows of Mount Kosciusko. Almost every form of sport is available, whether for the expert who likes to play huge fish, the swimmer who loves the surf ski,or those who like mountaineering. For the hardy explorer there is much that has hardly been touched. You may thus easily enjoy the sport or the climate which you wish, and if you choose Melbourne, you frequently may have every kind of climate&nbsp;within a single day!
I formally declare open this, the Session of the Congress of the International Olympic Committee, the Sovereign Body of the Olympic Games.


AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE. MINISTERIAL STATEMENT4TH APRIL, 1957.
AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE.STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RIGHT HONORABLE R. G. MENZIES,TABLED IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON 4th APRIL, 1957.
I present to the House a review of overall Government policy on Australian defence. &nbsp;Following upon a close examination by the Defence Department, the Chiefs of Staff and relevant departments, Cabinet has given comprehensive attention, first, to the chances and nature of hostilities, second, to the strategic basis of Australian defence policy and, third, to the composition and equipment of the Australian defence forces.
A review of defence policy and of the defence forces is, of course, at any time, a matter of outstanding importance. But the present review has even greater significance because it is made against the background of great scientific and technological developments which have occurred in the recent past. These are of direct relevance to the consideration of risk, the nature of the forces and the equipment which those forces should have. This has led to a number of new decisions which set a new pattern for Australianforces and the most modern standard of equipment.
It is, for obvious reasons, not desirable that the whole of the military appreciations which have guided our analysis should be made public. But it is possible and desirable to say certain things. The first concerns the possibility of war. In earlier days one could speak of war or of peace without the need to add further words of description. Now it is necessary to speak of global ( or full scale war); limited war ( or armed conflict short of global war); and " cold war.
In considering the risks of global war, great weight is attached, not only here but in major countries abroad, to the deterrent effect of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons. There is, we believe, a clear realization on the part of all the Great Powers that a major war would be, almost inevitably, a thermo-nuclear one and would, almost certainly, lead to mutual destruction. Global war is, therefore, we think, unlikely to occuras the result of deliberate planning, but it could ' occur as a result of sudden passion or miscalculation.
&nbsp;A limited war is always possible, as we have seen in the Middle East and Indo-China, and such a war could break out with little or no warning. It may, in fact, be that the powerful persuasions which exist not to engage in global war may tend in the minds of the Communist Powers to increase the temptation to engage in limited wars, A limited war, of course, might grow into a global war, but this would depend oncircumstances, none of which can be calculated in advance.
On the whole, we believe that the Communist Powers, notably the Soviet Union and China, will continue to seize every opportunity to attain their aims by means of the cold war; that is, by infiltration, internal subversion and the propagation of revolutionary ideas, terrorism and other forms of lawlessness, sabotage and economic destruction. These are the methods by which the Communists pursue their objectives of extending the boundaries of communism and narrowing the boundaries of freedom.
But here again, the line between cold war and a limited war is one all too easily crossed by those who have aggressive intentions.
I say these things because we have reason to fear that when it is said that the common judgment is that the fear of global war is reduced there may be many people who are tempted to believe that we can forget about war altogether. This is, unhappily, not true.
&nbsp;In a global war, Australia's role would, having regard to our population, be significant but relatively subsidiary. Our chief task would be to co-operate with our Allies and to take our share on a basis consistent with our interest, our resources, and our sense of responsibility.
If a limited war broke out in South-East Asia and did not at once develop into a global war, it would, in all probability affect those countries in South-East Asia whose safety and independence are significant and perhaps vital for us. For example, any recrudescence of Communist aggression in South Viet Nam, in Laos or Cambodia, in Thailand or Malaya, would at once affect the safety and defence of Australia.
It is of immense importance to us that the free countries of South-East Asia should not fall one by one to Communist aggression. Security in the area must, therefore, be a collective concept. We believe that participation in regional arrangements for collective defence is the most effective method of securing the safety of Australia and the other countries who are parties to these arrangements. Such participation also provides the best means of co-ordinating our defence policy and planning with that of our Allies. We cannot stand alone; and therefore we stand in good company in SEATO, in ANZUS, and in ANZAM.
The association of the massive power of the United States with the regional arrangements I have referred to, and her assurances of support in the event of Communist aggression, are vital factors in maintaining security in this part of the world. United Kingdom forces, though substantial, are necessarily smaller than the United States forces in this region. Despite the re-organization of her forces which is now in hand, the United Kingdom will continue to maintain substantial and flexible striking power in this region.
At present SEATO is very important for the defence of South-East Asia. It has already achieved significant progress, as was demonstrated during the recent conference at Canberra. Putting aside for the present purpose the economic and political associations which are involved in the Treaty, it is good to know that on the military side much planning has been done, the stage having been reached when it has become necessary to set up a permanent military planning office at Bangkok, the head-quarters of the SEATOorganization. The ability of the armed forces of the SEATO nations to work together has been developed in a number of combined exercises, and contact between military advisers has been provided by means of annual schedules of combined training exercises. In addition to all this, our own defence co-operation continues effectively with the United Kingdom and New Zealand, and with the United States in the ANZUS Treaty.
I remind the House of these matters because I want to give emphasis to the belief of the Government and, I am sure, of the Australian people that we would not, except at our peril think of the defence of Australia as a purely local matter, confined within the Australian coastline. For if our coastline became the subject ofinvasion it could only be because our great friends had already been defeated. Even in what is called a limited war therefore, and in the less obvious aspects of the " 1cold war, it is an essential ingredient in Australian defence that we make and keep ourselves ready to co-operate with our allies. We cannot expect the defensive assistance of the great democratic powers unless we are ourselves prepared to take a proper part in the common defence. There is nothing new about this conception. Australia hasdemonstrated acceptance of it in two world wars already.
It may be thought by some that, with the advent of nuclear and thermo-nuclear weapons, conventional arms are becoming irrelevant. This is by no means true. The fact is, that nuclear potential is available so far anyway only to United States, the United Kingdom and Russia. How far nuclear weapons would be used by these countries either in attack or in defence in a limited war we cannot foresee. At any rate, for all other nations there will continue to be a requirement for conventional arms. Accordingly our present planning and preparations are proceeding on the basis of an operational contribution to allied strategy of highly trained men armed with the most modern conventional weapons and equipment. The emphasis is not any longer, so much on numbers as on mobility, equipment and fire power. This is not to say that man power is unimportant. It will still be necessary in the event of a great war to commit large forces to the struggle but in the upshot speed and the capacity to hit will determine victory.
It is obvious that defence policy and economic policy must run together. This at once brings up special considerations. In Australia the vast programme of national development and industrial expansion and migration currently puts rather more strain on national resources than it does in many other countries. To a large extent the Government has had to finance this development from revenue because loan raisings have fallen short of the total funds needed. These things are not without impact on the amount of theresources which we can devote to defence. But the Government has concluded that for the year 1957-5 8 the broad figure of the cost of the defence programme should be of the same order as that provided for defence during the present financial year, that is £_ 190,000,000.
This is a large sum but modern weapons are extremely costly and it would be useless to raise fighting forces without giving them the most modern weapons with which to fight. Large capital expenditures are necessary. Reach and development programmes which include the highly technical and highly skilled work which is being done in the field of testing at Woomera in conjunction with the United Kingdom are costly. However, the Government believes that the people of Australia will accept the fact that our nationaldefences must be maintained at an adequate level to enable us to play our proper part in the mutual security arrangements to which we adhere and, therefore, in our own defence. This brings me to the question of the composition of our forces. Before I proceed to describe our plans on this matter, I should make three points.
First, under both SEATO and ANZUS, it seems clear that in the event of war we will be fighting side by side with the United States. Particularly in the event of a global war, it would be manifestly difficult for the UnitedKingdom to maintain a line of supply to South-East Asia, though the United States undoubtedly could. Common sense dictates that under these circumstances, we should pay considerable attention to the logistic aspect of war, and standardise so far as we can with the Americans. Though this is a wholeheartedly British nation this is not a heresy. It merely recognizes the facts of war. It is based upon exactly the same reasoning as that upon which, I am sure, the United States would wish to see Great Britain, France, Germany and the other European NATO countries standardizing as among themselves their own weapons and techniques so as to eliminate the necessity for excessive stocks of spare parts or precarious technical reinforcements over the waters of the Atlantic.
It is for this reason that, as I will point out, we have decided both in aircraft, in artillery, and in small arms, to fit ourselves for close co-operation with the United States in the South-East Asian area.
&nbsp;Second, we have for some time been greatly disturbed by the fact that an undue proportion of our annual expenditure has been laid out upon the maintenance of existing forces, the bulk of who are only partially trained, while too small a proportion of our expenditure has been available for equipment. We have, quite frankly, disturbing deficiencies on the equipment side. Such, however, have been the immense social advantages of National Service Training that we have been reluctant to modify that great scheme. I say " 1modify because we have never thought of abandoning it! In addition to this. We have encountered some inevitable delays in getting into production of the FN Rifle and its related ammunition, while on the aircraft side, technical advances have been made so rapidly that it has been difficult to determine within any feasible financial limit how our re-equipment should proceed. This problem is not peculiar to Australia. It has been vexing the United Kingdom authorities for a long time. We have now concluded that we should reduce the proportion of our Defence Vote which goes to manpower and increase the proportion which goes to modern equipment.
Third, this problem is not solely a problem of money. A considerable proportion of our regular forces has been exclusively devoted to the basic training of the C. M. F. and of National Service trainees. This fact, while it has enabled us to give basic training to something like 180,000 men, has inevitably reduced the number of regular troops available for immediate use in the event of war. I will not need to tell honourable members that it needs more than a Government decision to expand the regular army. In these days of high competing wages and full employment, the number of recruits for the regular forces is limited. We certainly cannot afford to make an inadequate use of them.
Having made these observations, I pass to the important question of the composition of the forces we think it proper: to maintain to meet the possible threats. We cannot prepare for every eventuality, but a judicious balance of highly trained regular forces possessing mobility and power, and added': ate reserve forces capable of rapid expansion in time of emergency, can aid must ensure that we can meet our regional and local defence tasks.
&nbsp;I will, quite briefly, take the three Services in turn.
The Navy:
Our review has shown that the present structure and organization of our naval forces is sound having regard to their strategic role, and no major changes are proposed.
The function of the Navy in war will be to ensure the defence of sea communications, to act in a convoy where necessary for military forces, and to co-operate al ring lines already worked out with our Allies in general operations. We have for some time been conducting a programme of naval construction and alteration designed to produce craft of the appropriate kind. This programme is being accelerated. The Fleet Air Arm will continue to consist, operationally, of one aircraft carrier, one naval air station and afront line establishment of 40 aircraft in five squadrons but because of the availability of a second carrier " Sydney which has been used during recent years as a non-flying training ship, and of Sea Fury aircraft, it has been decided that this second carrier should be restored to a flying training role. This will permit aircraft now operating from the Naval Air Station at Nowra to be embarked from time to time. Naval constructionwill, as I have said, be speeded up to correct the present shortage of ships of the appropriate kind, and as a means of reducing overhead costs.
The strength of the Permanent Naval Forces will be maintained at an average figure of about 11,000 for the next three years.
The Army:
I have already explained that we are seeking in particular mobile well-equipped and readily available regular forces. Moves have already begun to organize a Brigade Group of over 4,000 as a cohesive battle formation trained to the highest pitch. This force will be equipped with the most modern weapons available. Special attention will be paid to mobility and the requirements of tropical warfare. The force will be additional to the infantry battalion group who will continue to serve in the Commonwealth Strategic Reservein Malaya, which has a great part to play in the Cold War.It may be appropriate to explain our proposals in relation to National Service Training. This scheme has given great benefits to our country in instilling ideals of personal discipline, loyalty and service. We introduced it, and we are very proud of its results. Largely as a result of its introduction, we have to-day a total ‘of over 180,000 men who have received basic training. But we are no longer able to count defence potential in terms of numbers of partly trained men. We have been forced to consider whether devotion ofthe same effort to the initial training of national servicemen would cost, in time, money, and manpower, a disproportionate amount as compared with what should be expended on quickly available defence forces.
We have, therefore, decided most reluctantly to reduce the size of the national serviceintake.
&nbsp;The Navy and the Air Force are both services which require the continuous engagement of men for service at home or abroad. They have not been able to secure much advantage as military organizations from national service training. We have, therefore, decided that in the case of the Navy and the Air Force, national service training will end.
In the case of the Army, the call-up will be on a selective basis, which will be subsequently announced, and will amount to 12,000 trainees annually. We do not propose any change in the present system of universal registration. All young men on reaching eighteen years of age will continue to have an obligation to register. The universal liability to serve remains, but the call-up will be limited to 12,000 each year. Selection will be made by ballot. This will not affect the present geographic and other types of deferment including the deferment of rural workers as at present. The new scheme will commence with the second call-up for this year which will begin in July. The total period of training will remain at 140 days, but in future this will be served in an initial period of 77 days continuous training, followed by three years in the Citizen Military Forces for an equivalent of 21 days' training each year. After completing their training, national servicetrainees will remain on the reserve for the balance of five years from the date of call-up as at present.
&nbsp;This announcement will, understandably, produce disappointment in many minds. I should, therefore, point out that the physical savings of employment of a good deal of regular army man-power in the reduced training scheme will contribute substantially to the build-up of the Mobile Brigade Group, while the reduced expenditure on maintenance will permit some most important increased expenditure on the re-equipment of our fighting forces. Approximately 2,000 regular soldiers will be freed for active duty in this way.
National Service Training will, of course, not cease. It will continue, within its numerical limits, to provide a reservoir on which the Citizen Military Forces can draw. The C. M. F. itself is, of course, vital to the rapid expansion of our forces in time of emergency.
This whole concept of rebalancing the forces in favour of effectiveness and equipment is, of course, in line with the trend in modern defence provision overseas, and reflects both the increased fire power of the new weapons and their greater complexity and cost.
&nbsp;In our consideration of the Army, we have, in accordance with the principles I have already described, decided to provide modern equipment standardized or compatible with that used by the United States. Our re-equipment plans can involve expenditure of nearly £-40,000,000 over the next three years. These plans include provision of the new F. N. rifle and its related ammunition and the U. S. 105mm. field artillery equipment. The F. N. rifle, because of its ease of operation and rate of fire, will greatly increase the effectiveness of the infantryman, while the fact that it uses the small arms ammunition round which is already in use by the armies of the United Kingdom and the United States of America, will contribute considerably to flexibility of supply. The 105mm.-equipment has trajectory characteristics enabling it to operate effectively in wooded and hilly country and is, therefore, most appropriate to the difficult areas in which it is likely to operate. In brief, it combines the virtues of the Howitzer and the the 25-pounder.
Overall total regular army strength will be maintained at about 21,000.
Air Force:
&nbsp;The Air Force should include fighter aircraft of the most modem kind to ensure local air superiority and to deal with any raiding bomber. It must have transport aircraft of the highest quality also. The cost of modern aircraft is extraordinary and re-equipment will therefore prove a very considerable burden.
&nbsp;We already have a substantial Air Force, including light bombers, fighters and modern maritime reconnaissance aircraft. We are planning to re-arm with fighter aircraft of a performance equivalent to the Lockheed F104, which has been accepted by the United States Air Force, and with transport aircraft of the type of the C. 130, which is already in operational service with the United States Air Force.
&nbsp;It may be thought by many honourable members, as it was thought by me when the proposals first came forward, that it is unfortunate that we should adopt a re-equipment plan which appears to produce some divergence from the United Kingdom. But it seems to us clear that, having regard to ANZUS and SEATO and to our geographical situation, Australian participation in any future war must be in close association with the forces of the United States of America.
The Air is the most mobile of all arms. It is, therefore, in the air that we have felt it desirable to standardize on types of aircraft which would enable the Royal Australian Air Force to co-operate with American Air Forces, with common lines of supply. We have, of course, thanks to Australian ingenuity and industry, a powerful provision of Avon Sabres, still in the first rank of fighters, and the celebrated Canberra bomber.
We are developing a powerfully equipped and efficient air force. The strength of the regular Air Force will build up from its present level of 15,000 to 16,725 by June, 1960.
&nbsp;Two other important new projects in Air Force preparedness will be the introduction of the first ground to air guided weapons unit and the setting-up of mobile control and reporting units at Darwin and Perth. It will be understood that, as modem aircraft operate at greater speeds and altitudes, electronic control and reporting have become more difficult and complicated. The guided weapons unit will be located in theSydney defence area and will, therefore, be used for air defence training in a place where a modem control and reporting unit has already been established.
Defence Production:This year will see the completion ' on schedule of the much-abused but little understood St. Mary's filling factory. This plant has been erected on the advice of our military experts that it is of the highest order of priority. It will be essential for the filling of bombs, shells, and other projectiles. Without it the country would be grievously handicapped in the event of war.The Small Arms Factory at Lithgow will shortly commence the production of the F. N. rifle.
Production of the Jindivick pilotless aircraft in Australia is continuing. Deliveries have already commenced against orders placed by Sweden, and inquiries have been received from other overseas countries.Research and Development:I have already mentioned Woomera. Our co-operation with the United Kingdom in the Long Range Weapons Establishment has been both dramatic and productive. We know how much importance the United Kingdom attaches to this venture. Our effort in relation to it will be maintained vigorously at about the existing level for at least some years to come.
Indeed, I should point out that what has been done at Woomera and Maralinga contributes to the development of the nuclear deterrent and, therefore, relates to something which has the highest priority in the global strategy of the Western Powers.I wish to refer, before I conclude, to the matter of Defence Administration. The head-quarters of the Defence Department itself, and of all the other departments in the Defence group, are in Melbourne. The Chiefs of Staff of the three Services have their head-quarters in Melbourne. This separation between the centre of Government in Canberra and these important, and indeed vital, branches in Melbourne has created difficulties. We believe that, for complete efficiency, the head-quarters of the Cabinet, ofthe Prime Minister's Department, of the Treasury, of the Department of External Affairs and of Defence should all be within immediate reach of each other in the Federal Capital. Defence policy is inseparable from other aspects of Government policy and, in particular, foreign and financial and economic policy. The Government has, therefore, decided that it should take steps to repeal the separation and to improve the swift co-ordination of policy and action. To this end, we are initiating a movement to Canberra of thoseelements in defence which deal with policy.
The Minister for Defence and the Minister for the Interior are in consultation about the details of the transfer. The Government will provide the additional money for the necessary development of housing and other elements in Canberra. The first part of the move will be accomplished in two sections. At the beginning of 1959, some 500 officers from the Department of Defence and from the Departments of the Navy, Army and Air, who are associated with the operation of the Defence Committee, the Chiefs of StaffCommittee and others will move. Later in that year, another 600 persons from the Service Departments will move so that the Service Boards will meet in Canberra. Office accommodation will be available for all these people in the new permanent secretariat, while the provision of housing is being actively dealt with. The date of later moves has not been fixed but there will be no undue delay. I have no doubt that the result of this transfer will be to add enormously to the efficiency of our defence and to the co-ordinationof national policies.
We have also made some important changes in the higher defence organization. The Defence Committee, which to-day comprises the Secretary of the Defence Department and the three Chiefs of Staff, is being made a more comprehensive body by the addition of the Secretaries of the Prime Minister's Department, and the Departments of the Treasury and of External Affairs. The present practice of co-opting representatives of other interested departments and specialized advisers from time to time will be continued. The Chiefs of Staff Committee, consisting of the three Chiefs of Staff, will meet regularly on purely military matters so that there may be no restraint placed on the expression of professional military views. In addition to this, of course, the Chiefs of Staff will continue to attend at Cabinet and Cabinet Committee meetings dealing with defence and will be in regular consultation not only with their own Service Ministers but with the Minister for Defence who has an overall responsibility for defence policy.
May I conclude with some brief but general observations?
In 1950, I brought down in this House the first Defence Programme of my Government. The facts of Communist expansion in Europe prior to 1950 imposed an obligation on all Australians to heed the war~ nongs of these events, and subsequently I sought a mandate to strengthen our defence system. The continuance of the greatly enlarged programmes then instituted has been justified by subsequent world events.
Prior to the death of Stalin in 1953, Communist expansion had been characterized by dramatic coups which came to be accepted as a regular occurrence. Honourable members will recall that those countries which were unfortunate enough to be occupied by the Soviet Union were taken rider control. Expansion and re-armament on the part of the Communist Powers proceeded in the face of extensive disarmament by the West. When Germany surrendered after the last war, American armed strength in Europe amounted to 3,000,000 men. Within one year after the end of the war this enormous force was diminished to 390,000. The United Kingdom strength in Europe at the armistice was 1,300,000. It fell to 488,000 in one year. The Soviet Union, on the other hand, kept in active service some 3,000,000 men.
The rapid reduction of armaments by the Western Powers was an act of good faith which the Soviet Union chose to disregard. The free world had no alternative, in the face of this accumulated Communist power, to getting together in a common defence. In 1949, N. A. T. O. came into being.
But international communism continued to find outlets for its dreams of expansion. In 1950, the Communists instigated an invasion of South Korea by North Korea, and once again the shadow of war fell across the world. This event was for us one of prime significance. International communism was for the first time engaging in overt aggression in Asia. The challenge was promptly taken up and, in response to that challenge, Australian forces of all arms operated in Korea. The Soviet Union found itself blocked in its efforts to crush Europe by force and therefore decided upon new tactics in their vision of world conquests.If only they could expunge from memory the suppression of the Baltic States, the coups in Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Korea; if only all these things which seemed to condemn communism in the eyes of the world could be made to fade in human memory, then the way would be open for renewed efforts at expansion.
The central idea of the new policy was to create an air of innocence around Soviet diplomacy in order to disguise the Communist subversions which were designed to ensure Communist success. In February of last year, Mr. Khrushchev, the Communist leader, tried to dissociate communism from the personality of Stalin and from the odium attaching to his post-war works. He made a notable speech. It was published. The point about it was that the speaker made no attempt to criticize the immoral side of Stalin's behaviourinternationally. It was rather a speech of a man seeking world power and condemning his predecessor. At first the world was startled, but perhaps relieved, by these revelations, and hopes ran high that the “cold" war would be called off. The new tactics looked like being successful. Indeed, world commentary on Soviet affairs seemed to be dominated by those who wishfully thought that the Communists had mended their ways. At home and in the satellite countries, the Russian leaders made some small adjustments towardstheir dependents. These were enough to give some of the people who had known freedom a taste of freedom again. For example, the Hungarian people set up a Government which was free from the Secret Police terrorism which is the normal sign of Communist Government. What happened? The free regime lasted for a few days and was crushed by Russian tanks. But the memory of Hungary in the free world is still alive, and more alive than ever having regard to recent horrors. It speaks more clearly than all thehypocritical protestations of the apologists of international communism.
Other things happened. From our point of view they happened with particular eloquence in South-East Asia.
The Communists were busy provoking mischief where they thought mischief could do most good to their own cause. In the Middle East, the Communists promoted mischief when they thought it could do most damage to the economic ties of the Middle East and European countries. I will not dwell on this matter. I may have an opportunity of speaking about it before the debate on foreign affairs concludes.
&nbsp;But while the events in the Middle East have captured the attention of the world, we cannot forget that in South-East Asia, communism has intensified its programme of subversion.
&nbsp;The cold war has taken a savage toll of the lives and cultures of the people in South-East Asia. For example, in a period when the Federation of Malaya has been working hard, with active British co-operation, to mobilize its resources for nationhood, Communist terrorists have waged a wicked campaign to destroy the very basis of the social life of the Malayan people. We are proud to think that troops from Australia have been helping the people of Malaya to defend themselves against this menace. Malaya is not, of course, a single example. There are other free nations who are struggling to maintain the free institutions necessary for the survival of their ancient traditions and the achievement of a modern independence. Those who try to excuse Communist terrorism in South-East Asia by suggesting that it represents a stand against colonialism ignore the fact that there are only two colonies on the South-East Asian mainland-Malaya and Singapore. In both of these States, the Governments have been elected by popular vote and are, with the active assistance of many independent nations, including our own,drawing up constitutions which will ensure eventual independence.
The aggressive Communist attitude and the slogans about “colonialism" also ignores the situation in free Burma where, since independence, the Communists have been waging a ceaseless campaign in arms against the Government. They are undismayed by the fact that the leader of the Burmese nation is distinguished internationally for the honesty and courage of his approach to the problems of world peace.
In view of these Communist intentions and the subtlety of the machinations and dangers which inhere in their immoral approach to international relations, the defence programme is for us of paramount importance. Let us remember that communism is still advancing in spite of the fact that it has had setbacks which may and will, as we hope, finally prove disastrous. We have no cause to slacken our efforts to defend ourselves in co-operation with our neighbours and our friends.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


"THE AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES"
It gives me both official and personal pleasure to present to the House the valuable report on the Australian Universities made by what I will refer to as the Murray Committee.
Last year, when in England, I approached Sir Keith Murray and asked him whether he would preside over an investigation of the problems of our universities. He agreed to do this, subject to the approval of the Chancellor of the Exchequer in Great Britain, an approval which was willingly given.
The Committee appointed was very well balanced.
Sir Keith Murray himself is the Chairman of the University Grants Committee in Great Britain and is highly skilled in assessing the financial needs of universities, the wisdom and practicability of university development programmes, and the part that Governments can play.
Sir Ian Clunies Ross, the Chairman of C.S.I.R.O. is, of course, familiar with our national need for scientists in a wide variety of fields and has an intimate knowledge of the problems of our universities.
Sir Charles Morris, the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Leeds, is a practising University administrator, familiar with the Universities' day-to-day problems.
Mr. A.J. Reid, the Chancellor of the University of Western Australia, is a former head of the State Treasury and a Member of the Commonwealth Grants Commission. He, therefore, has a special knowledge of both University matters and Commonwealth-State financial relations.
Mr. J.C. Richards is Assistant General Manager of the B.H.P. and a former Rhodes scholar. He was able to bring to the enquiry a considerable knowledge of industrial interest in and requirements of the Universities.
To this strong Committee, we gave a wide charter which included the role of the University in the Australian community; the extension and co-ordination of University facilities; technological education at University level; the financial needs of Universities and appropriate means of providing for them.
In less than the three months - July to September 1957 -&nbsp; the Committee visited every University institution in Australia, received the views of large numbers of people and bodies, including Government Departments, and has prepared this extensive report.
We are grateful to the Committee for its remarkable speed, thoroughness and grasp of the matters involved in their task.
The Government has also had the report of the Australian Academy of Science on Scientific and Technological Manpower Supply and Demand in Australia.it is a very valuable analysis of one aspect of the problems investigated by the Murray Committee and indeed reinforces much that is contained in the Committee's report.
This is not the appropriate time to comment in detail on the Academy's findings, but I do take this opportunity of commending them for their contribution to an understanding of one important aspect of the total problem.
To-night I have the privilege of presenting to the House a statement of the decisions which the Commonwealth Government has so far taken. Some matters have yet to be finally dealt with; but we considered that there should be no delay in dealing with the main recommendations, having regard.to what the Committee has described as "the need for immediate action in 1958,1959 and 1960 if the position" (of the Universities) "is not to be catastrophic".
But before I announce the particular decisions, I should make some remarks to explain the setting in which the problem is being looked at and the reasons for what may be regarded by some as a departure from normal Commonwealth practice.
It is of course true that, under the Australian Constitutional division of powers between Commonwealth and State, education is in the State field. It has been dealt with in a progressive manner by State 1Governments and Parliaments at a rapidly growing cost; this cost being very naturally a material factor in the steep increase in tax reimbursements and special grants to States in recent years. We are not promoting any idea that the legislative power over education should, by a Constitutional amendment, be transferred to the Commonwealth. The idea of uniformity can be carried too far.
In both primary and secondary education each State, with highly varying conditions of climate and occupational opportunities, is in the best position to judge for itself its own most suitable educational curriculum and organisation. Such matters are not best or most flexibly dealt with from one national centre. Experience has shown the advantages of local policy and administration in the educational field.
Why then has the Commonwealth Government come into this matter at the tertiary or university level? That it should do so in the Capital Territory is, of course, inevitable. The Australian National University and the Canberra University College are clearly its responsibility and not that of any other Government. But we have pursued an active policy in relation to the Universities generally for reasons which have .seemed to us to be of inevitable and special importance and urgency. Our view of their urgency has been much sharpened by the report of the Murray Committee.
Since this report and the decisions of the Commonwealth Government mark, as I hope and believe, the beginning of a new and brighter chapter in the history of the Australian Universities; and as our acceptance of much greater financial responsibilities should, if it is not to lend itself to loose generalisation, be clearly related to its own special circumstances, I will take a little time to summarise the particular elements which justify and seem to us to require special Commonwealth action.
The whole feature of University education is that, upon the basis of a general mental training achieved by the primary and secondary systems, it provides, for those willing and able to undergo it, special and higher training. Such training leads to the acquisition of recognised degrees, the attainment of high professional qualifications, the entrance to higher research, particularly but not exclusively in science and technology, and the securing of those immeasurable and civilised benefits which flow or should flow from the study of, or association with the students of, humane letters.
The University is not a professional "shop", though in my day we used to identify our own by that mercantile name. As the word implies, the University must not be narrow or unduly specialist in its outlook. It must teach and encourage the free search for the truth. That search must increasingly extend to, but is not to be confined to, the physical resources of the world or of space. The scientist is of great and growing importance, and what we propose to do will, I believe, enable many more scientists to be trained in proper circumstances and with improved tuition, buildings and equipment.
But I hope that we will not, under current pressures or emotions, be tempted to ignore the basic fact that civilisation in the true sense requires a close and growing attention, not only to science in all its branches, but also to those studies of the mind and spirit of man, of history and literature and language and mental and moral philosophy, of human relations in society and industry, of international understanding, the relative neglect of which has left a gruesome mark on this century.
Let us have more scientists, and more humanists. Let the scientists be touched and informed by the humanities. Let the humanists be touched and informed by science, so that they may not be lost in abstractions derived from out-dated knowledge or circumstances. That proposition underlies the whole University idea. It warrants and requires a great variety of faculties and the constant intermingling of those who engage in their disciplines.
To perform these vital tasks our Universities must be equipped in a very practical way to meet the challenge which, both in quality and quantity, becomes more urgent and insistent every day.
I have indulged in these general reflections, not because the Government has any reservations about the urgent and growing need for more scientific training, a need which has been more and more clear in recent times, but because it would be unfortunate for the Universities themselves if the balanced conception of higher education came to be regarded as out of date.
I will not take up time by making extensive quotations from the report. I will content myself by pointing out that the Committee has detected and clearly stated some of the most important elements in the problem of the present and future of our Universities.
They make it clear that we are suffering from a grave shortage of University graduates. They refer with great force to the fact that even 25 years ago there was a theory that most nations were over-producing graduates and that the pattern of the future might well be "that industrial communities would be run by machines and unskilled labour, the whole direction and control being in the hands of a few very brilliant and well-trained experts"-. This illusion has disappeared. As they say: "The post-war community calls for more and more highly educated people all along the line, and in particular for more and more graduates of an increasing variety of kinds. Industry and commerce call for more. graduates, government and public administration call for more graduates, and all the services of the welfare state call for more graduates. The proportion of the population which is called upon to give professional or technical services of one kind or another is increasing every day and the proportion of such people who have to be graduates is increasing also.
They sum that matter up in a few words:
"High intellectual ability is in short supply, and no country can afford to waste it; every boy or girl with the necessary brain power must, in the national interest, be encouraged to come forward for a University education, and there must be a suitable place in a good University for everyone who does come forward."
They emphasise that education is only one of the two central aims of the University, the other being research. They make an interesting and important comment upon the nature of our population growth, a growth which is accompanied by the characteristic concentration&nbsp;of population in the cities.
"Not only has the rate of increase outpaced the capacity of the schools and universities, but it is also weighting the younger age groups to an extent that is not experienced in countries whose population is not growing so rapidly; *this is a factor which entails a relatively greater deployment of resources into the building of schools and universities than would be necessary if the population were more evenly distributed among the age groups."
Again there is the most practical consideration that the enormous development of, and capital investment in industry, both primary and secondary, has been accompanied by relatively high production costs. If our capital resources are to be used to full advantage, there must be more expertise and a growing demand on the Universities.
It is, therefore, clear that the demand for all Universities' graduates is bound to rise. There are, the Committee finds, shortages of graduates in Arts, of economists, lawyers, doctors, dentists, agriculturalists and veterinary scientists, no less than of scientists and industrial technologists.
In addition to these, the secondary schools, providing an education to matriculation standards, are making a heavy demand on Universities for graduates in Arts, Mathematics, and Science. That demand is unsatisfied, with the result that we find ourselves in something of a vicious circle, the University students being numerically limited by the supply of teachers in the schools, and the supply of teachers in the schools being limited by the insufficient number of University graduates. For 1960-61, Government and non-Government schools will .require an annual intake of 450 mathematics and science teachers. But -the output of science graduates from all Universities in 1957 for all purposes is likely to be little more than 500.
Another striking fact of the very many set out in a report which I hope will be widely read is this: There are today 36,000 University students in Australia. The numbers are growing. The size of first-year classes already presents overwhelming difficulties, resulting in many cases in the adoption of quotas. Yet the Committee has reached the conclusion that the total number will, if provided for, grow to 70,000 in 1965 and possibly to 80,000 by 1967, which is only ten years hence:
The position would be slightly less disturbing if we were getting, if I may use the expression, "full value" out of those who are or become undergraduates. But we are not. The failure rate is alarming. Thus, of the 1951 first-year entrants only 61 per cent passed first year in 1951; only 35 per cent graduated in the minimum time; and only 58 per cent are expected to graduate at all. This failure rate is, in the words of the Committee, "a national extravagance". It reduces the efficiency of the Universities, and it grievously lessens the national resources of trained graduates.
What are the reasons for this waste? The Committee did not find any reason to suppose that the matriculation standards are lower than they used to be. It seems to me that they regarded as the effective reasons several large and significant matters.
Classes are much too big. The personal contact with the lecturer is greatly reduced at the very time when the disciplined school-boy becomes a self-reliant adult and needs to have guidance as well as freedom.
There is clearly far too low a proportion of staff to students; much lower than in Great Britain where, incidentally, the failure rate, for a variety of reasons, including a more selective admission of students, is much lower.
The pressure of work, particularly in the science faculties, has been greatly increased by complex modern discoveries and the opening of an immense variety of new avenues of knowledge.
Building and equipment are alike inadequate. Lack of accommodation extends to class-rooms, laboratories, libraries, common-rooms, and those student amenities, including sporting facilities, which are an essential element in a full undergraduate life. There is gross over-crowding and many make-shift buildings. The shortage of equipment and materials becomes more acute every year. In the physical sciences, out-of-date equipment represents a grave handicap. This no doubt has something to do with the finding that there is a serious general weakness of honours and post-graduate research schools. This is not due to any lack of general aptitude, for Australia has&nbsp;produced more than its due proportion of distinguished research workers. It is primarily due to lack of encouragement and of facilities.
Staff salaries are too low to attract and retain the necessary number of first-class lecturers and instructors.
Scientific and technological education and research are naturally but increasingly most expensive as compared with other faculties. Thus, in the Melbourne University, the Faculty of Law with 702 students costs at present £27,381; the Faculty of Engineering, with 482 students, costs £187,301.
All of these considerations seem to us to mark out the University problem as one which possesses special difficulty and urgency, which call for unorthodox Commonwealth action. On the machinery side, the Committee is of opinion that there is inadequate liaison between the academic body and the policy-making and controlling Senate or Council. The Vice-Chancellor, in their view, should become the academic leader as well as the Executive
Officer for overall policy.
The Committee recommends that there should be an Australian University Grants Committee, to develop a national policy, to co-ordinate the work of the Universities, to co-ordinate the work in this field of the Commonwealth and State Governments, to examine proposals for the creation of new institutions, and to plan University development generally.
Finally, on the financial side, the Committee has been inevitably struck by the ever-increasing budgetary difficulties of the Universities, difficulties which beset and hamper the mere carrying on of their present&nbsp;activities. They have also reached the conclusion that the capital provision for the Universities must be dramatically increased if the future is to be looked at with anything less than despair. They recommend that the Commonwealth should enter the field of capital provision.
They sum their view up in one sentence. "State funds are no longer adequate to meet the existing situation. If the States' financial resources have not enabled them *to meet the Universities' needs up to the present, they will certainly be inadequate to put things right and get ready in time for the inevitable expansion which lies ahead. The efforts of the States require to be supplemented and speeded up.
The Commonwealth Government has, in fact, been finding increasing sums of money for the State Universities. The annual grants for recurrent purposes have risen from £1,103,000 in 1951 (when the scheme began) to £2,300,000 in 1957; in addition to which we&nbsp;pay through the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme, the fees of no less than one-third of all the full-time students in the Universities. The State Governments have also devoted increasing attention to this problem.
The Murray Committee states the position concisely in paragraph 67 of its report:
"The States have endeavoured to afford special treatment to their Universities in the allocation of their funds. Between 1950-51 and 1955-56, the States' revenue from income tax reimbursement grants, State taxation and special grants rose by 77 per cent, but their grants to the Universities rose by 123 per cent."
&nbsp;
Nothing could more vividly show how the Universities' problem has grown and is growing and how inescapable it is that the Commonwealth should accept an adequate share of a financial burden which probably no State could support by itself. It is, of course, (and I think I Should say this clearly) unfortunate that the Universities in Australia should be overwhelmingly dependent upon the financial goodwill of Governments. But private benefactions have been isolated; endowments in total provide only a small fraction of the total income. The reason for this is pointed out by the Committee. In paragraph they state, and quite truly, that there are large sections of public opinion which are not yet aware of the facts and do not yet appreciate their implications.
"Certainly they are not as much alive to the needs of the future in this country as they are in the United Kingdom and the United States. Indeed, they are not as sensitive in this matter as might have been expected. Australia has already benefited in quite spectacular fashion from the application of science in the primary industries; there is common agreement that, with a very high standard of living, secondary industry can only maintain its present promise of great achievement by technological and managerial skill and enterprise of the highest quality; and behind all this is the basic need to drive ahead with the development of a whole continent, vast areas of which, but for the benefit of science, must remain unproductive bush and barren desert All this is becoming more fully recognised. What is not recognised is that this requires not a small number of very clever people, but a very large number indeed of very highly educated men and women, and that nothing short of this will do With this sketchy, but, I think, necessary preamble, I now turn to the decisions which the Government has already taken. Some of those decisions, as will be seen, relate to recommendations for joint action between the Commonwealth and the States. We are at once putting in hand discussions with the States on these matters, for it is only by close and true co-operation that the desired results can be secured. But we think it proper that we should at once indicate quite clearly our own willingness to co-operate along the lines which I will indicate.
Our decisions are as follow
1. We accept, in principle, the recommendation for the setting up of a permanent Australian Universities Committee. We are not satisfied that it should be called a "Grants" Committee, since that word may be thought, on Australian precedent, to indicate its functions too narrowly. We reserve for future but early consideration the composition of the Committee and its terms of reference. So that it may function to the greatest effect, and give the best guidance in co-operation between Governments and Universities, we would wish to have some discussion with the States before determining both composition and charter.
&nbsp;2. We agree that this new body cannot be expected to function with sufficient knowledge and experience to make recommendations for an earlier year than 1961. We, therefore, accept the view that the special needs of the Universities for 1958, 1959 and 1960 should be dealt with by decisions now taken; these years being regarded as an interim and, in a real sense, emergency period.
3. On the side of recurrent expenditure, which covers day to day running, the present Commonwealth grant to the States for their Universities is, as I have said, million. Broadly, the basis is Commonwealth for each £3 of State grants, plus fees. We accept the recommendation that the Commonwealth grants (on the same terms) be raised 10 per cent. each year for 1L958, 1959 and 1960. This will raise the Commonwealth grants to
1958 .....&nbsp; £2,568,500
1959 ..... £2,825,400
1960 ..... £3,107,900
This makes a total of £8,501,800 for these three years compared with Commonwealth Grants totalling £.6,040,930 in the three years 1955, 1956 and 1957. &nbsp;
4. The ordinary Commonwealth Grants to Canberra University College will also increase by 10 per cent. each year. This will raise the grants from £341,735 in total for the last three years to £-582,000 in total for the next three years.
5 As to the Australian National University as with the Canberra University College, we will, of course, continue to face up to our own responsibilities. The Committee has recommended that grants to the Australian National University be increased and, bearing in mind the Committee's words that some modification may be required, we accept their figures which total £4,396,000 for the three years 1958, 1959 and .1960, compared with a total of £2,804,500 for the years 1955, 1956 and 1957.
6. As an additional unmatched emergency grant, not conditional as in the case of normal recurrent expenditure, we will grant to the States for their Universities, as recommended
£lm in 1958
£1.5m in 1959
£2m in 1960
or a three years' total of £4.5m.
&nbsp;
7. Similarly, an emergency grant will be made, as recommended, to the Canberra University College of £67,000, spread over the three years.
8. We accept the view that University staff salaries should be increased. We think that there is merit in the Committee's recommendation that there should be an increase of £500 per annum in &nbsp;professorial salaries, with appropriate rates of increase in the salaries of other academic staff. The estimated total cost of this, on existing staff establishments, would be £750,000 per annum. Our share, under the existing formula, would be £187,500 per annum. We are willing to find this.
9. Apart from this, we will provide for similar additional allowances for salary increases in the Australian National University and the Canberra University College. The estimated cost of this is roughly £150,000 for the three years.
10. The total cost to the Commonwealth of decisions 8 and 9 will be of the order of £712,000 over the three years.
11. We do not at present contribute to the cost of State University buildings and major equipment. The Committee has recommended a building programme for each University over the next three years, and has suggested that in each State, except Western Australia and Tasmania, the cost be divided £91 for £1 between Commonwealth and State. In the case of Western Australia and Tasmania they recommend Commonwealth for £1 State. We accept these principles.
12. Before setting out the financial implications of this acceptance, I want to make it clear that capital provision by the Commonwealth assumes, and is indeed conditional upon, the carrying out by the States of their normal contemplated programmes. The Commonwealth capital grants are to be, in nett terms, additional and not by way of replacement of State expenditure. Only in this way can the fullest benefit be conferred.
13, If Honourable Members will look at Table 11 in paragraph 408 of the Report, they will see the figures. We expect the "Possible State Contributions" there set out to be realised. Except in one case They represent a continuance of the present level of State capital expenditure. If the State contributions set out in Table 11 are in fact made, we accept the recommendation that, in 1958, 1959 and 1960, the Commonwealth should contribute to capital expenditure (a thing we have not hitherto done) a total of £E6,270,000.
These figures, of course, relate to the State Universities.
The Committee also recommended that there should be a contribution by the Commonwealth Government for the equipping of new buildings calculated at 16 per cent, of its share of the cost of the new buildings (£6,270,000), or £1,003,000, leaving the universities to find the balance from additional State grants, from gifts from industry and other non-State sources. We accept this recommendation.
14. Recommendations about capital expenditure on the *Australian National University have been made, and we note them to be not very different from the present rate of capital expenditure. The general order of the recommendations, which is for £1,070,000 over the next three years, appears acceptable but, in any case, as I have said we will continue to meet our responsibilities in relation to the Commonwealth Universities.
The recommendations relating to the Canberra University College are deferred pending a decision on the special question as to the future development and association of these two bodies. The answer to this question has not been fully worked out by the Committee. We propose to examine it promptly.
15 We have considered the residential University Colleges, to which the Committee and the Government attach value and significance. We accept the recommendation (in paragraph 196) that the Commonwealth should offer, for the next three years, capital grants for the building and equipping of, or extensions to, such Colleges, on the basis of £21 for every £21 provided by State Governments or other sources, with the recommended limitations that total Commonwealth grants so given should not exceed £2200,000 in the first year, £400,000 in the first two years, or £9600,000 in the whole three year period.
16. We have noted that the Committee was of opinion that various aspects of the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme should be the subject of further investigation. We will take the necessary steps to put the investigation in hand.
17. It may assist a clear understanding of the magnitude of these propositions if I say that over the next 3 years the decisions I have already announced will, if acted upon by the States as well as by. &nbsp;ourselves, raise the Commonwealth expenditure in relation to the State universities from about £6,000,000 in 1955, 1956 and 1957 to about 2~0,0 n15, 99ad16. In addition to this increase for the State universities, we shall be increasing our provision for the Australian National University and the Canberra University College on the lines I have indicated.
I would like to make one final general observation. In my own undergraduate days, students were either scholarship holders, at a time when scholarships were few and difficult to 'win, or students maintained by relatively poor parents prepared to make great sacrifices for their children, or (in probably a minority of cases) students whose parents could readily afford to sustain them through their courses of training.
I can well remember a wry smile on hearing a Member of Parliament describe the Melbourne University of my day as a "bear garden of the idle rich." Old conceptions die hard. It is not yet adequately understood that a university education is not the perquisite of a privileged few. It is not to be thought of merely in terms of the individual student. It has become demonstrably clear that a complex and highly industrialised modern society has claims upon the universities which must-be met, and has great responsibilities for seeing that those claims can be met.
The social, scientific, economic and industrial complexities of Australia today are largely beyond the imagination of 40 years ago.
Great skill achieved after high training is no longer to be regarded as something to be admired in a few. We must, on a broad basis, become a more and more educated democracy if we are to raise our spirituhi, intellectual, and material living standards. Viewed in this way our universities are to be regarded not as a home of privilege for a few but as something essential to the lives of millions of people who may never enter their doors.
This new charter for the universities should serve to open many doors and to give opportunity and advantage to many students. They will, I am sure, not forget that under all the circumstances I have described, the community is accepting heavy burdens in order that, through the training of university graduates, the community may be served. This represents a challenge to the whole future student body to take the fullest advantage of the chances which come to them; to see that future failure rates are not their fault; to realise more than ever that the contribution that they have to make to this great social effort is to be willingly and effectively made. A university may look to governments, and perhaps primarily to governments, for land and buildings and equipment. But its ultimate achievement will depend, as ever, upon the zeal and quality of its staff and of those who train under them.
It is, I think, a happy thing that we should have had the Opportunity of reviving our conception of the universities and their work by the presentation and discussion of this brilliant and provocative report.


"On behalf of myself, the Australian Government and the people of Australia, I extend to you warm congratulations on your election to the high office of President of France and send good wishes for the future.
I am certain that under your leadership, the cordial relations which have existed between our two countries for many years fostered by the comradeship of our soldiers in war will be maintained and strengthened."
CANBERRA, A.C.T.8th January, 1959.


Commonwealth and State Directors of the tour of Australia later this year of Her Royal Highness the Princess Alexandra of Kent met in Canberra to-day.
They discussed factors to be considered in the formulation of a consolidated programme for the tour. A broad outline programme will now be prepared and submitted to Her Royal Highness in London before she leaves to visit Latin America next month.
Tentative dates for her itinerary are Arrive Canberra, August 15, 1959; arrive Queensland, August 18; arrive New South arrive, September 9; arrive Victoria, September 16; arrive Canberra, September 23, prior to her departure from Australia.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.8th January, 1959.


FOR PRESS:
Interchange of New Year Messages
The following messages were exchanged between His Excellency Mr. N. Khrushchev and the Prime Minister, Mr. R.G. Menzies, over the New Year period :-
"HIS EXCELLENCYMR. ROBERT GORDON MENZIESPRIME MINIST-R OF THE COMMONTEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
In connection with the present New Year I send to you, Mr. Prime Minister, the Government and people of Australia from the Government of the U.S.S.R. and from myself personally greetings and best wishes. I am deeply convinced that the establishment of an attitude of mutual understanding and thorough collaboration by states and peoples on the basis of the principles of peaceful co-existence presents the brightest guarantee of safety, the strengthening of peace and the removal of international tension.
N. KhrushchevMoscowKremlin.
&nbsp;
"HIS EXCELLENCY MR. N. KHRUSHCHEVCHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS OF THE U.S.S.R.KREMLIN. MOSCOW.
I thank Your Excellency for your telegram of New Year greetings and good wishes from the Government of the Soviet Union and yourself.
We in Australia earnestly hope with you that 1959 will be a year of improved international understanding.
The Australian Government and the people, for their part, will continue to pursue with sincerity and vigour the objectives of lessening international tension and Sestablishing trust and lasting peace amongst nations, If genuine good will and co-operation could be brought to bear these objectives will be the closer.
R.G. MENZIES.
With the compliments ofRobert Kennedy,Special Assistant to the Prime Minister,CANBERRA, A.C.T.12th January, 1959.


Parliamentary salaries and allowances.
The Government has decided to set up an independent Committee of Inquiry to report on the salaries and allowances paid to Senators and Members of the Commonwealth Parliament and also to report generally on related matters.
It will be recalled that both the Committees which have previously examined and reported on these matters - the first in 1951/52 under the Chairmanship of the late Mr. Justice Nicholas and that of 1955 chaired by Sir Frank Richardson - recommended a review at suitable intervals. The 1955 Committee stated in its report that “a periodic review of Parliamentary salaries is necessary irrespective of the way in which changes are made and in fact whether any changes are made.” In the course of the last Parliament, my colleague the Treasurer, The Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, in his capacity as Leader of the House to Members that review of these matters should be made early in the life of each new Parliament and subject only to quite abnormal &nbsp;circumstances the conditions then determined should apply unchanged throughout the life of that Parliament. That is the view of the Government. It has discussed the arrangements now proposed with the Leader of the Opposition, the Rt. Hon. Dr. H.V. Evatt, and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, The Hon. A.A. Calwell.
Salaries and conditions of Senators and Members were last Reviewed in 1955, and the last review of the emoluments of Ministers and office bearers of the Parliament was made in 1952.
The terms of reference of the Committee will be

to enquire into and report upon the salaries and Allowances payable to Senators and Members of the House of Representatives, including those paid to Ministers and Members who are office bearers of the Parliament.&nbsp;
If it be reported that it is necessary or desirable to alter such salaries and allowance or any of them, then to recommend the nature and extent of the alterations that should be made.&nbsp;
Generally, to enquire into and report upon the conditions which apply to the service of Members of Parliament and Ministers, and any other related matters which may come to the notice of the Committee in the course of its enquiries and which it may consider should be reported on.

The members of the Committee will be --
SIR FRANK RICHARDSON, who was a member of the 1951/52 Committee as well as Chairman of the 1955 Committee and who has been &nbsp;requested by the Government to be Chairman of the present Committee
MR. G.E. Fitzgerald, BA, B.Com, FASA, FAC (Aus.), FCIS, who was a Member of the 1955 Committee, and
N.L. COWPER, CBE, BA, LL.B., have also been asked to be members.
All three have indicated their willingness to serve.
Sir Frank: Richardson is well-known as a leading Melbourne businessman and has served Australia most capably in a number of honorary capacities. Mr. Fitzgerald is a highly qualified and prominent Melbourne accountant, and Mr. Cowper, a prominent Sydney solicitor, is on the Executive of the Australian Institute of Political Science and has made a special study for many years of political and constitutional matters.
It is expected that the Committee will hold its first meeting shortly.
Mr. K, H. HERDE of the Prime Minister's Department will be Secretary of the Committee.
CANBERRA.17the January, 1959


Royal Commonwealth Society Australian Capital Territory Branch.
INAUGURAL DINNER HOTEL CANBERRA WEDNESDAY,&nbsp;4TH FEBRUARY 1959.
THE PRESIDENT&nbsp;Sir William DUNK, C.B.E in the Chair
SIR WILLIAM DUNK:&nbsp;
Mr. Prime Minister, DR. Evatt, Mr. Casey, Your Excellences and Ladies and Gentlemen:
It is not my purpose to make a speech tonight, but I do want to speak for just a few minutes about the A.C.T.&nbsp;Branch of the Royal Commonwealth Society. First of all, I would like to express the thanks of&nbsp;the council of&nbsp;the branch to all of you who attend this dinner tonight. It gives us the encouragement we were looking for and we know now that we can go ahead with the assurance of&nbsp;the support of this most important cross-section of the community of the Territory.
I am sure that you would want me to convey to the Prime Minister’s to Dr. Evatt, Mr. Casey, Mr. Black, who is President of the Branch of the Society, and to Sir Horace Robertson, who is President of the Victorian Branch our pleasure that they have been able to accept our invitation to this function. Unfortunately his excellency the High Commissioner for the United Kingdom, Lord Carrington, and Lady Carrington and His Excellency the High Commissioner for India, Mr. Menon, and his wife have inescapable commitments for tonight and are unable to be present. They have asked me to convey their apologies and I am sure that on our part we would express to them our sincere regret that they are unable to be with us.&nbsp;Dame Pattie Menzies as you may know, has recently acquired new family responsibilities and we would like you sir, to convey To Dame Pattie our congratulations on the acquisition of another grandchild and express our regret at not having the pleasure of her company tonight.
I would like to say a word about the work of&nbsp;the Branch and what we expect will be the pattern of its future work. We&nbsp;hope through the years to develop a&nbsp;programme which will, through addresses; through film medium and other means bring closer to us all the Countries of the Commonwealth and increase our understanding of them And their ways of&nbsp;life. It's a point on which we are assured we will have the support and help of the Missions of the Commonwealth countries in Canberra. Additionally we would hope that we would be able to Arrange for members to meet here visiting people of&nbsp;importance in The Commonwealth. The first of those will probably be Sir Gilbert Laithwaite who, as you know, is Permanent Secretary of the Commonwealth Relations Office in London, and we hope to arrange a reception for Members of the Society for him early next month. I hope that other Speakers will touch on the Commonwealth in its present relationships. Its future will rest very largely on the statesmanship of its Leaders, on the skill of its diplomats, but much as I think this-2-
to be true statesmanship and diplomacy is not enough of itself; Underneath it as a foundation we must have the good" homely touch of friendliness and I kindly understanding. Now that to me is the main purpose of this Society and to the extent to which we can Foster it we are improving the cohesion of the Commonwealth and It we are giving the statesmen something on which to build, something on which the Commonwealth will grow. That is the task, the signature tune if you like, of the Canberra Branch and I would like to think of it that way.
It's my privilege tonight to introduce the toast of the Royal Commonwealth Society. The Prime Minister, DR. Evatt, and Mr. Casey have generously agreed to speak to it. Ladies and Gentlemen, the Prime Minister.&nbsp;
THE PRIME MINISTER:
Sir, this is a very remarkable occasion for Dr. Evatt and Mr. Casey and myself because we are supporting Sir William Dunk (Laughter). As a rule, in our various experiences we do our best to get a little support from him, but tonight he has reversed the process. Now I have had a look,&nbsp;not at the clock but at my watch and I have looked at the programme and 1&nbsp;realise that you are now going to have six speeches of&nbsp;an average length of 9 &amp; 1/2,&nbsp;minutes each. And I am bound to say as one of the speakers that I&nbsp;find it most satisfactory. But if I&nbsp;might begin with a discordant note there are one or two people here tonight who in other fields of activity advise me and one of&nbsp;them is a great expert on flags. And rightly or wrongly because I would not know, honestly, I&nbsp;wouldn't know, rightly or wrongly, he tells me that the Union Jack is upside down. (Laughter). Which I&nbsp;am also told is a signal of&nbsp;distress. And, therefore, sir, it is Perhaps very appropriate that you should have got the better of this ill-omen in advance by&nbsp;having us come here together to a dinner ofthe Royal Commonwealth Society which continues to show that so&nbsp;far from the Union Jack being a signal of&nbsp;distress it is a signal of&nbsp;the most remarkable community of&nbsp;peoples and of&nbsp;the greatest hopes for the future. (Applause).
I&nbsp;suppose, sir, that there is no more remarkable story in this century: a century which is otherwise disfigured by&nbsp;many evil and indeed horrible events, there is no more remarkable process in this century than that by which, to put it in the particular, the Royal Colonial Institute became the Royal Empire Society and later the Royal Commonwealth Society; colonies became self-governing colonies, then became independent member countries of&nbsp;The Commonwealth, and in one or two cases ceased to be in the Commonwealth but became self-governing countries with all their hopes for the future. I&nbsp;am not at all sure that in a century
-3-
in which the home of the race of most of us has been lettered and almost broken from time to time, I am not at all sure that the most remarkable thing has not been this superb process by&nbsp;which people have moved from dependence to independence and have remained bound together by&nbsp;friendship and by&nbsp;ties that are not easy to define, but certainly not easy to break. As Dr. Evatt will remember, there was a greatly celebrated legal historian who once described the history of one of the processes of the law as the history of the development from status to contract, and without being too technical the whole point that he was making was that some centuries ago peoples' rights depended upon where they were born, how they were born, what dues they owed to other people and if you wanted to determine their rights you asked, "what is his status, what is her status", and as time went on people moved away from that into the era of contract in which free people uninhibited by&nbsp;status governed their lives by&nbsp;free bargains they made one with another. And here we have a&nbsp;perfect analogy. Iremember well before the war going to a Conference. I&nbsp;was not a Prime Minister then. I confess I was later on and they found me out. But I mean that this time I was not the Prime Minister but I&nbsp;went to what was then called an Imperial Conference representing my then Prime Minister and at that time there were as few people, as few nations, at the table at No. 10,&nbsp;and beyond those and well outside of them there were literally hundreds of millions of people who were not speaking for themselves but by others. And in this short period of time of a quarter of a century later I&nbsp;now find myself walking into the same room and meeting on equal terms the representatives of India and Pakistan and Ceylon, &nbsp;The representatives of Ghana and before so long the representatives of the West Indies this is a very, very remarkable experience. And if we are to ask the reason for it, it is this - we have not been afraid of the consequences of our own policy. The whole Genius of British colonialism, if I may say so this rude word "colonialism", the whole genius of it was that people should come to govern themselves, to become their own nation and their own people, an (- what has happened in the last 25&nbsp;years is the clearest proof of it. I am not one of those who think that it has not been revolutionary because in some cases it has. This is a Royal Commonwealth Society but the relationships of &nbsp;Australia and the Crown acne the people of&nbsp;Australia with the Crown are not precisely the same as the relationships between, say, the people of India and the Crown because while we all acknowledge the Queen as the head of the Commonwealth some of us have the Queen in our own country in the processes of our own law, while others have felt it necessary from their own point of view to Have become republics and, therefore, this is in a sense
-4-
a revolutionary movement. But in everything that matters it is a movement of an evolutionary kind, because, if you look and see what has happened in the countries which are now independent, proud, free, members of the Commonwealth, what do you find - you find within them a respect for the law and its administration which I venture to assert is one of the greatest gifts of Great Britain to the world. You find in them a belief in Parliamentary self-government, in true democracy, in the right to rule yourselves by your own chosen people which again has been the great contribution of Great Britain to the world. You find two other things, and this goes for every country represented here tonight. You find first of all no spirit of aggression it is a very proud thing to be able to say in a rather nervous world; in a world that is wracked by divisions; in a world that wakens up occasionally with fear and goes to bed with fear; it is a wonderful thing to be able to say with no reservation that there is no country in the Commonwealth which offers a threat of aggression to any other country in the world. Here is a great common element, an element which has moved through the whole of our joint history from the time when Great Britain herself was the greatest colonial power in the world. And finally, sir, because I remember my own rule people will occasionally say to me what the difference is between sitting in a Conference with what we would call foreign countries under some friendly arrangement of alliance and Sitting at No. 10&nbsp;Downing Street or wherever it may be with the representatives of 9 or 10&nbsp;countries of the Commonwealth. And the answer to me, who am now almost an old hand in these matters, is quite simple - we have, whatever our, differences might be whatever the distinction between our cultural histories, one from the other whatever differences we may have on current politics or affairs, we sit down together in a spirit of companionship. We are friends. 1e understand each other; we can speak our minds to each other. But we come out of our conference still as friends, still as companions, still as members of the greatest Commonwealth the work has ever seen. And, Sir, it is because those things are so true and sometimes so overlooked that I give myself the enormous pleasure tonight of supporting with you the toast of the Royal Commonwealth Society, and as I propose it Ana as you listen to me proposing it you will know, as I know, that we are thinking not of our differences which are small but of our unities which are enormous an as I believe, immortal.
SIR WILLIAM DUNK:&nbsp;
Thank you, sir. Ladies and gentlemen, Dr. Evatt
DR. H. V. EVATT:
Mr. Prime Minister, You’re Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen. It is a great honour to support this toast and I think that the Prime minister has adopted the correct And philosophical approach to this problem not so much by speaking of the successful work of the society which under the difference of names has been continued by your resolution, but In the story that lies behind the Commonwealth; because if lectures are given, as they will be given in the Society and its various branches, about conditions throughout the Commonwealth and elsewhere, there is nothing more important than an understanding such as the Prime Minister has depicted of the nature of the Commonwealth itself and also, if I may say so, of the men who helped to build it, because it is not the work of a few years. Great men have put their minus together to create the Commonwealth, the British Commonwealth of Nations it was called. It is called the Commonwealth today but its association with Britain is close. Indeed, Her Majesty the Queen is the head of the Commonwealth and of course the Queen occupies an even closer relationship with some of the members of the Commonwealth. But just think of some of the Men of the Commonwealth. Take your minds back to the First World War and the settlement of that war. At that time, Australia, like Canada and New Zealand and South Africa, was a self-governing Dominion; it was not recognized as an independent State or a State with independent rights throughout the world, but at the conclusion of that war efforts made by the Prime Minister of Canada, Borden, by the Prime Minister of Australia, W. M. Hughes, by the two leaders of South Africa, the then leaders of South Africa, Botha and Smuts and by others, resulted in the self-governing dominions becoming signatories to the Treaty of Peace itself - an extraordinary and enormous development. But the matter having been taken that far, these nations given by Britain the right of self-government in local affairs, were determined to have similar rights in international and external affairs and those rights were not given reluctantly but given freely. And so you come to the new period, some 8&nbsp;or 9 years after the war, when what is called the Balfour Declaration was made and the dominion status was then defined as indicating something belonging to the self-governing dominions which gave them equality of status with the Mother Country herself, equality of status with inequality or differences of function. And that period was gone through. The Statute of Westminster was drafted which removed all technical legal obstacles in the way of self-government in internal or indeed in external affairs being exercised.&nbsp;
-5-
So you had the Statute of Westminster passed in various parts of the Dominions. And then in the Second world War it showed Further developments of the character I have mentioned and the Commonwealth of Nations developed from the British Commonwealth of Nations. I think it is right always to remember that it Was and is, British in origin, not only because of the association of the Queen but because the whole conception dates from the Balfour Declaration and is really one of the greatest triumphs of the British contributions to civilization and democracy throughout the world. Then, of course, there have been further developments.
There has been the emergence the Prime Minister indicated, of new members of the Commonwealth, not only the old Commonwealth, so to speak, of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, but new members of it, such as India and Pakistan and Ceylon; and now nations such as Malaya, Ghana and no doubt the west Indices, and the list is by no means complete. And there are differences and difficulties throughout the Commonwealth which arise from time to time; differences, acute differences, in internal affairs and quite a few differences in international affairs. But what of it!&nbsp;As the Prime Minister says, the Conference takes place, there is an exchange of views, and whatever the members of the Commonwealth do about it, they don't fight about it, they consult about it and they indicate an example which could well be followed by the United Nations itself. The conferences are completed and they allgo about their work it is a noble conception. I don't think there are any limits to the possibilities of the British Commonwealth of Nations, so long as we remember what its objectives are. Its objectives are, of course, the advancement of the members, also the advancement of democracy throughout the world and the welfare of all peoples. It is the same objective in essence as the United Nations. It is the parallel boy. When Ghana came into The Commonwealth, Ghana was almost simultaneously admitted as a member of the United Nations and they had the double status there. Similarly with Malaya, and it will go on. And I want to see the Commonwealth supported and I know it will be supported in Australia and not merely by the Government but by all peoples, by all political parties and all the people of Australia. Good luck to the Society for continuing in this way and congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman, on your initiative in getting this movement started.&nbsp;
-7-
Mr. CASEY.
When I received an invitation from the Chairman to attend this inaugural function of the Australian Capital Territory Branch of the Royal Commonwealth Society, I was very pleased it was a very tactful letter, a very pleasantly worded letter. As sometimes happens, the sting was in the tail, because after having said all the nice things that Sir William Dunk is frequently, but not always able to say (Laughter) he then got on to the question of the time during which I was supposed to speak and he told me that, as he did not have any intention whatsoever of putting any limitation on the time for which I would speak, he would hope an6 believe that I would fine myself able to say what I had to say within a period of 10 minutes. (Laughter). And&nbsp;I have got some reason to believe that he put something in the way of a limit, the same very tactful time limit on Dr. Evatt. The Prime Minister, may-be through his Office, was given the run of the tide but I noticed when I put the clock both on the Prime Minister and on Dr. Evatt. The Prime Minister spoke for 15 minutes and Dr. Evatt for 10&nbsp;minutes so I would expect that the whole thing has adopted a certain pattern at the instance of Sir William Dunk and quite rightly too. It reminds me of a short time ago in Sydney when I was speaking at a luncheon gathering and in rather polemical fashion I asked the chairman how long he wished me to speak and he said, very genially that I could speak for as long as I pleased, but added, "Of course, we have to go at 2 o'clock". (Laughter). Well, Mr. Chairman we are here tonight, a great many of us, a very great gathering, I think one of the largest gatherings I remember attending in Canberra, to pay our small parts in the launching of the Australian Capital Territory Branch of the Royal Commonwealth Society. And it is very right and proper, I would believe myself, and I think you would all believe, that there should be a branch of this old, traditional and famous Society in its various phases here in Canberra, the Seat of Government in Australia. Because here in Canberra as distinct from the other capital cities in the States of Australia, you have the High Commissioners of all the component parts of the Commonwealth; indeed I think it is very right and proper and appropriate that too is place Canberra should be the seat of what I would hope would in due course be, the major body of the Royal Commonwealth Society because here should be and I think one can say there is, the inspiration as far as Australia is concerned. This is the capital of Australia; here is the diplomacy, here should be I think the ideas that should radiate out on behalf of Australia to all parts of this Commonwealth so far as Australia
-8-
is concerned, and I would hope and expect that this Branch in Canberra would become a powerful Branch, would take the initiative in this business of binding and holing this Commonwealth together. As the Prime Minister has rightly reminded us the Royal Commonweal is under a year old. Thirty years ago the Royal Empire Society was founded, and I think it was 70 or 80 years ago that all this business had its beginnings in the Royal Colonial Institute; each one of those three names, titles, reflecting the state of affairs and the composition of this curiously proclaimed association of countries that we now call the Commonwealth of Nations. An so far as Australia is concerned, I think there is probably no man more advanced in the matter than Mr. Daniell, the Secretary of the Sydney Branch and, I would expect, his Chairman, Mr. Black. Those two men, I understand, fought a fairly lonely battle a few years ago in an effort to have the name changed from the Royal Empire Society, which had become in the effluxion of time a rather outmoded description, a description that was not agreeable by any means to all the present day members of the Commonwealth. Mr. Daniell I remember, netted me in for a gathering in Melbourne of the Royal Empire Society as it then was. I had myself fairly strong ideas that the old name Royal Empire Society had become an outmoded name. It was as I say disagreeable by reason of its assumed connection to some of the newer members of the Commonwealth, and so I went to this gathering and I saw Sir Charles Ponsonby a figure and a man of consequence whom I believe in my mind was probably allergic to these new, modern names. So I moistened my lips and, thought frightfully hard and got up and made a speech for the change in name, expecting to be cut in half by this rather formic able old gentleman from London. But that didn’t happen, and I may have had some hand in the changing, in cue course, of the name from Royal Empire Society to the Royal Commonwealth Society. But in the course of that, over a period of twelve months, I received a considerable number of insulting letters, and I was called a Communist and all sorts of things by those people who had, understandably, very nostalgic feelings for the old name which had become enshrined in men's hearts and minds. I asked Mr. Daniel as to his experience and he said he was called something worse than a Communist and he and I were branded as people that other decent people did not really go along with at all. Anyhow logic had its way in the end and it became the Royal Commonwealth Society and here it is. Now without taking up much more time-I am watching the clock and Sir William Dunk in the first war I was connected with Sir Thomas Blamey who was then Colonel Blamey and vein I used to growl about things to him he inevitably used to say to me "we’ll all right, what&nbsp;
-9-
are you going to do about it?” And I have tried to remember what he said and what he meant on a number of subsequent occasions. And I just say to myself, well here we all are in this room at the inauguration of the Royal Commonwealth Society in Canberra and what are we going to do about it. I think there is a lot to be done about it. There is a lot of linking still to be done in this Commonwealth - things are not all rosy in the Commonwealth, there is still a lot of linking, liaison work, and getting together to be done and I think probably this Branch in Canberra is the one to take the lead with the other branches in trying to do some of these things. I think the links between each one of us, the component parts of the Commonwealth and the United Kingdom, are all pretty good but I think myself that the links between the other members, between Australia and Canada even you might say Australia and New Zealand, Australia and Malaya, Australia and all the other component parts, those are the things that need to be strengthened. They are not easy to strengthen. I ask myself how that can be cone in actual practice. One of the ways it can be done is by direct press representation between the various component parts of the Commonwealth which is much more lacking than the average person would tend to believe and I believe that is probably, or I would think it is probably, the most important single thing that could be done, if that could be achieved. If the great Press barons of this country and their opposite numbers in other parts of the Commonwealth could be induced to have direct press representation between the various component parts, then I think a great, a considerable step forward would be made towards the further linking up of the component parts of this Commonwealth. Now, Mr. Chairman, I will say very little more because I think I am just about on the 9th minute, although there is a vast deal more to say. The Prime Minister gave, as he always does, an inspired address as to the origin and the history and the importance of the work of the maintenance and the strengthening of this Commonwealth. Dr. Evatt took it on another line but still made, if I may say so, a most useful contribution. And as there are many people still to speak I don't want to speak for much longer except to say, that I believe it is inherent in the hearts and minds of all of us here tonight to do, each one of us individually and as a Society, everything that can be possibly done to keep this grand conception of the Royal Commonwealth Society and of this Commonwealth in being and growing for the future and for myself, as one of the sponsors of this motion tonight, I would wish every good fortune and vigorous good fortune at that, to this new and, I hope, powerful Branch of the Royal Commonwealth Society.&nbsp;
-10-
SIR&nbsp;WILLIAM DUNK
Ladies and gentlemen - I give you the toast - The Royal Commonwealth Society.
SIR WILLIAM DUNK
I would now ask the Deputy President of the Branch, Mr. Newman if he would be good enough to propose the toast to the visitors.
MR. NEWMAN
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Prime Minister, Your Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen. Tonight it is my privilege, on behalf of the President and the members of the A.C.T. Branch of the Society, to extend a welcome to our guests. The programme indicates that the next toast is that of the "visitors". I think there is a marked difference - quite a fundamental difference, between visitors and guests, and I prefer to refer to you all tonight as the "guests" of the Society. Visitors may be welcome - they may not - for instance I may go home to lunch and say to my wife, "I had a visit from the bank manager this morning" quite a possibility and she might say "well I had a visit from the wireless inspector", and so on they're not welcome but as guests we do welcome you all to this inaugural function of the Australian Capital Territory Branch of the Royal Commonwealth Society. I wish to refer, briefly, to a remark of the Prime Minister's when he spoke of the conferences he has attended at No. 10 &nbsp;Downing Street, of representatives of the various Commonwealth countries and to the good that stems from such meetings. About 12 months ago, or a little more, it was my good fortune to attend a conference in London of the opposite numbers to myself in the other British Commonwealth countries, of which there were 10 represented at the Conference including Ghana - we didn't meet at No. 10 Downing Street, but at the Commonwealth Relations Office just opposite, and the good that flowed from meeting the representatives of those other countries; discussing their problems with them; realising what some of their difficulties are and the fact that older countries like Britain, Canada and Australia could very materially help the younger Commonwealth Countries in their problems, I found it very inspiring indeed, and it fired my enthusiasm for the formation of this Branch in the Australian Capital Territory. Since my return from England I have had a lot of correspondence with the representatives of the other Commonwealth Countries and they have freely acknowledged the help we, in Australia, have&nbsp;
-11-
been able to give.
Now tonight the toast is, as I say, that of our guests. The Chairman has already extended a welcome to the Rt. Hon. the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Dr. H. V. Evatt and the Rt. Hon R. G. Casey, I would like to add to that list, Mr. Ivan Black, the President of the Branch, and Lt. Gen. Sir Horace Robertson, President of the Victorian Branch. are also fortunate to have with us Mr. Rigby, the Chairman of the Council of the Branch and Mr. Daniel, the Secretary of the N.S.W Branch to whom reference has already been made.
In referring to those gentlemen I would like to express, on behalf of the A.C.T. Branch of the Society, the thanks we owe to them for the assistance they gave us in the formation of this Branch in Canberra. The way to go about forming a new Branch of the Society is rather unusual - we were required to have 100 members of the Society residing in the area in which the new Branch was to be formed. :Well&nbsp;we scouted around in Canberra and found, I think, that we had 5 or 6&nbsp;members of the Society, but with the co-operation of Mr. Black and the N.S.W branch we were able to enlist members in the A.C.T.&nbsp;and have them registered and enrolled as members of the N.S.W Branch. When we had our requisite number, something over 100, we made application for the Royal Charter, which was granted. A matter of the greatest importance to the A.C.T. Branch was that the New South Wales people were good enough to refund to us, all our nomination fees and all our subscriptions - that Sir was a very fine gesture on their part and one which we greatly appreciated. Without that we really could not have got going. We have had a lot of assistance both from Victoria and from New South Wales. Mr. Rigby and Mr. Daniel came to Canberra initially to help us when we held our first meeting with the idea of forming a Branch and we are very grateful for the assistance we have had from them.
In welcoming the guests tonight, I cannot individualise amongst the many who have come along, but I would like to mention that we extend a special welcome to the Hon. Gordon Freeth, the new Minister for the Interior (applause). As many of you know, Mr. Freeth is now a resident of the
A.C.T. and we are hopeful that after this meeting is over, or in the very near future, we will be enrolling him and Mrs. Freeth as members of this A.C.T. Branch.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is not much more I need say. It is very gratifying to the Chairman, to myself and to the members of the Council to see such a wonderful attendance here tonight. The response from our own members&nbsp;
-12-
in bringing along guests has been really excellent; it gives us a lot of encouragement for the future and I would now ask those members of the A.C.T. Branch of the Society if they would be good enough to rise and drink a toast to our guests.
MR. NEWMAN:
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, Mr. Ivan Black, President of the Branch will respond to the toast and will be supported by Lt. Gen. Sir Horace Robertson, President of the Victorian Branch.&nbsp;
MR. IVAN BLCK.&nbsp;M.L.A.
Mr. President, Mr. Prime Minister, Dr. Evatt, Your Excellences, Ladies and Gentlemen: May I thank you all most warmly on behalf of the visitors or should I better say for the very warm way in which you have honoured the toast proposed in such kindly fashion by Mr. Newman who sits on my left. I am particularly grateful to Mr. Newman for making some reference to the part played by the N.S.W Branch in the formation of this Australian Capital Territory Branch and I am most grateful to Mr. Newman for referring to the work done by the Chairman of my Council, Mr. Alex. Rigby and the Secretary of the Branch, Mr. Daniel. I must admit quite frankly that although I was most enthusiastic about the formation of this Branch, for reasons which were not within my control the spade work was done by those two gentlemen, and I want to take this opportunity of paying my tribute to them. Now I know that all the guests here tonight will be as delight as I am that a Branch has been formed in the National Capital of Australia. We&nbsp;have the headquarters of the Society in the capital of the United Kingdom, we have Branches in Ottawa and in Wellington, but it is a matter I think of some regret that it is only now that in the National Capital of this third senior nation within the Commonwealth we have been cable to form a Branch.&nbsp;
However, this inaugural dinner has been a splendid function. The splendid speeches too have maintained a fair average, and I assure you that if it is up to about 10 &amp; ½ minutes I will be bowled very early in my innings and reduce the average back to the 9 ½ which was referred to earlier on. But in passing May I say this we have a situation now where we have a Royal Commonwealth Society, and there are some anomalies connected with the name. The plain fact being, Sir, that there is confusion in the minds of some people as to whether we are a Commonwealth of Australia organization or a Commonwealth of Nations organization. And now it is that I want to look, not pleadingly, but coaxingly, towards the Prime&nbsp;
-13-
Minister, because I believe it is now appropriate since we have emerged as the Commonwealth of Nations that we should speak always of Australia, not as the Commonwealth of Australia, but just as Australia! It can be done without constitutional amendment simply by introducing the use of the word Australia as a matter of common parlance. We are one of the free nations within the Commonwealth of Nations, and as such I believe we are Australians.
Well now, my thanks on behalf of the guests is most sincere; you have entertained us right royally and before I conclude I want to make a small presentation to this new Branch on behalf of the N.S.W Branch of this great Society. It is rather a common experience for all of us, in fact it has been a common experience for many years that especially around the time of the Loan Council or the Premiers' Conference it is very frequently said, sir, that Canberra in particular gives N.S.W. nothing. Well now let me assure you that so far as the N.S.W Branch of the Society is concerned, whether we feel you give us nothing or not, we want to give you something. I've been very interested tonight to see you displaying the flags of the various Nations of the Commonwealth. The only two missing are Ghana and the Central African Federation. Some years ago we decided in Branch that we would keep up to date with the flags of the Nations of the Commonwealth and we bought a large number of these, and mounted them on a bridge as we believe that there must be a bridge among all the Nations of the Commonwealth if we are to prosper and play our proper part in the world. So that is the reason we mounted them on a bridge. And here we have them with the flag of Australia naturally taking pride of place, that is, strictly according to protocol, sir, with the Union flag on the right and the Canadian flag on the left and so on. We always display these flags at all our functions and I do hope that you in this Branch within the Australian Capital Territory will always do the same thing. But now may I formally thank you, Mr. Newman, for so kindly proposing this toast, And on behalf of all the guests may I not only thank this Branch for their extremely kind hospitality to us all but also on behalf of the guests may I wish this most important Branch every success in its efforts to strengthen the ties which bind the nations of the Commonwealth together.
-14-
LT. GENERAL SIR HORACE ROBERTSON.
Nobody said anything to me about a time limit and as Tim the last speaker I presume the rest of the evening is mine! Ladies and Gentlemen, several speakers mentioned the flags which are around this room. They take my mind back to about 10&nbsp;years ago, when it was my lot to be concerned in a Joint Commonwealth Venture, and when we had very many difficult problems to face. In order to try and get the various members of the British Commonwealth together I was in the habit of giving dinners to which I invited my various Navy, Army and Air Force Commanders from Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, from Canada and South Africa, from India and Pakistan and from any others who happened to be about. And we used to identify them by having the flag of their own country placed where they were to sit at the table. We made the dinner a little more "Commonwealth" by getting some Toheroa soup from New Zealand, some Canadian salmon from Canada, and appropriate food or drink from each of the countries, and the South Africans somehow took unto themselves the role I've no doubt because they thought it was the best - &nbsp;of supplying us with brandy. Whether the bandy had anything to do with it or note got to a stage among ourselves in which we became very closely welded together (laughter) and I recall the effect on my friend Colonel Pretorius from South Africa, a direct descendant of the first President of the Boer Republic against whom the British fought he was an Air Force officer and a most likeable person of whom we all were very fond. But one night he was move to such an extent that he got up and said that he had lived in the British Empire all of his life and that he had always felt an inferiority in that he was not treated as other than a colonial. Now for the first time in his life in Japan, in Korea, at these dinners and among the others he had felt at last that he was an equal among equals, that nobody claimed superiority over anyone else and that we were all one family working together. I always look back on that mordent as one of our greatest triumphs. Of course, it is natural with a family for them to get together because the family has something which binds them closer together than any bonus can be among friends. And it may be that one of the factors wildish pushed us even closer together was the fact that we were somewhat overshadowed by a very large and very powerful ally with whom we were all very friendly and although we got on famously with our ally, we all felt that he was a bit big and it was a little difficult to talk to him as an equal. I had at times to try and present Australia's views to our ally, and&nbsp;the replies I received while always&nbsp;
-15-
friendly, did suggest that Australia had only about the population of New York and that the views of all the small nations, while interesting, could not carry much weight alongside those of the big nations who shouldered most of the burden.
But I have also had the privilege of speaking on behalf of the whole British Commonwealth, with the whole might and weight of the British Commonwealth and of this family together, and our big friend has had to listen and to give serious consideration to the views that were put forward. Therefore, I suggest that not only for the good that comes among ourselves, not only for the friendship that comes among ourselves, but for the furtherance of our own individual and collective efforts it is wise for the British Commonwealth to speak as often as possible with an agree and unific voice. That is why when I came back to t-Australia, I have taken an interest in the Royal Commonwealth Society and now fulfil the role of President of the Victorian Branch, which I think am I right Mr. Black?- is, next to Great Britain, the largest Branch in the world (laughter). But it's no use just belonging to a Branch and having these pleasant dinners with all these distinguished people here unless we do something, and I can only tell you of two things that we are trying to up in Victoria. The first one is that as the London headquarters provide such a wonderful meeting place where members from all over the world can stay and meet and are provided with all sorts of facilities we have taken a similar step with our premises in Victoria, and we have a residential section where we&nbsp;welcome memb.rs from all over the British Commonwealth, and we have already had a large stream from Malaya, from Ceylon, from Africa, from India, from Pakistan, from Canada, &nbsp;ruin New Zealand and from the United Kingdom. They come and stay there and it gives an opportunity for us all to meet together. The second thing is education about our Commonwealth, and of course what we used to know in the past as jingo, is no longer popular. But there is nothing to be ashamed of in knowing something of the history and of the peoples and resources of the various countries of the British Commonwealth in fact there is alot to be proud of. And so we have approached Headquarters in London, where they have a Commonwealth Studies Committee and asked them if they will produce a book describing each country of the British Commonwealth, and in view of the startling changes that occur from day to day, that it might evil be a loose-leaf book so that the new members of the British Commonwealth can be
-16-
Incorporated as they grow to equal status with us. The Education Department of&nbsp;Victoria has undertaken they will adopt that book throughout the whole of their schools as a textbook. I believe that if we can get that book then all Commonwealth countries may want to use it because it is a record of great achievement, great things to be proud of, and of the great future which still faces us in this British Commonwealth. Mr. President, on behalf of the Victorian Branch, I&nbsp;wish all success and good fortune to the Australian Capital Territory Branch. We are delighted that a Branch has been established here as we feel that the National Capital of Australia is not truly the National Capital unless it also has its national representation of the Royal Commonwealth Society. Thank you for your welcome.&nbsp;


COPY&nbsp;
Minister for the Interior,&nbsp;Parliament House,&nbsp;Canberra, A.C.T. &nbsp;2 February 1959.
My&nbsp;dear Prime Minister,
Knowing your keen personal interest in having the policy making core of the Defence and Service Departments located in Canberra at the earliest possible moment, I thought you would like to know what progress has been made to date. This letter, therefore, describes in detail what has been achieved.
In November 1956,&nbsp;Cabinet directed –&nbsp;


that the policy making' core of the Department of Defence and such other staff as would need to be associated with it in Canberra for policy making purposes should transfer to Canberra at the earliest possible date; and&nbsp;


that planning be based on 450 - 500&nbsp;being transferred initially, i.e. as soon as office accommodation was available in ‘B’ Block of the Administrative Building, and a further 600&nbsp;about six months later.


Subsequently a scheme to provide for the transfer of approximately 1,100&nbsp;personnel over a period of one year from 1st January, 1959&nbsp;was submitted to and approved by&nbsp;Cabinet in February, 1957.&nbsp;&nbsp;At the same time approval was given for a programme of works, including additional houses, schools, and associated engineering works, totalling an estimated £37.2m. to be spread over a period of five years from 1st July, 1957.&nbsp;This programme was designed not only to meet the needs of the transferees but also to meet the normal requirements of the rapidly expanding city. The prime task, however, was to effect the transfer of personnel of the Defence and Service Departments and I am pleased to be able to report that the first phase of the movement has been completed.
According to figures furnished by&nbsp;the Department of Defence, 433 positions w-ere transferred in the first group. Some of these, however, were&nbsp;vacant&nbsp;and the occupants of some other positions declined to transfer. The actual number for whom accommodation had to be found totalled 372.&nbsp;Including 47 United Kingdom and United States Liaison staffs. Approximately another 20 were accommodated at Fairbairn and Harman or obtained private accommodation.&nbsp;
The following shows the type of accommodation provided for the transferees&nbsp;
Houses 208
Flats 62&nbsp;
Hostel beds 102
Despite this requirement it was possible during 1958&nbsp;to allocate to the ordinary waiting list a total of 864 tenancies made up of 637&nbsp;new houses and flats and 227&nbsp;re-allocated vacancies. This compares with the previous best total of759&nbsp;during 1956,&nbsp;and the previous three-year average of 625. Accordingly, far from suffering any loss because of the transfers, the need to accelerate
The building programme to meet the transfers benefited those who were on the waiting list for housing.
The need to provide such a large number of houses, flats and hostel beds, and at the same time make some provision for&nbsp;
-2-
people already in Canberra who were waiting for housing, presented quite a formidable task. A&nbsp;special unit was set up in the Department of the Interior to do the initial planning and programming and to co-ordinate the activities of the various agencies concerned in the overall development involved. Much credit is due to these officers, to the Department of Works, and over the latter half of last year, to the newly created National Capital Development Commission, for seeing the programme through and ensuring that requirements were met on time. It was a striking example of good planning and excellent team work between the various departmental agencies, backed up by
Close co-operation on the part of the contractors and men on the job.
The actual movement of officers with their families, and of departmental papers and records, was also carried out very smoothly and the officers of the Department of Supply and the removalists are to be commended on the manner in which this largescale movement was organised and completed.&nbsp;
The allocation of accommodation was carried out in Melbourne some three months prior to the move commencing by&nbsp;officers of the Department of the Interior. Every officer being transferred was interviewed and given a choice of house types, consistent with his family needs. As a result quite a number of officers have expressed their appreciation for the way in which they were treated. The Victorian Branch of the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association in their official journal, "Viewpoint" had this to say: -&nbsp;
"Victorian ‘Viewpoint! Wishes to add its congratulations to the officers from the Department of the Interior who carried out the allocation task in Melbourne with such patience, fairness and courtesy that every future tenant went away with complete satisfaction."
The Secretary, Department of Defence, also expressed his thanks for the way the job&nbsp;was handled.
As you know, additional schools, pre-school centres and mothercraft centres also formed an important part of the five-year construction programme. Some of these were required urgently to relieve the over-crowding that had occurred due to the rapid growth of Canberra over recent years, as well as to meet the increased requirements arising from the transfers. Since 1st July, 1957, additional school accommodation has been provided as follows&nbsp;
&nbsp;




&nbsp;


Classrooms


Other rooms&nbsp;


Maximum capacity




North Ainslie primary


8


4


380




Forrest Infants and primary&nbsp;


15


5


700




Tharwa school – extensions&nbsp;


1


-


48




Lyneham high school


19


21


900




Lyneham infants and primary&nbsp;


15


5


700




 
(Portions only of these two schools have actually been taken over but the remainder will be available later in the year.)&nbsp;
In addition, the first stage of alterations and additions to Telopea Park School to convert it to a full High School has been completed, giving 24 classrooms and 18&nbsp;other rooms with a total capacity of 950.&nbsp;
Further schools in course of design n or projected are: - &nbsp;
-3-




&nbsp;


Classrooms


Other rooms


Maximum capacity




Red Hill Infants and Primary (required by 1960)


23


5


1000




Narrabundah High School (required by 1961)


19


21


9000




Canberra High School – extensions – additional home science and technical accommodation.&nbsp;
Telopea park High School – second stage – mainly alterations&nbsp;
The denominational schools have also increased their accommodation. The Roman Catholic Church has made extensions to St. Edmund's College providing additional classrooms and science laboratories, and a new secondary school for girls has been opened this year at Braddon providing accommodation for 400.
The Canberra Church of England Boys' Grammar School has built a block of new classrooms, assembly hall and ancillary accommodation, giving additional capacity of 120. The Girls' Grammar School has at present under construction a block of five classrooms, science laboratory and ancillary accommodation,
As a result of the school expansion programme the increased school population at the beginning of the school year has been absorbed without difficulty and the further increase expected from the second moves to commence in July can also be absorbed,
Three new pre-school centres and two mothercraft centres were also opened during 1958.
Second move. The Defence Department has stated that it is anticipated 624 positions will l be transferred in the second move scheduled to commence in July next. Construction to meet the housing requirements of this group is proceeding. Individual needs are not yet known but based on the pattern of types of accommodation sought by&nbsp;those in the first group, there appears to be little doubt at this stage that requirements can be met in time to permit of the second movement commencing on schedule.
(Sgd.)&nbsp;GORDON FREETH.


P.M. 2/1959
FOR PRESS:
MOVEMENT OF DEFENCE AND SERVICE DEPARTMENTS TO CANBERRA
Statement by the Prime Minister
The first stage in the movement of the Defence and Service Departments to Canberra had been completed with quite remarkable Efficiency, the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said to-day.
"A movement of this nature cannot help but be accompanied by a legion of problems", Mr. Menzies said.
"Apart from the purely physical problems of housing the Individual’s concerned and providing working space and facilities, there the necessity for avoiding any disruption in the work of the Departments.
"That this has been achieved in all aspects with a&nbsp;9 minimum of disturbance and complaints is a matter for congratulation for All those who took part in the move.
"I have received a report from the Minister for the Interior (Mr. Freeth) showing just how successfully the move was carried out. I attach a copy."
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
17th February, 1959.


For Press:&nbsp;
CONFERENCE&nbsp;WITH STATE&nbsp;PREMIERS&nbsp;
Statement by&nbsp;the Prime Minister
The dates for the forthcoming Premiers' Conference would remain unchanged, the Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) said to-day.
The conference will begin in Canberra on March 4, and is expected to last for three days.&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said, "We have considered suggestions that the date of the conference should be changed because three State elections will take place in March.
"However, the conference will have some matters of urgency before it - the position of the claimant States, for instance, cannot be too long deferred.
"Other matters, such as finance for roads, need to be considered as soon as possible so that arrangements flowing from policy decisions made at the conference can be worked out
before the end of the financial year.
"For these reasons we have decided it would be impossible to postpone the conference until after the three State elections have been held.
"In effect, this would have meant postponing the conference until about the end of April, as we would have to allow time for newly-elected Premiers to brief themselves on their State financial affairs.
"I should add that I have not received a request from any of the Premiers for a postponement."
CANBERRA, A.C.T,&nbsp;
19th February, 1959.


FOR PRESS:
P.M. 3/1959
QUEENSLAND CYCLONE DAMAGE
Following is the text of an urgent telegram sent by the Prime Minister to Mr. John Murray, the Member for
Herbert, on 19th February:
“Please convey to victims of cyclone disaster sincerest sympathy on behalf commonwealth government and on my own behalf stop I shall be glad to have from you on your return to Canberra a full report on the extent of the damage”.&nbsp;
Canberra, A.C.T.&nbsp;19th February, 1959.


NOT&nbsp;FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE SUNDAY,&nbsp;6&nbsp;FEB. 22
FOR PRESS: P.M. 5/1959
ROYAL VISIT: APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR GENERAL&nbsp;
Statement by&nbsp;the Prime Minister
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today that Mr. W.R. CUMMIING, C.V.O., Assistant Secretary, Prime Minister Department, would be Director-General of the visit to Australia Later this year by&nbsp;Her Royal Highness the Princess Alexandra of Ken, Mr. Cumming has had considerable experience in the planning of visits to Australia by&nbsp;members of the Royal Family.
He was Director of the visit to the A.C.T.&nbsp;of Her Majesty the Queen, in 1954.&nbsp;
He was Joint Director of the Australian visit of His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh, in 1956.&nbsp;
He was Executive Officer of the Commonwealth organisation which arranged the visit of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, in 1958;&nbsp;and was the Director for her visit to the A.C.T.
It is expected that Mr. Cumming will leave for London early in April to discuss with Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra know the details of her visit. When discussing the Queensland portion of the programme Mr. Cummins will be joined by&nbsp;the Agent Genera for Queensland, Mr. Muir.&nbsp;
Mr. Cumming is a Queenslander who spent his early life in Southeast Queensland. His parents are now living in Brisbane. He is a graduate of the Universities of Queensland and Sydney.
Her Royal Highness will arrive in Australia on the 15th August and leave about the 26th September. She&nbsp;will spend three weeks of her six-week stay in Queensland attending that State's Centenary celebrations.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
22nd February 1959.


STRICT EMBARGO: UNTIL THE PRIME MINISTER BEGINS TO SPEAKAT
APPROXIMATELY 3.05.pm.
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON.&nbsp;R.G. MENZIES, C.H., Q.C., M.P.,
IN THIE HOUSE&nbsp;OF REPRESENTATIVES ON TUESDAY&nbsp;24th FEBRUARY, 1959
INDONESIA AND&nbsp;WEST NEW GUINEA
What has been our policy?
1.&nbsp;We recognise Dutch sovereignty of west New Guinea; we have supported and continue to support this sovereignty.
2. We say that if sovereignty is to be changed it must be by&nbsp;legal methods, i.e. by&nbsp;some means which international law accepts and recognises.
3.&nbsp;We have in the United Nations taken up the position that Indonesian submissions on this Netherlands territory are neither in substance nor in form within the effective jurisdiction of the political organisation of the United Nations; that it is not the function of the General Assembly to interpret agreements nor to pass judgments on questions of territorial sovereignty. This did not and does not exclude a reference by&nbsp;the parties to the International Court.
4. We have advocated and still advocate the reference to the International Court of the Indonesian claim to sovereignty. The Dutch have previously expressed their willingness; Indonesia has refused.
5. We have always maintained that the paramount interest ultimately is that of the indigenous population. This view recognises sovereignty, but looks to the future in terms of self-determination. The same goes for Australian New Guinea and Papua,
Has there been any change?
NO.
On two occasions during Dr. Subandrio's very welcome visit I had the opportunity of stating Australia's position. I will put to the House that position in substantially the terms in which, as Prime Minister, I stated it to Dr. Subandrio.


We are and always have been of opinion that the Netherlands has sovereignty over West New Guinea. If, as you clearly do, you dispute this, the matter should be determined by&nbsp;a lawful process, i.e. either by&nbsp;adjudication or byagreement arrived at in free discussion.&nbsp;


We are certainly not prepared to urge the Dutch to negotiate. You have made it clear publicly in Australia that your conception of a negotiation is that it should lead to and work out the conditions of a transfer of sovereignty. Under these circumstances, for us to urge the Dutch to negotiate would be to take up the position that we desire to see the sovereignty changed. This would be a clear reversal of our policy, and we will not do it. Je will therefore not advocate a negotiation.&nbsp;


-2-&nbsp;
(c) But should Indonesia and the Netherlands come to some agreement in the future about sovereignty, we will recognise and respect it, just as we expect our own sovereignty to be recognised.
(d) This is not to say that we are not deeply concerned with the future of the indigenous populations of New Guinea. We are most concerned. Are developing our own portions of New Guinea along lines which will, we hope, in due course, lead to self-determination. We expect similar policies in West New Guinea.
(e) We would desire that Indonesia should publicly affirm that force will not be resorted to in order to establish territorial claims. This principle is vital to Australia and her own security.
(f) We would think it a tragedy if our differences on the matter of .Vest New Guinea and the Netherlands should impair the development of sensible friendship and mutual understanding between our two countries. Indonesia is our nearest neighbour of great population; we both have much to gain from peace; we are not disposed to fall into war with each other; in your search for democratic government and administration, your dangers, like ours, come from undemocratic and aggressive world movements.&nbsp;
(g) You will find Australians an instinctively friendly people, clear in their views about New Guinea, for vividly remembered historic reasons, and to gavel disturbed by&nbsp;your treatment of Dutch assets. But if we can isolate these matters of difference and see them dealt with in a lawful way, there is no reason why we should not live as friendly neighbours, with mutual Assistance and tolerance, with common hopes and interests.&nbsp;
The joint communique of the two Ministers was designed to give effect to these propositions.
What are the complaints?
Dr. Evatt must face up to some specific questions.&nbsp;


Does he regard a disputed territorial claim as unfit? For adjudication in the International Court, the supreme adjudicating organ of the United Nations? For, though he says there is "nothing to decide" the fact is that Indonesia does claim, as against the Dutch, sovereignty over West New Guinea. There is thus a clear justiciable issue.&nbsp;


Suppose Indonesia decided to accept the jurisdiction of the Court, would Dr. Evatt deny that jurisdiction? If so,&nbsp;why?


If the Court decided the issue of sovereignty in favour of Indonesia, would Dr. Evatt (in my place) repudiate the decision, or accept it?


Should he accept, how the case would differ from a transfer of sovereignty freely agreed upon between the two parties principal. Can the Court do by&nbsp;judgment what the parties cannot do by&nbsp;free agreement or settlement?
-3-&nbsp;
Should he reject the decision, what would he do to make his rejection effective? Would he move the United Nations to overrule the Court? Would he quarrel with both the Dutch and the Indonesians, each of whom had, ex&nbsp;hypotheses, accepted the jurisdiction of the Court? Would he really think that the United Nations would vote to overrule the Court?&nbsp;
But pursue the matter further.
Dr. Subandrio is reported to have named the Labour government of Australia, chiefly moved on this matter by&nbsp;Dr. Evatt himself, as “the midwife" of the new Indonesian Republic.
Suppose the Dutch had, at the hand-over, included West New Guinea with Java and Sumatra and the rest of the Netherlands East Indies in the transfer, would Dr. Evatt, as midwife, have refused to deliver the additional child?
What could or would the Labour government have done had W4est New Guinea been included?
And if the Dutch at some future time, exercising their own judgment (and we are clear that any decision must be made freely and no under threat or duress) were to decide to add West New Guinea to the transfer, notwithstanding, the fact that we recognise and clearly support their claim to sovereignty, what could or would an Australian government do, except recognise the new sovereignty as lawful?
It is said that we have changed our policy. I venture to assert that it is the Labour Party which has changed its policy.
On Wednesday last, Dr. Evatt said:
"The Minister seems to suppose that, if sovereignty over West New Guinea resides in the Netherlands, it can be&nbsp;transferred at the will of the Netherlands to Indonesia, and that will be&nbsp;the end of the matter. But it is not!”&nbsp;
But in 1949, Dr. Evatt's government thought the matter one between Indonesia and the Netherlands. Thus, on October 7, 1949, in answer to a question by Mr. Falkner, Dr. Evatt, as Minister, said
"Sovereignty of Dutch New Guinea is in the Netherlands, and it is for the Netherlands to say whether Dutch New Guinea shall come into the agreement. From our point of view the relationship of Dutch New Guinea with the Indonesian Republic and the future government of the territories concerned are matters primarily for the Dutch and Indonesian governments. I repeat that our interest is that there should be&nbsp;a peaceful settlement of that question."
The whole of this controversy appears to have sprung from a miss-interpretation of the words "would not oppose such an agreement." These words have been twisted to mean that Australia will actually encourage the making of such an agreement. This is
not our attitude, as we made crystal clear to Dr. Subandrio in the statements I have already recalled. It just could not beour attitude. For years we have not only accepted and supported Dutch sovereignty, but have also supported the Netherlands in the United Nations. So clearly have we contemplated a continuance of Dutch administration that, as recently as November 6th, 1957,&nbsp;the Australian and Netherlands Governments publicly defined the jointly agreed principles being followed in respect of their New Guinea territories.
-4-
These principles included a declaration of the basic importance of the interest and inalienable rights of the indigenous inhabitants; and the need for co-operation in policy and administration, having regard to the geographical and ethnological association between the two sections of New Guinea. The two governments agreed that they would continue and strengthen their co-operation. In conclusion, they said:
"In so doing the two Governments are determined to promote an uninterrupted development of this process until such time as the inhabitants of the territories concerned will be in a position to determine their own future.
Nothing that we have said or done modifies or contradicts this joint declaration in any way.
If honourable members will look at the relevant paragraph of the recent communique, they will see that our no opposition or, as I would prefer to say, our recognition, is to attach only if and after an agreement is reached "1between the Netherlands and Indonesia as parties principal, arrived at by&nbsp;peaceful processes and in accordance with internationally accepted principles.
It seems to have been overlooked by&nbsp;some that this communique contains at least three other statements about New Guinea which are of significance for Australia.
The first is that it is now on record in this joint document, which will be studied in Indonesia, that Australia not only recognises Netherlands sovereignty but also recognises in
Respect of New Guinea the principles of self-determination.
The second is that we have stipulated that any agreement should accord with "internationally accepted principles".&nbsp; Those principles are in some important ways expressed in the Charter of the United Nations. They certainly include a recognition of the duties to native peoples arid their ultimate right of self-determination,
(As Mr. Joske pointed out to the House on Thursday last, one of the international principles, binding on Indonesia, the Netherlands, and Australia as member nations of the United Nations, is expressed in Article 73&nbsp;of the Charter. We think that under that article all the inhabitants of New Guinea, W4est or East, whoever has the responsibility of administration, have interests declared to be paramount. These, as I have said, are referred to in the joint communique, and were emphasised by&nbsp;us in the discussions.)
The third is that Indonesia expressly renounces the use of force to sustain its claim to West New Guinea. In view of some threats and rumours of threats, we attach great importance to this statement as no doubt will other powers concerned in the peace of South East Asia, and the South-West Pacific.&nbsp;
There is another aspect of this matter to which I would wish to make a brief reference.
We&nbsp;have stated that we will not put pressure on either of the parties to come to any new arrangement. It should however&nbsp; be understood that we are not forgetting our special relations with the Netherlands, our joint declaration of November 1957,&nbsp;and the importance we attach to the development of the indigenous inhabitants of New Guinea as a whole. We therefore have a lively and continuing interest in the result of any negotiations should the Netherlands, freely decide to engage in them. We would therefore naturally expect to have our voice heard on the matters which affect the future of New Guinea.&nbsp;
-5-
We are not aware of any Netherlands intention to negotiate, but clearly any negotiation would relate to a variety of aspects of the future of West New Guinea and its inhabitants.
Conclusion
It is, I think, unfortunate that our friendly and frank, but civilised talks, with a car and significant neighbour should have given rise, here and there, to such intemperate forebodings. My&nbsp;own government has a clear record of friendly association with the Dutch, with whom we have, and will, expand as opportunity offers, the administrative contacts to which I have referred in respect of our various sections of New Guinea. We have made it plain that the Dutch will most certainly be under no pressure from us either to negotiate or withdraw. But it would be offensive to them to suggest that they are not their own masters in these as in other things.
We have equally made it clear to Indonesia that, apart from our firmly held views on the Dutch issues we desire friendship, understanding and peace. We think that the recent talks advanced these desires.
Before I finish, I would like to reiterate Australia's genuine interest in the welfare of the young and growing nation of Indonesia. We were all impressed by&nbsp;the visit which we have just had from Dr. Subandrio indicating, as it did, his Government's real desire for co-operation. We were impressed by&nbsp;Dr. Subandrio himself, personally and as the representative of a very significant neighbour, whose scores of millions of people live so close to us, and whose good will is so important for our own future. I am bound to say that his friendly, well-informed, and intelligent approach to us and his explanations of Indonesian problems, have done nothing but good in clearing the air of misconceptions which may have existed in some minds. Should ill-considered criticisms of the outcome of his visit damage the relations strengthened bythis visit, it would be&nbsp;a stop backwards. I&nbsp;hope that there will be an end to doubts and fears now that our position has been made clear.
With the compliments of
Hugh Dash,
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister,
CANBERRA, A.C.T.


FOR GENERAL RELEASE.
ROYAL VISIT 1959.
The following is a list of the Commonwealth Organisation for the visit of Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra of Kent.
Her Royal Highness will spend about 6 weeks in Australia from August 15th next, and will visit the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland (where she will spend 3 weeks), New South Wales and Victoria.
Director-General - W.R. Cumming, Esq C.V.O.&nbsp;
(Already announced
Secretary - J. Dingwall, Esp.
Public Relations Director - R. Kennedy, Esp.
Commonwealth Security Officer - R.W. Whirred, Esp., M.V.O.
Commonwealth Transport Officer - J.W. Reilly, Esq.
Postmaster-General's Department - L.A. Fincher, Esq.
Department of Civil Aviation - D.S. Graham, Esq
Department of the Navy - Lieutenant - Commander&nbsp;
P.J. Hutson, R.A.N.
Department of the Army - Lieutenant- Colonel
Department of Air - Wing Commander D.E. Moseley,
R.A.A.F.
With the compliments of Robert Kennedy,&nbsp;
Special Assistant to the Prime Minister.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
10th March, 1959.


&nbsp;PRESS CONFERENCE&nbsp;GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON.&nbsp;R.G. MENZIES,
C.H., Q.C., M.P., AT CANBERRA ON&nbsp;THURSDAY, 12TH MARCH, 1959 AT 3.30
p.m.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: &nbsp;Under-Secretaries, sir, have you made a decision on their future? You said in the Cabinet statement you would be considering this.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No, not yet. I have been having some discussions on it in the last two days.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;There is a suggestion, sir, that you might have been considering them going on to the Executive Council. Would that be possible, sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I&nbsp;have no idea. No, I have nothing to say about that yet.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Can you tell us, sir, if there is any legislation pending we haven't heard about. I mean in this session, not these sittings?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know what ones have been announced.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Sir, what has happened about the proposal to bring? In legislation on union fees, or rather union charges for the political parties. I think before the elections there was some discussion that you may bring a Bill to prevent the victimisation of people who refused to pay.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I remember there was some discussion about that at the tail end of the last session the last Parliament but I have not seen anything on it of late. That is not to say that the Minister for Labour is not going into it
&nbsp;
QUESTION: &nbsp;Has the Government made a final decision not to proceed with the F104 in any form for the R.A.A.F.?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: That's the star fighter. We rejected that one a long time ago.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
QUESTION: That's finally rejected?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;What about the 105&nbsp;millimetre Lowitzer
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Not that I know of. I think you had better ask the Minister for Defence that.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, at the opening of Parliament, Sir William Slim Made some reference to Australia wanting to have Closer trade links with Asia. Much the same thing has been said by Mr. Casey at the E.C.A.F.E.&nbsp;Conference. Do we take that as being a deliberate policy by&nbsp;Australia to try and strengthen her ties with Asia?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Look, I'm not up with the discussions at E.C.A.F.E.&nbsp;I don't know about them yet and I would want to have a talk with Mr. Casey about that before I said anything on that point.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;His thinking was along the same lines as Sir William Slim in his policy speech by&nbsp;saying that
We wanted closer trade links.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes; but if you want some particulars on that, I&nbsp;am not able to give them to you.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-2-
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;It wasn't so much particulars, sir as to whether it was a sort of a general policy that we are now trying to establish ourselves as leaders or Western leaders in Asia trough trade and various other things.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I think that's a very large inference. I think you ought to talk to the Minister for Trade as to what the possibilities are, because I sometimes hear rather exaggerated estimates of them; but he's the expert on that. You ask him.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, in view of Mr. Casey's talks today with Mr.Firubin, can you tell us what advantages there will be for Australia in a physical resumption of diplomatic relations with Russia?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No- is&nbsp;Mr. Casey having talks with Mr.Firubin today?
&nbsp;
COMMENT:&nbsp;It has been reported so.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't even know that.
&nbsp;
COMMENT: I think Mr. Firubin announced it, sir.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Did he?
&nbsp;
COMMENT: &nbsp;Yes.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Oh well, no doubt it's true.
&nbsp;
COMMENT:&nbsp;And reporting to Cabinet.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, we've heard nothing about that. I am not going to engage in a discussion of the pluses or minuses of something until it is something which calls for decision.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Is it true that the International Bank has rejected the idea of a dollar loan for the Mt. Isa-Townsville railway because Mt. Isa Mines wouldn't guarantee sufficient tonnage on the line?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: The whole nub of the argument there has been whether an effective freight contract can be made between the Queensland Government and the company. So far, the result hasn't been entirely satisfactory; but I know that discussions are still going on, but they primarily concern the Queensland Government and the company, and it is not for me to say what the point of view of the International Bank is. But I know that on its past practice, it would want to see an effective freight contract, so that the amount of any loan could be ammortised within the appropriate time.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Does the Commonwealth come into it at all, sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: We come in as the borrower.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Has the bank rejected the request?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; Don't ask me to make announcements on behalf of the Bank; I'm one of their customers.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:
&nbsp;
Has the Commonwealth Treasure, sir, had discussions with the company on any tax concessions that might help to get that kind of a contract you are speaking about?&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-3-
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Look, I&nbsp;know that the company has from time to time raised tax problems, but really, you ought to ask the Treasurer about that, I think. I mean I don’t know what developments there are in that field.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Does the Commonwealth have to give any guarantee, sir, along these lines?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: If the Commonwealth borrows money from the International Bank, it is the borrower and it is completely responsible. The Commonwealth then proceeds to lend the irony, and in that case, suppose - and it's only a suppose - suppose there were an International Bank loan for the Mt. Isa railway project, then we would be the borrowers and we would advance the money to the Queensland Government; and in order to enable us to pay off our debt and interest to the World Bank, the Queensland Government would enter into corresponding arrangements with us, and their capacity for doing that is quite plainly affected by&nbsp;the nature of ,whatever freight contract they make with the company. So it is a three-cornered affair. But the prime matter for discussion is one between the Queensland Government and the company. We have exhibited great willingness to do our part with the World Bank and we have had, of course, a number of discussions with them. But whether there is a World Bank loan or not depends on many things: first and foremost, it depends on the decision taken some day by&nbsp;the board of the World Bank; nobody can anticipate that. But the basic material that would be needed before you made a formal application for the loan would be some arrangement on freeing ;hits between the Queensland Government and the company, of a kind which we thought, at any rate, fitted into the pattern of the lending policies of the World Bank,
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, on the question of overseas investment, I&nbsp;think Mr. Foley of the British Tobacco Company made a statement recently saying that he was becoming rather worried about the overseas companies gradually taking over a vast number of Australian companies. Mr. McEwen has made a suggestion that it might be a good idea for every overseas investor to enter into partnership with Australian investors, Is that something that you
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I think that it is first of all, we welcome overseas investment. The general Australian opinion does, because we can't generate inside Australia from our own resources all the capital that is needed for these developmental projects, whether they are public or private. Think that it is eminently desirable that wherever it is possible overseas investors should establish some kind of partnership with Australian citizens - which means that wherever possible, they should admit Australian investors to the equity capital of the enterprise. We haven't laid down any rule about that. First of all, probably because we couldn't and secondly because circumstances differ in every case. But whenever overseas people see me or see my colleagues on this matter of investment we never fail to draw their attention to the fact that we think it desirable that they should have some Australian proprietary interest in whatever it is.
&nbsp;
-4-
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, do you see any indication of those overseas investors coming more and more to that point of view?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I think I&nbsp;have of late - yes.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;General Motors Holden, sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER:I can't say that, because we know what their share structure is. But I think the last half dozen people of consequence in this matter who have come to see me just to have a general talk about policy have fully understood that point I'll say it that way.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, will there be a Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference in London this year, and if there is --
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think not; but that will be for Mr. MacMillan to decide. Frankly, I don't expect that there will be one. They've got all these preoccupations at the present time, and the Queen goes to Canada in June for a couple of months over the St. Lawrence waterway. Later on in the year we’ve got a visit by&nbsp;Princess Alexandra. No; it's only my guess, but I think it's about right.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Do you propose making an overseas trip yourself?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I'm hoping to - yes.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Can you tell when you propose to make the visit?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No I haven't arranged it yet, but I'm hoping to.&nbsp; I Think I should this year.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;It is the first time since 1957,&nbsp;isn't it?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.&nbsp;Pay a brief visit at any rate, to America and Great Britain in particular, probably going through the one to the other.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Coming back through the Far East, sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know yet.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: &nbsp;What time of the year?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER I am hoping to do this in May-June.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, in relation to your recent invitation from Dr. Subandrio has that been confirmed at all by&nbsp;an official invitation from President Soekarno.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No. I've heard no more.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;You wouldn't contemplate going under the present Conditions?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No, I would expect an invitation from the head of the Government, yes. I've heard nothing more about that.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Can you give us any idea of the reasons why you want to go to America and Great Britain? Is there any particular subject you want to discuss?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No. I think that the Prime Minister of Australia ought to be&nbsp;in direct personal touch with these people at reasonable intervals of time. It is very important.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-5-
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;On the general subject matter foreign affairs, economics.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I want to - if I go - I want to have some direct intimate informal discussions about, no doubt, all the current matters as little program as possible.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;East Berlin in particular?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Don’t ask me to say what the subjects are. Our experience of life is that all the subjects that are current today are non-current in two months' time who knows. Whatever is a lively issue, I would hope to discuss.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;How long will you be away for?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don’t know yet.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, would the recent successes that the Government has been having with its internal loans lead you to expect that the overall cash deficit would be about ‘less than half what you anticipated last budget time
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is very early to say that, but it will be substantially less, because the cash responsibilities on the loan program will quite plainly be lower and so there will be a reduced deficit. As a matter of fact, I noticed that when the Treasurer said the other day that he anticipate there would be&nbsp;another deficit next year that's quite right; there must be somebody read into that an inference about taxes, but it has got nothing to do with that. I mean all other things being equal, I would anticipate that there would be~ a cash deficit next year, for reasons similar to the ones that produced it this year.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;To a large extent, that would rule out any major tax concessions?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Don't ask me that. We won't begin to consider that until we are approaching the budget. And when we begin to approach the budget, you boys will all publish the most authoritative stories as to what is going to be in it, won't you? (Laughter).
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Is there anything you can say, sir, about the Governor-General ship on the departure of Sir William Slim and the appointment of a new one?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No.&nbsp;We&nbsp;have a rather loose arrangement on that. I would think well, he won't go before Princess Alexandra has gone. I suppose that remans somewhere about the end of the year. But we have got no hard and fast date in our minds.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Can we assume that this will be one of the subject!, you will discuss when you are in Britain?&nbsp;
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;You could, yes.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir as you will be away in May and June, does Thai mean we will have a late budget, or what, or will you discuss the budget before you go?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No; we never begin to discuss the budget until July.
&nbsp;
COMMENT: I thought there was always a preliminary discussion Before the Premiers' Conference and Loan Council.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: The general state of affairs well, we've had that and there will probably be another one before the next Premiers' Conference. We have to consider the problem of tax reimbursement, for example, and the overall state of the loan program. Yes, we discuss those things, and they have an effect on the budget. But we don't actually get to the problem of budgeting until after we have got rid of those things.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Sir, have you made any definite arrangements as yet about the appointment of an independent committee to review the tax laws?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes; it has been under discussion between Ministers and the Treasury. We have been working out the terms of reference. It is quite alive. I would hope to have something announced on that any moment in the next week or two; certainly quite soon.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, is there any indication of when Sir Garfield Barwick will be in a position to put submissions on constitutional changes to the Cabinet? Is it likely this year or early next year?&nbsp;
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. The first thing is to re-establish the committee. I think that will probably be done in the next week.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Under his chairmanship?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, that is one of the problems we have to consider, as to whether he can put in time on it. When we clear that up, we will get the committee re-established, and they will go on with their work. They have made an interim report. We haven't considered the interim report. I don't know whether he has or whether he thinks that within some limited time he can make suggestions to us. But I haven't discussed that.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:
I understand, sir, that Sir Frank Richardson has either delivered his report to you or is about to do so.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER:
They tell me that he is delivering it quite soon. It hasn't yet been delivered.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Sir there is no hard and fast view as to whether you’ll wait until the new committee has completed a further report before Cabinet considers the interim reports of the committee?&nbsp;
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No, there's no hard and fast rule.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, on that report, do any recommendations apply from July 1,&nbsp;or will they
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: My dear boy, I haven't a clue as to what the re commendations are.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Any of them?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't a clue what they are. How can I start discussing problems of retrospectivity? For all I know, the recommendations are all negative.
&nbsp;
-7-
&nbsp;
COMMENT: I meant July 1&nbsp;this year.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I am not going to anticipate any of those things. I will read this report first when I get it.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Did you read, sir, that the Scotch were burning your immigration literature?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I saw that. I concluded it must have been a cold winter. (Laughter).
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, there was an earlier question on possible legislation arising from the union Political levies. Isn't the position that the Government is waiting for a High Court decision for the Burbury decision?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I think you are right. I think that does have a bearing on it. But really I haven't given any thought to that matter myself lately, but now you mention it, the decision of the Court probably will throw a good deal of light on this thing. That is quite right. I don't know whether the Attorney has been looking at this.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Sir, have you been asked to represent Australia at the imperial Cricket Conference at Lords in June?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No, sir. Oh no, there's some limit. (Laughter).
&nbsp;
QUESTION: Sir, is it proposed to introduce in the current sittings a Bill to authorise the second £2 ½ million grant for development of the north-west?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I hope so. There are always a few technical matters that have to be thrashed out on that and that may affect the data of introduction. It won't affect the date of operation of the second £2 ½ million, because you remember that I said that we had agreed to find over a certain period of five years £2 ½ million and that we would double that. Well, the £5&nbsp;million covers the same period
&nbsp;
QUESTION: So that unless the State gets on with the job in a hurry, they run the risk of losing portion of the £5&nbsp;million?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know, but the original £2 ½ &nbsp;million was offered in relation to projects which were put forward by the States - by Western Australia I mean - and in a general way approved by us. Certain ones were put forward and approved and they are understood to be in hand. Subsequently to that, the Premier has put up a proposal in relation to the Ord River, and it is not quite clear yet as to whether this is designed to be part of the £5 million, or whether it is a separate project which he is asking for to be additional. The last I heard of that was that we had asked him for further information.
&nbsp;
QUESTION: I understood, sir, that in the House the other day you gave the impression that the Premier had now told you that most, if not all, of the £5 million would be spend on the projects already approved by the Commonwealth.
&nbsp;
-8-
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think I said that. But having regard to the nature of' the projects, I wouldn't be surprised if they needed all the money, because they are quite substantial. I mean, our £2 ½ million was really designed to help on that matter and I would think that these projects might easily absorb the whole sum; in which case, this Ord River proposal would be something additional; but at present I have asked to have that cleared up and until it is cleared up, it may be a little difficult to appropriate the £5&nbsp;million for certain purposes with that matter still vague. And that may give rise to a little delay in introducing the legislation, but it won't give rise to any delay in our acceptance of our own responsibility from July, 1958,&nbsp;for five years, or the increased sum.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Would it be a reasonable assumption, sir that the second additional grant from the Commonwealth might only result in a saving for the State Treasury, the way the State intends to handle the scheme?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I suppose that's up to the State. We intended it to be of assistance in the development of the north-west. But in all these matters, one is very much in the hands of a State Government within whose area the particular things come.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Mr. Menzies, are you going to appear on the platform with Mr. Morton for the elections in New South Wales?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know who's going to be there. I am making a speech - they tell me - tomorrow night in North Sydney. I will go down and I will make a short speech and come home.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Are you going to underwrite his promises?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I'm not an underwriter. (Laughter).
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Will this be your only appearance in the campaign?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Are you also going to the west, sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Mr. Menzies, is it true that the Snowy Mountains Authority is spending ahead of its 1958/59 allocation, and that the Government has agreed to give it a supplementary grant until the end of the year to enable it to keep its work ahead of schedule.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I really think you ought to get that form Senator Spooner. Don't you think so? He's been handling that. I know about it myself, but I'd very much prefer
&nbsp;
COMMENT: I just thought you might be&nbsp;able to give us some details.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I'd much prefer him to deal with it. I'll just say one thing about it: Yes, they have been ahead of their scheduled expenditure and at least one reason is a very satisfactory one and that is that the contractors have got on with the job&nbsp;so fast that really they have almost begun to run out of "chips"&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-9-
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;It involves bonus payments to a great extent, doesn’t it?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well I don't know how it's been done, but I know the Authority is delighted with the efficiency, not only of the American contractors but of the Australian contractor, and of course I've got a rather favourable eye on expedition of this matter, because the sooner any stage is finished, the sooner it &nbsp;revenue-producing. There has been a financial problem about it, but we thrashed that one out and I think I wouldn't trespass on the jurisdiction of my colleague, but if you ask him, he could probably tell you about it.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;There is no suggestion that this extra grant will come out of the 1959/60&nbsp;allocation, which could force them to cut that work?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No, whatever is done won't interfere with the flow of the job -&nbsp;no. But ask him about that, because I don't like making statements on matters that one of my colleagues has been handling in Cabinet and on which he has secured agreement. But he's got an interesting story to tell, I should think, which you might ask him about.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Were you pleased, sir, to have Sir Thomas Playford back again at your conference table this time?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it wouldn't be the same without him.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Sir, during the Premiers' Conference, Mr. Cahill add some references to the future of the federal system. Do you believe that current Commonwealth- State financial relations and the temper of the recent Premiers' Conference have been jeopardised or could jeopardise the future of the federal system?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: As a matter of fact, I thought this last Premiers' Conference was the best tempered conference we have ever had. I did indeed. Of&nbsp;course, there is no question about it that uniform tax brings about a de facto result in constitutional balance - that's quite true. But practically all the States have accepted that feature of life. As you have noticed, five out of six - in the case of Victoria, of course, some of their troubles arise from the formula, and their disabilities on that matter are quite perceptible, because they arise from the fact that Victoria was a very low taxed State before uniform tax, you see. It was almost the lowest taxed State. State taxes in Queensland were probably three times as great as those in Victoria, It was the policy in Victoria to keep State income tax down, and if you establish a formula on the average of tax collections over a period of years then they are bound to suffer - and they have. &nbsp;Of course the formula has had its internal adjustment over ten years, so that it is now on adjusted population, which means population adjusted for the density and the number of school children between 5 and 15.&nbsp;And Victoria says that is not quite a fair thing because there are other factors that ought to be taken into account. For example, they say: "We may have fewer school children per thousand than some other States, but we have had more migrants. We have had a considerable increase in our adult population. While that modifies&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-10
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER (continuing): relatively the demand on us for schools, it increases the demand on us for housing and services and other things." And then they also say: "We've had a very acute industrial development and all these developments in areas like Dandenong and Thomastown and out towards the hills and around Geelong by concentrating population in certain places sets up demands for now schools, whereas if your increase is more spread, existing schools with a little extension could cope with it." In other words, they say two factors have been selected: density of population, on which they are bound to lose as a small State, and school children population, and there are other factors. I stated quite plainly that I am not apply about this formula. I think that it is really the root of the Victorian trouble about uniform tax, and the day after the conference the Treasurer and I had a long discussion with Mr. Bolte and Mr. Rylah about the formula and invited then to make suggestions that we should be able to consider. At the same time, we are going into it, to do a little analysis ourselves with the idea of meeting the Premiers the next time with some constructive proposals about how the formula ought to be stated. Then, of course, entirely apart from that, which is the formula of distribution, the formula amount itself has chronically proved inadequate and it may be that we ought to write a new formula, but start a new base year as will. The formula of increase will still go on; it works tolerably well, but it started too low.
&nbsp;
(TAPE CHANGED AT THIS STAGE)
&nbsp;
QUESTION: &nbsp;By the time you meet them, sir, do you expect to have a Cabinet decision on the payment of social services to aborigines?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Oh yes.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Mr. Menzies, some time ago Professor Bland criticised some unnamed civil servants for speaking in public on matters of policy and last night in the House, Dr. Coombs was also criticised for having made some statements in the Mills Memorial Lecture about the administration of monetary policy. I wonder if you could tell us what your own feeling is about the extent to which civil servants should be allowed to speak and the latitude they ought normally to be granted when speaking on matters of policy in public?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I always think it undesirable for any civil servant to speak publicly on matters of policy which civil servants have to administer, because that involves entering into the political field which I think is very undesirable, and I'm now talking about senior civil servants. Dr. Coombs, you know, is in rather a different position. He is Governor of the Bank, and the Bank is set up it is not a branch of the civil service like any of the departments and he, of course, with his board, makes an annual report in which many comments and observations are made relevant to the operations of the central bank, and if a man of that distinction is invited to do the Roy Milne Lecture they even got me to do it once many years ago on some aspect of central banking, or&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-11-
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: (continuing): discussing the problems of central banking, I think it would be depriving people of valuable expert knowledge if there were some rule that he couldn't do it. But he would use his discretion; he always does in my experience. I've never known him to exceed the bounds of proper discretion on those things. I very greatly admire his discretion and judgment
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;In his speech on banking the other night, Dr. Evatt suggested that the establishment of the new money market had been organised in the arbitrary grant of access to the market to a chosen number of stockbrokers, in order to make it possible for them to in some way skim the cream on Government bond dealings and in the various markets
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I heard that said. As a matter of fact, the possibility of having a short-term money market has been under discussion for many many years. An abortive attempt was made to do it in a small way about 20 years ago - more than 20 years ago. A&nbsp;short-term money market has great advantages as the experience in bigger countries shows; but, as it happens on this occasion, the idea of this kind of entry into a short-term money market was promoted by the Commonwealth Bank, very powerfully - not by&nbsp;somebody else. And after a long examination proved by&nbsp;us, and in order to make it operate certain people enter into relations with the Commonwealth Bank and with their own banks all that is quite normal. As it happens, the creative idea on this matter cane from the Bank.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;That doesn't rule out the possibility of others entering into the same relationship?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Oh no there's no monopoly rights here. They'll have to comply with certain conditions which relate to their stability and so on, but the bank will see to that.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Any views,sir, on the Berlin question?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;No; there is nothing at this stage.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Will Sir Arthur Fadden be going into the bank job,&nbsp;sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't a clue. Legislation is not through yet. I might apply for it myself. (Laughter). Well, it would be&nbsp;the fifteenth job&nbsp;I've been nominated for. (Laughter).
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;In the last few days in the House at least three Government backbenchers, while praising certain points of the legislation, have said more should be&nbsp;done to protect various aspects - would it be true to say that the Government has completely closed the door to further amendments, or not? Is the way still open at a later stage?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Look, the Government has had an examination of all the points that have been raised both ways this year. The Treasurer has had long discussions with a few mourners who had particular ideas. We then examined the whole of those; we made two amendments; and so far as I am concerned, that is it. There has been no suggestion made to me that Cabinet should re-consider any of&nbsp;these decisions. They were discussed for a very very long time.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
-12-
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Do you expect to be&nbsp;going overseas before the next Premiers’ Conference?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know the date of the Premiers' Conference yet, so I don't know. I was saying something earlier that I think it desirable to go overseas this year some time May-June, somewhere round that period.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Will you be away for long, sir?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER I don't know yet.
&nbsp;
QUESTION:&nbsp;Will you fly&nbsp;all the way, sir, or go by&nbsp;sea part&nbsp;of the way?
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I had a good look at my wife the other day and I decided that if anybody ever wanted a fortnight's holiday, it was my wife. She is greatly overworked. I think I might get her on to the water for a little while.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
With the compliments of:&nbsp;
Hugh Dash, Press Secretary to the Prime Minister, Canberra, A. C.T.


FOR PRESS
&nbsp;
ROYAL VISIT&nbsp;1959.
&nbsp;
Commonwealth and State authorities connected with the organisation of the visit to Australia of Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra of Kent met in Canberra to-day.
&nbsp;
They discussed co-ordination of the programme to be submitted to Her Royal Highness in London early next month, after her return from her visit to Latin America.
&nbsp;
With the compliments of Robert Kennedy,
Public Relations Director, Royal Visit&nbsp;1959.
&nbsp;
CANBERRA.
16th March,&nbsp;1959.


P.M. 8/1959
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;
COMMONWEALTH POST – GRADUATE AWARDS.
&nbsp;
The first 100&nbsp;Commonwealth post-graduate scholarships had been awarded and the scheme was now successfully launched, the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced to-day.
&nbsp;
The 100&nbsp;awards made available by the Commonwealth this year were allocated to Universities by the Universities Commission in consultation with the Vice-Chancellors' Committee.
&nbsp;
Most Universities had completed selection for their awards, for each of which the Commonwealth will provide £900 annually for living allowance and tuition. The awards would be available for up to four years, but it was expected that they would be held on an average of from two to three years.
&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said: "These post-graduate awards were approved by the Government on the recommendation of the Universities Commission.
&nbsp;
"Although we believe that our action on the recommendations of the Murray Committee for increased Commonwealth grants to Universities for current expenditure will provide more adequate staff and equipment for research purposes, we felt that, having regard to the urgent need for highly trained research workers, something more should be done to assist Universities to build up their post-graduate schools.
&nbsp;
"The Government, therefore, did not hesitate to adopt the proposal for post-graduate awards.
&nbsp;
The students whom the Universities have selected all have outstanding academic records.
&nbsp;
"They include many first-class honours graduates and a number of University medallists, and will undoubtedly make notable contributions in their various fields of study in Mathematics and the Natural Sciences, in the Humanities and the Social Scion, and in Technology and Applied Science.
&nbsp;
"The Universities have received the scheme most enthusiastically, and it would seem that it has already given
An appreciable stimulus to post-graduate, work.
&nbsp;
"This will be of great benefit to the scientific and cultural development of Australia".
&nbsp;
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
19th March, 1959.


PRESS RELEASE
&nbsp;
NOT TO BE RELEASED BEFORE 3AM WEDNESDAY 25TH MARCH
&nbsp;
COMMONWEALTH EDUCATION CONFERENCE
OXFORD, ENGLAND 15TH-29TH JULY, 1959
&nbsp;
(STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER)
&nbsp;
The United Kingdom Government released the following statement this morning:-&nbsp;
"All the Governments of the Commonwealth have now accepted an invitation from the United Kingdom Government to attend a Commonwealth Education Conference in Oxford from the 15th to 29th July. The principal Colonial territories will also send representatives. Delegations will be composed of officials and representatives of educational interests including the universities.
&nbsp;
Lord Halifax Chancellor of the University of Oxford will be President of the Conference and Sir Philip Morris Vice-Chancellor of Bristol University will be Chairman The United Kingdom Government have invited delegates to spend the week before the Conference visiting educational establishments in the United Kingdom. They will be guests of the United Kingdom Government for the whole period of three weeks.
&nbsp;
This Conference stems from a decision of the Commonwealth Ministers at the Commonwealth Trade and Economic Conference held at Montreal in September 1958 that a meeting should be convened by the United Kingdom during 1959 to formulate a new programme of Commonwealth Scholarships and Fellowships and to review the existing arrangements for cooperation between Commonwealth countries on all aspects of education.
&nbsp;
Prime Minister's Comment: Mr. Menzies, in commenting on this announcement, confirmed that Australia has accepted the invitation of the United Kingdom Government to send a delegation to the Education Conference in Oxford next July. He added that the composition of the delegation is now being discussed with State Premiers and various interested authorities.
&nbsp;
STRICT EMBARGO. Not for publication, broadcasting or cabling before 1 am E.S.T. Wednesday, 25th March, 1959&nbsp;
NO.9 /195 9
&nbsp;
CABINET DISCUSSION ON PARLIAMENTARY SALARIES REPORT
&nbsp;
STATEMENT BY the PRIME MINISTER
&nbsp;
Ministers have today considered and discussed the report on salaries and allowances of Members of the Commonwealth Parliament made by Sir Frank Richardson, Mr. G.E. Fitzgerald
And Mr. N.L. Cowper.
&nbsp;
After an elaborate discussion, we have decided to adopt the recommendations of the report without amendment, and will introduce legislation accordingly.
&nbsp;
As we are anxious that the Report should be carefully considered as a whole, since it provides a great deal of important material I do not propose to make any long comment upon it. I say this because I hope that everybody interested will obtain a full copy of the Report and study it. But four particular matters deserve mention:
&nbsp;


There is sometimes a complaint that Members of Parliament "fix their own pay". The fact is that they are bound to do so under the Constitution which provides Parliamentary Allowances on a certain scale "until the Parliament otherwise provides". As the Committee says: "It was, therefore, clearly contemplated that the remuneration of Members could be altered from time to time, and it was laid down that any alteration should be made by Parliament itself.&nbsp;


&nbsp;
My own Government has introduced, for the third time now, the practice of referring the problem for independent advice by an outside committee, making its report after investigation from Parliamentary and non- Parliamentary sources.
&nbsp;


&nbsp;We have stated our policy that a review of these matters should be made early in the life of each new Parliament and that, subject only to quite abnormal circumstances, the conditions then determined should apply unchanged throughout the life of the Parliament. This, we believe, is a sensible provision.


&nbsp;


The 1951 Committee covered the whole field, including the salaries and allowances of Ministers. The 1955 committee was specifically asked not to deal with the salaries and allowances of Ministers, or of Parliamentary office-bearers, or of retiring allowances. The position is, therefore, that these matters have remained untouched and unconsidered for over 7 years.


&nbsp;


In view of constant misrepresentation, I should again point out that the so-called "allowances" paid to Ministers and private Members do not form in the ordinary acceptation of the term, part of their salary. They represent amounts which, if paid out by way of political expenses, are then deductable. Nobody dreams of adding to the salary of some business executive the amount of expenses which he incurs in the business of his company. Yet it has not been uncommon to find some commentators adding to the salary of a Minister or Member an allowance for political expenses which represents no nett gain to himself. This is a matter which I urge people to keep in mind when considering this important document.&nbsp;


-2-&nbsp;
&nbsp;
The Report sets out in close detail the nature of the expenditure of a non-private kind which a Member of Parliament is bound under modern circumstances to incur. I would, therefore, urge that the closest attention should be given to the reasoning of the Report. I am sure that, if it is carefully considered, the general public feeling would be that what has been recommended pays proper attention to the labours and responsibilities of Members of Parliament and their wives, and will help to give effect to the Committee's view that, while the emoluments of Members of Parliament should not be extravagant they should be of such a kind as not to deter able men from entering the Parliamentary service of the nation.
&nbsp;
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
24th March, 1959.


P.M. 10/1959
MINISTER FOR TRADE FOR WASHINGTON TALKS
Statement by&nbsp;the Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies)
The Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) announced today that the Minister for Trade (Mr. McEwen) would leave for the United States on Thursday to discuss a number of trade matters in Washington.
Mr. Menzies said the visit would be short and Mr. McEwen would return to Australia before he himself left for abroad.
Mr. Menzies said that Mr. McEwen's talks would cover a range of subjects which could be best dealt with on a Ministerial level at "on the spot" discussions. Mr. McEwen had a full understanding of Australia's and tire United States' trade problems, and a short personal visit was more convenient at this time, in view of the fact that Mr. McEwen would not be able to be out of Australia during his (Mr. Menzies) absence overseas.
Mr. Menzies said that Mr. McEwen would be away less than three weeks and during that time the Minister for Defence (Mr. Townley) would be&nbsp;Acting Minister for Trade.
CANBERRA,&nbsp;28th March, 1959&nbsp;


P.M.11/1959
&nbsp;
MEETING OF COMMONWEALTH AND STATE&nbsp;OFFICIALS
ON OVERSEAS INVESTMENT.
&nbsp;
Statement by&nbsp;the Prime Minister.
&nbsp;
The Prime Minister announced today that a meeting of Commonwealth and State officials would be held in Canberra next Monday (6th April) to discuss action being taken in Australia and abroad by&nbsp;the Commonwealth and State Governments to attract private investment from overseas.
&nbsp;
Last September Mr. Menzies announced that the Commonwealth would review, co-ordinate and, where necessary, improve the facilities and information provided through its overseas agencies to prospective investors.
&nbsp;
"We recognise that Commonwealth activity in this field should be developed in co-operation with the investment promotion activities of the States and private business interests," Mr. Menzies said today.
&nbsp;
"The meeting next week will discuss ways of arranging continuing co-operation between the Commonwealth and the States."
&nbsp;
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
2nd April,&nbsp;1959.


P.M.12/1959
WEDDING PRESENT TO THE CROWN PRINCE OF JAPAN
Statement by the Prime Minister
Australia has presented a watercolour, "Mt. Serle, Flinders Ranges" by Hans Heyse to the Crown Prince of Japan and his bride on the occasion of their marriage.
Sir Alan Watt, Australian Ambassador to Japan, made the presentation.
The watercolour is a fine example of Heyse’s work and the Crown Prince expressed great pleasure when receiving it. The painting bears a plaque reading in part "From the Government and people of the Commonwealth of Australia, 10th April, 1959".
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
10th April, 1959.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Speech by the Rt. Hon. R. G. MENZIES, C.H., M.P.,
On Ministers of state bill 1959.
(From the Parliamentary Debates,&nbsp;14th April, 1959.)
Mr. MENZIES&nbsp;(Kooyong-Prime Minister) (8.5) - I move - That the bill be now read a second time.
In accordance with the announcement made by colleague, the Treasurer (Mr. Harold Holt), a little earlier, and in accordance the agreement of the House, I propose not to confine my remarks to the one bill, but to discuss the whole of the matters covered by&nbsp;the three bills which have been referred to. And that, I&nbsp;am sure, is desirable, because they all arise from the one investigation, the one report, and the one series of determinations by&nbsp;the Government.&nbsp;
It is not, Sir, for the first time that the Parliament has had to consider its own emoluments, its salaries, its allowances and its superannuation benefits, because, of course, under the Constitution of this country as it still stands, the salaries of members of the Parliament-then called allowances -were fixed at an amount of £400 per annum. But they were fixed until Parliament otherwise determined, and, as everybody here knows, that means that Parliament can from time to time, as it thinks appropriate, determine these matters. On this occasion, as on two prior occasions, it was decided that a committee quite outside of Parliament-but a knowledgeable committee- should investigate these matters and make recommendations to the Parliament through the Government. This is the third occasion on which that has happened and, as on every prior occasion on which&nbsp;
-2-
there has been a change of salary or allowances- going back for over half a century -there has been a remarkable uproar, largely fermented, as I&nbsp;will indicate later, by&nbsp;sections of the press, and, to a large extent, based upon an unwillingness or an inability to understand what the duties of members of Parliament are and what the duties of Ministers are. This, after all, tonight, is an opportunity, which I would not willingly have missed, to enable at least some hundreds of thousands of people in Australia to learn that there are two sides to this question, and I regard my responsibility this evening as a responsibility to see that the Parliament's side of this matter becomes known to thoughtful people who, in our experience, will always come down with a&nbsp;sensible judgment if they have the materials before them.
In order to begin this exercise, Sir, I&nbsp;think I&nbsp;should point out something that most honourable members are familiar with -that this, of course, is not the first occasion on which this kind of thing has happened. When this Parliament began, 58&nbsp;years ago, the payment to members of the Parliament was £400 a year. That was in 1901.&nbsp;In 1907,&nbsp;it was increased to £600
a year, and there was an enormous press agitation. I&nbsp;think it was at that very time that some talented writer coined the great phrase about a salary grab, to which, of course, people of even greater genius have since added such expressions of “raiding the Treasury”. The payment to members was increased to £600&nbsp;a year in 1907,&nbsp;and that increase was violently opposed by,&nbsp;among other people, the very newspapers that have fermented and led the agitation against the increases now proposed. The payment fixed in 1907&nbsp;stood until 1920-&nbsp;after the First World War. There had been a great world war, with all its economic consequences. There had been all the inevitable inflationary pressures of a great war. Yet, in 1920,&nbsp;when a proposal was brought forward by&nbsp;the then government to raise the amount to £1,000,&nbsp;the agitation surpassed even that of 1907.&nbsp;That agitation came from the same people, the same very wealthy interests, and was directed to the same object.
In 1932 the depression was on, and this Parliament reduced the £1,000&nbsp;in accordance with the Premiers' plan. I think it must go on record that that was the first and only time when these great newspaper interests approved of what Parliament was doing. Between 1932&nbsp;and 1938,&nbsp;as the depression lifted, certain gradual restorations were made by Parliament until, by 1938,&nbsp;the sum of £1,000&nbsp;had been completely restored. That was greeted with a volley of abuse, of course.
1947 the amount was, by&nbsp;legislation, raised to £1,500.&nbsp;We had a very spirited argument in this House on that occasion, which I have taken the opportunity to reread in order to refresh my&nbsp;mind on it. Once more there was a violent press campaign directed not to one point that exercised my mind and those of some other people in this House at that time that wage pegging was still in existence-but directed to the eternal proposition that you
must never increase the salaries of members of the Federal Parliament because let us face it-we are not worth it.
In 1952, following a report, further improvements were made. There were improvements again in 1956,&nbsp;and now we have the current proposals. There may be some honourable members in this House- I&nbsp;am sure there are-who have never previously encountered these somewhat wintry blasts, but I&nbsp;can assure them that they are no colder today than they were in the past, that they go on&nbsp;and on, and if anybody took the trouble to investigate the nature and source of the press campaign since 1907, he would be irresistibly driven to the&nbsp;conclusion that if these gentlemen had had their way, members of the Federal Parliament would still be paid £400 a year, because no improvement of their salaries has even been lucky enough to secure the benediction of the press.
I refer to that matter of history because it is very important that we should understand the existence of this classical contest that has gone on between the members of Parliament who, if I may say so on behalf of all honourable members, have been elected by&nbsp;the people to sit in Parliament and to administer the government of the country, and those who, elected by&nbsp;nobody but themselves, undertake to assume control of the affairs of the country. It is a classical contest.
On this occasion I have followed the press campaign with great interest. I&nbsp;can
-3-
&nbsp;assure, all honourable members that I have not&nbsp;lost much sleep over it, but&nbsp;I have followed it with a certain academic interest. I have become accustomed now-well, I did many years ago-to all those rather contemptuous expressions that are used by some newspaper critics. But on this occasion an unbridled attack-I should refer to it at once-has been led in Sydney by the “Sydney Morning Herald" and its somewhat curious satellites-I think that is a courteous term-and in Melbourne by the&nbsp;"Herald”. I want to make an attempt to assist public thought to achieve a balanced judgment in this matter. I know that from the point of&nbsp;view of the press that will be a futile attempt, but I hope that I will be understood by a good number of&nbsp;people in this country.
In the main, what people have learnt about this matter has been derived from newspapers such as the ones that I have mentioned, and I want to say something about the campaign of each of those two newspapers in plain terms and, I hope, with that restraint which characterizes me. I have a clear duty to my fellow members in this Parliament, and I am not unwilling to discharge it. I have a clear duty to the whole institution of Parliament to put this matter in its right perspective. Sir, I have referred to the classical contest between the press and Parliament. Who interprets public opinion? Who influences public opinion? Who gives effect to public opinion? Is it Parliament, freely elected, known man by man and woman by woman, and representative of the people? Or is it the press, self-elected, anonymous, and in some cases representative only of the wealth and whims of a few? In that contest Parliament must win if parliamentary government is to be preserved.
Those are preliminary remarks, and I&nbsp;hope that they will be regarded as by no means irrational. I believe that they go to the root of this matter. So now I shall look at this campaign, which has influenced so many people and, for all I know, has influenced so many honourable members the line adopted by the Melbourne "Herald" has been almost impossible to follow, although on the whole it has done its utmost to whip up feeling against private members of the Federal Parliament. It has been almost friendly at times to the improvements now advised by the Martin committee in Victoria but, of course, they were made in reference to&nbsp;the Parliament of one State,&nbsp;and therefore they have much more appeal to&nbsp;the Melbourne "Herald" than recommendations made with respect to&nbsp;the much more important Parliament of the nation.
It was, I think, on 18th January that I announced the appointment of a committee to inquire into parliamentary salaries and allowances. On 19th January, following the announcement of the appointment of&nbsp;that committee-an independent committee&nbsp;appointed to examine parliamentary salaries and allowances, a committee against which, and against any member of which, no&nbsp;word has been spoken or could be spoken to impugn their independence or their probity-the Melbourne "Herald" published a leading article. I am sure that honourable members would be grateful if I recalled the terms of that article to their minds. The Melbourne “Herald” stated-&nbsp;
In announcing the appointment of an independent committee to report on Parliamentary salaries and allowances, Mr. Menzies is choosing the fairest way of answering those members of the two Federal Houses who have been suggesting that another increase in their pay is merited. The principle of periodic and independent reviews is sound. If rates are to be reviewed early in the three-year life of each Parliament, as Mr. Menzies suggests, it should follow that the findings of the committee are followed throughout this term, and are applied in their entirety.
Mr.&nbsp;Clyde Cameron.-Who said that? Mr. MENZIES. -&nbsp;The Melbourne "Herald" on 19th January, 1959. Then it concluded by saying -&nbsp;
It is right that parliamentary service should be adequately rewarded, and that its expenses should be periodically reviewed. But restraint in demands for privileges, and a lead in accepting the umpire's decision, are expected from the nation’s elected spokesmen.
These, Sir, were the words-on the whole, rather pious words. But who gave the lead in rejecting the umpire's decision? The same newspaper! When the report of the umpire was made, this very newspaper became highly critical and indeed almost vitriolic. So far from recommending that the umpire's decision should be taken, this very newspaper argued that there should not only be frank debate, which everybody welcomed, but far-reaching amendment. Oddly enough, the newspaper still said on30th March of this year-&nbsp;
Sir Frank Richardson and his colleagues examined the whole question of parliamentary
-4-
rewards very closely. The higher rates they recommend for the Prime Minister, senior Ministers and the Leader of the Opposition might well be justified. There is good reason to question some of the other increases.
When I read that, it was one of the few occasions in my life when I felt that I&nbsp;almost had a pat on the back-it was high time my emoluments were increased. I began to feel almost like the managing editor of a newspaper.
The statement would convey to any reader the impression that those who control the Melbourne "Herald" had a quarrel in particular with the salaries of private members and that there was no quarrel really with what was proposed for people like myself. But in the great campaign to lower the prestige of Parliament and correspondingly to increase the authority of the press, this newspaper succeeded in contradicting its own attack. It has a representative at Canberra, who wrote and published, not only in the Melbourne “Herald" but in the "Courier- Mail" in Queensland, an article about the recommendations concerning myself, which up to that time I had thought were being rather pleasantly received. For complete dishonesty, this article will take a lot of beating. I want to say this quite plainly: It is high time that it was understood by&nbsp;some of these people that those who live by the sword are liable to perish by the sword.&nbsp;
This man made two points in particular. The first was that, under the recommendations, the Prime Minister is to be given a total salary, of £10,000, but that as he will get an additional £4,000 odd in special allowances, he will be receiving more than the Prime Minister of Great Britain. This was put in headlines. As the writer well knew, that story was completely untrue. The Prime Minister of Great Britain does, I believe, get a net salary of £10,000 sterling, which I&nbsp;would have thought was a very modest salary for a man carrying his responsibilities in the world. But does the "Herald" suppose that he maintains No. 10 Downing-street and Chequers and discharges all his representational duties out of that salary? Of course not! Every child knows that other financial arrangements are made about these places and that substantial entertainment expenses are met on behalf of the Prime Minister of Great Britain. However, it was thought fit, in order to stir up public opinion, to pretend, quite dishonestly, that by comparing my salary-or my projected salary, because I have not got it yet-and allowances with somebody else's salary, omitting his allowances, passion would be aroused.
A second aspect was developed by the same gentleman. It was a second fantastic untruth. He offered to drop a crocodile tear over the Governor-General. Sir, I am sorry to have to refer to this and I do so with the greatest goodwill to the distinguished Governor-General of Australia. This man dropped a crocodile tear. He said, “Isn’t this terrible; the Prime Minister of Australia is to be given £10,000; that is all the Governor-General gets, and that is what he was getting in 1901”. He even achieved the great skill of referring to it as a unique industrial anomaly. I do not need to tell my distinguished friend, the Leader of the Opposition (Dr. Evatt), or anybody else who has been in office in this country, that it is quite true that the salary of the Governor- General has stood at £10,000 since 1901. It is equally true, though this writer suppressed it, that that salary is free of tax, whereas the Prime Minister's salary is, of course, like anybody else's taxable.
It is also true that ever since 1901, instead of changing the salary itself, every government in succession has accommodated the Governor-General's office to the changes that occur by&nbsp;carrying on the Estimates more and more of the expenditure that the Governor-General has to incur. The total vote to-day of that kind is just on £50,000. I&nbsp;do not object to it; I&nbsp;think it is quite right. For the comparable items which might be related to the Prime Minister's allowance, the total would be certainly not less than £17,000 or £18,000. But the newspaper, so desperate to create a false impression in the public mind, set out to tell these two absolutely cracking lies in order to stir up public opinion.
Having said that-I hope with great moderation and restraint-I will turn to the other champion dealing with us - the “Sydney Morning Herald”. Judging by&nbsp;recent experience, this newspaper understands the art of monopoly better than perhaps, anybody else in the country I&nbsp;
-5-
say this quite plainly and I&nbsp;hope that many thousands ‘of its readers may hear or read what I&nbsp;say about it: It has conducted a completely vicious and misleading campaign. I admit that its reputation for accuracy has steadily declined in recent years - certainly whenever I&nbsp;have had the misfortune to be in the way. Its antipathy- I was going to say to my Government, but I&nbsp;think I&nbsp;should say to any government that happens pop&nbsp;be in office-is well known. But, day after day, it has published leading articles on this matter. These articles have a singularly undergraduate quality in their thinking and expression, but at any rate they lose no opportunity to cry down the quality of the Federal Parliament. Sir, I&nbsp;hope I&nbsp;will be allowed to say this, and I&nbsp;hope that people will ponder over it: I have not observed that any of the rich men who control this newspaper have offered themselves for parliamentary service or have come out of their comfortable anonymity so that the people may see them and judge them.
One of the most unctuous opinions repeatedly expressed by&nbsp;this journal is that we should not seek to attract able men to Parliament by&nbsp;increasing salaries, since parliamentary service is a vocation to which men and women should not be lured by&nbsp;money. Sir, perhaps I can speak with some authority about t is matter because I do not think my worst enemy would think I&nbsp;did not have some sense of vocation in this matter. My&nbsp;six years as Opposition Leader with&nbsp;a parliamentary salary of £1,000&nbsp;for the most part and an Opposition leader's £400 a year with no travelling allowance or electorate expenses, cost me a substantial proportion of my savings-with the complete approval of this newspaper. Sir, I Believe in Parliament as a vocation which involves sacrifices, sometimes of money, almost always of family life and of the helping of the future of children. The present recommendations for members will make none of them rich. They mean simply that they will not be or become so financially embarrassed as to have their public capacity affected.
But, Sir, I have always heard-I have been credibly informed if that is the right phrase-that the leaders of the press had a sense of vocation themselves sufficient to make them regard themselves as the Fourth Estate. How do those gentlemen of the. "Sydney Morning Herald" regard their own vocation? There is a quite simple test by&nbsp;which the general public can determine the good' faith and merit of the "Sydney Morning Herald's” opinion. Let that newspaper publish on its front page in respect' of its managing director-whose name I think is Henderson-his salary, the expenses of all kinds paid on his behalf by&nbsp;his company, a short summary of the benefits by&nbsp;way of concessional shareholdings which have come to him, and a precise amount of his superannuation benefits,. Both in terms of capital and income. Let them not weary in well-doing. So that comparisons may be fair and assist the judgment of their readers, let them also publish similar details in respect of their next two most highly&nbsp;paid executive or editorial officers. Then let them publish on the same page and without benefit of interlarded comment -the corresponding figures with which, if they have read the Richardson report, they are quite familiar, for the Prime Minister, the Treasurer and the Minister for Trade of the National Government. The readers of the “Sydney Morning Herald” would then, Sir, have an opportunity of addressing themselves to the important question somewhat overlooked in this context: Which trio has the more responsible task in this nation?
Now, Sir, having said that, I&nbsp;want to turn to one or two other aspects of this matter. First of all, it has been said-and said by&nbsp;people of repute whose opinions I&nbsp;respect -that the time for these proposals is not opportune; that it may lead to some impact on the basic wage, or inflation or something of that sort. I respect that view. It is a circumstance which the Cabinet itself discussed very elaborately before we appointed a committee. All I&nbsp;want to say about it is this: The proposal to which effect is now being given is a proposal that the salary and allowances of members of this Parliament should be dealt with every three years, at the beginning of each Parliament, and that the decision should endure, except for some quite phenomenal or catastrophic circumstances, for the whole of the period of three years.
Perhaps it is overlooked that in some States the basic wage is adjusted on the cost of living every quarter, but in the Commonwealth jurisdiction there has, in effect, now&nbsp;
-6-&nbsp;
developed a practice of an annual review of the basic wage. Therefore, the basic wage or some aspect-some material aspect-of wages will be under examination every year, and therefore every year will be a year in which it is the wrong time to deal with the salaries and allowances of members of Parliament. We do not do it this year, but we do it next year. But next year, the same business is on. Honourable members will understand quite plainly that if you are to refuse to have parliamentary salaries and allowances dealt with because in the same year there are wage investigations, then parliamentary salaries and allowances will not be dealt with at all for many years to come. That is my answer to those who, quite honestly, feel that this is untimely. It always was untimely, bythe way. I do not remember any occasion on which somebody did not find it possible to say that the time was not ripe. But a matter of this kind cannot be left indefinitely. It is not decent to say to members of this Parliament that year after year, whatever comes or goes, they are not to have their emoluments and their expenses adjusted. It would be a monstrosity.
Indeed, Sir, I think I&nbsp;ought to permit myself this remark: There are still a few people in ‘Australia who look back to what they believe to be the good old days when members of Parliament were not paid at all. I say this as somebody who, I would have hoped, was notoriously not greedy on these matters: unless there were payment of members of Parliament and that payment was adjusted from time to time in the light of&nbsp;the demands of members of Parliament -if wewent back to the old days-there would be no Labour Party except by&nbsp;great sacrifices on the part of trade unions and people outside to enable them to come here. Payment of members of Parliament was one of the earliest reforms advocated in the nineteenth century, and a very good reform it was since it enables Parliament to be made up of&nbsp;a general cross-section of the country and not of people who are the paid representatives of some group and of people so well off that they do not need to be paid at all. That is not true parliamentary representation. We have in this House representation of every kind and class of activity in the country, and it is a good thing for Australia that that is so. I apologize for being so long, but the time must not be begrudged that will enable the other side of this controversy to be made known.
Let me say something about the salaries and allowances that have been recommended for members. The committee has recommended an increase of £400 a year in the salaries. Now Sir, whether that figure is right or wrong is, after all, a matter of judgment after consideration of the facts. It is not a matter of prejudice. It is not a matter of guesswork. It ought to be a matter of judgment on the facts. It has nothing to do with principle; it has nothing to do with conscience. What the increase ought to be is a matter than can be determined only with a knowledge of the evidence on which the committee acted. How can we know what the evidence was? Honourable members of this House, of all parties, laid material before the committee and gave confidential information. They are not going to have that information published to the world.
Mr. Clyde Cameron.- I do not mind if my overdraft is published.
Mr. MENZIES.- No. But that ‘is because your bank manager is familiar with it already. These things are not to be made matters of public notoriety. I have not seen the material put forward by any honourable member, nor has any newspaper writer. The committee saw this evidence, and the committee formed its judgment on it. Somebody might have said that the increase should be £200. I would have thought that in all the circumstances nobody could decently have suggested less than £200, having regard to the events that have occurred. Somebody might say £200; somebody else might Say £250, and, indeed, somebody might say £500. The committee has formed its judgment and has said £400-and this is the recommendation, mark you, which has brought down the major volley of abuse, the recommendation for the increase for private members. It has been said, "I do not mind about the Ministers", and “Of&nbsp;course the Prime Minister ought to be paid more", but
private members? No!
Somebody had the impertinence to say that this committee had sat secretly, that there was something furtive about the whole&nbsp;
-7-
business. Furtive! The committee was appointed and a public announcement made. The committee then sat. It advertised to the public that it would be glad to receive evidence from members of the public, either orally or in writing, and it invited every member of both houses of this Parliament, by circular, to offer such information as they cared to. Not only were various members of the public interviewed, at their own request, by the committee, but -and I state a conservative figure-no less than 1,500 written communications were received by the committee from persons other than members of Parliament. Every one of those communications was read; every one of them was laid before the committee. Therefore the committee had the material before it on which it could apply its mind to the decision. What it did was to set out to establish a standard which would enable men of ability and without private means to offer themselves to Parliament and to remain in Parliament. Does anybody quarrel with that as a standard? Does anybody in Australia want to have a national Parliament remember that this is the great Parliament of the country-from which men of ability without private means will be excluded for financial reasons? The question has only to be put to answer itself.
Now, Sir, I have stated the position as regards salaries. Of course it has been said, not here but elsewhere, "The federal committee was hand-picked”. Well, I suppose it was. I suppose every committee that is appointed, without being elected by somebody, is hand-picked. I suppose the newspaper editors and their right-hand men are hand-picked, since I have no reason to believe that they are elected by anybody. Therefore, if hand-picked means chosen, we plead guilty-they were chosen. But, as I said before, I have not read or heard of anybody sufficiently bold to accuse the three prominent citizens who sat on the committee of dishonesty or of indirect motives or of intellectual incompetence.
It is very interesting that the Victorian Government appointed a committee which recently made a report. I do&nbsp;not think there was one man on the committee who could be accused of being-what is the expression- a great business tycoon. They seemed to me to be well known, highly&nbsp;regarded, respectable, normal citizens, and they made a report. The interesting point is that, despite the material difference in responsibilities between the Parliament of the nation and a parliament of one State, that committee made recommendations certainly no less adequate than the ones that we are considering, and in some respects even more so. But I have not so far read any attack either on the membership or on the report of that committee.
Now, Sir, apart altogether from salaries, the Richardson committee made recommendations regarding increases in the electorate allowances of members. There has been an enormous amount of misleading comment on this matter. I just want to make one or two remarks about this aspect. I know that every honourable member is aware of these facts, but I am sure that many people are not. Of&nbsp;course this practice of publishing members' salaries and allowances, adding the two together and calling the result the salary, is a clever little trick.
Mr. Luchetti.-Dishonest.
Mr. MENZIES. - It&nbsp;is quite dishonest, quite fraudulent, but I find that people are misled by it.&nbsp;I wonder what would happen of some of the people who: practice this little trick had their own expenses added on to their salaries and the totals published as their salaries. Dear me, I can hardly imagine the consequences of it! Of course, electorate expenses are granted in order to cover electorate expenses. They are granted to recoup a member of Parliament for the expenditure which he must incur if he is going to be a conscientious and competent representative of his electorate.&nbsp;Of&nbsp;course, the expenses vary from place to place. How can you do more than establish a sensible average in matters such as this? I will undertake to say that there are honourable members in this House, with large, rambling country electorates, who spend far more in attending to their electorates, going from place to place, driving their cars, paying their hotel bills, attending to their correspondence and paying postages, than they get under the existing allowances.
I thought the committee did a very sensible thing in regard to this matter. Realizing that all this argument about allowances was grossly misunderstood, it set out to&nbsp;
-8-&nbsp;
classify some of the items on which members have to spend money. It mentioned Dona -tons, subscriptions, accommodation, travelling expenses, postages and other matters. I am not going to take up time in reading that part of the report. I&nbsp;only hope that most people will ultimately read it. But, having looked at it and considered it, who are we to say that the sum that is calculated is wrong? How would I know? Take my own case, as Prime Minister, with a major responsibility for Cabinet decisions. How on earth would I know what the honourable member for Darling (Mr. Clark) has to spend, or the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr. Luckett), or the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr. Browne), in the course of a year in representing their particular electorates? The committee, I&nbsp;think, directed its mind to that with the greatest possible care, and it has made recommendations. Apparently, we are invited to reject these recommendations, not in favour of a carefully calculated sum but in favour of a mere guess, a mere uninformed guess, as to what the amount should be.
Now, Sir, the next point that I want to mention-it also has a bearing on this matter-was mentioned by&nbsp;the Richardson Committee in its report for, I&nbsp;think, the first time. It is very well for people to affect to sneer at members of Parliament -the very ones whom they elected to this place as the best available candidates not so long ago! But most members of Parliament have the great privilege of possessing a wife, and everybody who has sat in Parliament for any time at all knows that his wife works as hard as he does in the representation of the people. I marvel from time to time at the labours that are undertaken by&nbsp;our wives, some cynic may say in our interests, but I prefer to say in the interests of the discharge of our public duties. The committee has pointed this out. Is the point of view that that does? Not matter? How can the wife of a Member of Parliament or a Minister discharge her public responsibilities and at the same time do what she would like to do about the bringing up and educating of her family? This is a matter of far more than money. This is the sacrifice that is made by&nbsp;people who go into Parliament, and the whole future, of the sons and daughters of very many members of Parliament has been affected by&nbsp;the fact that there has been no opportunity to give them the close parental consideration that would normally be given in the ordinary household. I&nbsp;do not want to be like some of these critics and convert everything into cash. I&nbsp;will content myself by&nbsp;saying that I think a parliamentary wife is worth something, and that it would be a great pity if a member of Parliament did not receive a degree of remuneration which enabled his wife to do these things in the public field while, at the same time, discharging her duties as a wife and as a mother.
I&nbsp;turn now to members' pensions. This committee did a valuable service in this respect because it pointed out-many honourable members more familiar with the details than I&nbsp;am may have realized it already, but it certainly pointed out to me, among others that this parliamentary pensions scheme, so far from being something for which the taxpayer assumes complete responsibility is, in an uncommonly high degree contributory. You know how people are so willing to sneer about these things, saying, “Oh, yes, they have pensions and they pay practically nothing for them” that is a lot of nonsense. I have yet to hear of any superannuation scheme outside Parliament under which an employee, if we may so describe ourselves for that purpose, pays 10&nbsp;per cent. of his salary into the superannuation fund. The committee pointed this out, and said-I am sure that nobody could seriously disagree with it -that therefore these pension benefits ought to be improved, that a slight increase in the payments by&nbsp;members would enable that improvement to be made, and that under anything short of abnormal circumstances, the fund would be, as it is today, extraordinarily solvent. I do not think it is very good English to say that something is "extraordinarily solvent”, but it means, presumably, that there is a pretty substantial credit balance, thanks to member’s contributions. The present recommendations will still leave the parliamentary pension’s scheme much more onerous to contributors than any outside scheme of which we have knowledge. But I do urge that the people should understand that although there has been a whipping up of opinion on this matter, the parliamentary pension’s scheme is in. fact one for which members themselves carry a degree of responsibility&nbsp;
-9-
greater than that which people in superannuation schemes in any other walk of life that I&nbsp;know of are called upon to carry.&nbsp;
One question that arises at once is whether the pension benefits should be made retrospective. I use the word rather loosely. The question is whether those who, having gone out of Parliament, are already drawing parliamentary pensions, should have the benefit of these improvements. There is no recommendation on that point by&nbsp;the committee. The Cabinet is of opinion that in these circumstances, as there will be additional contributions and additional benefits in future, the contributory pensions now being paid ought to remain on their existing footing and that the increased pensions ought to have only a future operation.
Now, Sir, having said that, I turn to the great problem of Ministers' salaries. I do not propose to say very much about it. No man is much of an advocate in his own cause; I very much prefer to do what I have been doing so far, that is, to advocate the cause of members of this Parliament. But, of course, Ministers' salaries were bound to be reviewed. I&nbsp;hope that everybody in Australia. will understand that when the first Richardson committee was appointed and made its report in 1955&nbsp;the Cabinet expressly excluded from its terms of reference the salaries of Ministers and parliamentary officers, because we felt that at that time in some particular circumstances We had to show a little restraint on this matter, without denying to members their right to a review. In the result, seven years of great economic changes and stresses and all kinds of circumstances have gone by&nbsp;since the! Salaries of Ministers in this Parliament were looked at, and I&nbsp;would think (That somebody would need to be a pretty earn Australian to come along at this stage and say that they ought not to be reviewed on this occasion.
Sir, in the result, the committee has looked at this matter. It has recommended two things about Ministers, one an increase in salaries and the other a series of non-contributory pensions for Ministers with a minimum period of six years of service as Ministers and a maximum period of ten years or more. We have given a great deal of thought to this. We shrewdly suspect that the committee regarded these two things as being in parallel and recommended them both, thinking that they supplemented, each other. But we had many discussions and we quite freely reached the conclusion that to introduce these pension payments for people other than the one exception, that was originally established years ago in regard to a Prime Minister, would be wrong. We thought that it would be a good thing if, instead of having non-contributory pensions for Ministers, we applied ourselves to the task of seeing whether some suitable contributory scheme, quite distinct from the members' fund, could be worked out. Of&nbsp;course, that will take time. Therefore we say nothing more about it except this that we are not legislating for non-contributory pensions for Ministers on this occasion.
Sir, I had no idea, when I&nbsp;stood up, that I was going to speak for an hour, and it seems fantastic to have to refer, before I&nbsp;sit down, to one magnificent item-motor cars-because the committee made a recommendation. I&nbsp;do not know why; it is not a very great matter. But it was to the effect that anybody who had been Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition or Deputy Leader of the Opposition in this House for five long, weary years was to have for three years after he left Parliament the benefit of an Official car, no doubt for public and official functions. Well, it is one of those little things that have attracted so much attention from some people that one would think it was almost earth-shaking. In fact, there has been so much argument about it that anybody who stands a chance of being a beneficiary from it would, if he is like me, sooner be without. Therefore, we drop it. It flutters to the ground like a dead leaf. It is gone. I hope that that knowledge will give everybody great comfort, and I&nbsp;part with it, myself, with no sorrow at all.
Mr. Speaker, I conclude with the hope that the Australian public, now having heard, in an imperfect way and by&nbsp;no means exhaustively, the case for their elected representatives in Parliament, will consider that case with care and will determine it with their usual judgment.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.


P.M. 13/1959.
VISIT OVERSEAS&nbsp;BY THE PRIME MINISTER
Statement by&nbsp;the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) will leave Sydney on 28th April, 1959,&nbsp;in s.s. "ORCADES”&nbsp;for San Francisco.
At Auckland on Friday, 1st May, Mr. Menzies will meet the Prime Minister of New Zealand (Mr. Walter Nash).
In North America, Mr. Menzies will make visits to Ottawa, Washington and New York. On Thursday, 21st May, he will meet the Prime Minister of Canada (Mr. John Diefenbaker) for personal discussion, and subsequently meet the Canadian Cabinet.
During his Washington visit, which will be from 22nd to 27th May, he hopes to have discussions with the President (Mr. Eisenhower) and other administration leaders on matters of foreign affairs and finance. Discussions on similar topics will also be held in New York.
The Prime Minister will fly&nbsp;from New York to London towards the end of May and in the United Kingdom he will hold discussions with the Prime Minister (Mr. Macmillan) and members of the United Kingdom Cabinet. These discussions will cover much the same topics as those in North America and will include, in addition, domestic matters of Commonwealth interest.
Mr. Menzies will be accompanied by&nbsp;Dame Pattie Menzies his Private Secretary (Miss Hazel Craig), his Special Assistant (Mr. Robert Kennedy), and Miss I. Dalton of his personal staff. An officer of the Prime Minister's Department Mr. K.N.&nbsp;Jones) will join the party in North America.
Details of the Prime Minister's return to Australia by&nbsp;air are not yet determined but will be announced as soon as possible. The probable date of return is early July.
CANBERRA.
15th April,1959.


For PRESS
(Not for publication before a.m. 25th April, 1959)
ANZAC&nbsp;DAY MESSAGE&nbsp;FROM HER MAJESTY&nbsp;THE QUEEN
The Prime Minister announced to-day that His Excellency The Governor-General had received the following message from Her Majesty:-&nbsp;
"Once again my thoughts are with my people in the Commonwealth of Australia and New Zealand in the commemoration of Anzac Day, a day of glorious memory of all those whose courage and devotion to duty did so much to ensure victory in two World Wars. The remembrance of their valour and loyalty is an inspiration to us all."
At the request of the Government, His Excellency has sent the following message to Her Majesty:-&nbsp;
"With humble duty I convey the sincere thanks of the Australian people for Your Majesty's
Anzac Day Message."


EMBARGO: NOT&nbsp;FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE 12.01 A.M. MONDAY, 27 TH&nbsp;APRIL 1959.
&nbsp;
FOR PRESS:
&nbsp;
VISIT OF H.R.H. PRINCESS ALEXANDRA OF KENT
STATEMENT&nbsp;BY THE PRIME MINISTER
&nbsp;
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, today announced the outline programme of the visit to Australia during August and September of this year of Her Royal Highness Princess Alexandra of Kent.
&nbsp;
(FOR INFORMATION: This is a simultaneous announcement, together with the Premiers of the three States Her Royal Highness will visit. The Premiers will give details of the State programmes.)
&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said Her Royal Highness would arrive at Canberra in the afternoon of Friday August 14. She would leave for Queensland on Tuesday, August 18.&nbsp;He would travel by&nbsp;air to New South Wales on September. From New South Wales she would travel to Victoria on September 16.&nbsp;On September 23&nbsp;she would fly&nbsp;from
Melbourne to Canberra. On Thursday and Friday, September 24+/25, she would visit Cooma and the Snowy Mountains area before leaving&nbsp;
Australia on September 26&nbsp;to return by&nbsp;air to the United Kingdom.
&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said that so far as possible Commonwealth and State Tour Organisers had tried to produce a programme which would achieve three things:-
&nbsp;
1.&nbsp;To entertain the young Princess while, at the same time, showing her as much as possible of Australia and Australian life.
&nbsp;
2. To enable as many people as possible to see Her Royal Highness during her visit.
&nbsp;
3.&nbsp;To ensure that Her Royal Highness enjoyed her stay in Australia, and that the programme at every opportunity contained an "accent on youth".
&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said that three weeks of Her Royal Highness' 6-week visit would be spent in Queensland, which was celebrating its centenary year. She would spend 12 days of her Queensland tour in country areas. She would spend a long week-end on a Barrier Reef Island.
&nbsp;
Her Royal Highness' visits to New South Wales and
Victoria would be comparatively brief and informal.
&nbsp;
In New South Wales she would make two country visits.
In Victoria she would begin her visit with a train trip from Wodonga to Melbourne.
&nbsp;
Her Royal Highness' visits to the Australian Capital
Territory would be at the beginning and end of her tour. (AN&nbsp;OUTLINE OF THE A.C.T.&nbsp;PROGRAMME IS ATTACHED.)
&nbsp;
"I&nbsp;am sure that Her Royal Highness will see much to interest her, and we hope that she will enjoy herself as much as we will enjoy having her with us," Mr. Menzies said.
&nbsp;
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
26th April, 1959
&nbsp;
VISIT TO THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY BY HER ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCESS ALEXANDRA OF KENT
FIRST VISIT
&nbsp;
Friday, August&nbsp;14
Afternoon Her Royal Highness will arrive R.A.A.F. Base, Canberra.
Evening - Free.
&nbsp;
Saturday, August 15
Morning - Free.
Afternoon - Free.
Evening - Her Royal Highness will attend Governor-General's
Dinner.
&nbsp;
Sunday, August 16
Morning - Her Royal Highness will attend Divine Service. &nbsp;Afternoon - Free.&nbsp;Evening - Free.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Monday, August 17
Morning - Her Royal Highness will visit Australian War
Memorial; and Assembly of School Children.
Afternoon - Her Royal Highness will attend Ball at Parliament House.
&nbsp;
Tuesday, August 18
Morning - Her Royal Highness will fly&nbsp;to Brisbane.
&nbsp;
SECOND&nbsp;VISIT
Wednesday, September 23
Afternoon - Her Royal Highness will arrive R.A.A.F. Base, Canberra, from Victoria.
Evening - Free.
&nbsp;
Thursday, September 24
Morning - Her Royal Highness will tour Cooma and Snowy
Mountains area.
Afternoon - Her Royal Highness will tour Cooma and Snowy
Mountains area.
Evening - Free.
&nbsp;
Friday, September 25
Morning - Free.
Afternoon - Her Royal Highness will return to Canberra
Evening - Her Royal Highness will attend Dance at
Government House.
&nbsp;
Saturday, September 26
Her Royal Highness will depart Canberra by&nbsp;air for return to the United Kingdom.


FOR PRESS: P.M.No.&nbsp;14/1959

STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER. RT. HON. J. McEWEN
The Federal Cabinet has not, as reported, approved a five-year plan for the development of Canberra at a cost of £55 million from 1st July next.
No decision in these terms has been made and the programme for governmental works and housing in Canberra will continue to be subject to the normal annual budget procedures.
Cabinet has given consideration to plans for the development of Canberra and has decided that, in addition to providing, at broadly the present level of expenditure, for the essential requirements such as engineering services and housing arising out of the planned transfer of Departments to Canberra and the normal growth of Canberra, it should be the objective to provide for the introduction of some features to develop the national character of the capital.&nbsp;
A programme of the order of&nbsp;£3 million, spread over the next five years, was envisaged for these special features. A specific decision by Cabinet would still be necessary before any particular project was commenced. Cabinet had authorised work on the Lakes Scheme to begin without delay.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.
1st May, 1959.


P.M.No. 15/1959.
COMMONWEALTH BANKING CORPORATION
Statement in the House of Representatives by the Acting Prime Minister. The Rt. Hon, J. McEwen, M.P.
While the Commonwealth Banking Corporation will not be formally established until the legislation has been proclaimed, which will not be until about the end of the year, it is necessary to proceed at once with the appointment of the Board of the corporation, so that the re-organization necessary to give effect to the legislation and to constitute the Banking Corporation can be carried through. This action will include planning of such things as staffing and accommodation, arrangements for the commencement of business by the Commonwealth Development Bank and the integration of the Commonwealth Trading Bank, the Commonwealth Savings Bank, and the Commonwealth Development Bank into the framework of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation.
Cabinet has decided to appoint Mr. Warren D. McDonald, C.B.E., to be Chairman of the Board of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation, which is being set up under the Banking Legislation recently passed by the Parliament.
Mr. McDonald is Chairman of the Australian National Airlines Commission which operates T.A.A. He will in due course retire from that position, but, because of the various problems confronting T.A.A. during the coming months by reason of the introduction of its new fleet of Fokker Friendship and Electra aircraft and associated matters, he has consented to carry on his work with T.A.A. at least until these particular problems have been dealt with.
Cabinet has also decided to appoint Mr. E.B. Richardson, C.B.E., as Managing Director of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation and Mr. A.N. Armstrong as Deputy Managing Director of the Corporation. Mr. Richardson is at present Deputy Governor of the Commonwealth Bank and Mr. Armstrong is General Manager of the Commonwealth Trading Bank.
I should add that under the legislation the Board of the Commonwealth Banking corporation will comprise eleven members, of whom it is required that eight shall be neither directors nor officers of the Bank nor members of the Commonwealth Public Service. The legislation provides that the other three members shall be the Secretary to the Treasury, the Managing Director of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation and the Deputy Managing Director of the Corporation.
With the appointment of the Chairman, therefore, seven other members of the Board have still to be appointed. The Government intends to make these appointments at an early date.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.6th May, 1959.&nbsp;


PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON.J. McEwen, M.P., AT CANBERRA ON THURSDAY, 7TH MAY, 1959, AT11.30 A.M.
QUESTION: There are reports that Australia will be called on to further reduce its production of lead and zinc, which arises from the current New York meeting to the extent of 23,000 tons. Have you any information or any comment?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I have some information, I think the story flows from falling lead-zinc prices, dating back more than a year, followed by the American anxiety and the local anxiety of their own industry. So that, about a year ago, we were proposing from here, after consultation with the Australian industry, that, there should be a study, at the international level, of the relevant facts, which would have the dual objectives of seeing whether anything could be done to stabilize markets and give us a basis on which we should argue with the United States that they ought not to take any unilateral action that is more than a year ago. Sir Edwin McCarthy, at his end, took on instructions, an ititiative in convening international meetings, and this has evolved with him Montreal Conference decisions intervening, which gave a general lead in the approach to world commodity prices. This had led to a succession of conferences between governments and their industries internationally between the industries without benefit of government; and a succession of meetings under the auspices of the United Nations. All this has culminated in the meeting which is now current and may be, in fact, practically finished, in New York, in which governments under the auspices of the United Nations - but all equipped with the advice of their own industry people - have been considering what might be done to stabilize world markets and prices for lead and zinc. I think the critical approach was a question of whether it was practical and desirable to attempt to reasonably equate the quantities of these metals coming on to world markets with the consumptive demand. I think we may expect perhaps today some announcements to emerge from the meeting. I know there have been rumours, but there are no official decisions yet that have been communicated to me.
QUESTION: Do you think you might be happy about the information that is coming?
MR. McEWEN: I think so, because the whole procedure has been a work-out of what I was propounding for our Government at Montreal - that there should be a commodity by commodity study of the factors which may contribute to stabilisation of commodity prices. This has been an actual work-out of that approach.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, Isn't this rather a suggestion not to cut production in any country, but instead to keep a certain amount of lead and zinc off the market by stockpiling in the countries concerned?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I have been carefully choosing words, I say equate the quantity of lead and zinc coming on to world markets to the consumptive demand, it would be left to each country - &nbsp;possibly to each company - to decide whether it’s contribution would
-2-
be at the point of production, or at the point of smelting, or at the point of export to world markets.
QUESTION: Would there be any Government advice to Australiancompanies on that point?
MR. McEWEN: There is certainly no Government instruction. There is a desire by the Government that, to the extent that our own policies are having a work-out, that Australia should be capable of speaking with a single voice. And that has substantially been achieved.
QUESTION: But, actually, this is more a question for industry than for Government - to take the initiative, I mean?
MR. McEWEN: My own attitude is that the Government ought never to take an arbitrary position if industry is willing to make a decisive arrangement itself. And the units of production in these industries are so few in number that I have always thought that it should be feasible, and I believe in the Australian scene, it is feasible, for the industries to reach such a measure of agreement that it avoids the necessity for Government intervention.
QUESTION: What you say, Sir, seems to suggest that however it may be achieved, we may be brought to a position of agreeing to a further reduction in exports at least?
MR. McEWEN: No; I would correct you there. The industries have done that substantially themselves over the last year. Some of the Broken Hill mines announced long since that some would reduce their working days, and some reduce their exports. And you have seen recently the announcement on behalf of Mt. Isa.
QUESTION: And this would probably not affect us - any agreement we have already anticipated?
MR. McEWEN: I think you may take it that it would not further affect us.
QUESTION: We have had reports that Broken Hill have already agreed with other producers on a private level to a 12 ½ per cent. cut in their sales. Does this mean that if there was an agreement by the United Nations committee that there would be, say, a 10 per cent. cut in sales? Surely Broken Hill would have to make a further cut in their sales from their current level, following such an agreement?
MR. McEWEN: Well the relationship, in my experience which is a fairly long one, between the mining groups, is that they meet these problems without all necessarily taking the same action at the same time. But they get a total end result that is substantially the equivalent to what it would have been if they had all taken the same action at the same time.
QUESTION: Could I just check the precise wording of something? You said earlier, Sir? You said it would be left to each country or each company to decide at what point there should be controls - whether at mining, smelting, or export. You said "each country" or "each company"?
-3-
MR. McEWEN: I said both, and I was trying to get back the atmosphere in which I was quoting both. To each country and, perhaps, to each company, so that in one country it may even be a governmental decision. In our country - in this country - I am sure that whatever is done is going to transpire to be an industry decision which may not necessarily apply in both metals an equal formula to every producing unit. They work out a balance "You do a little more on lead and we'll do a little more on zinc”. They do that kind of thing. It works out, well, much better than a government applying an arbitrary formula.
QUESTION: It has been reported this morning, Mr. McEwen, that there is something in the nature of a revolt in the Government parties over the New Guinea taxation position. I understand that the party met and considered the matter again this morning. Could you clear the thing up for us?
MR McEWEN: &nbsp;Well, I saw the "revolt" in print, but I would say there has been no revolt. There has been a vigorous discussion, as I would hope always to have as evidence of a virile party organisation. A further discussion this morning has been conducted in a completely amicable atmosphere.
QUESTION: Can you say, Mr. McEwen, whether the Government will allow debate on the New Guinea issue? If so, when and how?
MR McEWEN: The New Guinea question of taxation?
COMMENT: Yes.
MR McEWEN: There will certainly be an opportunity for debate if legislation is passed in the New Guinea Legislature, because our own statute requires that such New Guinea legislation is finally tabled in our Parliament. That produces a procedural opportunity for debate.
QUESTION: I will put it another way: Will there be an opportunity to debate it before it is finalised in the Legislative Council? I think that there will not be a special opportunity created; but today is "Grievance Day". The Supply debate is on the stocks, and there are opportunities for any members to express themselves.
QUESTION: On another New Guinea question, Mr. McEwen: Is it a fact that there are proposals before the Government, which may or may not have reached the Cabinet, for QANTAS to leave the New Guinea airlines field and for them to be replaced by Ansett and as a sort of extension of Australian domestic airline operations.
MR McEWEN: Well, I think it is publicly known that Mr. Ansett has expressed his desire to be allowed to get into the New Guinea traffic. This has not been a matter of Cabinet discussion. It may well transpire eventually to be so.QUESTION: Have you got any person in mind to succeed Mr. McDonald as T.A.A. Chairman, Sir?
MR. McEWEN: No.
-4-
QUESTION: Is there likely to be an early appointment?
MR. McEWEN: I would think not a very early appointment, for the reasons that were incorporated in my announcement of his appointment to the other position.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, have you yet received any reports from Washington on the "Food for Peace" talks or is it a bit early at this stage?
MR. McEWEN: Well, of course, I have received advice I mean the cables are buzzing backwards and forwards because guidance and instruction have to go from here. I am expecting a final communique in today. Indeed, it may have just hit my table for all I know. But I certainly have not sighted the final communique
QUESTION: When do you expect a decision to be made, Sir, on? The QANTAS proposal for a new Sydney hotel?
MR. McEWEN: I cannot put a time upon the thinning that relates to this. It is evident that the growing volume of business of QANTAS - particularly with the additional traffic that is expected to be associated with the 707's- &nbsp;raises the question of the adequacy of the Wentworth Hotel for QANTAS’s own purposes there. And that does quite legitimately, raise the question of whether QANTAS is to be in a position to service the additional traffic and service it where? - this is a matter in which exploratory discussions are proceeding between QANTAS and the Government at the present time.
QUESTION: Has it reached Cabinet level yet, Mr. McEwen?
MR. McEWEN: Oh yes, it has reached Cabinet level, but not toa definitive point.
QUESTION: Is there likely to be an early Cabinet decision?
MR. McEWEN: Well, in a matter in which discussions are proceeding, I frankly can't anticipate how quickly we will reach a decision.
QUESTION: Is it just a question of discussion, Sir, or are you Seeking further information?
MR. McEWEN: What is the difference?
COMMENT: Quite frequently, a preliminary Cabinet discussion leads to a decision to get some further facts that may not initially be before the Cabinet.
MR. McEWEN: Well, I think that is partly the position, but I think the exploratory discussions and that is the term I use will roam over the whole field of necessity, dimensions, and when, where I think that is the kind of discussion that is proceeding.
QUESTION: Has any protest boon made to the Government against this hotel going on in the party, for instance?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I have never heard of any protest.
QUESTION: By private parties like Chevron?
MR. McEWEN: No. To the best of my knowledge - no.
-5-
QUESTION: Senator Partridge is handling the matter at this stage, I take it between Cabinet discussions?
MR. McEWEN: Yes, naturally; it is his business.
QUESTION: The R.S.L., Mr. McEwen, is proposing to ask the Government to introduce legislation to restore soldier preference legislation which would not be open to challenge in the court. Have you considered that matter at all, or received any request?
Mr. McEWEN: My understanding and I am without the benefit of the Attorney- General's advice on this is that the Court's decision is on a straight constitutional base that would leave the Government - leave the Parliament - without power to legislate to re-establish preference in ordinary employment. This, of course, does not touch on my understanding the constitutional right of the Government in respect of its own employees. The Government does not propose to vary its policy in regard to its ovum employees. The Boyer Report which deals with the whole matter of public service employment by the Commonwealth, will be studied on its own merits. I am not aware as to whether this issue is raised at all in the Boyer Report. But it will be studied on its merits. And I understand that the State Governments have said that they propose to sustain preference as they have had it up to the present time in their own employment.
QUESTION: Are you proposing anything outside the public service Level on this matter?
MR. McEWEN: I am, personally, not aware of what opportunity there is outside the Commonwealth employees.
QUESTION: Have you had any further information, Sir, on this so-called new wonder fibre from Italy?
MR. McEWEN: No, I have not.
QUESTION: What is the Government's attitude to Sir Thomas? Play ford’s request for money for the rail standardisation?
MR. McEWEN: I am not equipped to answer that.
QUESTION: Has anything come before Cabinet yet, Sir?
MR. McEWEN: Not in the immediate past.
QUESTION: How far past have you had something to do with it?
MR. MCEWEN: Well, I think it is known didn't we announce back at the time of the election that we would make some funds available? I think that is the most recent treatment of the matter by the Government.
QUESTION: Have there been any discussions with Britain on the launching of satellites from Woomera?
MR. McEWEN: I am not able to answer.
QUESTION: Sir, it has been suggested that a third Minister, other than Mr. Downer and Mr. Cramer, will be going abroad shortly. Are you in a position to tell us who he is and what his purpose would be in going abroad?
-6-
MR. McEWEN: No, I am not in a position, but I have seen Senator Spooner’s name mentioned in the papers. All I can say is that the very nature of Senator Spooner's Department and its functions is such that there could arise an occasion for him to go abroad, but there is nothing in prospect as of the present.
QUESTION: Can you say, Sir, when you think the present sittings will finish and when the House will resume again?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I expect them to finish probably today week. I can't say with any precision when the House will resume the Budget session. That will be influenced by the timing of the conclusion of the Cabinet's Construction of the Budget, I should think.
QUESTION: You have no time-table in mind for the Budget itself?
MR. McEWEN: Not a precise one.
QUESTION: It will be later than last year, I take it, Sir?
MR. McEWEN: I would think it might be a little later, but notmuch later.
QUESTION: Have you any date in mind yet for the Loan Council- Premiers’ Conference?
MR. McEWEN: No, we have not a date.
QUESTION: Does it look like being early or late?
MR. McEWEN: It looks to me like being medium. (Laughter.)
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, there have been reports that there have been substantial revisions in the balance of payments estimates for 1958/59 and probably for 1959/60, compared with what was sought at the time of the last Budget; also that the overall cash deficit that the Government looked to at the time of the last Budget will almost certainly not be realised. In view of that more favourable out-turn in those two basic financial estimates which governed the bid at the time of the Budget, would that, in your mind be prima facie evidence in favour of more tax reductions or a more liberal approach in the next Budget, just as a matter of principle?
MR. McEWEN: Well, let me try to deal with the two subjects separately. The balance of payments - to the extent that the balance of payments has improved through additional earnings, is gratifying but not very great. The balance of payment improvement is, undoubtedly, principally attributable to capital outflow, which is gratifying but not predictable with any great confidence or precision. And I would think that, to the extent that our policies are affected by the phenomenon it is illustrated in the fact that with a fall-away in earnings, we have sustained, for the time-being, the import licensing ceiling at 800 million. I think we will take it from there in accordance with our experience of capital inflow and then in the import licensing period following the present one, we will have the benefit of the new wool season. I don't think I can really say more than that, except to repeat that it has been our constant desire to lessen the stringency of import licensing as we felt it was safe to do it. But we have no intention of applying a short-term approach and on and off approach to that. That is good for
-7-
no one. On the other side, it is undoubtedly true that the response to Government loan raisings has been very gratifying. I don't think that the Government feels that the future in this is completely predictable. Last year, there is no doubt that the estimate of the outcome of loan conversions was a contributing factor to the deficit budgeting. And, by the sane token, an improvement in the loan situation will be appropriately taken into account in the Budget construction, but I would be the last to be guessing now as to the consequences for taxations
QUESTION: Sir, recently the New Zealand Minister for Agriculture conferred with Sir John Collins in Wellington on the price of Australian butter selling in the U.K. Have you had any official complaints from New Zealand about us dumping butter on the U.K. market?
MR. McEWEN: No I have not. I think that would come to me. Any such issue would be first considered by the Australian Dairy Produce Board and the Department of Primary Industry. But I think it would come to me pretty fast, and I have no knowledge of it at all,
QUESTION: Has the Government yet decided on an Ambassador to Moscow, Mr. McEwen?
MR. McEWEN: No.
QUESTION: Another point on this "Food for Peace": When you came back from America, you said that ii the Americans as I understand it if the Americans wanted to step up their disposals following the "Food for Peace" Conference, there would have to be some assumption by the Americans of some obligations towards stabilizing, or ensuring that would be able to have export earnings sufficient for our purposes, or there would have to be some compensation to us if the Americans expanded their surplus sales into our markets. Do you think, following what you know of the developments at the "Food for Peace" Conference, that we will have to pursue that line of approach?
MR. McEWEN: I don't think that we will. I don't feel able to be dogmatic about this, because I feel that there has been some shift of American policy some indication of shift of American policy even since I was over there
QUESTION: In other words, they are showing signs that they would be prepared to bind themselves in some way to not making sales that would affect our commercial sales?
MR. McEWEN: Well, they have been, from the outset, very fourthcoming in giving assurances that they recognise our claim to be protected in our legitimate commercial opportunities. They accept that as a principle. They will, I am sure, come out with a much more effective and continuous instrument of consultation, because to accept the principle is not enough in a spatter of individual transactions. We have always relied on two things – acceptance by an instrument of study and consultation. I think that that will be one of the outcomes of this conference. On the other hand, the operation of this declared principle is very important if there be any appreciable increase in the actual non-commercial disposal.
-8-
QUESTION: What form do you think this instrument of consultation could take?
MR. McEWEN: Well first it could be a committee formally constituted, including representatives of all the commercial exporters of wheat. So it could have a basis of existence founded upon an agreement - a formal agreement - between the countries concerned. Then it would need to have an appropriate charter which would need to be governed by a declaration of principle and procedurally capable of continuous and particular study of the financial capacities, for example, of individual countries to buy commercially; what inhibited them from buying commercially - a complete exchange problem or an exchange problem flowing from a diversion of their exchange resources to developmental programmes, as distinct from consumption imports. These are the kind of things.
QUESTION: Is there some evidence that the Americans appreciate that some countries are transferring their exchange problems to us?
MR. McEWEN: Yes, I think there is. And I really think there will flow from this conference an acknowledgement of the peculiar interest of Australia in wheat trade with the Asiatic countries. They have been our historic markets and, of course, we have the –geographic advantage of freight.
QUESTION: Have you yet decided on the composition and terms of reference of the committee to review taxation laws?
MR McEWEN: No, we have not.
With the Compliments of:
HUGH DASH,PRESS SECRETARY TO THE PRIME MINISTER.&nbsp;


AUSTRALIAN IMMIGRATION POLICYStatement by the Prime Minister, Mr. R.G. Menzies
As some question appears to have arisen here in respect of the Australian immigration policy, I think it desirable to say' one or two things in order to clarify the position.
The Australian immigration policy has been steadily maintained for the last 58 years. It is our national desire to develop in Australia a homogeneous population in order that we may avert social difficulties which have arisen in many other countries. It is clearly the right of any nation to determine its own racial constitution. We have maintained our policy in respect of people who are actually citizens of other British Commonwealth countries. I say this so that it may not be thought that our policy has some specific reference to an American State or Territory.
So far as I know most nations have policies which determine the intake of citizens from other countries. So far as Australia is concerned, I vent to make it quite clear that our policy, to which the overwhelming majority of Australians are deeply attached is not based upon any idea of racial superiority. We willingly recognise that citizens of other- nations possess abilities and traditions which we sincerely respect and admire. When, therefore, a citizen of some Asian or Oriental country is refused permanent entry to the Australian community, it is not because we are assuming to ourselves some superior quality. That would be untrue, unjust and, indeed, absurd.
But we desire to organise the future of our own country in our own way. Dyer have witnessed many examples of nations in which a mixture of races has given rise to deep prejudices and almost insoluble social questions. It would appear that in the Hawaiian Islands various races have been able to live together in complete amity and with mutual advantage. But this is not true everywhere.
The point I want to make is that our immigration policy was not devised as something with particular application to any one country. It is broadly devised, of long standing, and not discriminatory as between one country possessing non-European citizens and another. From time to time there have been suggestions made that we should introduce some quota system, My Government regards this as impracticable, as introducing possible new discriminations and as something which does not even begin to solve the problem of population movements, The whole essence of the matter is that we desire to build up our own population, partly by natural increase and partly by immigration in such a way as to produce as soon as possible an integrated population of a homogeneous kind.
I should perhaps emphasise that, as was realised by the Asian Relations Conference at New Delhi in 1947, it is the prerogative of every country to decide what shall be the composition of its population and what persons should be admitted to permanent citizenship.
We receive and welcome many Asian visitors whether they come for business or for travel. We have today approximately 6,000 Asian students attending, our universities, technical colleges, schools and other educational institutions. It has been our experience that these students, in common with many other Asian visitors, have encountered no feeling of discrimination. Are in fact a friendly people, not given to making distinctions among people on grounds of race or religion? But we do not want to see created in our country minority problems or prejudices or occasional bitterness such as exist in some countries where large numbers of non-Europeans and Europeans live in separate communities,
HONOLULU.9th May, 1959.&nbsp;


FOR PRESS:
Mr. W.R. Cumming, C.V.O., Director-General of the visit of Princess Alexandra, is proceeding to Sydney and Brisbane for discussions with each of the State Directors for New South Wales and Queensland about the programme of Her Royal Highness' Australian visit.
Mr. Cumming will be in Sydney on May 12 and in Brisbane on May 13.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.12th May, 1959.&nbsp;


PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. J. McEWEN, M.P., AT CANBERRA ON THURSDAY, 14TH MAY, 1959, AT 5 P.M.
QUESTION: Mr, McEwen, have you had any communication from the British Government yet on the use of Woomera for space research for launching satellites?
MR. McEWEN: Yes. I think we can say that we know of the British Government's plans, which have not reached the point of planning projection yet - planning the instrument - carrying device. Well, we are in Woomera in partnership with the U.K. Government. I don't think the point has been reached at which there is any necessity, I believe, to decide where this operation would take place. But if, for this instrument carrying device, Woomera were judged to be the right place, of course, I have no doubt we would be completely co-operative.
QUESTION: Well, anyway, it has been made clear to the British Government that if they wish to use Woomera for this, they can do so?
MR. McEWEN: I think it is clear; it does not have to be made clear if that isn’t too Irish.
QUESTION: The Americans put up a proposal some time ago that they might be allowed to increase the tracking facilities at Woomera. Has anything happened on that?
MR. McEWEN: I can't answer with detailed precision, but, to the extent that the Americans want to establish tracking facilities here, there would be complete co-operation here.
QUESTION: Following the visit last week of the Lockheed and Northrop people to speak to our Defence people, can you say whether the Government is looking to making a decision about these various matters on aircraft replacement, say, within any specific time? Have they got any time period that they are thinking of in which they are looking to come to a point on it?
MR. McEWEN: I don't think it can be said that they have a precise date decided. But these things, clearly, take so long to mature that I think it can be said that the appropriate defence authorities are studying what type of aircraft will replace the current type.
QUESTION: You would not say that they were looking to being ready to be clear in their own minds, say, in two months or three months or any period such as that?
MR.McEWEN: I would think not so in so narrow a bracket of time as that; no.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, this week - in the last few days - the Minister for Civil Aviation introduced a Bill, which has now been shelved, about airport controls and drinking liquor and so on. Can you give us any guidance about the Government's intentions about that matter?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I think that the frank answer is that the Government believed particularly in respect of international travel, that it was desirable that we should have facilities that are common in today's world for international travellers. And the legislation that was introduced conforms to that general
-2-
objective. Well, it is common knowledge that it did not find favour in its existing form in the Senate, and the Government has withdrawn it in deference to the Senate and will re-study the situation.
QUESTION: It is abandoned?
MR. McEWEN: No. It would be wrong to say that it is abandoned. It is not legislation - if I may remind you - that is exclusively confined to alcoholic liquor, although the searchlight was turned on alcoholic liquor in the facilities and services.
COMMENT: The business concessions.
MR. McEWEN: Well, business concessions seems to be a business enterprise. But, a packet of cigarettes - a whole variety of things that a traveller may need.
QUESTION: In shelving it, has the Government been influenced by any temperance protests - any Rechabite movement or anything like that?
MR. McEWEN: Well, that really has not arisen. I think it has been influenced by the Senators.
QUESTION: As I understood it, Sir, the basic idea behind the Bill was that it should help to make airports pay, and the Government is still holding to that principle and wants to go ahead to make airports pay by establishing franchises there in the future. Is that right?
MR. McEWEN: I would not have thought that making airports pay was a primary objective of the legislation. I think it was a service to the travelling public that was the primary thing in mind.
QUESTION: When do you hope to re-introduce it – in the Budget? Session?
MR. McEWEN: I would not put a point of time on something that was unacceptable in its existing form; clearly, it must become a matter of discussions. When you engage in those kind of discussions, who can put a time on it?
QUESTION: Do you mean discussions with the nine "6 o'clock closing hours" Senators?
MR. McEwen: No.
QUESTION: Is that their objection, Sir, the time factor?
MR. McEWEN: No; I don't think it can be quite narrowed down to that. I think it is a broader objection that I don't find myself able to completely describe, but sufficient to justify some negotiations.
QUESTION: These negotiations, will they involve talks with the States? Is there any attempt, in other words, to reconcile Federal and State laws on liquor?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I think the discussions will be. With the Senators. If the Senators have views on the interests of the States that clearly would bring the whole thing into the field.
-3-
QUESTION: In other words, you intend, if necessary, to overrideThe States.
MR. McEWEN: Oh no; I am not saying that. The legislation, in the form introduced, would have established on Commonwealth property as I comprehend it hours of trading that may, in circumstances, have been broader than the hours of the States. Although in respect of alcoholic liquor it could have been through the operation of bona fide laws in the State, it would not necessarily have meant that the concessionaire on the Commonwealth property would be operating wider than a hotel in the State could have.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, is it not also true that no State Government could license any liquor sales on Commonwealth airports without the permission of the Commonwealth?
MR. McEWEN: Yes. Well, you have the qualification without - well, I think that is true - without the permission of the Commonwealth.
QUESTION: On another airline matter: It was reported that Cabinet this week discussed the proposal for reorganizing the routes to New Guinea. Could you tell us anything about what was proposed or what was done there?
MR. McEWEN: I think - my memory has let me right down. (Laughter.)
QUESTION: Is there anything you can say yes, Sir, on the Dairying Committee?
MR. McEWEN: No; I am sorry. We are not in a position to make an announcement on the Dairying Committee. But Mr. Adermann and myself and some colleagues are really vigorously at work trying to put together the kind of committee that the Government believes to be acceptable. I think as soon as the House has gone into recess, we will have rather more time. But we have been actively at work over the last couple of weeks. The calibre of the people we want consequent upon the importance that we attach to this committee, is not easy to pick up if you really want good people.
QUESTION: Have you decided Sir, how many people you will have on the committee?
MR. McEWEN: The thinking is that we would have five people on the committee. That is our present objective. It is subject to gaining five people who would be sufficiently representative.
QUESTION: From the various States?
MR. McEWEN: Well, when I say "representative", I don't mean representatives of States or of interests. But I would like it to be clear - representative out of their experience and knowledge. And, clearly, this problem is so geographically wide-spread, we would want a pretty wide-spread representation to bring the actual practical knowledge to the committee.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen going back to the question of defence aircraft, got the impression that both Northrop and the other group Lockheed would be interested in investing money in the Australian industry, to make planes in Australia and also to use this as a service area to service SEATO. Has that proposition been put to the Government?
-4-
MR. McEWEN: Well, it has not been put to the Government qua government. It may - and I don't know - it may have been put to some level of government; it has not, certainly, been put to the Cabinet.
QUESTION: What would the reaction be to that, as a Government?
MR. McEWEN: I think the Goverment's reaction would have to await file Particular proposition. It would, on the one hand, have its own substantive merits, as against which, we have existing aircraft manufacturing establishments here, which we would not forget exist, of course.
COMMENT: This proposal was that they would invest money in the existing aircraft.
MR. McEWEN: Oh, yes. Well, then that clearly introduces the Ownership of the other aircraft interests, as well as the concern of the Government.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, has the Government's deliberation on the QANTAS hotel project reached any conclusions?
MR. McEWEN: No. The position is as I broadly described it last time. We have received intimations from private interests - more than one - that they would be prepared to build a hotel - to enter into an arrangement with QANTAS, etc. As QANTAS are the people who need the hotel accommodation, we have, in the first place, asked QANTAS to go into discussion with these various people. But that I make it clear does not mean that we have farmed the decision out to QANTAS.
QUESTION: There have been reports, following developments such as the possibly large wheat carry-over- or the much obviously large wheat carry-over - this year, and the fact that the world wheat prices, I think, as of now are somewhat below our domestic support price, that the Wheat Stabilisation Pool could run out of money in the first year of this current wheat stabilisation plan. Is that speculation on the right track. Does it look like running out of money?
MR. McEWEN: Frankly, I think it is a little too early to speculate to that extent. I have seen some evidence that in the last few weeks export wheat prices have slightly hardened, as a matter of fact. And I really think that before the Northern Hemisphere crop really comes in to sight, it is too early to speculate on values or the actualities of disposals.
QUESTION: What would be the position if it did run out of money? Would the Government then have to find the money out of its own resources to meet its commitments under the 100 million bushels?
MR. McEWEN: That's right. That is the provision of the Wheat Stabilisation legislation. The wheatgrowers have to put up to a certain formula their own money. When that runs out, or if that runs out, the Treasury stands behind the guarantee. The quid pro quo, of course, has been that the wheat industry has agreed to sell to the Australian public at cost of production during the last - what is is? more than ten years. In fact, the selling price to the Australian public would be much more than £100 million less than the selling price would have been during that period if it had been export parity.
-5-
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, coming back to the QANTAS hotel: Are these groups that you mentioned Sydney groups?
MR. McEWEN: Not only Sydney groups.
QUESTION: Could you give an indication from where they do come?
MR. McEWEN: I was just thinking of ethics. If you will let me pause for a moment. I think I can say frankly - no, I won't identify them. People who write to me and make a proposition no, I won't reveal them.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, will there be any further re-examination of the New Guinea tax proposals as a result of the deputation that saw you today?
MR. McEWEN: Yes. Mr. Holt, Mr. Hasluck and I met the deputation. Vie have heard in considerable length and detail certain criticisms. We have undertaken to consult our colleagues, which may not involve a full and formal meeting of the Cabinet, but an effective consultation on what has been said. It broadly involves two considerations, I think: First, a request that there be a deferment of the introduction, or, alternatively that there be some modifications in detail of the Bill before the House. And those are the two things that the Government will have to - the Ministers will have to consider.
QUESTION: No suggestion to drop it altogether - from the deputation.
MR. McEWEN: I think it would be an exaggeration to say it was suggested to drop it altogether. I think that the most extreme suggestion was that we should hold it up, pending a public enquiry; that was the most extreme suggestion.
QUESTION: Is there any possibility of a public enquiry, Sir?
MR. McEWEN: Well, that would be to pre-judge the consultations with my colleagues to say so.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, have you a date in mind for the resumption of Parliament?
MR. McEWEN: I think Mr. Holt has announced something of the Budget, hasn't he?
COMMENT: Not a firm date that I am aware of.
QUESTION: For the Premiers' Conference, Sir?
MR. McEWEN: I'm sorry. I thought you said "the resumption of Parliament". No, not a firm date, no.
QUESTION: Mr. Holt, this morning, appeared to have some hope of income tax cuts in the next Budget. Do you share that hope?
MR. McEWEN: Well, I find hope is cheap and encouraging. (Laughter.) But I could not be more explicit than that.
QUESTION: Can you say when Cabinet will have its first meeting on the Budget?
MR. McEWEN: No, I can't say precisely; but I think we have to get the Premiers' Conference and the Loan Council behind us before we can fix the date of that.
-6-
QUESTION: The Premiers, Conference and the Loan Council how Soon?
MR. McEWEN: Well - in a month to six weeks, I think.
QUESTION: Is there any Cabinet thinking at this stage on the Budget?
MR. McEWEN: I wouldn't be surprised.
QUESTION: On that, Sir, is it true that you are all quite happy about the prospects of revenue increasing in the coming financial year on the existing rates. In other words, there was a period, I gather when it looked as though revenue might fall again, but~ now, because of the increase in wool prices and so on, it looks as though revenue will be increasing.
MR. McEWEN: I think I would be correct in saying that the thinking is that the level of economic activity is pretty stable now and it is that which indicates the revenue that current rates…
QUESTION: Would it be up higher in the 59/60 than they are now?
MR. McEWEN: Well, the trend at the same level of activity with a growing population and so on, it tends always to increase proportionately.
QUESTION: That alone could be encouraging, couldn’t it?
MR. McEWEN: Well, the trend at the same level of activity with a growing population and so on, it tends always to Increase proportionately
QUESTION: The liabilities tend to increase commensurately, youKnow.
MR. McEWEN: The liabilities tend to increase commensurately, you know.
QUESTION: A rather more domestic question: I understand there was a luncheon between the Cabinet and the Liberal backbenchers. Was that your idea?
MR. McEWEN: Oh no, it was not; and your fact really is not right.
QUESTION: Isn't it?
MR. McEWEN: No. The Liberal Ministers gave a luncheon to the Liberal Party. The Country Party was not as liberal as the Liberal Party; the Country Party gave a dinner to the Country Party the other evening.
QUESTION: A sort of end-of-session party, was it?
MR. McEWEN: Just that, yes. We had a get-together; we had a buffet dinner on Tuesday evening; and the Liberals had a luncheon today.
QUESTION: Do you know whether you will be tabling this EconomicSurvey thing to-night?
MR. McEWEN: It will be tabled to-night.
QUESTION: Mr. McEwen, with reference to the Foreign Ministers' Conference taking place at Geneva, can you say whetherThe Government, at this stage, hopes or believes that it will lead to a Summit Conference
MR McEWEN: I think that the Government has always hoped that a foundation would be established which would justify a Summit Conference?
With the compliments of:HUGH DASH,PRESS SECRETARY TO THE PRIME MINISTER.&nbsp;


MT. ISA. RAILWAY INTERNATIONAL BANK LOAN PROPOSALStatement by the Acting Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. J. McEWEN M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister (Mr. McEwen) said today the Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) while in Washington had interviewed the Chairman and Board of Directors of the International Bank to explore further the Mt. Isa railway loan proposal which the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments had been sponsoring for some time.
Mr. McEwen said that as an outcome of Mr. Menzies' discussions with the Bank, a proposal had emerged that the appropriate Queensland Minister, who would no doubt be the Treasurer, and Mr. G.R. Fisher, Chairman of Mt. Isa Mines Ltd. should go to Washington for explicit discussions with the International Bank on points involved in any loan arrangements which had hitherto not been resolved to the satisfaction of the various parties.
Mr. McEwen said he had conveyed this suggestion, received from Mr. Menzies, to Mr. F. Nicklin, Premier of Queensland, who had intimated his willingness that his Treasurer should visit Washington in the near future. He had also conveyed the suggestion directly to Mr, Fisher who immediately expressed his willingness to go to Washington as soon as it was convenient to the Queensland Minister.
Mr. McEwen said he was sure that through these arrangements, Mr. Menzies had now established a basis of personal contact for the Queensland Government and the Mt. Isa Company with the International Bank officials.
This would no doubt load to an identification of the issues which were decisive to the whole proposal.
As the Commonwealth Government was the principal, as ultimate guarantor of any loan, the Federal Treasurer (Mr. Holt) had agreed to arrange for an appropriate official of the Commonwealth Treasury to be present at Washington also.
CANBERRA28th May, 1959.&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M. No. 1959MR. B.A. SANTAMARIA'S COMMENTStatement by the Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, Mr. McEwen.
When asked today to react to a comment by Mr. B.A. Santamaria, Secretary of the National Catholic Rural Movement, upon a report of an answer by him on a Melbourne television show on Sunday night, the Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, Mr. McEwen, said:-
"I made two points. First that considerations of trade with mainland China would definitely not influence the Government's policy regarding political recognition of the Communist Chinese Government. I then added that if the present Government of mainland China remained the Government - and it certainly appeared that that was likely then in due course, at some point of time, the fact would be recognised by all countries as it has already been recognised by the United Kingdom and most great powers.
“In reply to a further question, I added that the recent visit to Australia of officials of the Government Trading Agency of mainland China had no significance whatever to the question of politic recognition by Australia. I pointed out that in any Communist country all trading was necessarily conducted by officials of government agencies.
"The recent Chinese buying and selling mission was not the result of any invitation or suggestion by the Australian Government.
"Mr, Santamaria is quite wrong in suggesting that there has been any shift of policy by the Australian Government. Considerations of high policy will continue to decide our attitude to political recognition of mainland China."
Mr McEwen added that he had forwarded to Mr. Santamaria a transcription of the actual television interview which is recorded as a normal practice by the television station and which made the above quite clear.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.2nd June, 1959&nbsp;


FOR PRESS:EMBARGOED FOR THURSDAY MORNING PAPERS.LAUNCHING BY DAME PATTIE MENZIES, G.B.E.
Dame Pattie Menzies, G.B.J. the wife of the Rt. Hon. R.G. Menzies, C.H., Q.C., M.P., the Prime Minister of Australia. Will launch the tanker "British Trust" for the B.P. Tanker Company (the principal shipping organization of the British Petroleum Company) at the Kingston shipyard of Lithgow’s Limited, Port Glasgow, on June 26. The "British Trust" is one of a class of 14 ships of 15,500 tons dead weight on a summer draught of 29 feet 5 inches being built for the B.P. Tanker Company for the carriage of finished products between refineries and ocean installations for distribution in the B.P. marketing areas.
"British Trust" will be a product carrier and it is possible she will be employed between the Kwinana Refinery and Ports in eastern Australia in the future.
She is 525 feet overall length, 69 feet broad and will be able to trade between a range of ports where size restrictions are a limiting factor. She is diesel-driven, with a speed of about 14 ½ knots. Accommodation is provided for a crew of 57, all of whom, except apprentices and boys, will have single cabins.
The ceremony will be attended by Mr. Menzies and by the High Commissioner for Australia in London, Sir Eric Harrison and Lady Harrison.
With the compliments of -Hugh Dash,Press Secretary to the Prime Minister.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.3rd June, 1959.&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;P.M. No. 18/1959.LOAN COUNCIL AND PREMIERS' CONFERENCE MEETINGS.Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. McEwen. M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, announced today the dates of the next Loan Council and Premiers Conference meetings. They will be held in Canberra on Tuesday, 23rd, Wednesday, 24th, and Thursday, 25th June.
Mr. McEwen said that the main aim of the Premiers' Conference will be the completion of the discussions held at the Special Premiers' Conference in March of this year on Commonwealth-State financial relations.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.3rd June, 1959&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;P.M.NO. 19/1959NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE 1.A.M. SUNDAY, 14TH JUNE.PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO INDONESIA.Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon, J. McEWEN M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister announced that the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, would visit Indonesia for about five days towards the end of this year.
Mr. McEwen recalled that during his visit to Australia in February, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Dr. Subandrio, had invited Mr. Menzies to pay a visit to Indonesia.
The Prime Minister of Indonesia, Dr. Djuanda, has since written to Mr. Menzies formally inviting him, and Mr. Menzies had accepted. The details of the visit and the firm dates for it would be worked out later.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.13th June, 1959.&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M.No. 20/1959.
STRICT EMBARGO for 7 p.m. Monday, June 15.
MR. MENZIES' ITINERARY.Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. J, McEwen, M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, to-night announced the itinerary of the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, for his return to Australia.
Mr. Menzies will leave London for The Hague on Monday, June 29. After spending two days in The Hague, he will fly to Karachi, arriving on Thursday, July 2. He will leave Karachi on July 3, arriving New Delhi on the same day. He will leave New Delhi for Calcutta on July 5 after a two-day visit. After a day's stay in Calcutta, he will leave there on Monday, July 6, for Singapore. He will leave Singapore on July 7, arriving at Perth next day. He will reach Melbourne late afternoon July 8 and is expected to continue his journey to Canberra on the same evening.
Mr. Menzies plans to have informal talks with government leaders at The Hague, Karachi, New Delhi and Singapore.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.June, 1959.&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M.No. 21/1959.
DEPUTATION ON WAGES CLAIMSStatement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. J. McEwen. M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister Mr. McEwen, received a deputation this morning from the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the High Council of Public Service Organisations, the Council of Professional Associations and the Australian Council of Salaried and Professional Associations.
The deputation urged three things:
First, that the Government should direct the Public Service Board to negotiate with the Organisations with a view at least to interim increases in remuneration pending the final decisions by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission on the claims before it.
Second that the Government should agree to any Decision by the Commission being given retro-active application.
Third that the Government should restore the independence that the Public Service Arbitrator possessed prior to 1952.
Mr. McEwen explained to the deputation that their first request touched a question of high policy which had been considered by the Government on a number of occasions. The truth was that the Commonwealth had responsibilities which went beyond those of an ordinary employer concerned to do justice to his employees. Of course, the Commonwealth wanted to see justice done to its employees. However, decisions that thief Commonwealth took had a far-reaching effect beyond its own employment. They bore upon the State Public Services and private industry.
It was clear that whatever decisions were arrived at by the Commission on the many and varied issues raised by the claims before it, they could have a profound bearing on the future standards of remuneration of professional and "white collar" workers throughout Australia. Doubtless that was why the organisations had elected to take their claims to the Full Commission.Certainly the circumstances required that the decision on these issues should be taken by the supreme Commonwealth tribunal, and that they should not in any way be prejudged by action by the Commonwealth.
Mr. McEwen pointed out that not dissimilar considerations Applied with respect to the margins claims for industrial type employees.
Mr. McEwen explained that nothing that he had said derogated from the Government's concern to see conciliation practised to the full. The Public Service Board had, in fact, often engaged in conciliation.
Mr. McEwen was gratified to find that no one was alleging that such delays as had occurred in the hearing of the current cases could be ascribed to action on the part of the Commonwealth. He said the Government wanted the current cases to go ahead with the greatest expedition.
In reply to suggestions that perhaps the Commission might be disposed to make an interim Award, Mr. McEwen said that if such an application were made to the Commission the Commonwealth would not automatically oppose it. It would carefully weigh the substance of the application and the whole of the circumstances and advance a responsible attitude to it.
-2-
As to retro-activity, Mr. McEwen said he was aware there had been occasions when there had been agreement to backdating the application of an Award. If an application for retroactivity were made to the tribunal, the Commonwealth would determine its attitude in the light of all relevant circumstances,
Finally, Mr. McEwen observed that the decision taken by the Government in 1952 to provide for references and appeals to the Commission from the Public Service Arbitrator was a deliberate act of its policy in the field of industrial relations,
MELBOURNE,18th June, 1959.&nbsp;


AUSTRALIA CLUB
Speeches at the Dinner held at the Dorchester Hotel in honour of the RT. HON. R.G. MENZIES, C.H., Q.C. (Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia) on Monday 22nd June, 1959 with introductory remarks by H.R.H. DUKE OF GLOUCESTER, K.G. (President of the Australia Club), who was in the Chair
SPEAKERS:
THE RT. HON. HAROLD MACMILLAN, M.P.
Proposing the toast of Australia and THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, Q.C. who responded
37 Dover Street, London, W. I.July, 1959.
-2-
H.R.H. DUKE OF GLOUCESTER
Gentlemen; On behalf of the Australia Club, I welcome our distinguished guests. I thank them for honouring us and enabling us to make this a unique and historic occasion.
I have often dined at Vintners Hall in the City where they boast a room where five kings were entertained at one meal.
But some of those kings were captives, whilst our Prime Ministers and ex Prime Ministers are freemen and have never been captive to anything but their ideal of service to their countries, the British Commonwealth and Empire, and to world peace.
For me, personally, this is a great occasion: to have under my control, assuming that to be a fact, such a posse of Prime Ministers, or should I say a "pride", is something of which nightmares are made, but in reality is an enormous pleasure and honour.
Looking at them, I am reminded of something one of their great predecessors-Disraeli-said exactly one hundred years ago: "The Australian Colonies, though now in their youth, but in the youth of giants, have already, as it were, thrown their colossal shadow over Europe." Well, I am glad we have here in our English team a figure whose shadow, mentally and physically, grows no less.
But I feel that these words of Disraeli's could not better describe the powerful figure and personality of that great and representative Australian, Mr. Menzies, whom we delight to honour tonight.
I now call upon the Prime Minister of England, Mr. Harold Macmillan.
-3-
THE RT. HON. HAROLD MACMILLAN
Prime Minister and First Lord of the Treasury:
Your Royal Highness, you’re Excellencies, My Lords and Gentlemen, this is a great responsibility which has been entrusted to me tonight to propose the Toast of the evening – Australia - and in the presence of so many great men, and above all my master, leader, chief, it needs a very bold man to dare to speak. You described, sir, in a generous phrase the proper way of giving an account of a number of Prime Ministers, "a pride of Prime Ministers." I think it was a less generous undergraduate who was asked how you should describe a number of heads of colleges and answered at once, of course, "a Lack of Principals". (Applause.)
This is a very great occasion for me because it recalls to my mind that it is only eighteen months ago-it seems only a month ago-since I had the honour of a visit to Australia. That was indeed for me an unforgettable experience. I never can be sufficiently grateful for the kindness which you showed me, Mr. Menzies, and all the people of Australia showed to my wife and myself on every occasion. There were, of course, one or two moments of disenchantment. I remember as I drove into Sydney on my first arrival there I was amazed to see the great numbers of people on the streets and issuing from all houses; a huge crowd had turned out to welcome me, far greater, I thought, than any similar crowd could ever be in the old country, and I was deeply touched. Then someone told me the truth. It was six o'clock (laughter), that dramatic hour when they open in England and shut in Australia. Of course, I was duly impressed by Sydney and I described it, if I remember, in a speech written for me by my advisers as "the greatest City in the British Commonwealth, if not in the world". Naturally a few days later I said the same thing about Melbourne. (Laughter.)
It is a great opportunity for me tonight to have been chosen to propose this Toast, if only because it gives me the chance of
-4-
expressing publicly the deep impression which was made upon me by that visit, and then I am able to pay my tribute to our guest of honour tonight, my friend-I am privileged to call him my friend-a great man, a great Prime Minister, a great figure, perhaps the greatest figure in our Commonwealth today. (Applause.)
As you know, quite apart from a spell in office between 1939 and 1941 he has now been Prime Minister without a break for ten years. That is not a bad not-out innings even for an Australian (laughter) and he has not just stayed in but he has scored quite a lot of runs. I must say at times I envy him. Then he seems to do it so easily; he organises his life so well that every June (laughter) happily we find him in London-Mid June, about the time the Test Matches are coming on. I never get there. All I can do is to sneak away from the Cabinet room and have a look at the tape every now and then.
Under the guidance of Mr. Menzies, the stature of Australia in the world and her influence in world Councils have increased beyond all recognition. I remember when I was a boy the popular imagination in this country was that Australia was a land of sheep farmers and cricketers, especially fast bowlers. Well, you have since added tennis players, golfers, and four minute milers to the cricketers, and, by the way, may I make my passing tribute to the cricketers and say how much we admire their skill in the arts of fielding and occasionally of throwing, (laughter.) But perhaps I had better be careful about that or I shall be no-balled. You have sheep farmers, cattle farmers and you have a great deal else, too and if we look back only a generation, how extraordinary has been the growth. Thirty three years ago- I will take that year because it was one of the years in which England won the ashes, but it had another distinction. In that year the Imperial Conference met at which the philosophy of the modern Commonwealth, the economic philosophy was defined for the first time and there is in a corridor in Downing Street a picture of the members of that Conference, dressed in what seems now rather an old fashioned. I would even say Teddy
-5-
boy, appearance. But sitting in the front row is the leader of the Australian delegation, your Prime Minister of the day, a certain Mr. S. M. Bruce; how proud we are to have this great man with us today. (Applause.) That Conference was the beginning of a new era not only for Australia but for the whole British Commonwealth. It also marked in a sense the end of the old era for Australia, for it was the last year in which the Commonwealth Parliament sat in Melbourne before moving to Canberra. In those 33 years Australia has indeed travelled a long road. Her achievement has been staggering and one of which every Australian has a right to be proud.
Let us think first of the economic achievement. Australia is still, as she then was, largely a primary producing country; at least three quarters of her exports are in primary exports and we, I am happy to say, in the United Kingdom still take about one third of these exports. In this way, I think, we have contributed to the stability of the Australian economy. In the same way, you take a great proportion of your imports from the United Kingdom. We are thus involved together and the more we are the better it will be for both of us. But of course, each country has its problems which have come with this generation and indeed it would be strange if it were not, for you cannot take the world twice in a single generation, break it up into pieces, and then expect everything to go on exactly as before. The amazing thing is how much goes on as before and in the same spirit. Our economy has changed. At the moment we have an abundant supply, almost more than an abundant supply, of coal. We lack ashes, of course (laughter), but you seem strangely unwilling to export these. In these years, Australia has made an immense stride forward in the industrialisation of that country. Her economy now shows a great variety and, of course, that very process brings with it, as we know so well, new problems, and hence the revision of the 1926 Agreement which we made by agreement with you in 1957. But leaving for the moment the economic side, it is in the political stature in the world councils that Australia has made
-6-
such a significant advance. Her net-work of diplomatic representation has spread over the whole world, and its quality has, if I may say so, steadily grown and served to enhance Australia's prestige, and with this expansion of Australia's political ties has marched the inevitable increase in her worldwide interests and her world stature. In Commonwealth countries, partly no doubt from the character of the Prime Minister and partly also because of the strength and power of the country itself, Australia's voice is heard more and more convincingly; nor can we forget this-that whenever we are in trouble or any difficulty in the Old Country, we know we can look with absolute certainty to the support and loyalty and sympathy of the Australian people. (Applause.) They came from the same stock, share the same loyalties, and many of the common interests. There are, of course, some countries-I am sorry to harp on this theme but as it is being broadcast to America I thought it would be good for them--although unintelligible it would be good for them. There are some countries and one's heart bleeds for them, who do not yet play cricket. At the time of the 1954 Geneva Conference a British diplomat was said to have observed to a South Korean colleague "I see your Foreign Minister is batting first on our side". The Korean was a little at a loss, but answered "Yes, I hope he makes first base (laughter). All the same, I think this is a great gift, a symbolical gift, which England has given to the World. The Speaker's wig and Mace and the Umpire's white coat may perhaps be said to be legacies to the world of which England can be justly proud, for, after all, they both embody the same general idea.
I am glad that the Prime Minister of Australia has been able to do so much travelling. He fixes these things very well; he has been to Canada; he has seen for himself how the new concept of Commonwealth interdependence is growing. He is a frequent visitor to the Indian sub-Continent and to New Zealand, and he has been able to include South Africa in his travels. In a divided world the Commonwealth has, I believe, more to offer than ever before to the cause of peace. Australia not only
-7-
takes her general responsibility but her regional responsibility. Her membership of her keen interest in the Colombo plan activities, her intelligent strutting of Asian affairs-all these have marked out for her a constructive and valuable role in the future, and I think I ought to add, as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, a special word of thanks for all Australia has done for us at Woomera.
Now, sir, since it is your guest and not me you wish to hear, I would now conclude, if I might be allowed to do so, with a few words on a wider theme. We live in an age, I expect we always have done so, in which the voice of the croaker, the moaner, the faint-hearted and the cynical, are often heard, and now, of course, amplified by all our modern means of communication; these people declaim to us in flat and boring voices how they see coming the decline and fall of the British Empire. What they are really witnessing, if only they had the eyes to see, is something vastly different. It's re-birth. The curtain is not falling on our British story; it is rising on a new Act and as the transformation takes place, from a dependent Empire, into a free partnership of independent and interdependent nations under the Crown as the head of the Commonwealth. Of course, in this process complicated and different problems will arise. They arose, also, in its foundation. We must surely approach this new phase in a firm spirit of confidence and faith, and fortunately this is the spirit of Australia and I firmly believe of the Old Country, too. (Applause.)
Mr. Chairman, this habit of denigration is nothing new-it runs right through British history. It has sometimes been powerful and sometimes partly answered. I would venture, if you would allow me these few moments more, to read to you a sentence from Macaulay-the essayist, not the Yorkshire bowler (laughter). Writing 120 years ago, he used these words at a period when it seemed to many that the whole history of England was finished and would end in chaos and revolution. He said: - "We cannot absolutely prove that those are in error who tell us that society has reached the turning point, that we
-8-
have seen our best days but so said all who came before us with just as much apparent reason. On what principle is it", he went on to ask "that when we see nothing but improvement behind us, we are to expect nothing but deterioration before us". All that I saw of Australia during my visit convinced me of the immense future that lies before her. Her material reserves are vast, and so too are the moral qualities that will allow people of Australia to make the best use of those resources. We in the old country can rejoice at this prospect which opens up. Our two countries have done much together and been through much together. We have shared sorrows and we have shared triumphs. Ours is a partnership that will endure. Together we have battled for freedom and we have won and together we will work to give the world peace and prosperity. (Applause.)
-9-
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
You’re Highness, my Lord Chancellor, my Lords and Gentlemen, I always feel at a singular disability when I come after the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, my friend, Harold Macmillan, who has a superb technique. When called on to speak, he rises looking at if this were an entirely unexpected honour (laughter) he gazes around the audience quite diffidently as much as to say "Pray help me! (Laughter) and then delivers his magnificent speech! Whereas I, of course, get up full of brash confidence (laughter) hoping that somebody will be hostile (l daughter) and have to follow him! I must say I was a little uneasy at the beginning of his speech when he referred to Disraeli, because, while I am not a master of history like the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, I have some sketchy retrospect tie recollections (laughter) of him, and when he referred to Disraeli in a strange context, because he was referring to the fact that there were former Prime Ministers here, I thought he was going to quote that rather nasty little bit of Disraeli's when he said that he saw sitting opposite to him a row of extinct volcanoes! (Laughter.)
Well, I am not yet extinct (laughter) thanks to some extraordinary inadvertence on the part of the Australian electors not so long ago. But I think I Would like to say something about some of those who are here at the top table. I would like to begin by saying that I think that it is a remarkable honour to be paid to anybody that Sir Winston Churchill should have come here tonight. (Applause.) That he is and was always a volcano nobody will deny (laughter) but extinct? - nonsense, here he is! I am very glad to think, though I am otherwise sad about it, that what is being said here tonight is being precipitated by modern art and science into another room in which his wife and my wife are sitting. And so I hope you will forgive me if I break the normal rules on such an occasion by saying that everybody here tonight, and certainly everybody in Australia, having as we have the deepest affection for the
-10-
great man, would like to send a message of deep affection to his wonderful wife. (Applause.)
I don't need to say anything about other people, perhaps, but it is fascinating to me, as a man from the "back blocks", as you might say (laughter), to come into London and to be able to read in one newspaper on one day "Attlee on Churchill on Eden." (Laughter.) This, I think, is most fascinating, and I am lucky enough to have been Prime Minister of my own country so long as to have sat under Attlee, under Eden, under the great Churchill. And this is, I think, one of those things which for somebody like myself constitutes a sort of subtle title of honour not to be forgotten. (Applause.) I would like to say to them how much I appreciate the fact that they are here; I would like so much to say to Clem Attlee how much I am delighted that he should have been here. (Applause.) Indeed, the last time I saw him was not in person but on that strange and revolting instrument, the television (laughter) in which he was interviewed at great length and offered a series not of lengthy views but singularly monosyllabic views on a great number of affairs, and, as I sat and looked at it, I enjoyed it, I envied it. You know, when a current politician is being interviewed either on television, or on the wireless, or by the Press in person and he is asked a question and he says "Yes" or "No", he is regarded as something of a cad! (Laughter.) And perhaps they said that about my friend Attlee. Anyhow, he said yes", pulled the pipe out of his mouth and said "Rubbish" and put the pipe back again. (Laughter.)
One other thing I would like to say to you of a personal kind. And that concerns not my old friend the Lord Chancellor but my old friend the present Lord Chief Justice, because when I opened the newspapers and for once believed what I read (laughter) I saw that he had become, Hubert Parker had become, Lord Chief Justice of England. (Applause.) Beggared as I am by politics, my memory is not entirely imperfect, and I remember on a certain celebrated occasion in the Privy Council, I had, purely ex-officio but also vocally led, two distinguished
-11-
lawyers of the English Bar. He was the second and I sent him a cable, and the cable if he just does not mind my referring to it, said this: "Isn't it wonderful. After all, there was a time when for a solid fortnight in the Privy Council, I argued the case and I had two juniors. One of them has been Lord High Chancellor of England, and the other is now Lord Chief Justice. After this, even my opponents in Australia can't say I have never had any respectable period in my life." (Laughter.)
Sir, I don't want to make a long speech-I think that would be not appropriate- but, if you would allow me, I would like to say just a word or two about my own Country, my own proud Country, of which I am infinitely proud myself, something about this Country, the Mother Country of the whole Commonwealth and Empire, and perhaps a glancing reference to the state of the World. Could you bear that? (Hear, hear) because if you could, I will be as brief as is decent about each of these three matters.
First of all, about my own Country. I do not think that it is widely understood as it might be that Australia has gone through a period of growth and development beyond the expectation of anybody a decade or two decades ago. (Hear, hear.) I remember before the war, when we took the finest advice we could get-that is to say, from economists and from statisticians, both of whom are extraordinarily good men-retrospectively! (Laughter) and they said to us, not only orally but in writing that Australia would, in due course, by about 1975, have 7 million people, and the population would then begin to decline. I remember this so vividly; it coloured the whole of our policy for quite a time. And here we are in 1959 with 10 million people, and I assure you with every expectation of having 20 or million people by the turn of the century. (Applause.)
Now, it is a matter of great comfort to me-and I raise no controversial issues about that-when I tell you that the population of Australia is increasing, for the first time in recorded modern history, at a greater rate per cent. Than the population of Japan. (Laughter.) Now that is very important; that may, of
-12-
course, mean that the Japanese have accumulated certain modern ideas (laughter) but I would not wish to go into that unduly. The fact is, however, that the growth of the population in Australia both by migration and natural increase has been, I think, the dominating factor in the development of my Country (hear, hear) because it is not merely a matter of having more people: what counts is that all those who consider the future of their various business enterprises, all those who consider whether they are going to put money into a country, are always and properly concerned to know that they have an increasing constituency, and, in Australia, I think that that has had the most remarkable results.
I think that nothing pleased me more as I came around the world this time than to discover how. Many people, who were knowledgeable and significant emphasised their own surprise at the fact that in a period in which our great staple commodities like wool and base metals had had a sharp recession in price. Australia had gone along with stability, with growth, with optimism and that no recession of any kind had occurred. This is something worth recording; it is worth thinking about because, after all, it is not so many years, as my Lord Bruce will remember so well, when a similar decline in export income produced the most devastating results.
And similarly, when I came to this country, this wonderful Country, this country which is at the very heart of our entire inheritance, I find-and, as my colleague has somewhat offensively reminded me, I am here quite frequently (laughter) but I find this time a spirit of optimism, a general air in the country and outlook in the country, and, added to that, the objective statistics of the country which persuade me completely that this Country, battered as it has been twice in this century, battered on behalf of mankind, as it has been twice in this century, is once more resuming its position of success and confidence and courage and leadership in the world! (Applause.)
Any man who is so inveterate a traveller as myself is bound, of course, to meet many people, and I have become somewhat
-13-
accustomed in recent years to that gloomy dyspeptic character, to whom Mr. Macmillan made a glancing reference, that gloomy realist, as he calls himself, who says: "Well, of course, old man, let us begin by admitting that Great Britain is now a second-class power." Oh, how I love those people! (Laughter) a second-class power. And when you say to him: "And why, pray tell me", if I may borrow an immortal expression, "do you think Great Britain is now a second-rate power?" The wretched creature will always answer by casting out mathematical tables. "Well, you know, there are so many people; somebody else has so many more; somebody else has only a few less, you see."
Gentlemen, this, if I may venture to use one of my favourite expressions, is utter drivel! (Laughter.) How long is it since we became obsessed by mathematics, when we measured up the quality of a nation? I can't remember in my reading of history any time since the spacious days of the Great Elizabeth when in this country people said "Well we are a third-rate power because between us we muster fewer people than somebody else, or somebody else." This is utter nonsense! This is merely an arithmetical outlook on the world. The one thing that matters, and matters today more than ever before, is the qualitative outlook of the world. (Applause.) Nothing will ever persuade me, although I occasionally find my colleagues at Whitehall a little difficult to deal with, nothing will ever persuade me that this country, with all her Sister Dominions about her, in the words of the Raleigh Club, is not one of the great powers in the world because she is. It is nonsense, it is defeatism, to get away from that profoundly important idea, because, after all, the greatness of a country, the greatness of a Commonwealth, the greatness of the United States, Mr. Ambassador, with all its enormous resources, is not to be cast out merely in terms of numbers of people, or tons of steel. Its greatness depends upon the quality of its contribution to the thought, the moral dignity, and the moral leadership of the world. (Applause.)
Therefore, sir, I belong to those millions of people who like to feel that when we think of our own Country, Australia, we
-14-
think of the British World; we think of the ancient homes of our race; we think of those who have in every testing period been not only leaders here but leaders in my own Country. Does anybody suppose that when the war was on and the voice of Winston Churchill came out around the world it was the voice of one man, or the voice only of one group of islands in the world? Forget about it-it was the voice of free men all over the world, and, in particular, it was the voice of the people of the British Commonwealth all over the world! (Applause.) I hope we won't fall into the elementary error of thinking that when great events, dramatic torturing events, of that kind, are over that we relapse and we get back into our own little groups and we forget the marvellous unities produced by crises. I hope we won't fall into that error. I hope-that the next time you meet a man who talks about this Country as a second-rate power, you will remember those famous words which have just occurred to my mind:
"I would grasp Metternich until I felt his red, wet throat distilled in blood betwixt these two hands." (Applause.)
That, no doubt, is an incitement to violence and could notBe approved of, even by a former Home Secretary! (Laughter.) But all I mean to say is that in whatever vernacular you may offer it, tell him-you know exactly what I mean (Laughter) - what you think about his views!
Sir, as for the state of the world, I just content myself by saying this, because time marches on, I have had the great privilege myself in the last few days of having much discussion with the Prime Minister here and his colleagues, about four hours' discussion with Chancellor Adenhauer at Bonn, and about three hours' of discussion with President De Gaulle in Paris, and, more than ever, I am a believer in conference and in talk.
I know that those who can't talk very well have a rather acute disregard for those who can. (Laughter.) I know that politicians are regarded as a somewhat dubious form of life, but, believe me, talk is, perhaps, the most important thing in the
-15-
world. You have only to do what I have been doing in the last few days to realise that there are misapprehensions in the minds of people which can be removed only by talk, only by conference. Only by thrashing it out across the table.
And this is why I firmly believe that you can't have too many conferences about the state of the world. Any differences that exist are all the better for being isolated and looked at, because the average difference when you look at it, when you discuss it, disappears like a spilt piece of ice cream on a tablecloth. It is very true-let's talk.
The present Prime Minister of the United Kingdom has said this time after time; his very distinguished predecessor said it in his usual vivid terms more than once. But I believe in conference. People say to me: "Oh, the Geneva Conference, this has gone on for weeks and nothing has happened. They have now adjourned. Another flop." And some distinguished patriot, who has a large-paying audience in some vehicle of information, establishes his patriotism by publishing to the world: "All this is nonsense. It is a failure."
Gentlemen, I want to say this to you. I do not believe that honest talk between our kind of people and other kinds of people was ever a failure, because, believe it or not, what is said, what has been said at Geneva, gets known around the world. Here in Great Britain, here in London, you are naturally exercised about the state of Europe: so are we. Why should we ignore the problems of Europe, because it is out of Europe that the great crises of this century have come? But you must never forget that in our corner of the world we lie offshore, in Australia, and so does New Zealand, from a vast Asian population, scores and perhaps hundreds of millions of whom are not yet deeply committed either to the East or to the West as we call it; resistant to Communism but not completely involved in what we call the broad scope of Western Policy. But these are people who are moving up into the light of self-government. Every time they hear or read an honest case manfully presented, fairly presented, the kind of case that has
-16-
been presented at Geneva, in which there is no greed and no injustice and no slavery, but on the contrary freedom from slavery, for millions and millions of people, their minds must be affected, and, as to the extent to which they are affected, they are doubly affected when they find these noble and splendid views opposed by dead silence, by blank negatives or by overt or covert threats.
Gentlemen, don't forget that. Don't become too upset because a conference at a certain time doesn't produce a concrete result. I believe in my heart that everything that has occurred at Geneva, that the whole presentation of the case of the Free World has done infinite good to the cause of freedom, and, nonetheless, because it is brutally rejected by other people. (Applause.)
In short, sir-and I have been too long already, but "in short" means in short at last!.. (Laughter)... never let us forget that the struggle in the world, the struggle in the Cold War is a struggle for the minds and hearts of ordinary men and women all around the world... (Hear, hear)... and in that struggle for the minds and hearts of ordinary men and women, the steady, faithful, honest presentation of decent policies and decent proposals can never be overthrown.
Sir, it is for that reason that I am a great believer in conferences. I hope that they will go on because I do not believe for one moment that the leadership which has been generously put forward by this country and by our great friends in the United States of America is to be easily overthrown by people who simply say "No, no, I will take when I can." They won't take, they won't dare to take if the decent opinion of hundreds of millions of normal people around the world is against them. (Applause.)
-17-
CONCLUSION.
At the conclusion of the Dinner Viscount Bruce of Melbourne expressed warmest thanks to H.R.H. Duke of Gloucester for attending the Dinner and taking the Chair on this memorable occasion.
He mentioned that an invitation had been sent to Sir Anthony Eden but unfortunately through ill-health he had been unable to come. Had he done so there would have been present all the living past and present Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom and Australia.
His Royal Highness thanked Lord Bruce for what he had said and for the manner in which the Toast had been received.


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M. No.22/1959
PREMIERS CONFERENCE AND LOAN COUNCILStatement by the Acting Prime minister, Rt. Hon. J. McEwen M.P.
This conference comes about in two ways. First of all, at this time or about this time in every year the matter of the State Tax Reimbursements Grants and Loan allocations is decided. But, in addition, the Commonwealth has said that it has undertaken to make some general re-examination of Commonwealth-State financial relations. This was said in the policy speech, and the Conference on 4th and 5th March was the first step towards it. This Conference will resume the discussion on that issue.
It has been apparent for some years that the present tax reimbursement formula has not satisfied all the States and has been a source of disagreement both as to the quantum of the annual grant and its distribution. Every year for many years the Commonwealth has found it necessary to add an amount, arbitrarily arrived at, to the tax reimbursement formula grants. Further some States have said that the present distribution arrangements are unsatisfactory.
Over and above that, within the present financial year two States - Victoria and Queensland - have raised the question of applying for special assistance under section 96, i.e., Grants Commission assistance. If this were to come about, five States out of six would come within the Grants Commission arrangements and this would make the system unworkable. So it was clear that a study of a possible revision was needed.
At the March Conference the Prime Minister, speaking for the Commonwealth, said that we would put to study the question of something new which might rectify any position of disadvantage in one or two States while ensuring that the needs of other States were given due recognition.
So we have made this study. We have looked at the matter under several headings, which include the quantum of the grant, the distribution arrangements and Grants Commission arrangements, and we will be putting some proposals to the States - as we undertook to do. This whole problem does not reduce itself to simple arithmetic and does not lend itself to any precise scientific solution, but we have plans to put forward which we believe to be practical and common sense. It will, of course, be open for discussion around the table. We have already had from the States in answer to our invitation some helpful views and we have made use of those
I am hopeful that in a spirit of partnership and cooperation the seven Governments in conference will work towards better arrangements for future provision of grants to the States and their equitable distribution."
CANBERRA, A.C.T.22nd June, 1959,&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M.No.24/1959.
COMMONWEALTH CONFERENCE ON EDUCATION, ENGLAND, 7-29TH JULY.
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. J. McEwen, M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, announced today the names of the Australian delegates to the Commonwealth Conference on Education to begin in London on 7th July and continue at Oxford from 15th to 29th July.
Mr. McEwen said the delegation would be led by Sir Allen Brown, Deputy High Commissioner for Australia in the United Kingdom. Members of the delegation who would travel from Australia would be: -
Rt. Hon. Sir Earle Page,G.C.M.G., C.H., M.P.&nbsp;Mr. H.B. Basten, Vice-Chancellor of the University of Adelaide&nbsp;Dr. R.B. Madgwick, Vice-Chancellor of the University of New England.&nbsp;Dr. H.S. Wyndham, Director-General of Education in New South Wales.&nbsp;Mr. D.H. Tribolet, Director of Education in Tasmania.&nbsp;Dr. R. Mendelsohn, Assistant Secretary, Prime Minister's Department, Canberra.&nbsp;Mr. J.J. Pratt, Deputy Director, Commonwealth Office of Education.
The delegation would be supplemented as necessary from officers Stationed at Australia House, London.
Mr. McEwen said that the conference resulted from the Commonwealth Trade and Economic Conference in Montreal in September, 1958, when it was agreed in principle to establish a new scheme of Commonwealth scholarships and fellowships, and to hold a conference in the United Kingdom this year. The purpose of this conference was to review existing arrangements for co-operation between Commonwealth countries in the field of education, and to make recommendations for any improvements or expansion that might be possible with the idea of incorporating them in a new scheme as envisaged by the Montreal Conference.
CANBERRA,June 25, 1959.


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M.No.23/1959.
CONFERENCE WITH QUEENSLAND PREMIER AND TREASURER
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon, J. McEwen. M.P.
The Acting Prime Minister (Mr. McEwen) and the Treasurer (Mr. Holt) today conferred with the Queensland Premier (Mr. Nicklin) and Treasurer (Mr. Hiley) on the proposed Mt. Isa Railway Loan.
After the conference Mr. McEwen said the situation had no element of urgency which would not permit awaiting the return of the Prime Minister (Mr. Menzies) to whom he and Mr. Holt wished to explain the position reached by Mr. Hiley at his talks with the World Bank in Washington, and at today's discussions.
Mr. McEwen said he heard from Mr. Nicklin and Mr. Hiley the point reached in the negotiations with the World Bank and which had some disappointment for the Queensland Government.
CANBERRA,25th June, 1959&nbsp;


FOR PRESS: P.M. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; No.2/1959.
EXPERT COMMITTEE ON COALStatement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. J. McEwen, M.P.
The Commonwealth Government has decided to establish an Expert Committee to advise it on all aspects of research into the uses of coal. This decision is in line with the announcement by the Government in its Policy Speech that it would assist the expansion of such research. Arrangements for setting up the Committee have been worked out between my colleagues Mr. Casey Minister for External Affairs (as Minister in charge of C.S.I.R.O.) and Senator Spooner (Minister for National Development, and whose portfolio includes the Joint Coal Board). The Committee will report to Senator Spooner.
The Committee will make a complete review of research in Australia and overseas and will consider both the short and long term aspects. In recommending to the Commonwealth Government those lines of research which should be initiated or further encouraged, the Committee will give special consideration to those which offer promise of leading quickly to an increased demand for coal, although, of course, it is not to be expected that this could be achieved overnight.
The amount of research that has been done and is being done in 'Australia on the uses' of coal is considerable far great than is generally appreciated. The Government considered therefor that, before launching out on any new research or intensifying existing research, it would be wise to take stock of current work both in Australia and overseas. The “Government proposes that this Review should be the starting point for future research policy so Far as “the Commonwealth is concerned. "'It is convinced that the net arrangements. Are of the greatest importance to. The coal industry Australia and that great benefits will accrue from the work of. The Committee
The Commonwealth has been. Fortunate in obtaining the consent of. The following men to serve on.theCommittee;-
Mr. W. Pettingell, General Manager, Australian Gas. Light. Company, who will be. Chairman; Dr. R.S. &nbsp;Andrews, Chairman and Managing Director, GasFuel Corporation of Victoria; S&nbsp;Professor J.P. Baxter, Vice-Chancellor, University of New South Wales.&nbsp;Mr. J.R.A Glenn, Managing Director, I.C.I.A.N.Z.&nbsp;Dr. H.K. Worner, Director of Research, Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd.
The Commonwealth is not only grateful to these men personally, but to their respective employers for. Allowing them to undertake this important national task.
The Commonwealth representatives on the Committee will be :-
Dr. F.W.G. White, Deputy Chairman, C.S.I.R.O.;&nbsp;Mr. S.F. Cochran, Chairman, Joint Coal Board;&nbsp;Dr. H.G. Regatta, Secretary, Department of National Development.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.26th June, 1959


FOR PRESS: &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; P.M/1959.
THE WORLD REFUGEE YEAR.Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. J. McEwen, M.P.
"This year will be known as the World Refugee Year. This Sunday, 28th June, has been set aside as a day of prayer for the refugee and for the dedication of the concept of the World Refugee Year." Stating this today the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, asked Australians to remember the refugee in their prayers.
"The concept of the World Refugee Year originated in the United Kingdom in April 1958, when attention was drawn to the major international problems of the refugees who are the continuing tragedy of our time. To-day there are in Europe more than 160,000 refugees and these are being added to daily. In the Middle East there are one million Arab refugees; in China, 10,000 refugees of European origin, and in Hong Kong at least one million Chinese refugees.
"To focus international attention on the plight of these people, it was proposed that the World Refugee Year should serve as the medium for an all-out effort to solve their problems.
"Member Governments of the United Nations and its specialised agencies were urged to co-operate in promoting the World Refugee Year as a practical means of securing increased assistance for refugees throughout the world, and the Secretary-General was requested to take such steps as he saw fit to assist in the promotion of the World Refugee Year.
"Australia's role in the World Refugee Year has recently been considered by the Commonwealth Government. As a result, a National Committee for the World Refugee Year Appeal has been formed under the auspices of the United Nations Association of Australia, which in close co-operation with other interested organisations, has agreed to organise a public appeal for funds. The Australian Government will contribute £50, 000 towards this appeal, whilst we are also taking appropriate steps to make public donations allowable deductions for income tax purposes as from 1st July. The purpose of this appeal is a most worthy one and I have no hesitation in commending it to you.
"The Australian Government has already brought to these shores more than 234, 000 refugees making us, on a population basis, the leading country of resettlement for refugees. The World Refugee Year presents an opportunity for us to add further to this impressive record.
"I am confident that you will all wish to be associated with this humanitarian task."
CANBERRA A C.T.27th June, 1959.&nbsp;


PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER RT. HON. R.G. MENZIES, C.H., Q.C., M.P., AT CANBERRA ON THURSDAY, 9TH JULY, 1959, AT 3:30 P.M.
&nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: I think perhaps the best thing for me to do is just to talk a little bit about the various matters that I have had to look at in the course of my journey. If I show any signs of going to sleep half way through, will you give me a nudge? I have averaged about 3 hours a night sleep for the last eight days when I visited the tropics.
There was no conference this year of a formal kind but by the time I got back home I had had talk’s - quite extensive talks - with, I think, ten heads of Government. I saw Mr. Nash at some length in Auckland; Mr. Diefenbaker and his Cabinet in Ottawa; I saw the President and Mr. Nixon and Mr. Herter in Washington; I had talks with the World Bank in Washington; and with the International Monetary Fund - Mr. Jacobsson, the head of the I.M.F. in Washington. I had some discussions in New York with our financial agents there. And then, of course, Mr. MacMillan and his Cabinet; Chancellor Adenauer; President De Gaulle; the new prime Minister of Holland Mr. De Quay; and with the Foreign Minister of Holland in Zurich. Then I saw the new President of Pakistan in Karachi - President Ayub. I had some very long and interesting conversations with Mr. Nehru in Delhi; and then I saw the new Prime Minister and some of his senior ministers in Singapore. So it was a pretty good round- the- world survey of problems and discussions with them.
I think before getting on to the political aspects of the journey - it was a very absorbing journey. I didn’t have - well, I almost had no private spare time. But that was well compensated for by the fact that I had some tremendously interesting talks with leading people.
In Washington - I'll come back to these other large problems I had discussions with Mr. Black of the World Bank, and with some of his senior executives, about Mt. Isa, and I also saw Mr. Jacobsson of the International Monetary Fund who told me that he could be quoted as saying that he found the discussions that we had very interesting. I asked him two things: One, whether the annual consultations with the fund by countries with balance of payments problems that applies to a great number of countries, of course including our own - might take place this time Australia. And I am hopeful that that will happen. I also invited him to come out here himself.
QUESTION: That is in this coming September?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes - well it is some time later this year.
I thought it would be a good idea if he came out himself. He said he would like to he accepted it in principle, but it is a matter of time-table with him. &nbsp;
My business with the World Bank had, of course, particular relation to the Mt. Isa railway project. It is quite true that in any projected borrowing from the World Bank, the borrower would be the Commonwealth of Australia. But the World Bank is a bank for reconstruction and development, and it is not merely a matter of lending money and feeling sure that it will get it back. No question of that arises. The real question is: If it makes a loan is that loan assisting some piece of positive economic development? And therefore it has been particularly concerned to know what contract or &nbsp;
-2-
arrangement would be made between the Queensland Government and the Mt. Isa company. I have, from time to time explained to both of them what the principles of the Bank are and the kind of problem that has to be met. But I have had a feeling for some time that it would be of very great advantage if the Queensland Government and the company talked around the table with the Bank, so that they both would not have to rely on what I had to say about it. They could be informed themselves on the spot and discuss it on the spot.
So I had two objectives in my discussions there. One was to find out whether the World Bank was interested in the Mt. Isa project; whether it thought that in the broad it was a good one; and whether it would like to be associated with it in some way. Of course, unless those questions could be answered in the affirmative, all other discussion would be academic.
It became quite clear that the answer was "yes" to all those questions. They are interested in the project and they think that it is a good one, looking at it broadly; and I am sure that they would like to be associated with it. But they have their own financial principles which they have applied to other countries and other prospective borrowers, and which they would, therefore, need to apply to us with respect to that matter.
The second question was whether, there having been some breakdown in negotiations, the position of the Bank was completely inflexible. And it became clear that that was not so; there was some room for manoeuvre. But it would involve, of course, some movement on the part of the company, in particular - and incidentally of the Queensland Government.
So I said, "Very well, under these circumstances, will you be satisfied if I invited, through my colleagues at home, the Queensland Government and the company to be represented, in the one case by their Treasurer, and in the other case by the Managing Director of Mt. Isa - Mr. Fisher - and to suggest that they come to Washington?" They agreed to that very willingly.
I was not there when the discussions occurred - but there were some discussions, which apparently did not achieve finality. I do not regard the matter as necessarily concluded by those discussions. It is a matter which I will have to take with my Treasury Colleagues. There are very great difficulties about it - there always have been - but I still think there is some room for accommodation.
I was very fascinated when I arrived in London to be told in the press that as I got aboard the plane at Idlewild, I said I was very optimistic about a loan. I have no need to tell you that I did not see any pressmen at Idlewild. I had no statement whatever to make about a loan, nor would I be such a fool as to prejudice discussions with the Bank by making any statement that looked cheerful about it, because it is a difficult matter. Nobody knows better than I do about the Bank and its methods. We have had a good deal of success with them.
-3-
QUESTION: It was reported out here, Mr. Menzies that the Bank had imposed impossible conditions on the company, would it be possible for you to say a little bit on that?
PRIME MINISTER: I do not think so, I do not think anything is gained by that. I did not see that, but I imagine that what that means is that the company would not be prepared to go so far as the Bank thought it ought to go for the making of a loan. But you must forgive me for not offering any opinions on those matters because I have yet to see the detailed reports of their discussions in Washington.
QUESTION: Did the limiting of lead and zinc production affect them at all?
PRIME MINISTER: I do not think that had anything to do with it. I have not heard anything that would suggest that that was a factor.
The whole problem there is how far the company is prepared to go in guaranteeing revenues to a reconstructed railway line which would amortize the cost of the railway line the bulk of which was to be found by borrowing, partly from the Bank and partly, perhaps, &nbsp;on the market in the United States. But it is all a matter of how far one is prepared to go and now far the other is prepared to go. Apparently they did not reach a composition. I did not, for one moment, think it was easy; but I am sure their discussions will have value because each now understands the other’s point of view at first hand.
QUESTION: Before you leave that subject, did you also invite the World Bank to hold their next meeting here?
PRIME MINISTER: No. That question did not arise.
So that that problem as between ourselves and Queensland and the company is still unresolved, But I myself do not regard a composition as being impossible, provided that all the people concerned are prepared to exhibit an accommodating mind.
But one must under the position of the Bini, because it has many clients in many countries many applicants in many countries. It just cannot, off-hand, apply a generous rule to us which it refuses to apply to perhaps three or four other countries. And therefore it is a matter for very close, sensible discussion.
However, I will be taking that up with my colleague, the Treasurer, and I will be informed, because 1 know that while I have been away there have been discussions between Mr. Haley from Queensland and my oi-nm people. Well, naturally I have had no opportunity of discovering the details of those matters.
QUESTION: Does the success or failure of the World Bank loannean the end of the whole question?
PRIME MINISTER: I do not know. But it would be very useful to get a loan from the World Bank. It is always a useful thing for us in Australia not being entirely flush with capital ourselves to be able to bring in capital from outside. Therefore, a World Bank loan or a Wall Street loan, or whatever it may be, has considerable national advantages, not only in supplying capital but in helping on the balance of payments side of the problem.
QUESTION: In your discussions with the World Bank and our own financial people in New York, did you raise the possibility of further loans from the World Bank on a general basis for Australia this year?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I did not, because you have to remember that the World Bank has made us loans on a pretty general basis to a very large extent - 300,000,000 dollars - and I think the position of the Bank today is that in future it does not exclude the possibility of further loans, but it would like to have them related to a project, which is the rule they have always applied, or almost always applied, in their lending policy. And this is a project which has great merits - great attractiveness - but economically, from their point of view the essential thing is: Can we be sure that the development of the mine and the development of production and the increase in export earnings by the production of additional material, will be matched by some undertakings which will make the railway proposal - which represents about: £30,000,000 - successful? So that the railway will be rebuilt and in due course paid for. The two things balance and that is intelligible.
However, I do not want to go into the details of that matter, because they have had their discussions. They have not arrived at a composition on this matter, but as I say I will know more about that and what the possibilities are, from our point of view, when I have seen the details of their discussions; I haven't yet.
QUESTION: Has the Bank suggested at any time, Sir, that this is the sort of project we ought to finance for our' selves, and that our priority for borrowing has slipped down compared with other countries who are on their list?
PRIME MINISTER: No. The Bank is genuinely interested in this. It feels that it is the kind of thing that fits into the Bank pattern; but it is not prepared and I do not criticise it at all to make any substantial abandonment of its general rules. We are not its only customer.
QUESTION: Do you think, Sir, the Bank would be more interested in a less ambitious construction programme?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I have heard a rumour in the last twelve hours or so that there is some less ambitious programme. But that is all I know it is a mere rumour to me, so I prefer not to discuss it. But it was not the size of the project that was the point of disagreement as far as the Bank was conserned. It was how far the contract between the Queensland Government and the company would be satisfactory to it as a lender of the money.
QUESTION: Sir, when you say there is room for some movement by the parties, is there room for any movement in the Commonwealth's attitude
PRIME MINISTER: My dear fellow, we have worked like slaves on this.
COMMENT: I know, Sir.
PRIME MINISTER: I cannot think of a solitary thing that we have not done that we could do. I myself have put in an immense amount of time on it. We are not open to criticism on that point.
QUESTION: No. The point I was thinking of Sir, one of the Mt. Isa company's conditions is partly that they have to bear most ,f the guarantees for the line. In fact, a part of the line will not be entirely devoted, or even a majority devoted, to their use.
PRIME MINISTER: I understand that. I understand their case on that. But from the point of view of the International Bank, what it says is that where some work is to be done primarily at the request of the major user not the sole user, but a major user then the major user ought to be prepared to make a contract with the State Government or whatever the authority may be, in order to look after the amortization of the cost. Well, that is the Bank's rule; it is not my rule; that is the Bank's rule. That is one of the facts of life.
QUESTION: It is quite clear fort what you say, Mr. Menzies, that the idea of approaching the Bank for this loan has not been abandoned?
PRIME MINISTER: Not by me no; nor, I hope, by anyone else. Well, then going back to these other perhaps larger international matters, I was very interested indeed to have talks in America and in England and on the Continent. Although I gather there are one or two people still surviving in Australia who think that the problems of Europe and the Western world are irrelevant to Australia most of us will recall that our own wars have come out of Europe in the past and Europe still remains a point of danger for us. And these are, therefore, very grave matters for Australian consideration.
Well, I am not a spokesman for the President of the United States - he can do that himself. But I must say that I found him in good health and vigour. I thought he looked better and sounded better than I have found him for perhaps three or four years. He was quite vigorous. But, as you know, he has been reluctant to have a Summit Conference unless there is some earnest of success some progress made by the Foreign Ministers at Geneva. They are, I believe, resuming on the 13th - four days time. Or some guarantee of some kind that there will be a result. That is his view. He does not as I understand it reject the idea of a Summit Conference in principle. Indeed, the interesting thing to me is that there is no rejection of a Summit Conference in principle in either Washington or Bonn or Paris or London - none. But in Washington and in Bonn and in Paris, they attach conditions to it and say. "Well what is going to be discussed, I want to see what the agenda will be. I want to know what it is that is to be discussed." And in the case of the President. I think he goes further than that and says, "And I want some guarantee of good faith, so to speak. I want to see a prospect of a result." &nbsp;
I think, that in the United States, my impression was that the feeling is growing that there will be a Summit Conference. I am not saying that that is the President's view; but that is my feeling and I had a number of discussions,
I was at great pains to emphasise one thing in my conversations all of them and that was that the Geneva Conference, even if nothing came out of it in form, could not be regarded as a failure, because the proposals that were being put were honest proposals; they were not selfish proposals. They did not involve some material gain for the powers putting them forward. But they were designed to ease the tension; produce peace and a settlement. And I thought that when the world had the spectacle of proposals of that kind being put up day after day and explained carefully day after day, then the effect of that in the world was not inconsiderable.
I took the opportunity in each of these places of pointing out that while nobody may need to be persuaded about those matters in the United States or in Great Britain or in France, let's say, there are hundreds of millions of people in the world who are not in any of those places we are pretty close to a fair number of them who are not committed either to the Communists or to the West. They are, in effect uncommitted countries. And the effect upon their judgment of proposals of an honest kind honestly advocated was, I thought, very considerable, and that we in Australia were greatly influenced by that consideration. And I think that that point registered itself.
I elaborated that particularly to Mr. Herter whom I have never met before. I knew Foster Dulles, of course, very well. Mr. Herter himself is a man of great personal attraction. He is a tall man; he is a man with a rather winning personality if I might use that expression; he is obviously intelligent and I think that Herter will personally make a good seal of ground with the people that he negotiates with.
I was chiefly concerned to tell him that in the opinion of one not very important onlooker I thought that he was doing a good piece of work, and that the effect of this on the minds of people would be very great always remembering that this ideological battle or whatever we care to call it - is a contest for minds. Therefore whatever influences people's minds can never be regarded as a failure?
I do not know what is going to happen in this renewed conference, but I would not, myself, despair of something. They are not going to settle the problem of the re-unification of Germany; I do not think that anybody believes that that is a problem which can be solved this year or next year or the year after. Nor will anybody decide that fascinating and attractive legal arguments that are taking place about the foundation the legal foundation of the occupation of Berlin these are arguments that do not seem to me to be very material because there is no judge, no jury just have your fun and adjourn.
I told Chancellor Adenauer that it was - I asked him whether he had seen the reports of Liberace in the "Mirror" in London and he said he had, and I said, "Well, there you are, you see suppose there were no judge and no jury, how long could they go on having the most marvellous fun with no decision." And I think that in. reality what the practical point of Geneva will be and I hope they will do something about it a working arrangement about Berlin for the next five years or ten years, or something of that kind that will take the tension out of the atmosphere and will allow these other matters to be looked at in a quiet way.
I had long discussions in London, of course, with Mr. MacMillan. I attended a Cabinet meeting. I did gather from somebody that I had been promoted to be an emissary from the British Government, but I am sorry I cannot claim that dignity, because I had already arranged to go to Bonn and to go to Paris, and both heads of Government had been extraordinarily accommodating in giving me a date and plenty of time for discussion; just in the same way I always desired to come back via the Eastern route and, if possible, look in at Karachi, New Delhi and Singapore.
But, at any rate, of course I did have a pretty clear picture in my mind of how the United Kingdom Government was looking at these matters; that was helpful to me.
I did not go to Bonn to persuade the Chancellor of something. I was rather fortunate in that I had been there three years before and had established very good personal relations with Chancellor Adenauer, so that he greeted me as a friend. I think perhaps I was able to do a little good there, because I found that he was as I thought seriously misinformed about British public opinion. A lot of these statements of his that you read are founded upon a belief that he has that there is an acute anti-German feeling in Great Britain and in the British Government; and I do not believe that is true.
I had some amusing discussions with him in the course of demonstrating, as I hoped, that it was not true. I had about five hours with him altogether. I thought it was pretty handsome, considering that he had a few local disturbances on his hands. But it was a very good discussion. We discussed the European Common Market and the little free trade area, for example. I felt anxious lest the little free trade area that is the seven, the division of Europe into the seven and the six might become inveterate and produce and economically divided Europe which as I said quite freely on the Continent, was no good to them. No good to the six they do an awful lot of business with the seven.
I am satisfied that so far as Chancellor Adenauer is concerned, he would like to see a composition between the seven and the six. He does not contemplate with any satisfaction any permanent division.
I discussed that with General De Gaulle who, I think, agrees with that in principle, but is inclined to think that a longer period of time must elapse before effective negotiations between the two can be carried on.
It is a very interesting thing to an observer - two years ago, France was the weak spot in the Common Market. France was, economically, the problem child. There is no doubt that today France is becoming one of the most powerful factors in the European Common Market due to the immense prestige of General De Gaulle, and he has restored French pride and the recovery of France economically in the last 18 months is really quite remarkable, and it goes on.
QUESTION: Sir, on the sixes and the sevens, what is Great Britain's view at the moment? Is she likely to be interested? She has been more or less responsible for six being created.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it is an ill business to speak on behalf of any Government other than your own, and it is not always possible to speak on behalf of your own. But I think it can be taken definitely that Great Britain is not regarding the formation of the seven as a definitive act, but as something from which you can advance to discussions with the six. That, I am sure, is the received view in Great Britain. And it is a view which I myself took every opportunity of advocating.
It is quite true that in the event of such discussions, countries like Australia have important reasons to be heard consulted to be in on the formulation of any proposals. I discussed that matter also in Great Britain, and there is no doubt about it that that is fully recognised that in the event of any such discussions we will be in on the grass roots. They will, first of all discuss with us our mutual in respect to any of these masters, and indeed we have established some machinery for doing that on the official level in the first instance.
But the interesting thing, rally, is not that Germany which was tremendously powerful still is, of course but outstandingly powerful economically two or Three years ago- it is not that Germany does not want to have these discussions, because I am sure it does, but that France is gaining in strength. And I think that President De Gaulle feels that he needs some time yet to consolidate that position before committing his country to discussions of a further kind.
It is an active problem - it is not a dead problem. It is quite active and I think that minds, though they may be travelling at different paces, are really travelling in the same direction on it; but I am rather optimistic there. Of course, it would be a very good thing to have this settled, because there are always some little mutual suspicions, fears, apprehensions between one country and another, and it is a good thing to have them cleared up.
QUESTION: Sir, there has been some mention of the fact that West Germany might like to export more private capital. There has been a suggestion that they would like to have a double taxation agreement with Australia to make that possible.
PRIME MINISTER: I had no discussions about that. You have to remember that I was not there on specific matters of that kind. I was really there to get so far as I could inside the min s of the Chancellor in Germany and the President in France, and I had ample opportunity of doing that, because they were extraordinarily forthcoming and put their cards on the table.
I must say that Adenauer, though he is 83, is remarkably active. I did not see any sign of any failing. He is a very shrewd man but, I think, a little adversely affected by his conceptions, gained from the "Daily Mirror" and the "Sunday Express" no doubt, of what British public opinion is that is the British "Daily Mirror". And they do not represent British public opinion and certainly do not represent British Government opinion on that matter.
MacMillan himself stands very well with Adenauer who has a great respect for him, as has Do Gaulle. I had not seen De Gaulle since the war, and I saw big changes in him. He is a man today of a mellow kind. Nobody could have called him mellow during the war. We exchanged jokes that was something and he was very frank and forthcoming and relaxed. He feels justly proud of what he has been able to do for his country, and no longer frustrated, There he is and I think that his country has a great confidence in him.
QUESTION: Do you think he is right in his stand on the atom bombs?
PRIME MINISTER: Don't ask me to offer an opinion of' his views on that matter. There is a good deal going on about atom bombs, and somebody is now going to have a non-nuclear club no, I would sooner say nothing about. I have a few ideas but I would sooner say nothing about it.
QUESTION: Do you think that Mr. MacMillan's trip to Moscow has given him a greater faith in the Russians than li had?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh no, I would not say that. I thought it was a very good visit to pay and I think that he has learnt something about them at first hand. But you must not suppose that MacMillan is easily beguiled by people. He is not; he is a very shrewd man. But I think he learnt a great deal, and after all the whole advantage of a surimi talk- provided it is not too formal; provided people don’t get it surrounded by brass bands and myriads of officials; the great advantage of a summit talk is that a few men sit down together don't hurry themselves, get to know each other, to know what it is all about because nothing will persuade me that either Moscow or any capital in the Western World wants a war or contemplates one. So there is a good deal of this sort of thing going on, you see, and there is nothing like a personal meeting.
I have had some very interesting side lights on Khrushchev from several of these people that I have met around the world who know him, and it turns out he is like the rest of us sometimes he is in a good mood and sometimes he is not; sometimes he is expansive and sometimes he is not. Well if people would only sit down and have quiet, friendly talks and get to know each other, we would get somewhere.
QUESTION: Sir, on your return to London, did you have fresh discussions with Mr. MacMillan and his colleagues on the outcome of your talks in Bonn and Paris?
PRIME MINISTER: I did not see the Cabinet again, but I spoke to Mr. MacMillan on the phone and then I sent him a fairly full report of my observations in both Bonn and Paris particularly on what I thought to be their points of misapprehension of British attitudes and his own, and he was good enough to say he found this extremely helpful. I had a talk with him an hour the day before I left London; but that was of a more general kind. But he is in possession of the relevant matters that I felt were worth recording as a result of each journey.
QUESTION: Do you think the NATO Alliance has been affected at all, Sir, by this quibbling over who should have nuclear bombs and who should not?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don't think so. There is always a little bit of propaganda floating around, you know. I think that, basically, NATO is quite firm and good. President De Gaulle may, occasionally, leave some wry remark to make about nuclear weapons and France; but he is a realist. He knows that NATO is important.
QUESTION: Sir, which would be the major obstacle in the amalgamation of six and seven the exclusion of agricultural surpluses or French fear of British industrial competition?
PRIME MINISTER: It is very hard to tell, because they have not got down to braless tacks on that. I think that agricultural self-sufficiency in the Common Market Area is a very considerable factor - very considerable. You see, Germany buys wheat from France at about twice the price that she would have to pay us for wheat. There is a good deal of this agricultural self-sufficiency. As against that, you have to bear in mind that the countries of the Common Market conduct the bulk of their export trade with other European countries, and therefore they cannot be indifferent to what happens in those countries or what affects the competitive capacity of those countries or the industrial. Strength and purchasing power of those countries.
I think I had better push on a bit, because otherwise we might be here until I am you know.
&nbsp;I went over to Holland to have a look at the new Prime Minister there who is comparatively new to politics De Quay. He is a very nice man; indeed, I got on very we all with him. He was a Professor of Psychology.
QUESTION: What is wrong with that, Sir?
PRIME MIINISTER: Very good. I told him there were two of us. (Laughter} He was the Queen's Commissioner for Brabant for about ten or eleven years - the big province of Brabant. But he is very good. He had quite practical considerations of concern. You may remember that we were speculating a little when his predecessor went out of
office as Prime Minister, as to whether there might. Be a change of policy in the Netherlands with respect to West New Guinea. There will not be. He said, "We will carry on completely the policy of our predecessor.”
I notice that there has been a little flutter on the water about my talks with Lunes, which I had for some hours in Zurich. Well, there is no foundation for that. What had happened was when this matter was debated in our own Parliament after Subandrio’s visit, I made a speech with some care and at some length, and they had had a copy of that. And, in substance, having found that they had read this and considered it with some care, I said, "Well, that stands as a statement; there is no change from that speech." And I think they were content with that. Certainly, we had no disputes or no wrangles, and certainly there has been no change in our policy since I enunciated the policy with some care in the Parliament here no change of any kind.
I wanted to see the new President of Pakistan. Pakistan has had a lot of fluctuations with Government, as you know, ever since the Aga Aly Khan who was a very distinguished man. And now they have a President and Government containing a certain percentage of military people, and therefore some have been disposed to believe that it is some sort of a military Government, I don't think that is true, President Ayub himself is a very impressive man and a much civilised person very good. And his idea is that when they get things straightened up they will go he hopes in two years' time to elections and establish a parliamentary system of government, and let the generals go back to their soldiering; and I think he means that. I met two or three of his ministers who I thought, were pretty good, I am not saying that the others were not, but I met two or three who were very impressive.
One of the great things there, of course, is the projected agreement about the Indus Waters to which we are contributing an agreement negotiated by Black of the International Bank tremendously important. With it, West Pakistan has some proper chance of being economically liable, and without it, it lives precariously from year to year. I think it is the biggest material matter of dispute between Pakistan and India. I am not omitting Kashmir. Kashmir is not purely a material matter of dispute. It involves all sorts of other considerations and passions. But in an economic sense, this has been the big thing and it looks as if it is going to be cleared up and a number of us will contribute to the cost no it. And I am hoping that it will modify feeling of hostility, shall we say, or suspicion on both sides of the frontier. I hope it does, because at the present time, of course, as you know, both India and Pakistan are spending the bulk more than 50 per cent., up to 60 per cent. Of their total budget on defence, and the effect of this in low standard of living
countries with an awful lot of development work to be done can be imagined. So that this will not only have an immediate economic benefit for Pakistan, but it will have an indirect economic benefit for both Pakistan and India if it reduces the tension and enables them to devote a somewhat bigger portion of their revenues to economic affairs.
QUESTION: Did you get any impression, Sir, of better relations between the two? &nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I would not care to say that. I found on both sides a feeling of satisfaction about this waters agreement, and I am sure that will lead to better relations.
But, of course, these are two fascinating countries because in Karachi you can go and ask a senior official very influential man in Karachi about some corresponding fellow in New Delhi, and he says "Oh, he's a great friend of mine; we were in the old Indian Civil Service together." And-the same way in New Delhi an awful lot of crossed lines here which are lines of a friendly kind.
QUESTION: (Question inaudible)
PRIME MINISTER: Oh now, that is a very speculative question. That is so hypothetical, I think you ought to withdraw it, it is a very dangerous thing answering hypothetical questions.
I saw Mr. Nehru. I was in New Delhi for about three days and I saw him each day for some hours. We had long discussions. He, of course, has had a good deal of preoccupation first about Tibet and then about Kerrawa. But I must say I found him extraordinarily forthcoming and he is friendly. We had the most interesting, frank, comfortable discussions on all sorts of things, in the course of which he was able, of course, to throw a good deal of light on dark places for me because he was able to give me a pretty good account of the Tibet problems and the departure of the Dalai Lama, and also, of course, some sort of picture of what goes on inside Communist China because he has representation there. I think he has had a few exchanges with Communist China about some of the Tibet incidents. But everything he said to me on those matters, of course, I am not able to repeat, but I found it tremendously illuminating.
QUESTION: Did he expresses a desire to visit Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, we had a little discussion about that. He knows that when he can come we would be delighted. But he is a victim of the time-table too, because it is not very easy for him to get away except at some particular time of the year which may not be the best here. But I told him anyhow to chew it over and if he saw a chance whatever time of year it was we would be very glad to have him. It would be something of a break for him too, because he carries a most enormous responsibility enormous.
QUESTION: Does that discussion suggest, Sir, that it might be worthwhile if we had representation in Communist China, like England.
PRIME MINISTER: I have no comment on that. There is nothing fresh to be said on that.
Well, finally, there was Singapore where I met Mr. Lee, the new Prime Minister, and well I think most of his ministers. I had a long talk with him and then I talked with him and some of his ministers, and then I had dinner with all of them at night. They are a very young government; their average age is 37 He himself is 36. He is a man of high educational qualifications He was a double first at Cambridge and achieved a very high reputation in the law in Singapore and thereabouts before judges who were competent to express an opinion. He is a man of ability, He has some tremendous problems.
I am perfectly certain he is not a man who will lean towards the Communists. I think, on the other hand, on the contrary, he regards them as one of his problems. But the island has a population of 1,500,000. Its population is rising at the rate of 60,000 a year. It has got 25,000 people added to what they call the work force every year and a small island with, I suppose, no real possibilities of agricultural development. Or something of that kind, and therefore it must develop industries, and to develop industries it must attract capital. Well, he is a socialist, but when I was there, I read the whole of his election pamphlets, for example, -to inform my own mind, and also the speeches he has been making lately. And I think he is doing his best to establish that if anybody does invest money there, it will be all right; private enterprise will be recognised, I do not know; I am not preaching his case for him. But he is a seriously minded man and he knows his responsibility; he knows that he has got a great problem in employing his people. He has 6 per cent. of unemployed now and on figures that I have just mentioned, that figure is likely to rise. &nbsp;
He is, of course, very keen on securing the joining up with the Federation with Malaya. What his prospects are of that, well; your guess is as good as mine. I think that he feels that if that could be achieved, the population could then become more flexible. It could move into the rest of the Malayan Peninsula, and he would be free of this concentrated problem in one very small area,
But I liked him. I found him very intelligent and I liked the ministers with whom I talked his Health Minister and his Minister of Finance, and really it is very illuminating to find that you can have very much the same kind of conversation with that type of minister as you would in your own country with your own people similar problems.
But I think it ought to be assumed that this Government in Singapore is honest and is going to do its best to produce good government. Certainly, everybody who is in a position to judge assured me that they were personally incorruptible; that they were completely honest people who were going to do a job. And so I said to them, "Good luck, we regard you’re getting self-government as an achievement which is in the line modern British colonial policy, and the people have chosen you, and good luck to you. If we can ever be co-operative, let us know."
QUESTION: Sir because he has this big unemployment problem, I take it there is no desire on their part to kick the naval base out?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I do not know. The naval base provides, directly or indirectly, sustenance for 70,000 people. So it is a big factor that is men, women and children, 70,000 people. But I did not ask him what his prognosis was about the base. Naturally, in these meetings you are primarily concerned to establish some friendly relations so that in future he can write to me or I can write to him about problems as they arise.
QUESTION: Sir, do you intend to say anything about the Governor-General today? &nbsp;
PRIME MINISTER: No. I had two discussions with the Queen. We passed in review a variety of names. There are always two things about names: One, whether they are satisfactory and the other is whether they are available, which is a very different matter. And I said finally, "Well, Ma'am as this matter can be solved in September when you get back from Canada, there is no hurry about it. I will write to you." But we are familiar with each other's minds on that matter. That is all,
QUESTION: Did you discuss future Royal Visits, Sir, particularly one for the Empire Games in Perth?
PRIME MINISTER: I had some discussions, but there is nothing that can be said about it at present,
&nbsp;
With the compliments of-
Hugh Dash,
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister,
CANBERRA.&nbsp;


FOR PRESSP.M.No.27/19 59.AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES COMMISSIONAPPOINTMENT OF PART-TIME COMMISSIONERS.Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R.G. Menzies, C.H., Q.C.,M.P.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today the names of the four part-time Commissioners who, with the full-time Chairman, Sir Leslie Martin, C.B.E., will constitute the Australian Universities Commission.They are:-Professor N.S. Bayless, Victorian Rhodes Scholar at Oxford 1927-30, Professor of Chemistry in the University of Western Australia since 1938. He has also been Chairman of the Professorial Board and Acting Vice-Chancellor of that University from time to time.Professor A.D. Trendall, Master of University House, Australian National University, and Emeritus Professor of Classics, University of Sydney. He was Chairman of the Professorial Board of the University of' Sydney in 1945-49 and again in 1952-54 and was Acting Vice- Chancellor in 1953.Mr. K.A. Wills, C.B.E., M.C., E.D., O.St.J., Managing Director of G. R. Wills, Adelaide, and Chairman of the Finance Committee of the University of Adelaide.&nbsp;Dr. J. Vernon, General Manager, Colonial Sugar Refining Co. Ltd., who has a distinguished academic career and wide experience in industry.&nbsp;Mr. Menzies said he was greatly pleased that men of such standing and experience had agreed to accept the responsibilities of membership of the Commission in addition to their existing commitments. The Government, he added, was grateful also to the Universities and the business firms concerned, which in the national interest had agreed to put up with the inconvenience that must inevitably result from the absence on Commission business of such key men.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.21st July, 1959.&nbsp;


In my last Policy Speech I foreshadowed the appointment of a strong committee to enquire into the various aspects of the Australian Dairying Industry. The reason for this announcement was that the Government felt and feels that the problems of the dairying industry need to be objectively examined with a view to evolving policies calculated to ensure efficiency and economic stability.
We have now appointed a committee under the chairmanship of Mr. M.E. McCarthy. Its terms of reference are very comprehensive, It has to consider the conditions, structure and problems of the industry against the background of the overall interests of the nation.
The committee will hold its first meeting in Melbourne tomorrow (Thursday).
I want to emphasise the extreme importance of this enquiry which will, I hope, lead to conclusions of a comprehensive kind. The committee will visit many dairying districts in order to collect information on the spot. It will have, I am assured, co-operative help from the various State Governments and departments. Its work, if it is to be successful, will require full and frank expressions of opinion and propositions of fact from a great variety of people. This means that information has to be obtained not only from those who speak for various branches of the industry but from other citizens who may have criticisms to offer or suggestions to make. The greater the public interest in this enquiry, the more likely is it that the committee will be able to hear and consider conflicting views, not only y from producers and from consumers but also from anybody else who appreciates the importance to the nation of having the whole matter put upon a sound economic footing.
I express the hope, therefore, that there will be considerable public interest in the committee's proceedings and that anybody who feels that he or she has some useful suggestion or criticism to make should feel at liberty to present these to the committee.
Mr. McCarthy himself is a man of immense experience, having dealt with many great problems for the Commonwealth Government, He has an independent mind and he has with him a Committee selected for its variety of experience and its capacity for study and judgment.
CANBERRA, A.C.T.22nd July, 1959.&nbsp;



PRIME INISTER'S T. V. " FACE THE NATION" 2ND AUGUST, 1959
QUESTION: Mir. Menzies, after your recent visit to The Hague you
re-affirmed Australia's support for Dutch sovereignty in West New
Guinea. The Indonesians seemed to take this as a change of front
on the part of the Australian Government. Is that so?
MR. MENZIESNo, it is not. You may remember that after the
visit, the very happy visit, I thought, by Dr. Subandrio to
Australia, I made a speech in Parliament in which I indicated what
our policy was in the light of our discussions with him. Now it
was quite clear, it was and is quite clear, that we support the
Dutch claim to sovereignty. I put it to Dr. Subandrio myself that
I would like to know what the legal basis was of-the Indonesian
claim to sovereignty. And he explained at once that it was not on
legal grounds but on political grounds, and that was why the matter
had never been taken by Indonesia to the International Court.
Now that represents no change of front at all on our
part. We have frequently repeated that we recognise Dutch
sovereignty. If that sovereignty is to be changed then it must be
changed only by an agreement truly negotiated between themselves and
the Indonesians or by the decision of the Court. That was our
position. That remains our position.
QUESTION: Speaking of Dr. Subandrio, when he was here in February,
I think it was, there was a joint conmunique in the course of which
there was a hope that was expressed that there might be some day a
treaty of friendship between the two nations. Has that matter
been carried any further?
MIvR, NZIES: ' Tell, I do not know ,/ hat has happened during my
absence, but as you may havo heard I have an arrangement to go to
Indonesia myself before the end of the year. I do not know what
date, but I have accepted an invitation to go there before the end
of the year. And in that event, of course, we would pursue it
and very properly, because one thing which was quite clear during
Dr. Subandrio's visit was that we had no points of difference,
speaking in essential terms, other than our difference of view as
to the sovereignty of ' Jest New Guinea. And, therefore, there is
ample scope for friendship and honourable association. 
-9 STION Before leaving the subject, Kr. l. enzies, vihat do you
foresee for the ultimate future of Dutch " Tei Guinea.
I INZIES: ell, it is very difficult to look into the future
but if you look far enough then I would ho,; e to see selffrovemment
in New Guinea and I think theru would be areat merit
myself in seeing that as self-goverment of the entire island.
You see, treating it as a hole, because ethnologically there
are very few distinctions to be made between the people of the
West and the people of the East and the people of Papua.
Now our policy as you know has been and is to
-rorote tho ielfare of the native people, many of .; horn of
course are still living in their remote lnd rather savage
conditions, but to promote their welfare so that some day, which
is certainly not goin; to be next year or the year after or
something like that; some day they will be broutt to a state
of life in which they can accept self-govcrnment. Anu so far as
the Dutch are concerned they have told us that tIhey have the
same ultimate ambition for their people, ( nd therefore in the
long run, it won't eorhmcps be in my time as Prime Iinist-r, but in
due course, with all the efforts . e can make in the meantime to
nromote thoir welfare, we may find an in. de'endent nation of native
New Guinea citizens conducting their own affairs and I ho! e
living in terms of close friendship with Australia. 



P. M. No. 29/ 1959.
MEETING OF LEADERS.
Statement b the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies C. H., Q. C., MP.
" This is very good news. Nothing but benefit can come
from meetings between the heads of government of the two most
powerful countries in the world," Mr. Menzies said today.
" The exchange of visits will not only reduce the current
tension but will also bring President Eisenhower and Mr.
Khruschev into direct and, one may hope, personal friendly
relations which will render a subsequent summit meeting easier
and more likely to succeed."
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
4th August, 1959.
FOR PRESS: 


13th August, 1959. 
It is no part of my intention to inflict upon the House a species of travel talk. Nor do I desire to make a comprehensive statement on current foreign affairs, some aspects of which, such as the events in Laos, are engaging our close and anxious attention. 
What I want to do as concisely as possible is to speak of those large problems with which I concerned myself during my overseas visit, of some of the leading personalities and of my conversations and impressions. 
In relation to matters now under discussion and disagreement between the Soviet Union and the Western Powers, I will offer some observations arising from talks in Washington, London, Bonn and Paris. I will say a little about the European Common Market and the " Little Free Trade Area". My talks at The Hague with the Prime Minister of the Netherlands and at Zurich with the Dutch Foreign Minister deserve some mention in this House. Subsequently on my journey I had talks in Karachi and New Delhi of which I will say a little. I ended with a very useful and interesting meeting with the new government of Singapore. 
Naturally a great deal which is said in conversations conducted privately cannot be repeated. I will, therefore, largely confine myself to a statement of my own-impressions, and occasionally views, in the hope that they may in a small way assist our joint consideration of matters which have a lively interest for Australia and Australians. 
My visit to Washington was sadly interrupted by the death of Mr. John Foster Dulles. Of him and his wcork all I need say in expressing my own opinion is that while it was always permissible and occasionally, I thought proper to disagree with his view, it was never possible tohave anything else but the most profound respect for his ability, his integrity and his courage. 
Notwithstanding the intervention of these sad events, the President was good enough to give me a lengthy interview, the course of which demonstrated quite clearly that Mr. Eisenhower is in a state of health and vigour which one might not have expected two or three years ago. He has been for some time very reluctant to engage in Summit talks without a preliminary determination of the agenda and some preliminary achievements which might serve as an earnest of goodwill. On this point, I felt in Washington itself that opinion was developing a growing sense of the urgency of consultation. 
Nobody who knows Mr. Eisenhower will doubt his loftiness of outlook and his passionate devotion to the securing of peace. I think, therefore, that we were all, after my return to Australia delighted to find that he had arranged an exchange of visits with Mr. Khrushchev and that he would also take the opportunity of personal consultation with European leaders. He has made it clear that he is not negotiating on behalf of other people. One may accept this without forgetting that in so many international negotiations it is the first step that counts, and that the breaking of the ice as between individuals3 is the essential precursor to the breaking of ice between nations. 
Mr. Dulles' successor, Mr. Herter, flew in from Geneva with the other Foreign Secretaries on the morning of the Dulles' funeral.. He was good enough to give me an interview an hour after his arrival. I was particularly interested in this because, although I was on close personal terms with Mr. Dulles, 
I had never pereviosuly met Mr herter. I did my best to encourage him in what I thought his good work at Geneva in constantly propounding with clarity and moderation the approach of the democracies to the settlement of the German question. 
If I may say so without impertinence, Mr. Herter is a man of a singularly winning personality, behind which there is clearly a highly informed mind. We will, I believe, find much satisfaction in our future co-operation with him.
I had several long talks with Vice-President Nixon whose bold approach to international problems, prior to my visit, in Latin America and, subsequent to my visit, in the Soviet Union, commends itself to the Australian mind. It is quite clear that he is a great believer in going to the seat of the trouble and meeting other people freely and frankly. As I will point out later, this seems to me to be essential in the near future of the world. 
I do not propose to take up time in this statement in relation to my discussions with the World Bank in respect of the Mount Isa railway project. That matter is still the subject of negotiation in Australia, and I would wish to avoid any public argument about it. 
In London I had lengthy conversations of a quite informal kind with the Prime Minister and with the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations. I also attended, by invitation, a meeting of the Cabinet at No. 10 Downing Street, a meeting at which the possibilities of a Summit Meeting were discussed. The fact that I attended this meeting and took part in its deliberations, and very shortly afterwards went to Bonn and Paris was, I gather, interpreted in some sections of the press as an indication that I was the chosen emissary of the United Kingdom Government. This was not true. I had arranged my appointments with Dr. Adenauer and General de Gaulle two or three weeks before, and in my meetings with them I confined myself to eliciting their views on various topics and offering them such views as I had myself. I subsequently put Mr. MacMillan in possession of my impressions. 
It is quite true that on the major matter of a top-level conference I was completely in agreement with Mr. Macmillan and had in fact said so publicly at the National Press Club in Washington before I went to London. I think Honourable Members may take it as quite certain that Mr. Macmillan's advocacy of a top-level meeting has the overwhelming support of both Parliament and public opinion in the United Kingdom. It has been criticised in some other countries as suggesting appeasement. This, of course, is not justified; it suggests nothing more than the simple fact that when all the formal procedures, despatches and diplomatic exchanges, have failed to resolve important differences, commonsense indicates that leaders of governments should talk directly to each other. It is, I think, a source of great satisfaction to British people like ourselves that following upon Mr. Macmillan's visit to Moscow, Great Britain should be recapturing some of the moral and intellectual leadership in world affairs which she is so fitted to exhibit. Anybody who considers the part played in these recent months by British leaders, and who adds to this some understanding of the remarkable economic recovery of Great Britain, will reject the moans about Great Britain now being a second or third-rate power for the sort of nonsense that they are. Great Britain, after all, never was possessed of a dominance based on numbers. But her place among the great world powers is obvious and tremendously significant. 
Honourable Members will know that it is part of the Communist propaganda to represent the United States of America as the strong-hold of reaction and as the one Great Power opposed to Communism. The Communists try to convert every issue into one of " Soviet Union rersus United States". This is so false a picture, though, having regard to military and physical resources, so plausible a one, that it is essential that British leadership and initiative and prestige should continue. 
In 1956 I paid a special official visit to Germany and had ample opportunity of getting to know Chancellor Adenauer. The result was that on this occasion we met as friends and were able to get down to our discussions without preliminaries. In the result, I had four or five hours with the Chancellor, in the course of which I was, of course, particularly concerned to elicit his views on current international problems. It is neither proper nor necessary for ie to state his views on all the matters we had under consideration. But there are some things that can and should be said. 
Dr. Adenauer has led his country with singular distinction and success, Under his general direction West Germany has made a post-war recovery of the most spectacular kind. The German people are working very hard and very successfully to reconstruct and expand their industries, which have already become a very material factor in international trade. There is very naturally a strong desire to see Germany reunified. But at the same time, I did not get the impression anywhere in Europe that reunification is regarded as an immediate possibility, I felt that the Chancellor's chief anxiety was lest there should be such a recognition of the East German regime as would perpetrate a severance and tend to make ultimate reunification improbable., In particular, Dr. Adenauer exhibited some anxiety lest there should be some de facto recognition by the United K. ngdom. I pointed out to him that if he had in mind the making of normal business arrangements relating to trade with East Germany, then the Government of West Germany seemed to me to be already involved in such ar cangements on its own account. The German reply to this wis that it is one thing to make, under protest, working arrangeoents with a separated portion of your own country but quite another matter for some foreign nation to do sinilar things. 
This led us to a closer analysis as to why there should be apprehensions in the German mind, It very soon appeared that the Chancellor himself believes that public opinion and government opinion in Great Britain are strongly and even bitterly anti-German and anti-Adenauer. I did my best to combat this view, which in my belief is erroneously founded. It is, I think, and as I said to the Chancellor, unfortunate that one or two large-circulation English newspapers have published intemperate observations on the German problem. But I ventured the opinion that they did not represent sensible opinion in Great Britain, the British people having no faculty for the perpetuation of hatreds but, on the other hand, having a considerable respect for what has been done by the Chancellor and his people since the end of the war. 
Having found that the Chancellor had a very warm respect for Mr, Macmillan, I took the opportunity of urging that he should increase his personal contacts in order to clear up any points of difficulty or misapprehension which might arise. 
Dr. Adenauer had considerable reservations about a Summit Conference which was not preceded by proper preparation and the selection of the topic or topics to be discussed. But I did quite clearly get the impression that he agreed that what has been called " a Western Summit" should be held and that he would be happy to attend one. In this respect, recent developments are, we will all agree, most satisfactory. 
Apart from the question of reunification, the two other matters then under consideration at Geneva were, first, the juridical basis of the partial occupation of Berlin by Western powers and, second, the possibility of some working arrangement in respect of Berlin which would represent a sort of moratorium for a period of years. 
We both agreed that legal arguments, in the absence of any tribunal to decide the issues, should not be unduly pursued. I offered my own opinion that the best thing to do would be for each side to publish its views so that people around the world might consider them, and that they should then " agree to disagree" for the time being. 
One other matter which I discussed with Dr. Adenauer was the developments in relation to the European Common Market. I advanced the view ( a view, I thought, widely held in Great Britain) that if the six nations of the Cormuon Market found themselves side by side with the projected seven nations of the Little Free Trade Area, and nothing further happened, there would be an economic division within Europe of a mutually dangerous kind. Such a division would, I pointed out, be not only unhealthy from the point of view of the seven, but also from the point of view of the six since so great a proportion of the trade of the six is conducted with the seven. I therefore pointed out that it seemed to me to be im: portant that the organisation of the seven should be regarded as the constituting of a bridge across which negotiations with the six
might be carried on. 
Dr. Adenauer seemed to me to feel that in the course of time, Great Britain and other countries should be associated with the main European arrangements. But he clearly thought that such discussions could not be hurried, since France was going through a programme of economic reconstruction and should be given some time to complete it. I should add at this point that Dr. Adenauer was disposed to think that the period would not be unduly protracted but, the following day in Paris, President de Gaulle, while accepting the need for association in principle, clearly had in mind a longer period before negotiations could become fruitful. 
In spite of what I believe to be the erroneous impressions entertained by Dr. Adenauer about British policy, I am convinced that he is patriotically devoted to the maintenance of peace in Europe on a foundation of strong Western association, and that there are few difficulties which he raised with me in the course of our talks which could not be resolved by frank exchanges with the other Uestern leaders. 
In Bonn, as in Paris, I became greatly strengthened in my belief that a very great deal turned upon the attitude and approach of the President of the United States. It was, therefore, as I have already indicated, with particular pleasure that I read of the decision of President Eisenhower to establish direct personal contacts with Mr. Khrushchev, both in America and Russia. These exchanges have been referred to by President Eisenhower as an attempt to melt a little of theice that has been accumulating in recent years. 
It is, in fact, an outstanding phenomenon of recent times that personal contacts between leaders have come to be regarded as the exception rather than as the rule. 
In the course of most of my talks, I kept emphasising my owm belief that the events of the last two or threa years, ominous as some of them have been, have made it more and more important and indeed urgent that personal contacts should be developed. At an earlier date, as Honourable Members will recall, I shared the belief that preparatory work was an essential condition of a successful conference. There is still validity in that belief where the projected conference is to deal with specific and concrete ratterE. But in the last two years in particular, Comimunist propaganda has been concentrated upon what it calls " a peace offensive" l and upon an attempt to create the impression that the Soviet Union wants peace and is willing to discuss it with anybody at any time and that all the reluctance is on the side of the West, that is on the side of the democracies, This is untrue in fac%, but it must be demonstrated to be untrue before the tribunal of world opinion. Standing as they do for a peaceful settlement of Europe and the creation of a state of human affairs in which the threat of major war may be reduced, the dem-iocracies have nothing to lose and everything to gain by a constant willingness to engage in personal meetings and a constant willingness to expound their beliefs and proposals0 I did, in fact, continue to offer the opinion, both publicly and privaitely, in the United States, in Great Britain and on the Continent, that even an unsuccessful conference at Geneva -unsuccessful in that it was not producing any concrete results -had great value in the contest for the miLnds of nen. I constantly emphasised that even though the Foreign Minister of the Soviet Union might continue to reject the proposals put to him, the very fact that those proposals were made and maintained and explained to the world, should have a considerable effect upon what we refer to as the "uncommitted nations" particularly those of Asia whose attitude was of vital significance to Australia and who were themselves constantly feeling the weight and pressure of Communist propaganda. 
Mr. Macmnillan's visit to Moscow, though I have no doubt it was the subject of some criticism or reservations both in Europe and in the United States, was in my opinion a real stroke of statesmanship. It did a great dsal to encourage the idea that there is no salvation for the world in the perpetuation of frozen relationships or of invetera*-e hostilities. This is not to say that we of the democracies weaken in our rejection of Communism as something utterly alier to our traditions, our institutions of self-government or cur conceptions of human dignity. But it does mean that we b~ lieve that we cannot impose our ideas upon other nations any morn than they can or should impose theirs upon us. We must;, in brief, all learn to live in the same world without war. Many pec'ple like myself have frequently criticised the Soviet docdrine of peaceful coexistence, by pointing out that havin~ g regard to somne tragic world events in recent years, . t appeared to be a doctrine which permitted aggression on one side and rejected it on the other. But if, as a result of personal contacts and patient negotiation, the state of affairs can be brought about in which co-existence connotes complete mutual non-aggression and rights of selfdetermination in countries with old or new claims to nationhood, then such a new doctrine of ce-existence can and will be cheerfully accepted by all lovers of peace all over the world. Great as the apprehensions are which are naturally felt in Germany about the possibility of Communist aggression, they would, I think, be sensibly diminished if the leaders of the Soviet Union decided upon a course of true realism in international relations preceded by genuine discussions and founded upon a recognition of the right of every nation to live its own life and to govern itself in its own fashion. Detailed discussions will need much preliminary work. :. he function of personal meetings at the summit is to make such things possible. 
In Paris I had several hours with President de Gaulle whom I had not seen since the war and whose own personal career since the war must have been marked by a profound sense of frustration until he was called to power two years ago. 
President de Gaulle cccupies, of course, under the new French Constitution, a position of immense power. He enjoys in his own right, and for elocuent historical reasons, a position of immense prestige, He clearly has a considerable sense of pride in what has ha-Jpened, and in particular with the remarkable economic recovery of France. This recovery has, in fact, been so great that, whereas two years ago when I was abroad the dominant factor in the European Common Market was Germany, and France was regarded as something of a problem, France is today becoming one of the vital factors in the European economic settlement. 
As the President himself enjoys good personal relations with Great Britain's leaders, I would feel that the scope for co-operation at the top level is very considerable. I was particularly interested to learn both from President de Gaulle and from his Prime Minister, Mr, Debre, of their outlook on the Algerian problem. That they must sensibly put an . end to the fighting is, of course, both natural and inevitable. But they are certainly not contemplating the imposing on Algeria of any ready-made constitutional structure. On the contrary, they feel, as I think most of us here would that whatever form of selfgovernment should be created in Algeria should, so to speak, grow out of the Algerian soil and exhibit in its own fashion local Algerian attitudes and desires. I share the belief that ultimate forms of Government should never be imposed from without, but should, starting at the ground level and in the simplest forms of local administration, be encouraged to grow into something which is indigenous and not exotic. 
A system of government which is long-established and well understood in an old democracy is not necessarily appropriate, either initially or ultimately, to a country with new-found independence. This truth is frequently forgotten. 
At The Hague I was interested to meet the new Prime Minister, Mr de Quay, and his colleagues, It was of importance from an Australian point of view to discover whether the change of government : in the Netherlands involved a change in their policy in relation to West New Guinea. I was informed that there was no change. 
On my part, I was content to repeat that the statement of Australian policy set forward by lie in the Australian Parliament on 24th February, 1959, after the valuable visit of Dr. Subandrio, the Foreign Minister cf Indonesia, remained unaltered, These two positions were reaffirmed when I had a lengthy discussion with Mr. Luns, the Netherlands Foreign Minister, at Zurich. In both The Hague and Zurich, I found considerable importance attached to the development of administrative contacts between the Dutch and the Australian sections of New Guinea. 
We have, as Honourable Members know, already by our public declaration of 6th November, 1957, initiated such contacts. As each of the two powers concerned the Netherlands and Australia has as its expressed objective the developing of the native population to -he ultimate point of self-government, there seemed to me to be considerable advantage from the point of view of the native populatLon in frequent comparing of notes and collating of experience between the two administrations; and I said so, Indeed, I am sure that the process is one which can be profitably expanded. 
I arrived in Karachi just as the monsoonal rains were about to begin. These-rains later developed some ruinous floods, with consequences which excite the sympathy of all of us. 
Pakistan has, as Honourable Menbers know, sustained a number of fairly quick changes in the administration since the lamentable death of that great man, Liaquat Ali Khan. The new President, General Mohammad Ayub Khan, in substance took over in 1958 from the then existing administration and at present governs very largely in right of his own authority. There is inevitably a somewhat military flavour about the administration, since several of his Ministers are military officers. The President himself regards this as a purely temporary state of affairs, He told me, and I - think with great frankness and sincerity, that he hoped to proceed to the stage of popular elections within a couple of years and that the administration could then become puely civic. In the meantime, he and his colleagues are behaving with great vigour in the face of some enormous problems. 
We, in Australia, do not always realise that upon the partition of old India into India and Pakistan, no fewer than 18 million refugees passed between the two countries, most of them in a state of absolute poverty. There are still large settlements of such refugees to be observed in or near the great cities, many of their population existing in a state of indescribable squalor, Housing and re-settlement have therefore become major problems to be tackled with vigour and concentration. 
Apart from these matters there has been. of course, for many years, conflict between Pakistan and India in respect of Kashmir, and very great and unresolved differences of opinion about the waters of the Indus; the head-waters of which are in India but the ultimate flow of which is literally vital to the rural economy and the national existence of West Pakistan. On this matter, just before I went away, a statesmanlike achievement was made by the President of the World Bank Mr. Eugene Black, who, largely through his own efforts but with the complete backing of his directors, has negotiated a settlement of this problem which will involve substantial financial contributions from other nations including Australia, contributions which we are very willing to make. A settlement of this matter will, I believe, do much to relieve the tension between the two countries. 
When I point out to Honourable Members that in both India and Pakistan ( and, in a real degree, because of their own differences), substantially more than 50 per cent of the Budget is devoted to military preparations, it will be seen how essential it is, if these two countries are to devote an adequate volume of their resources to economic and social development, that so great a point of difference 3hould be removed. I found General Ayub, and later Mr. Nehru in New Delhi, pleased with the projected settlement and warmly appreciative of its high significance. 
In the course of three days at New Delhi, I had a number of long and interesting conversations with Mr. Nehru. He carries vast responsibilities which hie high prestige causes to fall to a large extent on his own shoulders. He was naturally concerned about recent events in Tibet and in the Province of Kerala. 
He was good enough to convey to me in an intimate way some of his own views about recent developments in Continental China. It is not my function to repeat them here but I found them of considerable assistance in discussing our own policies with my colleagues in the Cabinet, 
I conveyed to Mr. Nehru once more an invitation to visit Australia at sore tine convenient to him. He pointed out some of the difficulties of dates and seasons and I undertook to communicate with him a little later. 
In Singapore I had very good meetings with the members of the newly-elected government. 
The new Chief Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, is a young man, highly educated, and the average age of his Cabinet is under 38. 
Mr. Lee himself is a man of great intellcctual capacity. He is a Socialist, but I would accept his statements that he is opposed to Communism and that his policies and actions are designed to cope with it. A perusal of the election pamphlets of Mr. Lee's party did not justify some of the more extravagant statements that have appeared about the new government. The fact is that these rinisters have been elected by a proper democratic process and are, therefore, entitled to our complete friendship and co-operation. They have iiu-ense problems; a large population on a small island, increasing by 60,000 a year; an uncomfortable measure of unemployment running at about 6 per cent; an inability to expand resources in so small a place except by industrial activity which would require the confidence of outside investors. It is clear that there is a strong desire to become associated with the Federation of Malaya, an association which, in the view of the Singapore ministers would tend to relieve some of the pressures upon their own population and resources. 
While in any place like this one expects to find some of those attitudes of mind which derive from a lengthy opposition to the old colonialism, I did not find the Singapore ministers in any way lacking in realism or a desire for friendship. In particular, I was most happy to find that the coming to Australia of students and their subsequent return had been a remarkable success and had done much to create a better understanding of the Australian character and outlook. 
I came back to Australia much better informed, if not wiser. On the whole, I have some real optimism about the future, 


STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER ON
REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RADIATION ADVISORY
COMMITTEE.
In tabling this Second Annual Rep~ ort of the
National Radiation Advisory Committee, I do not wish to say
a great deal because the report speaks most ably for itself.
The members of this Committee are, as you know, among the
most eminent scientists in this country, so that what they
have to say in this report must carry great weight. The
report is expressed in the most simple lay language and the
story tells is enormously reassuring. We have, as the
report says, been fed a diet of news and reports about
radiation and its hazards which, to say the least, has been
alarming. It is cheering then to learn from these eminent
scientists that their painstaking investigations over the
last year have shown that Australia is one of the " cleanest"
countries in the world. Indeed, to take a case, the report
establishes that the average accumulation of strontium 90 in
Australian soils in August, 1958, was about one third of that
found in the United Kingdom, one fourth of that found in most
areas of the United States, and only one seventh of that in
mid-western United States. The report goes on to say
that the maximnam permissible concentration of strontium 90 in
the human body laid down-by the Committee of the International
Commission on Radiological Protection is 110 times gre Lter
than the concentration measured in Austral-Imi infants and
660 times that in adults.'
These are only two examples which I have culled
from this report. I commend the whole text to you so that
you may make your own evaluation of the " scare" stories to
which we have been subjected.
Two other points in the report to which I feel
I should refer concern the use of x-rays in medical practice
and the whole question of control of ionizing radiation.
e 9/ 2 
Ar. 2.
Concerning the use of x-rays in medicine, the
Committee has pointed out in its previous report the dangers
that can be associated with the use of x-rays. In this
report they repeat their warnings, but also refer again to
the equal dangers which could obtain if public alarm
became so great that people were toc:-becnme unwilling to
avail themselves of the necessary use of x-rays in medical
practice. I mention this point because I feel that it
should be underlined so that people will not subject
themselves unnecessarily to even greater dangers through-not
using this important aid to medical practice.
So far as the control of the uses of ionizing
radiation is concerned, the Committee recommends that the
Commonwealth Government should accept respornsibility for
the legislative control of all uses of ionizing radiation
throughout Australia. Honourable Members will understand
that this presents constitutional problems as well as other
problems, but the Committee's recommendation will be
considered by the Government and discussed with the States.
The Committee alsrn reports the resignation of
Sir Macfarlane Burnet who has been Chairman of the Committee
since its inception. Sir Macfarlane has found that increasing
personal commitments make it impossible for him to continue
on the Committee. However, Honourable Members well know the
contributions he has made to the Committee already have been
of outstanding value. I venture to say that only his great
sense of public duty has made him find the time which he has
already devoted to the work of the Committee. In a period
when, with all the great modern developments of this nuclear
age, we have been alarmed by conflicting stories of dangers
of radiation, Australia owes much to Sir Macfarlane ( and, of
course, to the other members of the Committee) for the work
put into this and the previous report. 
[Date confirmed]



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH B3Y
Rt. Hon. R. G. MENZIES, Q. C.,
ON
BUDGET 1959-60.
[ Fromn the Parliamentary Debates," 20th August, 1959.]
Mr. MENZIES ( Kooyong-Prime Minister)
[ 8.01.-Mr. Chairman, the Budget
speech delivered by my colleague the Treasurer
( Mr. Harold Holt) emphasized at the
beginning and throughout and at the end
that the twin purposes of this statement of
financial policy for the year were expansion
and stability. I want to repeat that
expression-expansion and stability-because
it seems to me that unless it is borne
in mind a great deal of the significance
of this Budget may be unseen.
Let me take the words in their reverse
order. The purpose of stability is to avoid
inflation and so ensure an adequate volume
of investment in government securities-a
type of investment that is not attractive if
inflation is on-and of capital investments
from overseas, which I rather gathered this
afternoon is not very well regarded by
some honorable members on the other side
of the chamber but which is admirably
regarded by people in this country. Not
only is the purpose of stability the doing
of those things; its great function is to
preserve the value of money internally, because
the preservation of the value 01
money, that is to say the value of wages,
salaries and income of all kinds, is essential
for-social justice ' and also clearly essential
for a spirit -of -confidence in the country.
7341/ 39. Recently, Sir, when I was in France I
had an opportunity to have a discussion
with Monsieur Rueff, who had prepared a
report for the French Government upon
French financial and economic reconstruction.
The report of his committee was
adopted by the Minister for Finance and
the President of France. Those recommendations
have been put into operation,
and the financial and economic recovery
of France in the last eighteen months has
been most remarkable. If any one has an
opportunity to read that report, he will
find that at its very centre is the whole
idea of stability. France had been suffering
grievously from runaway inflation, unrestrained
and incapable of being checked
because of political instability. Within the
last eighteen months, as I have indicated,
the recommendations made by this committee
have been put in hand. Those responsible
have set about arresting inflation,
and the result has been quite phenomenal.
Inflation, although it has not been unrestrained,
although it has come under a
very remarkable degree of restraint in Australia
in the last few years, remains a constant
danger as long -as increased production
does not cope with increased costs.
I should just like to say, apropos of -this,
that in the welter -of comnments -and -criti-
2
cisms about the present Budget I found
the very thoughtful speech of the honorable
member for Richmond ( Mr. Anthony)
very refreshing, because he directed his
mind to this great central problem of inflation.
I shall say a little more about it,
because what has troubled him has
troubled my colleagues and myself in the
course of preparing the Budget. But in
that speech there was a genuine and perceptive
observation on the Budget. All
these other observations that I shall deal
with in a moment completely missed the
point, the point being that stability is
essential to expansion and that stability
and expansion are the keynotes of the
financial policy of this Government.
It is quite clear, Sir, that some honorable
members may have overlooked the fact
that expansion is not the product, of inflation.
Inflation is its enemy. Its achievement
depends upon creating and maintaining
a spirit of optimism and confidence in
Australia's future, and upon guarding
against an excessive optimism which may
regard with contempt the menace of rising
costs, particularly in respect of actual or
prospective export markets. I say that
because I want to lay a foundation for the
approach of the Government to this matter.
These observations I have made have never
for one moment been absent from the mind
of the Treasurer or the minds of those
who sat with him in the preparation of this
Budget. Now I turn for a moment to the Opposition.
Members of the Opposition, of
course, have secured almost prescriptive
rights over a long term of years to professional
gloom. This gloom, valiantly
maintained frequently under very difficult
circumstances, has endured right through
the most remarkable period of expansion
in Australian history-a period that has
been marked not by disaster of the kind
prophesied by the Opposition but by a
record investment in this country from
overseas, an investment not made by fools
but by shrewd people who like to see a
country with a future and stability. That
period has been marked also by high levels
of employment, rising real wages, a phenomenal
increase in the amfenities of life, a
remarkable expansion of productivity in
basic and secondary industries, high solvenicy
in primary industries, and under and supporting it all a record expansion of
vital developmental public works and a
corresponding industrial expansion.
I pause there, Mr. Chairman, to. emphasize
this point: There are those who
rather choose to divide the volume of
investment in the country into investment
on public account and investment on
private account. In our country and in
this age there can be no such artificial
division, because without great public
works for the development of power,. water
supply and transport there could not be
the private expansion, the investment of
private capital, that we have seen going
on over the last ten years. The two things,
to coin a phrase, go hand in hand.
The Leader of the Opposition ( Dr.
Evatt) overlooks the fact-it was not overlooked
by my young friend from Richmond
-that we are budgeting for a substantial
deficit, a deficit of œ 60,000,000, at a time
when the state of the economy is in no
great need, as we thought a year ago it
may be, of some special stimulus. From
the viewpoint of pure national economics,
and even though the Leader of the Opposition
has said the dead opposite, there was
much to be said for a cash balanced
Budget. Under these circumstances I think I
ought to occupy a few minutes by pointing
out to the committee why we did -not go
for a cash balanced Budget on this occasion
-why we accepted a deficit. I will state
the major reasons. In the first place, to
balance the Budget, to bring out a dead
balance on this occasion, we would have
had to make no increase whatever in social
services or repatriation benefits and no tax
reductions of any kind, but, on the contrary,
if honorable members will examine
the figures, probably some increase in taxes.
Mr. Ward.-The Government could
have taken something out of excess profits.
Mr. MENZIES.-My friend always has
some wonderful scheme for taxing profits;
but it is a tax.
Mr. Ward.-You promised an excess
profits tax in 1950.
. The CHAIRMAN.-Orderl The honor-
Able member must remain silent.
Mr. MENZIES.-That would seem most
improbable. I wonder how many honorable
members would have been content, or 
how many people in Australia would have
been content, with a Budget this year in
which there were no increases whatever in
social services or repatriation benefits, and
no tax reductions of any kind but, as I have
said, quite probably some increases in tax.
That is a very powerful consideration for
a Government to take into account.
The second thing I want to say is that
every Budget deficit must be considered
in relation to the total volume of the Budget.
If, before the war, when the total Commonwealth
Budget was below œ 100,000,000,
until 1939, when I myself introduced the
first œ 100,000,000 Budget, anybody then had
said Let us have a deficit of œ 60,000,000,
this would have been regarded as sheerly
ruinous finance. But to-day with a Budget
which moves around the vicinity of
œ 1,600,000,000 in this country, œ 60,000,000
must be looked at in proportion and atlso
looked at in proportion to the total national
earnings, the total national income.
The third thing is that the heavy increase
in the basic wage-and there was
quite a substantial increase in it only recently-
in our opinion made it proper to
add substantially to the social service and
repatriation payments which will, in the
result, this year rise by œ 21,000,000. We
could not do that and, at the same time,
budget for a cash balance.
Finally-and I think this is legitimate
consideration-the willing acceptance of the
Australian public, who have co-operated
and behaved so magnificently in these years,
and the willing acceptance by the public
of past measures and their marked success
as a result of public co-operation, deserved,
in our opinion, some recognition in the
taxation field and therefore we have
given it.
Mr. Ward.--You have given 9d. a week
to the basic wage earner.
The CHAIRMAN.-Orderl The right
honorable the Prime Minister is speaking.
Mr. MENZIES.-You could not be more
right, Sir, and with your very kind permission
I will continue. It is interesting
that I should continue because I just want
to make this point that when the Budget
is disclosed to the committee-the Budget
of the entire Government, delivered by the
Treasurer--one looks to the Leader of Her
Majesty's Opposition ( Dr. Evatt) to deliver a pungent and pointed attack on it. Therefore,
as the Leader of the Government, I
think I owe the right honorable gentleman
the courtesy of having a glance at the
attack, if I may so describe it, which he
made on this Budget. I will begin by quoting
one of his expressions. It is inimitable,
but I quote it. He said--
This process of slugging the great bulk of
taxpayers has been going on cvery year continuously
since 1950-51.
Mr. Ward.-Hear, hear!
Mr. MENZES.-On one occasion at
any rate, the Leader of the Opposition has
support on his own side. Having delivered
hinlself of this trenchant expression, he then
went on to say-
The single man with average earnings paid
Is. 9d. in the œ 1 income tax in 1950-51
He now pays 2s. 4d. in the œ 1 and the Treasurer
proposes to reduce this to 2s. 2id.
Mr. Chairman, that statement is, of course,
grossly misleading and-unless I were to
accuse the right honorable gentleman of
inadvertence, which I would not dream of
doing-deliberately misleading, and I will
show how. Anybody listening in the other
night-if anybody ever listens in to these
lucubrations of ours-must have been
struck by the statement that here was a man
with a small income who must pay more
tax and yet, so the Leader of the Opposition
declared, this wretched Government says
it is reducing the tax. Therefore, I point
out this simple but cogent fact: In 1950,
average wages were œ 575 a year; in 1959
they are œ 1,040.
Mr. Ward.-Inflation has run riot, that is
all it is.
Mr. MENZIES.-AII right; do not dig
yourself a trap too soon. The first point
I want to make is that the right honorable
gentleman compares the rate of tax as if
the income had stood still. Now that, of
course, is a grossly misleading proposition
to put to the people. I will further illustrate
the truth by reference to the case selected
by the right honorable gentleman of the
single man earning average wages. In
1950-51, he earned œ 575 and his income
tax was œ 47 14s. or, as the right honorable
gentleman said, Is. 9d. in the His net
income after tax was deducted was therefore
œ 527 6s. a year. To-day he earns
œ 1,040 but under this Budget he will pay 
œ 109 3s. tax or 2s. Id. in the His net
income therefore, after tax is deducted, wvill
be not œ 527 but œ 930.
Mr. Griffiths.-Now express it in
terms-~ Mr. MIENZLES.-1 know that honorable
members opposite are upset and terrified to
hear a plain statement on these matters.
1 do not mind; the dog barks but the
caravan moves on. The right honorable
gentleman or his faithful myrmidons cannot
escape by saying that increased average
wages merely reflect changes in the cost of
living. The basic wage, by reason of several
decisions, has now risen to 16 per cent.
more than the change in the C series index
would produce while the rise in average
wages, as everybody knows, further
reflects the competition over a period of
years for available labour.
Mr. Ward.-What are you quoting, the
Richardson report?
Mr. MENZIES.-I am quoting myself.
Am I to be told that the noisy gentleman
who interjected has refused the salary
recommended by the Richardson committee?
What humbug!
Mr. Ward.-At least I do not get œ 15
a day expenses, free of tax.
The CHAIRMAN.--Orderl The honorable
member for East Sydney has not got
the floor.
Mr. MENZIES.-He has not recovered
from the rebuke he received this morning.
Then the Leader of the Opposition says that
our taxation changes are made to favour
the rich.
Mr. Ward.-Hear, hear!
Mr. Clay.-Hear, hear!
Mr. MENZIES.-I knew that two of you
would say that. The charge made by the
Leader of the Opposition is, as usual, easily
answered. The last Labour Government,
which was enriched by the presence of the
honorable member for East Sydney, among
others, produced its last Budget for the
1949-50 year. I take again the example
selected by the Leader of the Opposition,
the person without dependants, in order to
make-a comparison. That Budget provided
rates of income tax affecting all ranges of
income, and presumably expressed the
Labour Government's view of a proper
graduation of the tax. This is a reasonable assumption, I think, that one ought to be
able to make. Our 1959-60 Budget-the
one before us-lays down rates of tax
which represent a reduction, compared
with Labour's rates, of more than 60 per
cent. at the bottom of the scale-that is on
the lower incomes-ranging down to 19 per
cent, at the top of the scale,. on the highest
incomes. And this Budget, it should be
remembered, is presented by a Government
which is accused of slugging the poor. I
hope honorable members will follow my
point. In fact, I think I might repeat it.
Mr. Ward.-I neither follow it nor
believe it.
Mr. MENZIES.-I would not expect you
follow it, and the rest of your remark is,*
therefore, irrelevant. If you do not follow
it, how can you either believe it or disbelieve
it? Our 1959-60 Budget, I repeat,
lays down rates of taxation which repre-,
sent a percentage reduction on the rates
provided by the Labour Government when'
it was last in office of 60 per cent. on the
lowest taxable income, tapering down to 19
per cent. on -the highest incomes.
Mr. Ward.-That is a lot of rubbish!
The CHAERMAN.-Order! I will not
warn the honorable member for East
Sydney again. If he interrupts again, I will
name him.
Mr. MENZIIES.-These are simple facts
that are worth pondering on. They promote
a question in one's mind. Does Labour
propose-because if so we ought to knowthat
whenever income tax is reduced the
steepness of an already steep scale should
be violently increased at the cost of middle
incomes and higher incomes? If so, then
let us be clear that savings and investment
will be impaired, and the means of future
employment will therefore be lessened.
We certainly have not been unfair to the
lower income earner. . Let me . put it in
another way, so that he who interjects may
read later on. In 1949-50, when Labouwas
in office, again taking the case of the
person without dependants whom I have
been discussing, the tax payable on a taxable
income of œ 5,000 was fifteen times as much
as that payable on an income, of ; 1,000.
This was under a Labour administration, an
administration which, by its own profession,
did not slug the poor or pander to the rich. 
In the considered judgment of the Labour
Government, fifteen times as much tax ought
to be paid on œ 5,000 as on œ 1,000. In this
Budget, so. much reviled by Labour, the tax
on œ 5,000, for the same person, is not fifteen
times as much as on œ 1,000; it is, in fact.
sixteen times as much-and this Budget is
presented by a Treasurer who panders to tht
well-to-dol
Mr. Pollard.-lt must have been a
mistake. Mr. MENZIES.-Now, Reggie, don't
start giggling, because it creates the wrong
impression. Taking the case of a person
with a dependent wife and two children, the
tax on œ 5,000, under Labour, was 21
times as much as the tax on œ 1,000;
in this Budget it is 29 times as
much. Yet these people with imperfect
memories have the nerve to come along and
attack this Budget as if we were paying
off these mythical rich supporters of ours.
Now I turn to another topic-the loan
market. I am interested in this topic, because
the Leader of the Opposition made a
powerful speech about it before the last
election. He had some strong views on
it. I thought they were rather fanciful,
but still they were strong. One thing that
will strike the informed observer on public
finance is. that but for a dramatic improvement
in the loan market, last year's deficit,
which ended up at about œ 30,000,000.
would have been much greater, and ; t
would have been difficult to provide any
concessions in this Budget. Is the right
honorable gentleman pleased about the fact
that the loan market yielded over
œ 200,000,000 for the first time in modern
history? Of course he is not, because only
last year his great story to the Australian
people was that we were ruining the bond
market, and he propounded some rather
fanciful means of dealing with the situation.
Now, the bond market being so healthy, he
turns back to treasury-bills, those wondetful
things,. those I 0 U's, those promissory
notes, as the proper source of finance for
his projected. vastly increased payments out
of the Treasury.
Let'me remind honorable members, let
me remind everybody, if possible, that the
right honorable gentleman has attacked
every proposal in this Budget for improving
the revenues. I think that is right, is it not? He has, I repeat, attacked every proposal
for improving the revenues. He has
demanded increases of many millions of
pounds in payments out. He has, I think.
though I would not be dogmatic on the
point, advocated bigger and better reductions
of tax. To meet this remarkable combination
of financial proposals, he is for
inflationary finance, naked and unashamed.
To support this ruinous policy, to justify
his recourse to treasury-bills, the direct
creation of funds by the Reserve Bank,
what does he say? He harks back to the
war, about the financing of which he ventures
some very quaint ideas. He said
this-Treasury-bills were the instrument whereby to a
very large extent Australia's war effort was conducted.
Without the treasury-bill system the
nation would have been ruined by excessive interest
rates Honorable members will recall that he drew
a charming comparison between 1 per cent.
on a treasury-bill and 41 per cent. or 5 per
cent. on some other security, and pointed
out bow much money we were losing, how
much money we were giving away. Therefore,
I take it that his doctrine on this
matter, which so profoundly affects this
country, is that you pay less interest on
treasury-bills than on bonds and therefore
you should finance by treasury-bill. This
has a noble simplicity about it. To what
extent he is going to do it, he does not say,
though he is, if I may say so, clearly in a
rather carefree mood on that topic.
. Well, Sir, 1 will make three comments.
The first is in relation to Commonwealth
cash and conversion loans raised from the
public, and many of us can remember standing
on street corners and in other places
advocating these loans-very properly. I
myself even made a speech at the Melbourne
Zoo and for the first time had interjections
made to me by a real, live lion.
Mr. Ward.-Is that the loan that failed?
Mr. MENZIES.-They all succeeded. I
thought that that was your proudest boast.
Mr. Ward.-Not the one that you
supported. Mr. MENZIES.-I supported them all,
and they could not all have failed, because
Commonwealth cash and conversion loans
raised from the public during the war
amounted to œ 1,058,000,000. We know
that because, naturally, they have been 
maturing very heavily since 1956-57. As
have had occasion to say before, this
country is still called upon to pay for the
war, which is something that is occasionally
overlooked. But there it was. The loan
raisings in that period were œ 1,058,000,000.
Treasury-bills were extensively used, as they
always are, in advance of revenue and
market borrowing, but the outstanding
treasury-bills at the end of each financial
year during the war increased, on the
average, by about œ 70,000,000, or a total
for the war period of œ 343,000,000, as compared
with œ 1,058,000,000 from the loan
market. If those figures are compared, honorable
members will see at once that the overwhelming
bulk of the moneys raised by
borrowing during the war were raised from
the market on the ordinary terms of a public
loan issue. Of course, on top of that-as
everybody will agree and nobody will complain
or did complain-taxation reached
astronomical heights. There was all-round
rationing and investment was controlled so
as to assist bond issues, and there was conscription
of labour, of course. That doe.
not seem to support the idea that treasuryhills
represent the be-all and end-all of
public finance. As I had some recollection
in my mind of the views of the predecessor
of the Leader of the Labour Party on that
matter, and as the right honorable gentleman
is very addicted to quoting the late
Mr. Chifley, I might take the opportunity of
stating his views, as he put them to the
House. Mr. Polard.-Which you ridiculed at the
time. Mr. MENZIES.-On the contrary. Do
not start saying things like that.
Mr. Pollard.-You complained about
every increase in taxation during the war.
Mr. MENZIES.-You know perfectly
well that on the use of treasury-bills, as on
taxation, I gave the late Mr. Chifley my
warmest support.
Mr. Ward.-Only after he was dead.
Mr. MENZIES.-Ahl You know, you
can say that, but anybody who reads Hansard
"-and I suppose some melancholy
creature will, some day-will know how
right I am in what I have been saying, and
there are honorable members here who
know that that is the truth. Mr. Ward.-I was here.
Mr. MENZIES.-But I said honorable
members Now, Sir, all I want to say is
that the late Mr. Chifley did not share the
theory of the present Leader of the Opposition,
because, on 17th June, 1948, having
had a question put to him, not from my
side of the House. but from his own, he
said this-
From time to time, loans are raised by the
Loan Council on behalf of the Australian and
State Governments. In August, the Loan Council
will prepare its programme for the coming financial
year. Surplus moneys, which may be available,
are used to redeem treasury-bills which are really
IOU's. When a loan has been over-subscribed
and the money is being retained for use at a later
date, the Commonwealth uses it to redeem
treasury-bills, and the Commonwealth Bank has
not then so many of them outstanding against
the Government. In my opinion, that is the
proper method of financing government. Whether
in war or peace, it is not sound finance never
to redeem treasury-bills.
That was the view of a man so frequently
quoted, but his successor has made a speech,
or has read to this committee a speechwhoever
composed it, I do not knowthe
whole essence of which was: Why do
you bother about loan issues? Why do you
bother about paying these rates of interest
that you ought to pay on public borrowing,
when you can get it all cheaply from the
Commonwealth Bank? I leave that topic.
Opposition members may squirm and
mutter and do whatever they like about
it, but there it is. I have great faith in the
good sense of the people of this country
to pass their judgment.
I turn from that, because time marches
on, to say something about medical health
and medicine. The right honorable gentleman,
I thought, was * a little vague on that
topic, and he well might ' be. I just want
to say something about this Government
that has no sympathy with -people. Our
record is clear. We have proved our goodwill
by action. We are now entitled to
take steps to bring our schemes under
reasonable financial control and prevent
obvious abuses. In the last full financial
year of the Labour Government, what did
it provide? Professing that its heart bleeds
for people in need or in illness, what did
it do? It provided œ 5,885,000 for hospital
benefits. It provided nothing for
medical benefits, nothing for any pensioner
medical service, œ 149,000 for pharmaceutical
benefits, and œ 151,000 in 
lespect of tuberculosis. That adds up, as
you will see, to a substantial sum, but now
let me go on.
In the latest full financial year of this
Government that is supposed to have no
appreciaiion of social needs, we have provided
œ 14,800,000 for hospital bencfits,
œ 7,679,000 for medical benefits,
œ 3,806,000-for the pensioner medical service,
œ 20,972,000 for pharmaceutical benefits,
and œ 7,261,000 for the great tuberculosis
campaign. I shall put it in another
way. In the last three years in office of
these lovers of the distressed, they managed
to find œ 15,000,000-taking it to the
nearest million pounds-under all these
heads. In our latest three years-not our
-last three years, but our latest three years
-we have provided not œ 15,000,000 but
œ 142,000,000. Sir, I do not need to say
any more on that topic. These figures are
more eloquent than any words of mine
Ncould be.
I now turn to the Post Office. The
Leader of the Opposition attacked increased
postal charges as a measure of social injustice
but, Sir, the fact is that with rapidly
rising standards of living and increasing
population, the demands upon the Post
Office are multiplied whilst scientific developments
require more and more capital
expenditure if an admittedly efficient
organization is to hope to match demand.
In the absence of loan moneys available to
the Commonwealth, the Government is confronted
by a choice. I say in the absence
of loan moneys", because there are those
who apparently do not know that we do not
have loan money. The loan raisings, over
these years, have gone to the States. Therefore,
this idle reference that is periodically
made to carrying capital works of the Post
Office on the loan account is completely
Smeaningless because there are no loans.
So, what is the use of talking about a loan
account? But in the absence of loan moneys, the
Government, as I have said, is confronted
by a choice. It can either maintain present
postal and telephonic charges unaltered and
transfer the necessarily growing burden of
Post Office capital works to the general
taxpayer, or it can ask the users of the
Post Office to pay a little more so that the
standard of service can be maintained and
raised. That, put in its simplest form, Is the question that presents itself to any
Government. Believing, as we do, that -the
Post Office must develop, and that its proper
need for capital expenditure will grow, we
have preferred some changes in customers'
rates to a transferance of the general growing
burden to the ordinary taxpayer.
But, Sir, the Government has, particularly
in the past few days, considered with
great sympathy representations that have
been made as to the effect of the proposed
new charges for bulk postage. That is not
one of the major items in the list that was
referred to in the Budget, but it is not inconsiderable.
The present rate applicable
to bulk postage of newspapers and periodicals
is 21d. per 8 oz. on the aggregate
weight of the papers. The proposal had
been to increase this charge to 5d. for each
8 oz. with a minimum of 2d. for each
article. We have been convinced by the
evidence pat before us-and I think we
were all a little in the dark on this matter
until these representations were made very
broadly-that many of the small publications
produced by a large number of community
organizations would be seriously
disadvantaged by the retention othe
minimum charge of 2d. per article. In crder
not to penalize these organizations, we propose
to forgo the proposal to charge a
minimum of 2d. per article. The increase of
5d. for 8 oz. will stand, subject to what I
am about to say; but it has been pointed out
to us also that many newspapers and
periodicals are sold on an annual subscriptiop
which, in fact, contains a postal charge.
In order not to penalize the proprietors of
such newspapers and to permit them to
make any necessary adjustments, the rate of
5d. per 8 oz. will operate not from 1st
October, 1959, as had been intended but
from 1st March, 1960. I might add
that notwithstanding ' these changes, there
will still be a substantial loss to the Post
Office on the carrying of bulk mail. That
is something that perhaps is not very widely
appreciated. Sir, I want to say now just a word or
two about pensions. The Leader of the
Opposition has said that they are eaten
away by creeping inflation. Over the past
ten years, we have sought to meet this
position partly by frequent adjustments in
pension rates and, more importantly, by
measures to stabilize the economy and the 
currency. But what is the right honorable
gentleman's prescription. His prescription
is to adopt inflationary finance, and to use
a depreciated and depreciating currency
to increase welfare payments. The Leader
of the Opposition referred to child endowment.
I do not want to say very much
about this.
Mr. Peters.-I. would not if I were you.
Mr. MENZIES.-It was introduced by
us, you know.'
Mr. Stewart.-In 1951.
Mr. MENZIES.-You have your dates
wrong, dear boy. It was in 1941. But
what is that? A mere decade! The fact
is that child endowment was introduced by
us to redress some of the anomalies of
basic wage provisions. Later on, in 1951,
we applied it. to the first child. Since then,
let it be remembered, the arbitration tribunals
have made large additions to the
basic wage on the principle of the capacity
RY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMON' of-industry to pay. In doing. this, it is
quite clear to anybody who has followed
the proceedings, that the family needs of
the wage-earner have not been ignored.
To add substanially to the burdens of industry
by. raising child endowment, either
by. increased pay-roll tax or from the taxpayers,
. would have an additional effect
upon the capacity of industry to pay.
Sir, I conclude by saying this: If, as the
Leader of the Opposition constantly says,
we in this Government which I have the
honour to lead, look after the few and
Labour . looks after the many, I wonder
how it comes about-that Labour, the party
of the many, has been in office-under a
free democracy-for only seventeen years
out of 58 years of federation. Perhaps
Labour's answer is that the people are
gullible fools. If so, I hope honorable
members opposite will say it, in plain
terms, at the right time to the Australian
people.
WVALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANDERRA 



SPEACN If THE P1RIM MINISTP&amp; THlE RT. HON.
1* Q. MEIRS AT THlE OPINING Sip cas
SONS NIMIL DINGS IRI 18? ULTAM
Sirw I always begtn by saying " irw because like my friend
Nr. YAlly I find that if I dont, I an bound to forget sombody -the
first thing I vant to establish with you Is a feeling of sympathy for
so, because when I have said a few words to you I hiave to proms a but-.
tona It's here. I take it for granted that In an efficient Andu try
of this kind It will work. ( Laughter) When one presses a button at
Canberra the ' Division bells* ring ( Laughter) but an this occasion
somethin lse will happen which will celebrate the opening of the
Nov the first thing that I want to syis of a somewhat
frivolous kind, I fear, but I'vo board about = at foods for half a
day now, The romappears to be heavily ' lined with then. oftenever I
my wife sitting with her growing band of smll aandchildren I
find her scooping mysterious messes out of tins and pttingi them, into
the unsuspecting mouath of the little child, and I oather from all this,
that this really does the trick. In fact Hr, AHdgll, the second Mr.
Edgell I thought, got in a piece of pretty m; art adlvertising about
these ? wbiy foods Nverybody nodded szoept my friend R~ ose down there,
who is a omptitor and who seemed to me to have a slight attack of
the palsr at that moment. ( Laughter)
But what Iwant to say to you is thiss Have a ; ood look at
Out elly, and then have a good look at Tony Luchottiv Also have a
good look at me. Do you know we didn't have azny of these babr foods
when we vore young. ( Laughter) Think of what in joing to happen to
the next generations They will be a race, of giants and that is, of
course, nation-building In literally a big way.
Sir there are two aspects of the economia development of
our ounmtry 2Ai. h I think are sometimes overlooked jand are worth ntioning
on an occasion like this.
suficintThe first of them in that we have not yet, I t hink, tdec
suffiientpride In the romantic stories of achievumnt by mon who
began some th n w who took all the risks, who had the spirit of
enterprise and who h;; auy built up something Oret and useful. Here
we have today a perfect example of It In the case of the 13dgell 19ater-.
i see. Mro Edgellg the Chairman, I thought, sph_ 1 with proper pride,
twith som little modesty about his own contribution to this matter.
Who would have supposed In 1926 that anything like -this aould have
occurred, not only here, but elsewhere in Australia, Nobody would
have dreamed of It, When he spoke to you about * oanning' and the
developmunt of " armingO and the early stages of it he might very
well but for his modesty, have, told you that he with what today
woulA appear to be a very modest sm of MOMAy, ah; r the first world
war,, went over with in effect, his gratuityhialo nesadben
to work in canning lactories in the United Sates -so that he might
learn himself, through his own hands and through hown mind what
ought to be done about it.
Nov this is something that exhibits courage and Imagination
and as a family enterprise It has found every unit in It filled with
the ame spirit. And here today I have the great honour, and my wife
. ms the great tonourp of being here at an opening which marks another
big 3tep in the history of an enterprise which Is a: lready, of course,
a household name in Australia. We want to be proud of these things.
I never did manage to jet very such respect in my mind for sa mawho
ti a process of speculation,, lucky or otherwise, made a vast
fortune but I have an unqualified, admiration for people who have been
oons tructive who have built up great thinjs In Aust~ ralia* Look what
this family ? iitory has done for this delightful city of Bathurst,
for this district, for this State.
One could point to a dozen instances just like that or simlar
developments in other branches of industry, beginning with nothing, 
exeapt a high spirit plenty of intelli,, noe , plenty of imagination
and = alimited determiation and we, who are he beneficiaries to these
thin,, s, ought to acowod~ o that benoit, I think and treat such
developaient with th. respect that they ar* e. ntitlAl to. They are 1z.
deed charateristic of Australian history and nobody can ever under-.
stand the economic growth of this country unless he poea and seeks to
undar3tand the life story and tY* elife endeavours, of human beings,
Now that I think is somethin-, that I hope dives yjou pridel it invariably
2ns me both pride and pleasure, There in plenty of roam in
this country, thank God, for young peopl. e of enterprise, plenty of
doors to be opened and plenty of a ohievecienta to be made,
The other aspect of our economic hisitory which cames within
the span of my own lifetime is thist it isn't so long ajo that it was
the aoepted theory that there was some Inevitable oonfliot between
the interests of the mar. on the land and the Interests of the manufacturer.
' We were told wn I was a boy that either you were in favour
of secondary industry or you wore in favour of the farmer and you
couldn't be In favour of both. This sorry nonsenir' has been long
since disproved, but ne-ver could it be more eloquently disproved than
an an occasion of this kinds because YO 3ou6e the perat aigniticaee
of today is that the mn who grows thno wAother It is aspaaas
or green peas, or carrots, or whatever It may be finds himself able
to dispose of those things quite neartr howe to a processing works
which Is a s od indiustry and which has the enormous advantads of
Zetting its materi a at the source A~ nd fresh and ood, At the sam
time it gives to him u i toady market and a Sro-dng miarket flor what he
produoss. And ridht next to it Is the factory of Containers Ltd. a
factory of a kind which one, would normally,, years ago, have * zpeotei
to ' iM in a city and nowhere else. but here it is cheek tW Jowl
with this one so that we have pure secondary industry, a flood pro..
oessing inftstry and the . wving industry of the country, all brought
together into one, comass. This is the most eloquent proof that the
old Idea of Inevitablie division was a false onoo.
For myself I amvery delighted because I stood, not In this
room of course but in one of tWA others a long time ago -somebody
told so and I A0it isn't true, that Itwas 19 years ago -and there
was no hint of a enmaking factory at that time. There was no hint
of this enossous expansion. I looked at It as something of Zroat
interest something rather odd to find in, what 1 hope I may say with
respect is, a provincial City not one of the great cities of the
metropolis Pnd yet this arovth has gone Oo. Nov tbat, a_; ainq Is a
matter of lense* satisfaction.
But there are other causes for our satisfaction today, I
bean by soae light-hearted remarks, at least I intended them to be
light-hbearted# about baby fooda, Nov my wife,, naturally it'. inevitable
in the course of nature understands more about babies than
I do, and she has had a fair experienae of them,, including as I said
now, am* Randhilre half a 4osen of them and ahe has travelled
a great deal, not only over the length and breadth of this country
but around a jood deal of the world and she made a very good point to
me today as we were walking about. She saids " You knowq when you
consider the hardships, the difficulties that so many hu&amp; dreds of
thousandso or perhaps millions of young mothers put up with In the
past, una&amp; 1e perhaps byreason of where they lived or the ciromstanoes
or transport, to get te fresh food that they woould require, what a
4onderful thin i t has been for mankind that this food processing
industry s houald have s hown such a pheno mnl growth in recent times s
food that an be relied on, food that lasts, food that can be transi..
ported with ease, These are wonderful thiLngs for people to be able to
deta. I have beon through one or two great food processing
establishments in Australia and again I have a great pride in themi,
beeause they have the highest possible standard not only of buisiness
efficienqq but of cleanliness and of quality aA the result is, that
whereas at one stage earlier in my lir fpeople had a certain reluctance,
perhaps about some types of camied food, today it has become the
commonplace of life, And as the pressure of lifo increwa so Will 
the demand for Soods of quality available in a proper condition be
bound to rise* My friend, mr. Kelly, who has had a lot of activity in th~ ese
matters referred to the problem of decentralization. Decntralization
In a first-class Ideal* It is indeed, expressing iLt broadly, essential
but it is extraordinarily difficult. You cannot decentralize
an industry merely by passing an Act of Parliament, merely by pron-.
ouncizig a 0overuuaent poliq7, merely by some personal or public
advocacy, because in the long run the hard economics of industry will
have a profound effect on where that industry Is to go* Consequently,
ono doesn't expect to find a great stoel workcs hiands of miles away
from the source of its iron arnd its coal. One doesn't expect to find
heavy indus tries in dihich the handling ofproduots becomes a matter of
extraordinary cost, establishing themselves miles away from the neigh.
bourhood of the resources that they need. The great thing to aim at
in decentralization is to consider always whether the isture of the
industry is of such a kind that it lends itself to encouragement and
developmnent outside the city areas. Here we have, once more, a
splendid example. And, of course, the economic advantages are not confined to
thiose that may be worked out for you by an Accountant in black and
white. There are other advantages, There is one Lm the case of these
works$ I am perfectly cer" an that is the spirit of local pride and
of local teamwork that can exist between the employer and the employed.
That is not so omon in a big city where business tends to be impersonal
wvhere the man lives in one place and works in another., and It's
a day's work,. It must be extremely diffñ' ttxlt under those ciroaustances
to develop this local pride which does produe offlcienc', which doos
produce a pood understanding# and which does produce productivity of
the highest kind, Buat you got it in a place like this, and In an
enterprise like this. That* I think, is something which is 4enunely
an econamic advantage, though it may never be capable of being
expressed in a 9 sand d tabulation.
I was delighted, today, when I heard Mr. Edgell pay
that tribut, to the people who had worked oni the construction of the
machines being used In there. He wasnit, employing a form of words,
you noticed; he spoke with genuine feelingg ; h was enthusiastic about
It ; he kno that he had a team of people and that they were working as
a LXam And I believe SiLr, that in the long run as we beamse wiser
and wiser on these madters, if not you and at least our successors,
are bound to become wiser and wiser, even Mr. ILchtti's successor If
he ever has one ( Laughter) my turm out to be wiser and wieer,* But as
we all improve, wes and our successors, will, I believe, discover more
and more that the true future of Australia# as a producers as an exporter,
as a competitor in the world is doing to depend more and c'
upon genuine co-operation and enthusiasm and understanding in the fields
of employmient so that everybody who works in an enterprise has same
feeling of pride in what it is producingg a pride In what it is doing
for his towni and for his district and is therefore not an unwilling
servant, but a willing co-operator in the task. Anid that spirit, I do.
teat in this Vlaae, on all aides, and I thought it was admirably expressed,
as I ve said, by Mr. odgell.
Now, ladies and pentlmnen p yo had a bit of a burst of
speechusnaking -wday and I'm going to desit I satisfy myself by say-
Ing that it has given me unmommon pleasure to ocaic up here today to
have a look at what goes on, to meet soaw of my old friends and ooet
new ones, in particular the Mayor, who has been most courteous and gracious
to us today, And havin said that I will now perform the final
act, that is to say and don t hold me blameworthy, if it doesn't omoff
this will be one thing you can't blam me for ( Laughter) I now
declare these buildings open and I press the button. 



REPCRT TO THE NATION
TALK ON GTV9 BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES, QOCO, MVP.
AUGUST, 1959.
I am delighted to have the opportunity of saying something
to you about this last journey of mine around the world. I know
there are people who think that every visit around the world or
anywhere else by a politician is a species of holiday jaunt. I
can assure you that they are not. Mine was in fact the businest
journey I have ever had. I had almost no leisure time but I
found it much more exciting because in the course of my journey
around the world, I had quite close intimate discussions with
about ten heads of government in the various countries in the
world.. And although, of course, it won't be possible to speak
of all of them I do anticipate that before this little programme
is over, I will have the opportunity of saying something to you
about some of them.
JOHN FOSTER DULLES.
I knew John Foster Dulles very well indeed. We were
very closely associated in the negotiations for -the ANZUS treaty;
in the early discussions about the Suez crisis and of course,
later on. In that event, it was my duty, as I felt it, to
disagree with him. Up to that point, we had been in complete
unity. But the great thing about John Foster Dulles not always
understood during his life was that he was a patriot, a man of
the highest ideals and a man of the highest courage. It was
always possible to disagree with him; sometimes one might feel
bound to disagree with him, because we all have our own views.
But it was never possible to doubt that he was a man of great
quality. He was of enormous service to his own country, though
not always recognised for that service. He was of enormous
service to the free world, though a very contentious figure. I
believe that he has made an enduring mark in the modern world,
in circumstances of great difficulty.
QUESTION: And you've met his successor, Mr. Herter?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I did. In the course of my life, as you
know, I have met a great number of people, but I had never met
Mr. Herter before, and therefore I was very interested to do it.
He flew in from Geneva, I think, only that morning, but he was
good enough to give me an interview within half an hour of his
arrival. I found him a man of immense personal attraction. He
has charm-he obviously has a high intellectual background; he
has experience. And I think that, provided he gets the necessary
backing, he is quite likely to prove to be a very, very
distinguished Secretary of State in the United States. I liked
him. I came away happy about his point of view and what he was
doing. I took the liberty as I usually do, with may characteristic
impudence to give him a little moral backing in what he
was doing at Geneva. I think he is a good man and I think we may
be very, very happy about him.
QUESTION: And you had talks with the President.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I did. The President was extraordinarily
good to me about it, because he had invited us to have lunch with
him on the day which turned out to be the day of the funeral of
John Foster Dulles and so he gave me a very long interview that
morning. I had not seen him for two years. I ha~ d seen a bit of
him, of course, over the last three or four years before that.
I was delighted to find that he was in such health and
spirits that I could hardly believe it. He has had illnesses;
we have all been given somewhat gloomy reports about it. I
assure you that he sat there as a man in a very vigorous health
and certainly in a very vigorous condition of mind. He left me 
0 0 
in no doubt as to what his views were on anything that cropped up.
In other words, I found him a revived and vigorous man. And that,
I think, is a very good thing, and a very good thing because the
responsibilities that rest on the President of the United States
are tremendous. He has a duty of leadership, a duty which he owes
not only to the people of the United States, but to a lot of
other people. That I perhaps remember more vividly than
anything else. The point of view in Bonn, the point of view in
Paris was considerably influenced by the view in Washington.
QUESTION: President Eisenhower seems diffident about the idea of
a Summit Confference.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I, of course, have no right to be speaking
for him, you know. But I think that on the whole, his attitude
can be summed up in this way or it could have been:. " I am
always prepared to attend a conference anywhere if it will help
to preserve or to restore the peace. But I am not prepared to have
a Summit Conference unless I see some guarantee of success some
practical thing done by the Soviet Union as an indication that
goodwill is intended and a settlement is desired." That has been
his attitude. As you know, he is a man of very high ideals and
a most earnest seeker after peace. His view in the long run,
particularly in the events of the last two years, did not commend
itself very much to me, because I thought that the problem had
reached a point of urgency.
Anyhow, the President has now taken a very important step.
He has not yet said " I am for a Summit Conference"; nor, let it
be made clear, is he going to see Khrushchev, or is Khrushchev
seeing him, as representatives of the free world on the one side,
and of the Soviet Union on the other. What the President has
made very clear is that he will speak for his own country and
of course, as a very distinguished man, for himself; that he does
not regard himself as negotiating. Well, that I think is a point
of view that is quite understandable. But I have ] Lived long
enough in the world to believe that if the President of the United
States and the President of the Soviet Union not the " President"
but the master of the Soviet Union get together for a few days
of easy informal conversation walking around the garden, or
sitting at the table after dinner, then much could well come of it,
because if the ice is broken then the road to the Summit
Conference of a more elaborate kind will have been opened.
And so I find in the development that has occurred in the
American attitude great room for hope. I have, myselflively
expectations of The President, of course, is a determined
man, but I thought I detected in Washington in -the high quarters
in Washington, a growing feeling that we must get to grips with
these matters by getting into the closest and most; frequent
personal contact with people on the other side i~ f I might use
that expression on the other side of the whole conflict of the
world of ideas, on the other side of the Iron Curtain.
And therefore, not to make too long a story of it, I-was
delighted to find the American President in such good form, so
lively, so eager; and I am sure that we will all have the benefit
of it.
QUESTION: Finally, could you sum up your own attitude towards the
Summit Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, perhaps what I have just been saying about
the position of the American President reflects some light on
my own view. I believe I have always believed that if you are
going to discuss some complex concrete matter, say an international
trade discussion, or something of that kind, there must
be an enormous amount of preliminary work detail. work. Things
have to be put down on paper. Documents have to be abstracted
and put together. All sorts of work must be done. And, until 
0 
a couple of years ago, I thought that this probably was the rule
that applied to a Summit meeting. I confess I have changed my
mind, because in the last two years, we have seen such a
tremendous acceleration of the Soviet propaganda about a peace
offensive as if only the Communists wanted peace, and we didn't.
A terrible thought that the Communists should be able to
represent themselves, and themselves alone, as wanting peace,
when everybody knows that all the wars and rumours of war since
the great war, have been as a result of their actions.
And therefore, I believe, it is time,,-more than time to
have a democratic peace offensive. We are not to be on the
defensive. We are to assume the initiative. And the right way to
assume the initiative is to say, " Very well, we will talk with
you anywhere and at any time." Let's have Summit meetings. Don't
let's have them necessarily surrounded by brass bands and
publicity or even television. Let's have private conversations
designed to arrive at thos preliminary, personal understandings
which may lead to concrete results in a series of discussions
thereafter. Now, that exhibits why I believe in this business,
I do not think we have anything to lose how could we? but I
think we have everything to gain, by making it quiLte clear that
we are for peace and that we are prepared to talk anywhere and at
any time in order to obtain it.
DISCUSSIONS WITH MR. MACMILLAN
QUESTION: You discussed many questions with Mr. Macmillan.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. We had, of course, problems of the ordinary
kind between the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries,
including Australia. Then, of course, we had, in an overwhelming
degree, the problems associated with a Summit Conference, of
which Mr. Macmillan himself and his ministers were powerful
advocates. We had no formal conference. It was one of those
occasions when you could have informal discussions to a probably
far greater degree than if a number of people were there; and so
I saw a great deal of Mr. Macmillan, who is, of course, a very
old friend of mine and who has the happiest recollections of his
visit to Australia. With him, I had talks about our mutual
relations to the European Common Market, a highly important but
somewhat technical matter. We had discussions about other matters
of common concern. But above all things, we were pursuing our
discussions about the world position and particularly the
European position, because it was in relation to Berlin that the
Geneva conference was occurring.
We had a good deal to say about that, of course, not only
on Be-rlin but on the whole question of world settlemaent-and on
this, Mr. Macmillan has shown, as he showed when he went to Moscow
without much warning, without much preliminary preparation, that
he is all for arriving at peace by conference. We discussed that
a great deal, and in point of fact, I went, o at his invitation to
a Cabinet meeting at No. 10, and there we discussed the same
matter. I was given the courtesy of taking a hand in the talks;
and therefore, when I subsequently went to Europe, I was rather
well informed as to what the state of mind in London, at any rate,
of the Government, was. All these things proved to me to be
extraordinarily interesting. I felt, and I know from subsequent
correspondence with Mr. Macmillan, that he felt that as two old
friends and two people of responsibility his, of course, much
greater than mine we had secured mutual advantage, and, I think,
some comfort, from being able to talk to each other without the
intervention of other people or other circumstances.
QUESTION: We've been inside No. 10 with you. This wasn't your
first visit of course. 
PRIME MINISTER: Not my first visit by any means. Oddly enough,-
though I am as you can see, quite a boy I attended a meeting of
Prime Minislers for the first time in 1935. I was not Prime
Minister then, but I deputised for the late Mr. Lyons. Since then,
I have sat in that historic room with, I think, every succeeding
Prime Minister of Great Britain. Of course, the outstanding one
is this marvellous man ( Sir Winston Churchill). It is not saying
anything derogatory about anybody else to say that he IS
No. 10 Downing Street. He is the greatest memory that anybody
could have. I sat there with him early in the war and, of course,
later on after the war when he became Prime Minister once more.
I was delighted this time -I may say, I never go to London without
going down to see him, either at Chartwell or wherever he may be,
and we have talks as old friends. And this time you may be
interested to know that I found him quite remarkable. He is
like you and me; he is ten years older than he was ten years ago.
That is something that happens to all of us; and therefore he was
not the old robustious leader that we became accustomed to. But
his mind is clear. I went to a dinner at the Australian Club
seven hundred men at it in London, and he sat between myself on
the right and the American Ambassador on his left. And all I can
tell you is that he was a great deal livelier than I was. He was
in superb form. He discussed pseudo-political matters with me
in a rather bright and witty fashion; and on the other side, I
could hear him conducting a most learned discussion on racehorses
with Ambassador Whitney. That is something that appeals to us
all versatility and vigor, prolonged so magnificently.. shall1
never forget him.
BERLIN. We have all been saying of recent days that we hope that
the balloon won't go up over Berlin. Personally, I don't think
it will. Berlin's significance, of course, to us of what I will
call the western world, is tremendous. If Berlin passed into the
hands of East Germany, which is today a Soviet satellite country,
then I think that the blow to the pride of Germany would be
enormous; the blow to the whole western alliance in Europe would
be tremendous. I believe that it would give rise to an attitude of
arrogance and aggression from which aything could come. Therefore,
Berlin has been at the centre of the discussions at Geneva, As
you know, Berlin has become not only a city, but a symbol of a
conflict which everybody wants to see resolved, but resolved on
terms of justice to European nations.
Now, of course I had discussions about these things in
Bonn with Chancellor Aaenauer. He is a very remarkable man,
He is about 83, 84+; so full of vigor that he is already talking
about the next election. I think that is magnificent. I knew
him pretty well. In 1956, I had visited Germany specially. I had
some days with him and we became very friendly. He has a nice
sense of humour, and like me, he likes having his own way, if he
can, so we got on pretty well.
He has, of course, done a remarkable job. I know that
people argue now and think that he is becoming old and difficult
and all that kind of thing. The great recovery of Western
Germany since the war is to be credited to Adenauer, more than
to any other single human being. He has been a magnificent
leader, full of courage and, I think, full of understanding of the
European problem. He has got to very good terms with President
De Gaulle. He himself feels that relations between the Germans
and the French have been vastly improved.
He was extraordinarily good to me. He had a little
trouble on his hands, because, you remember, he was going to
become President and then decided to remain Chancellor. And under
those circumstances, I thought I might be lucky to get an hour
with him; but he gave me about five or six and nothing could have
been more interesting than our discussions. He has reservations 
about a Summit meeting, largely of the same kind as thoso enter-.
tamned by President Eisenhower. He feels, and I am sure he is
right, that it would not be good to see Europe indefinitely
divided in an economic sense between the Common Market to which
Germany belongs, and to the Little Free Trade Area led by the
United Kingdom and he looked forward to some reconciliation
between these two bodies. But one thing I did notice about him,
and it is worth a great deal of thought on the part of many
people: He is firmly convinced, or he was when I saw him that
the British people, and presumably the British Government, is
inveterately and bitterly hostile to Germany and to himself in
particular. He followed this line so much that first of all I tried
to discover why he should have any distrust of Great Britain;
why he should have this feeling that was so obvious. After an
hour, it appeared that he felt that some appeasement might be in
the air; that something might be done which would prejudice the
re-unification of Germany. I tried to get at that. We elicited
various things, not one of which I thought was crucial. But it
turns out he believes that the British have this hostility which
I have described. Well, I was so struck by this competely
confirmed attitude of mind that I chided him a little and said,
" You know, you are quite wrong. I think you must have been
confining your reading to one or two newspapers of a critical
kind." I rather think he had, but he certainly had this
impression. I took the liberty of saying, " Look, firstly it is
not in the tradition of the British people to maintain hatreds
indefinitely. They never have and they never will. Secondly,
I know something about opinion; certainly about top level opinion
in Great Britain, and I tell you that there is warm admiration
for what West Germany has done since the war the enormous
recovery and a very great admiration for what you, Mr.
Chancellor, have done by providing leadership in that process of
events.*" Well, I hope our discussions did some good. One never
can tell. I certainly felt that I, myself, had been a good deal
illuminated in my mind by discovering what was going on in all
this process of discussion from the German point of view, and so
I left very well informed, I think, on that matter, and I hope
I was able subsequently to convey to Mr. Macmillan some of my
impressions in a helpful way.
GENERAL DE GAULLE.
Well, that last picture you were looking at sho~ wed you the
President himself myself on one side and the Prime Minister of
France on the other, walking out from the Elysee, the President's
palace, into the back garden.
Of course I was tremendously interested, because I had
known him during the war in 1941 when he was not perhaps the
easiest man in the world to negotiate with. He had what we might
describe as a rather dour characteristic about him immensely
tall, rather dour; magnificently determined on the ultimate
liberation of his country; a man who found no reason to suppose
that you ought to have any jesting or lightness when you are in
the middle of a great struggle. In that respect, of course, he
was so unlike the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, who
always had time for a jest and struck his blows no less heavily
because of the jest.
So I was tremendously interested to see how De Gaulle
had gone in the intervening years years, do not forget, in which
he was grievously frustrated. Here he was, the whole spirit of
the delivery of France, of the Croix de Lorraine; and after
France had been liberated, after government was restored, he had
to live in his place in the country, seeing a new government
every six months or every nine months not a very happy state of 
affairs for him. But now he is back. He is the all-powerful;
he is the President, with width and depth of authority that no
previous President of France has ever had. He ha~ s not just sat
down and glorified himself with all this power., He has behaved
with most tremendous energy. Just let me give you one example.
Two years ago in Lond, having discussions about the
European Common Market everybody said with great truth, that
Germany was the dominating factor and that France, so to speak,
was the weak member, because France's economy was in a battered
condition galloping inflation going one, all sorts of currency
problems, the usual inability to get in the taxes, a lack of
adequate industrial development. And then came De Gaulle. With
his wide prestige and with the most superbly able advice, the
Programmxe has been put into operation in France which has had the
result of making France one of the king pins if you can have
more than one king pin in the European Common Market. In Bonn,
Chancellor Adenauer spoke to me all the time about the resurgence
of France. I heard it in Lond. And for this great credit must
be given to the prestige, the patriotism and the authority of this
very remarkable Frenchman,
THE NETHERLANDS.
QUESTION: There has been speculation that the new government of
the Netherlands might mean a change in policy on West Now Guinea
PRIME MINISTER: There has undoubtedly been a great deal of
speculation, because we did not know what would happen to the
point of view of the Dutch Government after their elections.
Prime Minister Drees, the previous Prime Minister, was a great
believer in what I will call the Dutch policy on West New Guinea.
His party, the Labor Party, was thought not to be quite so keen
on it as he was and there was some speculation as to what would
occur when he went out because he made it clear that hie would
not be resuming. And therefore, I was tremendously interested
to see the new Prime Minister, Mr. De Quay, who used to be a
Professor of Psychology and who was then Queen's Commissioner in
Brabant; and I was interested to find out from him and his
colleagues whether there might be some change in their approach.
The answer was quite clear and unhesitating: " No change. Our
policy on this matter will be precisely the same as the policy of
our predecessors." Later on, when I left The Hague and flew to Zurich, I
saw Mr. Luns, Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, and he
confirmed the proposition that the policy was a continuing policy
and that it need not be thought to be modified in any way. That
means, of course, so far as Australia is concerned, we continue
with our attitude and we continue with the little measures of
administrative contact with the Dutch that we have been
developing quite publicly over the last few years.
INDIA AND NEHRU.
I was very interested, of course, to see Mr. Nehru. We
are very old friends. We are believe it or not the two senior
Prime Ministers in the entire British Commonwealth, and we have
sat almost side by side at conferences at No. 10 Downing Street
for ten years, and therefore I am always pleased to see him and
always pleased to get from him his point of view. His worries
were enormous of course. There was this wretched business in
Kerala about which he had subsequently taken some pretty strong
action. And there had been the alleged rebellions and the most
positively brutal massacres in Tibet, with a lot of reffugees.
That was a great problem.
Very interesting if " interesting" is not too foolish
a word to think about this problem of refugees. Do you know 
7.
that we forget that after partition of the subcontinent of India,
there were 18 million refugees who moved from onE) country to the
other. Eighteen million tremendous poverty, tremendous squalor
in many places there were marks of it all over India and
Pakistan. Similarly, up in the north when the Tibet outbreak
occurred9 there were many Tibetans who came acrossi and there
again is one aspect that one might not realise. He pointed out
to me that to settle refugees who were accustomed to living in
a high, cold country like Tibet was very difficult. You could not
put them down into a hot country and expect them to endure. And
therefore, settlement has to be in the more mountainous areas of
India; and it is upon the mountainous areas, along what is called
the McMahon line, that constant discussion has occurred between
the Chinese Communists and Mr. Nehru's government. So this is
not all fun and games, not all milk and honey. There are great
points of difference7and Mr. Nehru was, as always, able to discuss
them with great realism and with great clarity. He was able to
tell me some very interesting things about development in
Communist China and I certainly came away with the impression that
it would be very foolish and this is an impression I had had a
long time for anyone to imagine that Mr. Nehru is an apologist
for the Chinese administration. He merely takes what he believes
to be a realistic view of the matter.
One other thing I will mention, and no more. In both
India and Pakistan, there was enormous pleasure at the prospect
of settling the Indus Waters problem. I think it will be settled.
We are all providing some money towards settling it and if it is
settled then, I believe one of the greatest causes of difference
between India and Pakistan will have disappeared and if that
happens, we will all be delighted.
SINGAPORE. I was looking forward to seeing Dr. Lee ( leader of the new
Singapore Government) and to seeing his ministers, I regard
elections in a country like Singapore as a great triumph for
modern British policy. All these places that were once simple
complete colonies are moving towards their independence, and when,
as in the case of Singapore, a popular election occurs and a
ministry is produced as a result, it deserves not our hostility
or our fear, but our sympathy and understanding. It is the choice
of its country. I had, of course heard all sorts of extravagant
rumours about the Lee administration being a sort. of Communist or
fellow-traveller administration. I don't believe it. I entirely
accept Dr. Lee's repeated statements that he is not either a
Communist or a Communist symapathiser but that on. the contrary he
regards it as a very important duty lo keep his country out of
the Communist orbit. He is a Socialist... yes... but there are many
Socialists in the British countries in the world. We have them
in our own country. I am not a Socialist. I would not, perhaps
have voted for him. I do not know. But he is there and I formed
a very warm opinion of him.
You must not think of people like that as if they were
backward in some fashion. Dear me, Dr. Lee himself is a double
first at Cambridge. He is a man of scholarship. He has a young
and enthusiastic team. Thirty-seven-and-a-half is the average
age of' the Singapore Government.
A big population on a small island a 1lI cn+ 4
increasing by 6o, 000 a year, wifh aat. tLonal 25 000 a year
additional Peoplp cooi-, iiig employment and all thai on an island
in whlich agricultural development is out of the question and the
future depends on industrial development.
It is not the kind of problem that any one of us would be
in a hurry to undertake. The Singapore Government, quite plainly,
has considerable hope, if not expectation do not think
expectation at the moment but considerable hope of joining up 
0 
with the Federation of Malaya, because they feel that under those
circumistances, movement of population and perhaps the use of
resources might be considerably increased. Anyhow, that is their
problem; but I just say for myself and for my own people, that
we want then to succeed; we want them to remain a community within
the British Commonwealth; and therefore they are entitled to our
sympathetic understanding not our patronage; they won't like
that, but to our sympathetic understanding-in everything they do.
QUESTION: To suna up, can you say what are the world danger spots
and what are the hopes for peace?
PRIME MINISTER: I suppose I could answer that question in a
rather abrupt way perhaps, because first of all, Berlin: Will
there be a settlement about Berlin? Will it become necessary to
have either violence or the threat of violence in Berlin? I am
hoping not, but so far very little progress has been made. There
is Berlin. That means Germany and the whole future of Europe.
There is the Middle East. It is out of the news a little
at the tine but we must never forget that the seeds of trouble
are always Zhere great conflicts in the Middle East, sometimes
concealed; and where there are conflicts, the Comunists usually
have some faculty for securing some kind of profit.
Next there is the trouble spot at the moment in Laos,
Now Laos Cambodia and South Vietnam, Thailand all extremely
vulnerable. If the Vietminh of the north of the old French Indo-
China became aggressive, and in particular, if they have the backing
of Commiunist China I do not want to exaggerate the dangers there,
but they are genuinely there and we will all hope that something
will be done through the United Nations or in co-operation with it
to restrain the fervour of some of the actions, the revolutionary
actions, now occurring in Laos.
And then, of course, for months now disappeared out of
sight, there is the problem of Formosa, the Mats-as, Quemaoy, the
off-shor islands of China all those problems which seem to blow
up about once a year with threats, and then subside a little.
But the fact that they subside does not mean that they have
disappeared. It was a very great privilege for Lie, and a great
opportunity for me, in the presence of so many points of difficulty,
to be able to have so many interesting and fruitful discussions
of which I have been able to give you only a hint, wi-th so many
of the world's leading and most responsible men.
I think I ought to say that I am very greateful to you
for listening to me, as presumably you have as patiently as you
have, if in fact you have been patient. Bu thank you very much.
With the compliments of-
HUGH DASH
PRESS SECAETARY TO THE PRIME MINISTER,
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRI4 MINISTER, TEE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES H
AT ST. MARK'S LIBRARY, CANBERRA, ON. 27TH AUGUST, 1959C.
My Lord Bishop and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I like that little touch of my friend Sutcliffe's about
another Prime Minister. ( Laughter.) There is a certain delightful
ambiguity about it; but if he is, In fact, intending to give me a
guarantee, as a very important civil servant, that I will still be
in office next year, I would be delighted to have it. But each
time I open the paper and I read about the latest uproar that has
been created by something my Government has done, I begin to have
my doubts. ( Laughter.)
Sir, I thought that instead of talking about some
particular current problems of international affairs, it might be
a good idea to say a little about some perhaps less obviou. s aspects
of what goes on in the world. We are very much inclined, aron't we,
to classify the world; to talk about the democracies in a sorlb-of
comprehensive expression without, perhaps, working out very closely'
what we mean by such an expression.
Back in 1919, somebody coined a great phrase in fact,
it was before that about making the -ntrld safe for democracyone
of those great rotund phrases that atbr-wct the mind superficially.
But I think we ought to do a littlt! thinking about what
it means and what we mean by " democracy", and In the course of my
little talk to you, I will suggest that We havo not beenwvery cle;' r
in our minds about this matter, and that a good deal 01 wiL
meaning stuff goes on in the world under the name of demcracy
whi-ch is not very usofil, and my even be rather dangerous.
Since that phrase was coined? what has heppened to the
world? There was a comfortable feeling in those days that the
world was steadily advancing to what we understand by democracy
parliamentary democracy. People pointed to a species of parliament
in Russia; they pointed to the Reichstag in Berlin; they pointedsometimes
a little hesitatingly at the Chamber of Deputies in
Paris. And there was a general feeling that the whole thing was
going on and that in due course everybody would be in line with us
and adopting our kind of parliamentary self-government.
Well, the fact is that since this phrase was stated,
hundreds of millions of people in the world have passed even out of
the expectation of any form of democracy, or the immediate
expectation of any form of democracy, because the rule of
dictators a rule that has considerable attraction for many
millions of people had extended itself since then over hundreds
and hundreds of millions of people. And I think that under those
circumstances we ought to give a little thought to the problem of
the spread of democracy. A greater area and a greater population
are under dictatorship today than anybody dreamt of 30 or 40 years
ago, Of course, there are reasons for that. They are reasons that
I have had occasion to think about in the past.
Parliamentary democracy began with us not with Australia
but with the people of our race, the people of Great Britain. it
was not exotic; it was a slow, steady growth from the soil
local government, larger areas of government, then a parliament
on an entirely undemocratic basis, then a series of reform acts which
made the parliament established on a democratic basis. All these
things occurred not hastily overnight but slowly over a course of
centuries, and in the present century the extens'ion of the
privilege of democracy the privilege of the vote to women; . so
that you have a complete suffrage. 
00 0 
I think, myself and I have always thought so in nmy own
life, that in Great Britain they do understand the working of this
machine this system perhaps better than any other people in the
world. And they ought to, because over the course of centuries,
and perhaps unconsciously in the early stages, tihey invented it,
and it grew up and they grew up to be part of it. We in Australia
have inherited it. If am rather disposed to think that in terms of
true democracy, we have no superior in the world in terms of
democracy. I rather think we are probably the most democratic
country in the world.
In the case of Germany, in the case of Russia, people
had a little more disposition to take orders; a little more
disposition to like governments with a touch of authority; and
the result was that the parliamentary institutions which were adoptEL.
in those countries did not have their roots in the ground, and they
blew away in the first high wind. That is not so with us. We
-were born and bred in a particular outlook on government and on the
rights of the people and on the function of parliament and on the
function of an executive; whereas in countries such as thoseI
have mentioned with a what I might describe crudely as a sort of an
instinct for being ordered around, parliamentary government was
overthrown and overthrown quite readily. It did not have its
roots in the soil as in our case. Now, in the case of some of
these countries these things may well change as time goes on.
But the point that I am making to you is that when we speak about
our democracy our systen of parliamentary self-government we
are talking about something that we ought to understand; something
that is deep in the line of tradition in our country, and that
therefore it won't be easily overthrown.
A man who arrived in Australia and by reason of some
temporary trouble or some disorder, set himself up to be the master
of this country to be the dictator of this country would, in
fact, be greeted with howls of derision; not with black rage but
with contemptuous laughter, because we don't look at things in
that way, and we never will. But that rule does not apply everywher-
Therefore, we had better look at our own democracy and ask
ourselves one or two questions. The first of them is: Are we
making, as far as we can, democracy, as we understand it, a good
thing? Are we making democracy safe for the world, to reverse the
old tag? Well, I think there are many admirable things about our
democracy. As I say we are, I think, at least as highly advanced
in that field as anybody else in the world. But we still have some
very quaint manifestations of things which are the enmy of true
self-government. We have a tremendous amount of complete
selfishness in our approach to public affairs. I know from long
experience that nobody who~ was affected by any government action
ever came along and said " I'm against this because I'm going to be
worse off" perish the thought! He always explains to you that
his attitude is one of complete disinterest; he is thinking only
of the good of the country. Well, whether it is cynicism on my
part or not, I think that in the majority of cases, the first
reaction in the minds of many people is a selfish reaction. And
until we get to a state of affairs in which a man may genuinely
ignore the small damage to himself,' because he sees the large
advantage to the country, to the nation; until we have reached
that pointi we won't be able to look the world in the ~ re and say
that our system of government is the very one for them, and that
they are complete fools not to adopt it.
The theory, I suppose, of parliamentary democracy is
that you are elected to parliament by a sufficient number of
generously minded, or misguided, electors. You are elected for
an almost intolerably short term of three years. What are you
elected for? Just to reflect particular interests? To bow in
the wind of current opinion? To yield to pressure groups, more and
more organised every year? Is that you function? Because, quite 
frankly, if that is the function of a member of parliament, any
third-rater will do, because you don't need to be extraordinarily
able or have high character or strength of mind to bow as some
passing event may invite you to bow.
A member of parliament has a very great duty to his
people, and one of those duties, of course as has been said by
better rmen than me before today is to bring to the service of
the country their own judgment and industry and character, not
distorted by anybody else's opinion at all, with the sure knowledge,
of course, that if what they do, if what they say they stand for,
if what their judgment requires them to decide at some particular
point does not commend themselves to the electors they will be out.
From ihe point of view of democracy it is much better for a man
to be out by exercising his own mind and character than to be in
by abandoning then. Pressure groups all this tremendous
organisation that goes on to have special interests put forward,
no doubt it is inevitable, but we must beware of letting it set
itself up as a substitute for the true duties of parliament and
the people who sit there.
Then of course, we have other disabilities. We might ap
well be frank about them. We have a great deal of intolerance,
and I don't suppose that any country will ever, in the true sense,
become the perfect democracy until it has achieved an attitude of
perfect tolerance, because if democracy means anything it :. eans
that the other man's significance in the cormmunity must always be
recognised; the other man's views in the commnunity must a'lways be
recognised. And intolerance of minorities, or intolerrtnee of
people who appear to us or to some of us to be a little odd in
views, is not democratic; it is something that we must always
watch. And then, of course and I think it more every year
our democracy is always being challenged by sheer sensationalism,
You have only to open your newspaper any day and you find some
sensational treatment of something not calculated to improve the
judgment of the reader, but to distort it; to make him feel that
that particular thing on which his c-,-. otions are being wound up,
is really the overwhelmingly significant thing of the day. Let us
see all these things in proportion.
Well, those are what you might call a few of the
orthodox moral homilies, but they are not irrelevant to the
consideration of democracy, because I say that in spite of
whatever defects there may be, I am proud to say that I * believe
Australia is as near to the ideal of parliamentary democracy as
any country in the world.
Now Sir, having said that, let mae just refer to the same
problem in the international sense. There is a common error
made in my opinion, it has been made in most countries and by
many people since the last war and that cormm-on error is the erro.,
of assuming that a system of goverment that is good for us is
good for other people, automatically. To take one example,
Australia has trust responsibilities to the north, in what I will
call, compendiously, New Guinea5 a large native population
inevitably, since we have not been there for very Long, a
primitive community, with its own infinite variety of languages
I am told there are literally hundreds of languages, not dialects,
but hundreds of languages. And with a native population an
indigenous population which varies from those who achieved
education as we understand that term, to those in the remote parts
of the island who are still living in a state of primitive savagery,
so that anybody from the outside who goes in, goes in at his own
risk. 
There you have the most complex structure a complex
of languages, a complex of cultures, ranging from European culture
to the most primitive up in the mountain fastnesses. And yet, at
any meeting of the Trusteeship Council there will be heard some
well-meaning person who wants to establ~ ish a time-table and say
that within 1x" 1 years self-government parliamentary selfgovernment
is to be established in the territory. And that has
agreat appeal to people. They sayt They are God's creatures;
they are human beings. Why shouldn ttthey have the right to rule
themselves?" And yet, if we walked out tomorrow, leaving them
with what we are pleased to call parliamentary self-government, the
result would be disaster in that area, and everybody knows it.
But, of course, the second fallacy in the minds of these
rather occasional and earnest people who want to put everything
into a time-table, as if all countries were the same, is that
stohmaet wohfa tt heims rgeoaold lyf orb eulsi evmeu stt habet aglolo d cofourn trsioemse boardey etlhse e. s amelIis
a very comfortable assumption that because parliamentary selfgovernment
is good for us, and we understand and we know how to
make it work, and occasionally we get a bit of value out of it
and occasionally we get a bit of fun out of it because of all
this which suits our temperament completely, a lot of people are
willing to say that it must be good for Indonesia, or it must be
good for New Guinea, or it is a splendid system for some other
country. How do we know that it is? Why do we assume that a syst; Aof
government which is not only a matter of our choice in our own
time but is a matter of inheritance; a matter that hazs been bred
into us a matter about which we have instincts. why should we
assume ihat a system of that kind can be imposed or conferred in
one blow on countries that have no such tradition, no such
experience, no such instincts? It is quite unreal, and I think
that we ought to beware of it.
You won't fail to notice that thore are two or three cases
in very recent history in which what we are pleased to call
the boon of parliamentary self-government has been conferred on
some large number of people to whom almost the first thing that has
happened has been the attempt to run a parliament fails; the
parliament is dissolved; then somebody comes along and says, " I
will take executive charge of the government and I will, of course,
take suitable steps to have a constitution drafted and then I
might have a constituent assembly to get it dealt with." And so
the first fruit of the creation ofT self-governmient is a species of
dictatorship; and we have seen it. Make no mistake, it exists in
two or three countries in essential particulars. It is only a
phase, I know, and it will be succeeded by some broader system of
administration; but whether that will be what we call the ordinary
parliamentary system as we understand it, I don't knou. I think
what we have to face up to is that we have a pretty full-time job
making our own system of parliamentary self-government serve the
purposes of the comm~ unity to the highest possible extent without
worrying too much about encumbering our neighbours with advice
or instructions as to what kind of system of government they are
to have. Because the truth is though you won't be here to
confute me and I certainly wontt be here to be confuted that
in a hundred years' time there will probably be as many clearly
different systems of government in the world as there are nations
in the world; each will thrash its own out.
Therefore, we must be careful about making this assumptionnot
uncommon, I regret to say, in the western world that the
system that is good for us must be good for other people, and
therefore all you have to do when the time comes, or not
infrequently before the time comes, is to say, " Here we are, now
set up a parliament; give everybody the vote, and all things will
be added to." Well, it is just not true, vie may be very proud of
our system and indeed we are but we are not to be assuming
that it is going to be equally good for everybody else. 
In the nineteenth century they understood a few of these
things very well. I know it is the fasion nowadays to say that
they were a lot of rather stuffy people, but it was a very great
Foreign Minister of England who, in the nineteenth century, laid
it down as axiomatic that one of the first things about foreign
policy was not to interfere with the internal affairs of other
countries; concern yourself with your relations with them, to
help thei, as indeed we are very proud to help in many places; to
give then on their request, such advice or experience as we may
have; but never to be butting in in our homely phrase on how
they conduct their internal affairs. And that is a pretty good
rule. Occasionally, exceptions may have to be made to it.
Occasionally, as in the recent events in Laos, you may have to watch
very carefully the rest of the world may have to watch very
carefully to see that what begins by looking like an internal
matter, does not achieve an international quality and invoke
international action. But that, of course, truly considardl im,
not an exception but a mere illustration of the rfl.
May I, Sir, before I finish, Just make one little gloss on
what I have been saying to you. People, public pooplc particularly,
and men particularly, like to make speeches ftrdinner. It is
a very suitable occasion o'n whieh toc maiit a speech, because everybody
is well fed and in a cheerful mood and the lightest witticism
evokes roars of laughter. And in that delightful atmosphere,
people are in the habit of getting rid of all the problems of the
world with a sweep of the hand, making powerful speeches about
Anglo-American relations, or something of that kind. It . j,, oes
down very well; everybody is for it, in the broad; and then
everybody goes home and says " That was a wonderful night; a most
powerful speech." And yet, you know with great respect to my
fellow after-dinner speakers a good deal of it is wasted; a
good deal of it was rather uselessly said, and for this reason
I'll take the same illustration: The great democracy of Great
Britain and the great democracy of the United States. People will
speak about these two democraces as if they were the same kind of
thing. They are not; as if they had the same system of government.
They have not; as if the approach of their leaders to the formulation
of policy was conducted in exactly the same way on both sides
of the Atlantic. It is not. The most important thing in the world
to discover, if you are going to avoid bickering, which occasionally*
happens between Britain and the United States, is to understand the
large differences of government that exist not just ignore the
differences and concentrate on the fact Lhe undoubted fact that
there is a parliament whatever you call it, whether it is called
Congress or Parliament and that everybody has a vote, as if
those two things, in this simple manner that I was describing to
you earlier, represented the whole definition of democracy, and
therefore we have the same system.
I have had a great deal to do with the United States
administration in my time, and the leading men there, and a great
deal of occasion for studying their system of government; and I
am constantly struck by the remarkable differences between their
system and ours. And if one establishes those differences, then
which one is it that we are wishing on to our neighbour. You see,
we come up against an awkward problem on the threshold.
In our country, in Great Britain, ministers work out their
policy in the Cabinet room and finally a policy emerges; it is
announced. And that is the policy of the government. The
government may be thrown out by a parliament that does not like it,
but until it is, it is the policy of the govrnment.,,-_ and-anybody
around the world can read it and say,, " well2 there you are, the
policy of the British GoVprnrnont, chte Australian Government is
so-and-so." The whr'lo thrashing out of this thing occurs behind
closed doors, and after a lot of close study very frequently of a
lot of documents and consideration of conflicting arguments. 
9' 0
0
0
I 
But in the United States of America, they are accustomed
to public evolving of policy. So that it gets thrashed out by
public discussions in committees, by somebody making a statement
to the press and somebody else disagreeing with it. All this is in
the process of formation.
I remember having one of many very fascinating talks with
the late John Foster Dulles who was a man of great character
indeed, but was regarded here for a long time, and in Great
Britain, as a man who had no policy except one that changed from
day to day. Well, the reason for that was that he gave me this
by way of illustration: He came back from a very important
conference in Europe. He prepared a report to the President on his
way back. He despatcheC, i lo the White House when aL-.' rved at
his house that evening, and foñ iC. rr t-1 4c -able a sir-.': ons to
attend a meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee nztex rmernin'-Pt
o'clock and he felt that he had to go. I wouldn't have, I fepr
Laughter. But, so deep-rooted in the American mind is this
question of congressional committees that here he was, the most
pressed, the busjo:-t man, with all his responsibilities, with
no opportunity of talk with the President at all, going before
a committee with all the glare of lights and television, o doubtand
the press, and was cross-examined from 10 o'clock ir. the
morning until 6 o'clock in the afternoon on how his mind To
on this thing. And the result is that he is put in a pos. ion, y
see, of threshing out, coram publico, what the policy miag-i t-rn
out to be, saying, " Well, of course, on the one hard I th-'
that is a consideration" and then, of course, scmebody n'-y twrite
down the bit that suits him and off it goes ard tie ex';
fellow writes down what he thinks.
( TAPE CHANGED AT THIS STAGE)
A minister in our country Iknows every noise hr. t.
parliament makes. He is familiar with the procedures of the
parliament. He is in constant contact with the members of
parliament and in particular with members of his own party that
support him. And the result is that he is very seldom taken by
surprise by something that emerges. 3ut in the United Sta.'; es thn.
is not the position. Ministers don't sit in conc-e.. s; of
them, in fact, have never been there I mean el; er ) cen r: iember3
of the Congress. The result is they have to deal wit-t.'-Lr
legislation and all that kind of thing by what we c. " s
remote control. That suits the United States of America. It has
one great advantage, of course, from the point of view o'
President: he may pick the best man at that subject
it may be in the country; put his hand on him and say, '. o1
come along and administer Commerce or administer Agriculture or
administer Defence" or whatever it may be. And that, no doubt, i
an advantage. But against that we have always seen tho
disadvantage of having an executive which is detached f. r" n
parliament, detached from the legislature; and to th't extent
not susceptible to the daily collection of impressions ar1, te ci.:
making and answering of criticisms.
All right, I like our system; the United St.-. es : ikes
its system. But you have only to look at those two illustrations
to see that people who assume that we both have the same system
of government are doing a disservice to our good relations, because
when you are discussing or thinking about your relations with
your friends, it is a good thing to have a clear understanding of
what differences there are in your methods, so that you may not be
led into a dispute about something which turns out to be based on
pure misapprehension of the machinery or procedures adopted by the
other man or the other country.
Well, Sir, that is a very rambling discourse. It lacks
the compactness of one of your sermons, Sir, ( laughter) but I hope
that, like your sermons, it may give us something to think about. 
7.
CHAIRMAN: Ladies and Gentlemen, you have now got an unrivalled
opportunity. You may ask questions of the Prime Minister. Do
take advantage of your opportunity.
UESTION: Mr. Chairman, when Mr. Menzies was talking about
democracy in the first part of his speech he mentioned that one
of the most important characteristics of the member of the House
or the Senate or any other parliament, should be that he exercise
his own judgment, his own decision; in fact, he should be rather
like the idea in Burke's letter to the electorate of Bristol.
Coming from the U. K. about two years ago, I find that in
Australia, the awful thing the Liberals invented in Birmingham
in 1870 or thereabouts, the caucus, is very much stronger out
here, and for that reason I wonder whether Australian democracy
is not, to some extent, tempered by the influence of caucus
and is not, therefore, altogether a true reflection of the
individual member's personal opinions, or the opinions if we
must be on a mandatory basis of the electors who put him up
for the post?
MR. MENZIES: Well, Sir, I hope I did not convey the impression
that I believe that all parties ought to be abolished or that we
will ever have a parliament that consists of 124 independents,
because, quite frankly, I think that would be terrible.
Parliament would simply cease to work, in my opinion, under those
conditions, and I would hate to be the independent Prime Minister
who presided over 21 independent ministers. I would not want
that post. But what I had in mind, of course, was that Donceiing
the importance of party alignment we all have them, in ill
aspects of life. We like to be with our friends who have the
same common approach to a problem as we have. And therefore
nothing that I say runs counter to that. But I do say tIt. t a
member of parliament wno pñ ants hirnself to ti pucle as
possessing a body of views of that kind, to which he will be
faithful and in which he believes, is not to allow himself to
be diverted from his proper course in carrying out those ideas by
some temporary schmozzle, by some temporary complaint, or a
little whipped-up popular temporary :--ovement or agitation, unless
he agrees with it. That is the point at which he mrust sy, " I am
here to exercise my judjient and not merely to take orde. rs whlich
lie outside the scope of what I have atiitted to the electors
and on which they have elected me,
I think you are quite right: That the caucus idea has
developed a great deal. It is, I think, pretty rigid in the
Labor Party; it is somewhat looser in my own, because some more
liberty I think, is permitted. I am sure it is permitted, except
on vital matters which affect the life of the government; in which
case, of course, any member of my party is free to vote against
the government, so long as he knows he is voting to put it out.
And that, I think, has a somewhat stimulating effect. ( Laugh"'; e.)
But I must say to my friend at the back that though I
concede these points about Australia, I thought I had perceived
them in equal degree in Great Britain. I think that if a party
in Great Britain held the Treasury Benches as one did not so
long ago by 7 or 8 votes, you would find that tiiat caucus
instinct would be very, very powerful, even if it represented onl,
the instinct of self-preservation. ( Laughter.)
QUESTION': Do you think that the establishment inr some of the
countries of the new British Commonwealth of semi--dictatorial
governments is likely, in the long run, to upset the unity of the
Commonwealth and take those countries out of it? 
MR. MENZIES: It is very difficult to answer a question like that
dogmatically. If I thought that the establishment of semidictatorial
governments here or here would contin'r until the
whole thing became a straight-out dictatorship, nou a preliminary
stage to getting a parliament or a constit4iion, but an established
thing, then I would think that it was almost impossible to
contemplate how such a government could fit into the conception
of the British Commonwealth. Because, although we have watcred
down or altered a number of the old elements which were once
thought to be of prime importance, I think the fact still remains
that we do set out to be an association of free and selfgoverning
communities, and an inveterate dictatorship . ould
I think, lead me if I were one of the people to d is to
doubt very much whether such a country ought to reman in the
Commonwealth. But, of course, I am bound to say to you. that I know one
or two of the pseudo-dictators. I am perfectly cortoon that f-n
each case it is regarded as an interim stage only to enble : he
country to be put into a proper state of organisation an. to
enable democratic institutions of some kind to cemele. If that
so, then one must not be in a hurry. If it turns out not to be
and it became as great a matter of plain dictatosLj L. 2 Germany
under Hitler or Italy under Mussolini, then I thinh I Yould be
voting against them. 


STRICT EMBARGO FOR FRIDAY MORNING'S PAPERS.
MOUNT&nbsp;ISA RAILWAY.
ARTICLE BY THE PRIME MINISTER (MR.&nbsp;MENZIES).
&nbsp;
I have gathered from practically all of my Queensland Commonwealth Parliamentary colleagues, and also from some communications I have personally received, that there is a great deal of propaganda current in Queensland to the effect that the Commonwealth Government has not made genuine efforts to secure the financing of the new rehabilitated railway; that, on the contrary, it has impeded the project; and that it has no proper interest in the development of Northern Queensland.
&nbsp;
The Queensland Government is familiar with the facts, and therefore cannot be held responsible for this propaganda. My Government has no quarrel with the Queensland Government on these matters, our interests are completely in common, and we share a great enthusiasm for this great mining and railways enterprise. To avoid foolish controversies, and to put the record straight, I have written this statement, which is designed to be objective and clear, and as brief as is practicable.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;As I have had more to do with the negotiations than any other Commonwealth Minister, most of what I have to say will have my own first-hand authority.
&nbsp;
What I will call "the project", which includes a dramatic development of the mining output of Mt. Isa so as to make it one of the greatest mines in the world, with large consequential additions to Australia's internal activity and export income, and a vastly improved railway link between Mt. Isa and the East Coast, began to be discussed some years ago. The then Queensland Government sought a report from a great firm of American railways consultants, Ford, Bacon and Davis. In what is still regarded as an authoritative examination, these engineers made it clear that should the company develop its daily production to 14,400 tons (and more so should this be increased to 19,000 tons), the projected cost of the railway (£29m) could be comfortably amortized, over a period of 20 years, by the resultant freight revenues from Mt. Isa.
&nbsp;
The company clearly would be undertaking a vast capital expenditure on the mine. From the point of view of Government, the question was how to raise the £29m for the railway and its associated expenditure.
&nbsp;
When Mr. Nicklin became Premier, he promptly investigated the matter, in close collaboration with Mr. Hiley, his Treasurer. He took the matter up with us before and at the Loan Council Meeting in June 1958.&nbsp;His proposal was that the Queensland Government should, out of its own resources during the period of construction, find £7m, and that £22m, should be borrowed abroad. We thought that a World Bank borrowing would have a triple benefit; one was that it would add to our capital resources for the carrying out of a great work; the second was that it would improve Australia's overseas balances; the third was that it would not impair ordinary borrowing for the States' works programmes.
&nbsp;
It was, however, necessary to secure Loan Council approval for a borrowing by the Commonwealth in the specific interest of one State. We undertook to do everything in our power to secure this approval, and it was in fact given.
&nbsp;
The proposal which the Premier formulated for purposes of the Loan Council, was that Queensland envisaged entering into a contractual agreement with the Mt. Isa Company, whereby the Queensland Government would agree to rehabilitate the railway between Mt. Isa and Collinsville by&nbsp;June 1963&nbsp;to the standard proposed by&nbsp;the expert consultants, Messrs Ford Bacon and Davis; and the company would agree to guarantee sufficient earnings on the carriage of inwards and outwards traffic to Mt. Isa, to meet the cost each year to Queensland of rehabilitating the line within a period of, say, 20 years from 1st July, 1963.&nbsp;It will at once be seen that, at that time, the proposal was that the company would amortize the total cost.
&nbsp;
We thought the proposal had great merit, and believed that it would commend itself to the World Bank as a borrowing for a specific and self-liquidating developmental project.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
From that day to this, firmly persuaded as I am of the great value of the project, nobody has worked harder to bring it off.
&nbsp;
But, quite early in the subsequent negotiations, it transpired that the Company was not prepared to guarantee the full amortisation, I am not criticising the company; it formed its own business judgment. But the change did present difficulties in securing the money from the World Bank. That bank is one of&nbsp;Reconstruction and Development. It does not lend money simply for the purpose of getting interest on it and securing a repayment of the principal. Its prime function is to finance, some economic development which will, so to speak, pay for itself. In the case of applications for loans relating to specific projects, the World Bank has made a practice of requiring a complete guarantee from the principal user.
&nbsp;
After preliminary exchanges with the bank, which it is unnecessary to particularise, we had a three-cornered conference at Canberra, in which I pointed out that I did not think there was any real chance of a World Bank loan unless there was a freight contract between the Queensland Government, which had a proper interest in securing the economic success of the new line, and the company, which had much to gain by&nbsp;a long-term freight contract in respect of a railway adequate for the ultimate expansion of the mine. Our discussions lasted until 3&nbsp;o'clock in the morning, and ended with a broad and no doubt tentative agreement by&nbsp;the company to guarantee (on various conditions) a substantial proportion of the amortisation, of the order of about 70&nbsp;per cent, which we&nbsp;thought would provide a basis for negotiation with the bank.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Upon subsequent reflection, the company did not feel able to confirm this. Alternative proposals were considered, but for various reasons, they later came to nothing.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
Just before I went off on my recent journey to America and Europe, we had a further conference at Canberra. Queensland Ministers had with them a revised draft agreement. We once more discussed the possibilities of a World Bank loan. Having once more explained the bank's method of approach, and the purposes for which it had been established, I was asked whether, as I had had great personal experience with the bank in the securing of earlier loans, I would be willing to take the matter up in Washington with the President of the Bank, Mr. Eugene Black, with I whom I was known to be on close and friendly terms. I replied that I would be willing to do so, though unless there was some very material change I was by no means sanguine of success. In effect, I said:
&nbsp;
"The bank will consider that this business is primarily a matter between the Queensland Government and the Mt. Isa Company. The bank has made it clear that it wants a freight contract between the company and the Government of such a kind as will make a very expensively re-constructed line not a liability to the Queensland Government, but an asset. They will want to strengthen the position of Queensland at the same time as they facilitate this enormous mining development."
&nbsp;
That was a perfectly fair statement, not of our requirements - our function was to become the borrower from the bank and to re-lend to Queensland - but of the requirements, as we understood them, of the bank.
&nbsp;
We had a good deal more discussion, which I need not rehearse, about the desirability of including in any freight contract adequate provisions to protect the company in the event of such events as a partial collapse of the mine, or some Government action, or war. But, in the broad, we agreed that a suitable freight contract would be necessary if we were to do business with the bank.
&nbsp;
I went to Washington and saw Mr. Black and some of his top men. Knowing that no loan could be actually secured in a day or two, I set out to establish, if I could, the essential pre-conditions of a useful negotiation. First, was the bank genuinely interested in the Mt. Isa project? Did it see it, as I saw it, as something of immense importance both for the development of Queensland and for the improvement of export earnings?&nbsp;
&nbsp;
The answer to that was unhesitating: "You can take it that this bank would be pleased to be associated with this project. But of course we have our own standards and practices." "Anyhow," I said, "you are keen?" Mr. Black said, “Yes."
&nbsp;
We then discussed the fact that the Australia Government would be the borrower. It was once more made clear – as I had tried to make clear at Canberra – that the proposal did not turn upon our credit-worthiness, which the bank regarded as unquestionable, but upon the freight arrangements which could be made between the Queensland Government and the Mt. Isa Company.
&nbsp;
“Well,” I said, "I think it would be useful – though they are not the direct borrowers – if I could get the Queensland Government to send their Treasurer, Mr. Hiley, to Washington, and the company to send Mr. Fisher. Would you and your officers be prepared to have discussions with them if they came over?" He said "Yes."
&nbsp;
I then said, "Before I do anything about this, I want to know one more thing. The bank has heretofore said that it requires a 100&nbsp;per cent amortisation guarantee from the principal user, the company. Is that inflexible?"
&nbsp;
After discussion, the answer was “No. We are prepared to negotiate on a basis of less than 100&nbsp;per cent, because we think this a valuable project.”
&nbsp;
I then dictated in the presence of the bank's representatives, the relevant passage of a cable to my colleagues at Canberra on these two points. The bank agreed. I think it necessary to set this out, because, although thereafter I made no statement at all on the subject of the loan, it has been, I gather, freely said by some people in Queensland that I "oversold" the prospects of a loan.
&nbsp;
Mr. Hiley and Mr. Fisher in fact went to Washington and had negotiations first with Mr. Black and then with officials which were in fact terminated by Mr. Hiley on the ground that he felt no adequate progress was being made. This was naturally a matter for Mr. Hiley’s own judgment, and I have no right or desire to criticise it. I did, however, receive in London a letter from Mr. Black in which he said he was sorry that the negotiations had terminated. (Mr. Black was himself in Toronto when the talks ended.) He repeated that the bank was very interested. He pointed out, quite accurately, as I subsequently learned, what the differences were, and added "I didn't think any of them were insoluble."
&nbsp;
On my return to Australia I was shown the documents, which included, by&nbsp;courtesy of the Queensland Government, reports which Mr. Hiley had made to Mr. Nicklin during the discussions. In these I read that the company, through Mr. Fisher, had at Washington offered, on certain conditions, to guarantee 70&nbsp;per cent of the amortisation of the cost of the railway.
&nbsp;
As this seemed to me, with my knowledge of the bank, to provide a basis for a further loan negotiation, but as the Commonwealth Treasury officer who had attended the Washington talks had expressed doubts as to whether such an offer had been made in terms (this being, of course, a matter of interpreting the language used), I decided to invite Mr. Nicklin, Mr. Hiley and Mr. Fisher, once more to come to Canberra.
&nbsp;
This they most willingly did. The conference began with a short statement by me on my own talks at Washington, followed by&nbsp;a question from me about the company's preparedness to guarantee 70&nbsp;per cent. Mr. Fisher at once rejected any such idea. Speaking to Mr. Hiley, he said, in substance, "I have never guaranteed 70&nbsp;per cent. What I said was that we were prepared to accept all&nbsp;surcharge on the freight rates to build up a fund of £5m which could be drawn upon if, in any year, the amount of freight was insufficient, and that that might, over a period of 20 years, produce 70&nbsp;per cent of the total amortisation." In answer to a question by&nbsp;me, Mr. Fisher agreed that if for any reason the volume of freight fell for some time, the 10&nbsp;per cent surcharged freight rates might not produce anything like 70&nbsp;per cent of the amortisation figure.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
As, in a matter so complex, there was clear room for misunderstanding, and as the 10&nbsp;per cent surcharge proposal had, I learned, been rejected at Washington, I was proceeding to ask some more questions about it, when Mr. Fisher said: “Felling under some pressure, I advanced the 10 per cent surcharge proposal at Washington, but it is now withdrawn." Well, I said, "What offer are you making?"; to which Mr. Fisher replied, "None. The company will guarantee nothing in respect of the railway rehabilitation. Why should we? We are mining people. We will develop the mine. The Government can develop the railway. That is its business, not ours."
&nbsp;
This statement was subsequently repeated several times, after which I made the obvious remark that, in the absence of any guarantee from the company, all talk about a borrowing from the bank fell to the ground, and that we could forget about it. This conclusion was accepted around the table.
&nbsp;
I am not quarrelling with the company or Mr. Fisher, who are admirably competent to decide their own business, or with the Queensland Government, which had pursued this matter with great activity and zeal.
&nbsp;
But I have stated the bare essentials of the negotiations, because it clearly appears that a proposal which began at the time of the Loan Council meeting of 1958 as one which involved a complete guarantee by the company, ended with a decision by the company to give no guarantee at all,
&nbsp;
Clearly, therefore, the failure to secure a World Bank loan arose from circumstances over which the Commonwealth Government had no control, and for which we can in no sense be fairly blamed.
&nbsp;
Mr. Nicklin and Mr. Hiley, I am sure, agree with this. Before our last conference ended, Mr. Haley opened up the possibilities of a borrowing from some other source or sources. I am in close correspondence with Mr. Nicklin about this matter.&nbsp;
&nbsp;
All that need be said at this stage is that the Queensland Government and my own are both active and co-operative, since we are both enthusiastic about the project, and will do all that we can to see it completed as a whole, in the interest of both mineral and pastoral development in Northern Queensland.
&nbsp;
CANBERRA,
August, 1959.



ADDRESS TO CONVOCATION
BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES9 Q C M. P.)
AT A GRADUATESt EVENING IN THE~ GREAT HALL OF THE UNIVERSITY* 6F
SYDNEY, FRIDAY, AUGUST 28, 1959.
I am much honoured by your invitation to deliver what you
are pleased to describe as the Annual " Oration" to Graduates of
this great and famous University,,
I was flattered some little time back to be made one of
your graduates causa honoris an agreeable expression which in
one blow gets rid of th obligation to pass examinations and
adorns one with unearned but delightful academic splendour. I
wish that I could repay your courtesy by offering to you an
address profound but engaging, the product of weeks of quiet
reflection in the company of my books and my thoughts. But for
a Prime Minister in a vigorously political community this does
not prove possible. Some of you may recall that in one of his
speeches during the war, Winston Churchill made a glancing
reference to Australia, where, he said, " politics seemed to be
carried on with a fine 18th century vigour".
There are certainly, for me, other problems to be
wrestled with, and preparations to beomade for much less academic
controversies. What I have to say to you, therefore, will be
somewhat discursive and occasional. B3ut here and there, I hope
there may emerge some ideas which represent the Views of a man,
himself a University graduate by examination, who has been
privileged to have something to do with Universities and the
attitude of Governments towards them,,
In Australia. the intense interest of Governments and
Parliaments in universities is comparatively modern. When I was
a student at the University of Melbourne I once heard a Member
of Parliament refer to it as " a bear-garden of the idle rich",
a quaint expression which even then, as I contemplated myselfland
my fellow students, seemed both stzange and. wonderf'ul.
When I was Attorney-General of the.-State of' Victoria, I
introduced into Parliament the legislation which, for the first
time, created the office of Vice-Chancellor of the Melbourne
University. Many years later, as Prime Minister, I had the great
privilege of setting up the Murray Committee, of securing the
assent of Cabinet to the adoption of its recommendations, and of
seeing them put into legislative and administrative effect. As
I extract some personal pride from these later developments, I
propose to say something about them.
In 1956, having conceived the idea of an authoritative
committee of investigation, I saw Sir Keith Murray in London. He
was and is the Chairman of the University Grants Committee in
Great Britain. I pointed out to him that while the Commonwealth
had, except in respect of its direct Territories, no comprehensive
legislative authority with respect to education, it did have power
to make grants to the ScL-ates, and that such grants might be made
for specific purposes and subject to such conditions as the
Commonwealth Parliament might think proper, With the co-operation
of Mr. Harold Macmillan, who was then Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and was therefore the Minister to whom-thte University Grants
Committee was responsible, Sir Keith Murray made himself available.
We associated with him a strong group, consisting of the late Sir
Ian Clunies Ross, Professor Charles Morris from Great Britain,
Sir Alexander Reid of Western Australia, and Mr. Richards, a
university graduate on th. e staff of the Broken Hill Pty. Co. 
The Committee was given a very broad charter. it
conducted the most intensive investigations and it made
recommendations, the adoption of which Iventure to say, has
opened up a new era in the history of he Australian Universities,
In the course of its report upon the role of the
Universities in the community, the Committee drew attention to
certain important considerations which are, I believe, at the
root of any proper examination of the place and functions of
university training.
A few of these aspects deserve particular mention, since
we must constantly have them in mind if we are to keep the
problem in proper perspective.
The first is that the modern complexity of life and the
increasingly complex nature of Australian economic development
require a very large increase in the supply of highJly educated
people. It is only in comparatively recent years that commerce
and industry have felt the need for more university graduates.
Public administration calls for more graduates. The pressure for
a greater concentration upon research calls for more graduates.
The growing need for more and more precision of thought and
analysis requires the trained minds which it is the function of
universities to produce. If all these needs are to be satisfied
then it becomes essenti a! that our uni ' arsities should be able to
provide accommodation and instruction and facilities for a
rapidly increasing number of students0
In the second place, as the Committee pointed out, " fIt
is the function of the University to offer not merely a technical
or specialised training but a full and -true education befitting a
free man, a ci-ifizen ol" a free country'?
I have had a good deal to say about this on other
occasions, but I take the opportunity of reiterating that there
is danger for the world if technologists and scientists should be
too narrowly trained, so that th-ey become less fitted to accept
their enormous social : cesponsibilities, It is one of the marks of
the current century that i. while magnificcnt skil. and a degree of
scientific investigation amounting almost to genius have presented
us year by year with more an~ d more material miracles, there is no
evidence that we understand hiinan bein~ gs any botto_ or that
wisdom has marched with knowledge,, Indeed it is the greatest
paradox of the 20th century that with all its superb cleverness it
has been marked by more violence and hatred and bar-barism than any
other century since the Middle Ages.
The third principle is that while education by teaching
must be one of the great objects of a great university, it has an
equal responsibility for research, This, of course,~ means that
the universities must attract and encourage brilliant men and
women to whom the function of discovery is a vocat: Lcn of an
absorbing kind, limited neither by the clock nor by undue
concentration upon material rewards.
The fourth principle is that a good university should be
a guardian of intellectual standards and intellectual integrity.
This, of course, involves a consideration of w. thas been called
" academic freedom". There may be some who think that this
expression connotes q. freedom from all restraints or from the rDrmal
rules which govern ordinary people, This is a misconception,
" Academic freedom" connotes the absence of external or political
compulsion upon the mind, it means that the search for truth must
not be controlled. by any authority other than the integrity of the
mind and spirit of the searcher, 
I have no particular respect for university teachers or
researchers who think it good that they should accormmodate their
work and ideas to their previously formed political alignments;
because, if they do so, they will introduce a tendentious
character into their work which will deprive it of objectivity
or authority and will tend to distract them from the unobstructed
investigation of the scientific or other facts.
By the adoption of the Murray report and the provision
of the very large sums of money involved in this adoption, we have
at any rate put the universities in the way of having better paid
staffs, more adequate accommodation, more up-to-date technical
equipment and greater general capacity for improving the essential
contact between teacher and student which has been increasingly
sketchy in recent years. One process of improving has, however,
been going on for some time. I can myself remember the heated
debates which used to occur about whether university graduates
ought to be given some special admission to the Civil Service
instead of having to start at the bottom rung of the ladder,
with no further intellectual training than is afforded by the
passing of the Leaving Examinations at the schools.
Slighting references used to be made about the " academic"
mind, as if a University degree, hard-earned it, most cases,
detached its possessor from the realities of ordinary life.
Relatively few graduates reached high administrative posts;
comparatively few entered Parliament. The position in these
respects has materially improved. Great organisations are eagerly
looking for graduates. Many of the leading men in the Civil
Service are graduates. In my own Ministry, there are no less than
12 Ministers, including myself, who have university degrees.
All this means that the universities have come closer to
the community and that the community is getting increasing benefit,
even in the most practical terms, from their existence and their
work. There is another aspect of University training to which
I should interpolate a brief reference. When I established an
earlier committee to make a quick report which gave rise to the
system of Commonwealth university grants now so enormously
expanded as a result of the Murray recommendations, I made a
special point to the Committee that I wished some portion of their
recommendations to be in relation to residential colleges. Ever
since then we have made increasing provision for these colleges.
For some strange reason, there was a certain resistance to these
ideas, based upon the fact that many of the residential colleges
are Church foundations and therefore have a religioiz background.
" Why," it was said, " should the State subsidise any Church
activity?" Without endeavouring to open up the much wider question,
which has been so hotly debated for a long time in respect of
church schools I would like to say that in the case of the
universities, ihe whole criticism seemed and seems to me to be
based upon a misconception of the true nature of university
training. A student in a residential college '-as a great
advantage, if he has the right point of view. He lives constantly
in a community of scholars and of students. In addition to the
normal attendance at class or in the laboratories, he has right
through the days and the weeks and the months, the opportunity of
discussion of informal talk, with men much better informed than
himself,. A thus has the opportunity of securing an education
" in the round". And it is exactly this broad and humane education
which the world lacks most, and the comparative absence of which
has so marred the history of the century. 
Before I leave the Murray Committee I should say something
of a recommended but most significant development.
In their report, Sir Keith Murray and his colleagues took
a long range look at the future. Realising as they did that their
financial recommendations which were very substantial) would
cover a limited period of time, they came to the conclusion that
there should be appointed a permanent Australian University Grants
Committee. As this Committee ( under another name -to which I will
refer a little later) has now been appointed under Statute and
much of the future of our Universities will, I hope, be inhuenced
by its advice, I will at once remind you of the reasons which led
the Murray Committee to recommend its creation.
In effect, there were six reasons
1. The Murray Committee had concentrated its work into a few
months. I accept responsibility. Art is long, but political
life is normally short; and I was keen for results. The
Committee knew that it had not completely covered the-ground.
It felt, therefILore, that there was need for further study,
and continuing study, of aspects which there had been
insufficient time to consider fully.
2. The university problem is not static but highly dynamic.
Demand is growing much more rapidly Lhan resources. " The
moving finger writes; and having writ, moves on." " The
degree of the required expansion," as the Committee said,
" and the ways in which provision should be made to cater for
this additional need will vary from institution to institution
and from State to State; the problem is far from being a
simple mathematical one and will call for close and continuous
consideration on a national basis."
3. Having regard to modern events, they concluded, as I think
most of us would, that an increasing percentage of students
would be attracted to the pure or applied sciences. They
recognised that, in terms of accommodation, and technical
equipment, science teaching costs more. They saw that the
provision of post-graduate and research facilities is of
particular importance in the scientific field. All of this
argued an urgent need for the existence of some body which
could continuously re-assess the financial needs of the
universities. " These needs," as the Committee said, " cannot
be determined once and for all."
4. There is the problem of university academic salaries, which
the committee found to be " the largest single item of the
universitiest annual current expenditure", and which is not
likely, in a world competing for skill, to remain static.
The Committee therefore thought that periodic consideration
of salaries should be undertaken on a national basis, and by
a permanent Commonwealth Committee.
Murray Committee further thought, and I thiink we would all
most heartily agree, that there is a standing need for coordinating
the w~ ork of the universities so -is t~ o get the best
value from limited resources, not only of money but of trained
manpower. ( That is a horrible economisth expression, "' manpow",
but you know what I mean.) This, they thought, applied with
particular force to specialist branches of unde~ rgraduate
teaching, and to post-graduate and research activities. They
made pointed mention, which it is timely to recall of the
need for consultation on the setting up of new institutions
of university status. There mfay be a temptation to regard
the creation of a new university, for example, primarily in
terms of money and buildings. The provision of' staffs of
high quality is even more difficult, and will be doubly 
difficult if we endeavour to spread what we have over too
wide an area. Of course there will be new universities;
notable beginnings are already being made; but great care
will have to be exercised to avoid duulication and waste.
To achieve this, the proposed new body will be of immense
value.
6. The projected committee will need to secure the confidence,
not only of the Commonwealth, but of the States, in the hope
that its advice will be acceptable, and accepted, all round.
It would be a calamity if the States who have done so much
to create and nourish their universities, came to think that
the Commonwealth was invading their proper autonomy in these
matters. My own policy has been to assist, not to invade.
We accepted this compelling reasoning, and therefore
decided to act upon it. WTe rejected the suggested name, the
Australian Universities Grants Committee because we thought it
contained a suggestion of a limited funcLon the recommending
of payments. As every Commonwealth Treasurer has known, no
particular encourage ment in this field is ever needed! We
therefore adopted the name " Australian Universities Commission",
and set it up under the Act of that name, passed this year.
It may be helpful if I remind you of the main provisions
of what will, I hope, turn out to be one of the landmarks in the
educational history of Australia,
The Commission has a full-time Chairman, that notable
scientist, Sir Leslie Martin, formerly of the University of
Melbourne, and is authorised to have 2, 3 or 4 part-time members,
We have in fact appointed four:-Professor Bayliss) Professor
of Chemistry in the University of Western Australia; Professor
Trendall of the Australian National University and Emeritus
Professor of Classics at Sydney; Mr. K. A. Wilis, Managing
Director of G. R. Wills Adelaide, and Chairmand of the Finance
Committee of the University of Adelaide; and Dr. Vernon, the
General Manager of the Colonial Sugar Refining Co. This,
as you will agree, is a highly qualified and most powerful
commnittee which should inspire confidence in all quarters.
The statutory functions of the Committee are:
to furnish information and advice to the Minister ( at
present myself) " on matters in connexion with the grant
by the Commonwealth of financial assistance to
universities established by the Commonwealth and of
financial assistance to the States in relation to
Universities";
to perform its functions with a view to promoting the
balanced development of universities so that their
resources can be used to the greatest possible advantage
of Australia;
to consult with universities and with the States upon
the matters on which it is empowered to furnish
information and advice;
to recommend the conditions upon which financial assistance
should be granted.
I might , with advantage, add a little gloss, since words
like " balanced development" are not necessarily self-explanatory:
Ci The Commission will be expected to see the universities'
picture as a whole; to make its overall financial
recommendations not so as to satisfy everybody's demands
everywhere, but so as to arrive at figures which have a
sinsible relation to government budgets and, in 
particular, to government revenues, which the taxpayers
provide. We cannot do or have everything at once ( in
spite of some not unpopular misconceptions to the contrary)
nor can we have all that we need quite so quickly as we
would like.
( ii) " Balanced development" does not mean that any established
University, old or new, should be prevented indefinitely
or for very long from establishing those usual faculties
and disciplines which are the main function of a University,
The teaching of history in Perth does not duplicate the
teaching of history in Sydney. The teaching of biology
in Melbourne does not duplicate the teaching of biology
in Adelaide. If a university is to be true to its name,
there are certain things it must teach, and certain studies
which it must pursue,
But there are highly specialised studies of a more
uncommon kind which may need to be pursued in one place in which
our limited resources may need to be concentrated, For example,
oriental studies, including oriental languages, which we have
sadly neglected, and for which we have so few qualified instructors,
cannot or so it seems to me, be sensibly pursued in, or in
connexion with, more than one University or centre or perhaps two.
In all these considerations, let us always remember that
the greatest shortage in Australia is of trained and disciplined
minds; we cannot afford to waste the efforts of any one of them,
I have high hopes of the Commission, Perhaps my greatest
reason is this: The more the advice of the Commission comes to be
regarded by both Parliament and people as careful, sensible and
authoritative, the less will the advance of University education
and of the universities themselves depend upon the enthusiasm and
encouragement of some Minister or Ministers who is or are
University-minded. The Universities will becomeby common
acceptance, a great and recognised instrument of national
progress and of rising standards of mental, spiritual and material.
living. I have spoken with some pride about the increasing
provision made by governments for universLties, This is, I
suppose, largely inevitable since if we are to train the many
thousands of graduates whom the community needsI the fees of
perhaps most of them will need to be met from other than family
resources, as will the cost of buildings, equipment and staff.
But at the same time, I would think it a misfortune if
universities in Australia came to be too heavily or even completely
dependent upon the goodwill and money of governments,, True, in
Australia, there are relatively few great individual fortunes,
It is, as I have pointed out, only recently that the controllers of
great businesses have looked to the universities for recruits and
have, therefore, found themselves deeply interested in the
success of those universities, There have, of course, been some
splendid benefactions to universities, but I would take leave to
doubt whether of all the thousands who graduate each year, more
than a few regard themselves as having any debt to their
university which they might hope thereafter to reccgnise or repay
in some degree. The Americans have, I think, set a great example in this
respect. In that country, universities have been on a great
scale beneficiaries of those who have passed through their doors
and have become financially successful, with a pride in building
up the university from which they graduated. 
There are, after all, obvious disabilities which attach
to an over-dependence of universities on governments. It may not,
in our time, be possible to avoid this over-dependence; but at
least we can become aware of the dangers and seek to avoid them.
The greatest danger is, of course, that he who pays the piper will
always be permitted to call the tune. We politicians are, in
spite of rumours to the contrary, human beings, and we are
perhaps not averse from obtaining or exercising power. There
will, therefore, always be a considerable temptation for
politicians, who by their votes provide the universities with
funds, to seek to dictate or influence lines of study and
occasionally to concern themselves unnecessarily with staff
appointments. This kind of thing can, unless it it sturdily
resisted, lead to a lowering of standards and a debasing of the
academic currency. It is, I fear7 a fact that Members of
Parliament are themselves in receipt of more advocacy to reduce
expert qualifications than to raise them. If the advocacy comes
from a sufficient number of constituents, there will be a
temptation to yield to it, There is always somebody to be found
to complain by correspondence or in the press that examinations
are too difficult or that they ought to be abolished. Such
anguished complaints are usually based upon the fact that " Little
Willie" has been ploughed in an examination in spite of what his
parents know him to be an extremely clever boy. Yet the truth
is that if we are to hold our place and make it a better place in
a growing and complex competitive world, the greatest ching is to
have rising standards of expert qualification,,
We can always get increased numbers by lowering the tests.
We will never get increased quality, which is the thing we need,
without raising them.
From time to time there emerges what I believe is called a
" modern" approach to the process of education. This approach is
based upon a somewhat pedantic interpretation of the word
" education". It concentrates upon the " leading out" of the
individual. It emphasises individual self-expression. It dislikes
the idea of discipline, One hears it said that the child must be
given the opportunity of following his own bent. This, I venture
to say, is a soft and escapist approach to education. It is,
oddly enough, never applied to athletes' We have not yet unduly
suffered from it in Australia, and I hope we won'to The fallacy
of such ideas is that they ignore the basic truth that before any
student can just " follow his own bent" he must have achieved by
concentrated work certain fundamentals, It is clear that his mind
must have acquired a degree of self-discipline before it can
venture freely into fresh fields of its own choosing, He may find
the study of mathematics a terrible drudgery. His parents may say
" how will this wretched algebra help my son to earn a living?".
But if the son's bent of mind is towards the sciences, he will slur
his mathematics at his peril.
It is the modern fashion to despise and reject Latin,
which is for most of us difficult, as being both dead and
irrelevant, but the neglect of the foundations of our wonderful
language is already bearing its fruit in slovenly speech and
writing, It is an odd thing that in a community in which we are
all given to self-expression, the niceties and precision of speech
have come to be somewhat disregarded, The avereae boys' school
appears to be completely indifferent as to how boys speak; so
that they may go through the school curriculum with satisfaction
but at the same time speak a species of obscure vernacular which
appears to take some pride in illiteracy and to regard good speech
as " sissy". A great number of girls' schools seem to me to do
much better than this, Yet good plain clear speech is of
increasing importance in the world.
Sir John Monash was, by commuon consent, a very great
soldier. He was a notable engineer. His success in both of these
fields was largely attributable to the superb clarity of his mind.
He was a magnificent and persuasive speaker, one of the best
advocates I ever heard. 
Sir Brudenell White, his outstanding staff officer, was,
I think, the most lucid and graceful of after-dinner speakers.
Sir Thomas Blamey, blunt man of" action as he was in many
respects, had a complete command of pointed and persuasive speech.
I am no scientist, but the greatest scientists I have met
have been men thoroughly educated in the use of their owfn
language and with a rare capacity for exposition.
You may say to me " What has all this to do with a
university?" Well, it has a great deal to do with it. The whole
point I am making is, if I may put it in this way, that at our
peril we should not attempt to divorce the study of the physical
sciences from the study of the humanities. We should not aim at
the production of the narrow specialist, since his narrowness will
put deadly limits to his social usefulness. We should, in all our
seats of learning, endeavour to provide courses of instruction and
facilities for daily contact which will brighten -the minds of both
the scientists and the humanists, making each of them want to know
something of the other man's work, and producing for all of them a
broad education which will not impair the acquisition of the highest
technical skill, but will actually improve that skill by giving
its owner a deeper perception and a clearer understanding of its
use and of its consequences,
To stun up, centnries ago, students at the few universities
were, so to speak, withdrawn from the world, walking and talking
in the groves of Academe, furnishing their minds.
They were not particularly concerned about whether their
studies qualified them for the earning of a living, except,
perhaps, in the Church. They pursued humane letters. Sciencelin
the modern sense, was largely unknown,~ Greek and Latin,
philosophy, history, were the chief materials of scholarship. The
universities were not professional schools; they aimed at the
general training of the mind, largely by reading and discussion.
They were ancient and autonomous bodies neither the servants of
government nor, in any real sense, maintained by themp.
Today, the whole scene has changed. The university is
predominantly, but I hope not definitively, a professional school,,
True, research is more and more encouraged, in the great tradition
of true learning. But increasingly, universities are maintained
by governments in the discharge of what is seen to be a social
responsibility. Classical studies have declined until they have
come to be regarded as a minority eccentricity, There is a great
drive for the production of more and more practising scientists,
doctors, lawyers, engineers, and teachers,
There have been other changes.~ Even as recently as in my
own youth, most students were attending their classes by the aid
of hard-won scholarship or ( and in many cases, and) by a real
self-sacrifice on the part of their parents, Today, that has
already changed. We have come to regard a university training,
for those qualified and willing, as a social right. Not only are
fees paid for many thousands every year, but in many cases living
allowances are provided, I remember saying to Sir Keith Murray
that I had great doubts as to whether enough wij--ers of
Commonwealth Scholarships were of genuine scholarship standing.
His reply was " You are looking back to your own time, when
scholarships were scarce and only a student well above the average
could hope to win one. But today most scholarships are government
grants in aid. Without them, far fewer people would be attending
universities." No doubt this great expert was right; there have
been fundamental changes., 
9.
But though people of average intelligence and skill are
essential to the world's work ( which is a great comfort to me),
there is still a growing and incessant need for something better.
A great university scientist said to me recently tha,: t while the
average capacity of to-day's students was very good, and probably
better than ever, he doubted whether we were producing enough
" 1peaks". This was, to me, an arresting remark. I know that in
Australia we have a curious passion for " uniformity" whether in
taxes or otherwise but we must realise that this passion can
become destructive. The great forward movements in civilise~ d
history have been commenced or led by uncommon men and women. The
great scientific discoveries have not been the product of routine
minds. The whole process of development and improvement in
Australia will slow down unless we succeed in producing more and
more people of superior talent, training and devotion,
That last word " devotion" needs some emphasis. The purely
monetary test of professional success is now increasingly popular.
" Which profession offers the greatest monetary rewards? That's
the one of me!"
Such an attitude of mind will, of course, never produce a
great doctor or lawyer or scientist. It never has. Take the law,
my first and true love. To one who finds his vocation in the law,
its study and practice have almost infinite satisfaction.
Protracted hours of work become a pleasure. To one who has no
vocation for the law, but has adopted it solely as a means of
living, it must, I imagine, forever remain a thing of dust and
drudgery. I know next door to nothing about science. True, I recall
that the first law of physics is that " action and reaction are
equal and opposite", but this is so true of politics that its
scientific origin has become dulled in my mind. But I do most
clearly understand that the great scientific discoveries have been
made by men of vision with a passion for research; not the
slaves of the clock, but of the elusive truth.
These reflections may help to convey to you my conception
S of the ultimate task of tlie Universitis which is not to be
content to be professional schools though this is bound to be
their primary function but to aim at contributing to the nation,
and to mankind, minds which are at once disciplined and imaginative,
reflective and productive. 



FOR PIESS: PM No. 31/ 1959.
EXPANSION OF BELL BAY ALUMINIUM PLANT.
Joint Statement by. the Prime Mnister and the Premier of Tasmania,
In a joint statement today, the Prime Minister and the
Premier of Tasmania, Mr. Reece, announced agreement upon a detailed
plan to increase the capacity of the Bell Bay aluminium works from
12,000 tons to 16,000 tons of aluninium ingots a year, at a cost
of approximately œ 3 million.
The plan for expansion was recomrnended to the two
Governments by the Australian Aluminium Production Commission.
Up till now the Cor. uonwealth has found œ 9.7 million and
the Tasmanian Government œ 1.5 million for the establishment of the
Commission's undertaking.
The Commonwealth contribution to the expansion programme
is that it will continue for the time being to guarantee the
existing bank overdraft of the Commission of œ 300,000. It further
agreo-as has the Tasmanian Government also, to temporarily waive
any claim on the Co:-iission for payments on account of profits,
interest or capital. It is anticipated that this will enable the
Commission to provide up to œ 650,000 from its own resources towards
the cost of the expansion programme. In addition the Commission
may be able to provide the further working capital that will be
necessary. The Tasmanian contribution will be to underwrite the total
cost of the expansion programme. It is estimated that this nay
involve the provision of œ 2 million. Even when the enlargement to
16,000 tons is completed, Bell Bay will still be able to supply
only about half the Australian demand, leaving the remainder to
be met by imports.
The two Governments have therefore agreed to continue the
negotiations to attract private capital to Bell Bay so that its
manufacturing capacity can be increased further. It is not
proposed to make any statements concerning these negotiations
until finality is reached thereon.
The new agreement should enable construction to connence
almost immediately.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
1st September, 1959. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTEA,", THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES AT CENTRAL METHODIST MISSION ON SUNDAY,
6TH SEPTEMER, _ 9D
I was reminded and kindly, by a newspaper yesterday
that this will be the 26th appearance of mine in this rostrum,
in this pulpit that's a long time isn't it?
When I bagan my second chapter of these appearames
about 14 or 15 years ago, Dr. Benson used to preteqyilchat I
came here to say something about the anniversary oi the second
lar but since then, in the last few years, he's become rather
" Father's day" minded. I don't mind telling you that I had no
idea it was Father's Day until just before lunch when three
turbulent grandsons, and one turbulent grand-daughter, arrived
to have lunch with us, and each of them, with that magnificent
gesture of generosity that has been hinted at by Dr. Benson,
presented me with the noblest of all gifts: a bag of peanuts
in the shell. I got a great kick out of it. They all ceme in,
one after the other and said: " Hellos Grandpa, Father's Day
present". And of course you know what young grand-children
are like at least some of you do. Having presented you with a
bag of something edible, they stand around expectantly and so a
good time was had by all ( Laughter).
In spite of it being Father's Day I still like, when I
come here, to say something about the state of the world. It is
ful of problems. I had the great good fortune earlier this year
to go around the world and to have long talks, and intimate and
friendly talks with no less than ten heads of Government. This
is, of course, always a very illuminating experience.
Each year one imagines that one understands what the
problems are for the next 12 months, or two years, but it never
quite works out like that. Today's red hot problem is out of
the news in six weeks, because some other problem has taken its
place. You just look back a little and remember that it isn't
so long ago that we were reading anxiously about matters affecLing
Quemoy and the Matsu Islands off the Chinese coast, with
Formosa in the background, and wondering how this might blow up
trouble in the world trouble not very remote from us because
we have had a faculty, and a very proper one, of becoming involved
in the world's problems, right through the lifetimes of
all of us. And then that just dropped out of the news, though
it didn't drop out of existence, and we began to read about Laos
and the great troubles they are having in that small, but not so
very remote country in South East Asia. Just as that matter
was beginning to lodge in the minds of a great number of thoughtful
people, there was trouble on the border between India and
Tibet and my distinguished friend, Mr. Nehru, found himself
compelled to say things and to contemplate things that he had
hoped never to say, or to contemplate.
So the world is shifting and changing in detail all
the time, and somebody who understands these problems, or hcpes
that he does, today, may, unless he takes care to pursue thcm,
find that he knows nothing about them in 12 months' time.
I mention that to you because I want to establish thr.
this is a very strange, shifting, uncertain, uneasy sort o
world. But if life is strange and shifting and uneasy it doosn C
make us enjoy it any the less. Uhat we need to do is to Lahvc a
look occasionally at the things that are not changing or shift,.
ing, so that we may get our sense of balance when we ccntor&gt; . t
world affairs. And therefore today Imrnrt going zo ta. 1k to -c
in particular, but I want to talk to you a little in the. broø d
about some of these matters.
I remember, Dr. Benson, that during the war h-hun T
the not unhappy task of being Leader of the Opposition., hc mg
been Prime Minister a post which. no doubt, if I rea2-
I will once more occupy some day and I well remember at that
time a very earnest man from America being in Canberra. He was
one of those men you have occasionally met them whose earnestness
overwhelms their sense of proportion, who are wishful
thinkers, who feel that whatever happens next must be good and
right and, therefore, it will happen. And he said to me: " What
would you think would be the state of affairs in the world
years after peace?" and I admit that somewhat lightheartedly, I
said to him: " Well I would think that ten years after the war I
would think that Nationalism would have grown greatly at the
expense of Internationalism. I would think that freedom would be
enjoyed by rather fewer people and I would think that on the
d. hole tariff barriers would be higher". He almost collapsed.
He said to me: " What a dreadful series of remarks to make." And
I said, " W4ell, I thought you wanted to know what I believed; if
you only want to know what Ithtink will please you, of course,
all that is wrong",
I mention that because we will not properly understand
this world that we are living in, this world in which we in
Australia are a small and highly exposed unit, unless we face up
to the facts of what has happened since the war. It was a war
to defend freedom and a very just war to defend froedom, and it
was a war to defend it ag-ainst one of the most wickeC. 1 dictators
that the world has yet produced.
But since the war hundreds of millions of people in
this world have become members of dictator countries, largely
against their own will. You think of countries like Poland and
Czechoslovakia, to a lesser degree perhaps Yugoslavia, countries
right up through the middle band of Europe, countries which were,
you know, historically, t'he homes of freedom, and today they are
satellites of the most powerful dictatorship in the world, not
by their own choice, but by force and conquest. At that time
before the war the people of China were not, peri-aps, the pcoplp'
of a PAation, because it is a great error to think that because a
country is a vast area, geographically on the map, it is in
consequence a Nation. No, China, continental China., was a group
of communities with individual War Lords occasionally warring
with eacti other. It wasn't a concentrated nation with a concerted
national mind a. nd national feeling as ours is. But at
any rate it preserved the ancient culture. It had a faith. It
lived, so to speak, its own life, And today, it, with all its
hundreds of millions of people, is governed by a dictatorship.
You see what I mean, that we are not to suppose that
the world has not changed since the war, or that all the changes
have been for the better. The fact is that there are hundreds
of millions of people who once felt that they were free, who
now know that they are not. And if we shut our eyes to that
fact we do badly, if we are to have a balanced view of the
world. There is a socond aspect to this that I would like to
say a little about : Nationalism. You know really, a lot of us
thought didn't we -in the course of t'. ae war, that' when, it was
over there would be a new, international organization and that
we would become all rather less national, and a little more
international, a little less insistent upon our own. rights and a
little more concerned with the rights of the community of men
and women around the world. Yet since the war we have found,
haven't we, in various parts of the world, a new, insurgent
nationalism w; hich has secured independence, which has, not infrequently
produced dictatorships, which has, in itso1f, the
spirit of aggression. With all the work done by the United
Nations I would very greatly doubt whether there has been any
period of ten years in my lifetime in which there has been a
more insistent demand for independent, separate nationalism on
the part of the people of a score of countries in the world.
There it is; that's one of the facts of life and we must face it. 
Well, how do we go about facing these things? One of
the ideas, most prevalent has been that you must follow all
these movements; wherver there is a movement for independent
nationalism you present the people of that country 4ith independence,
and we've done it. Nobody can doubt that whatever may
be said about colonialism in this world, the history of British
colonialism in this century has been one of glory and intelligence,
because the whole process has been to say to people:
" Very well, you have your freedom; you govern yourselves".
But there again, ro can easily go wrong. * o are not to assume
either that people are all equally competent to govern themselves
or that our system of Government is the right one for them.
Now I will say nothing about the first because it is
self-evident. But I want to talk to you a little, this afternoon,
about whether we ought to be so smugly satisfied that our
system of Government is the right one for Indonesia, or Malaya,
or Singapore or India, or Pakistan, or Ceylon, or Ghana, or
Nigeria, or the Vest Indies. Are we so right? Are we wise to
push down the throats of other people our ideas of how a country
ought to govern itself, just because they are our ideas? I don't
think we are. I think nothing could be more foolish. I think
we ought to pay a little more regard to other peoples' history
and hackground and religion and culture and leave it to them to
, rork out a system of Government which suits them, because it
suits them and not just because it suits us.
Do you ever think about our system of Government? I
know that I've been in the middle of our system of Goverrmpnt
now, believe it or not, man and boy, for 30 years, and I know ail
the noises that our system of Govcrnment makes and I know that
there are people who take a broad view of Government and a broad
view of national policy, and there are others who take a smaller
view and say: " What will it cost me?" and one becomes accustomed
to all this. But at the base of it I beg of you all to remember that
I am a Prime Minister of Australia and there is a national
parliament in Australia, and there is a parliament in each State
c&amp; pital, and a Premier and Ministers, because hundreds of years
ago our forefathers in Groat Br: train sat under the villne oak
tree and lerned how to manage their own affairs, their own
public affairs, their own local government. Step by stop, over
centuries the position was achieved in which there was a Parliament
elected freely by all the adult people in the country
without r. gard to wealth or privilege. That didn't happen
over night. It was only in the nineteenth century, that the
Parliament at Jestminster, which had fought and won its battle
with despotic monarchy over 200 years before, found itself by
successive reform acts, voted for by a wider and wider constituency
until adult men all had a vote by the end of the
century. It was only in the lifetime of a great number of
relatively young people that women had a vote in Groat Britain.
This process of self-government, of parliamentary
self-government of ours, has grown slowly and somctimes painfully
over a period of contuies. We all have it in our bloo. It is
part of our history. It is something wo learned about from our
father or our mother and that they in their turn learned about
from those wtho went before them something that we've read,
something that we've come to understand, something that we've
felt. That is why I always maintain that in Australia we
understand just as much about democratic, parliamentary selfgovernment
as any other country in the world. Vc are in the
forefront of that historic development. But it has taken
centuries. Do you suppose that you can take a community of many
millions of people, not bred in our tradition, not with that
fusion that has gone on for so many centuries with us, between 
4.
the principles of Christianity and the principles of representative
Government, bred in some strange creed, from our point of
view, with notable cultures going back into their own history,
but incapable of being understood by us, or by many of us, at
any rate. You can't take a fully grown plant, like our parliamentary
democracy, and put it down in an alien soil and expect
it to flourish and grow and bear its fruit as if it had been
there all its life. It is a very great mistake for . well-meaning
people to insist that our system of governing ourselves must be
right because it suits us it is right for us and then say:
" Well all we have to do is to present this, fully grown, to some
other community and say, ' Well, there you are boys, you all have
a vote, you will all have a Parliament, now just go ahead and
govern yourselves'". Life doesn't happen that way.
And I am saying that to you because ory now and then
you will read in the newspapers of some head of a neo Government.
whether it's in Africa or in Asia, who has done something
which, from our point of view, is quite dictatorial. And we
say, " But that's a terrible thing to do; this is a dictator's
action". Don't become too excited about that. There are
quite a few so-called dictatorships in these new countries which
will, in the course of years, mellow down until they develop
their own form of popular Government, and when they do it will
be their own form and they will understand it. Don't be too
severe in judgrent about what goes on in Ghana, or what goes on
in Karachi, or what goes on somewhere else. Don't be too
severe about it. You don't expect other people to be able to
adopt systems of Government which we understand instantly so
that everybody knows them and everybody responds to them just as
readily as those whose great, great, great, grand, grand-parents
saw the developments of these things in British countries.
And therefore don't let's force our views, and, above
all, don't let's be intolerant about Ihat goes on in these
countries. I'm not defending dictatorship. Dictatorship has
brought horrors to the world. lle will never have one in
Australia. But there may be countries which, in their early
stages of development in independent Government may need to
give much more power to their central rulers than wre world dream
of doing, so that order may be established and grac' rl-administrative
procedures can be worked out and put into operation.
Now the only other thing that I want to say a word to
you about is this: we think, and I think we are right, that we
understand our system of Government, though there are some
people who think that it is a system of Government by pressure
groups, or by threats, or by something of that kind, but we
know better than that. ' o know that by and large, over the
years, we have been able to throw out Governments which have
honestly tried to serve the interests of the community, And we
understand that. But we are a little bit inclined to assume,
aren't we, that our system of Government is just the same as
the system of Government in other democratic countries.
It has been my task and, of course, frorr time to time
my pleasure, to attend dinners in the United States, in Groat
Britain and in Australia in which glory has been attributed to
the relations between the United States and ourselves, the
United States and Great Britain, and in that genial mood, men
at least get into after a good dinner, people eliminate all the
difficulties, They talk about us being the same people, the
same language. Almost, they pursuade themselves that we are of
the same blood we are just completely identified people and
then they wake up next day and find there is a frightful brawl
going on between Washington and ihitehall, and they say: " I
don't understand how that happened; how coulc it happen?".
Silly enough thing to say, anyhow because my experience, when I
was a lawyer was that the most bitter of all litigation was
between members of families. But anyhow lot that pass. They
assume that we are the same in our system of Government, 
0
0 
Some day I hope somebody, if I haven't got the time
myself, will write something about the basic differences between
Ameiican self-government and our own, and if it is written, then
we will not quarrel with the United States from time to time. We
will understand what these differences are, they u; ill understand
what the differences are, and with an understanding of our
differences we have a much firmer foundation than we have by
talking rather vapidly about our unities and forgetting about
our differences. I give you one example.
In London, in Canberra, if we want to work out what
our policy is in some great international matter, vie don't,
contrary to what you may have thought, ask other people to talk
about it. We go into the Cabinet Room and we talk about it
ourselves, and we do a lot of reading and thinking about it,
and finally we say: " Well that is uhat our policy is to be in
relation to this matter", whether it's to be in relation to some
near territory like New Guinea or South East Asia or the United
States, Whatever it may be, when it emerges and is stated it is
our policy. And there it is. And people in the rest of the
world, reading it, being so advised by our Ambassadors and our
Ministers, are able to say: " Well we know where Australia stands
on this matter" which is very useful.
But in the United States, policies are today, to a
remarkable extent, thrashed out by Committees of Congress, not
one member of which is a Minister, because, as some of you will
know, Ministers, as we would call them, in the Cabinet, as we
would call it, of the President of the United States, not only
don't sit in Congress but they are not allowed to. They a-c
completely separate from Parliament I'll give up calling it
Congress for the sake of clarity and call it Parliament. So
there's a Parliament, House of Representatives, Senate, at
: ashington, not a Minister allowed to sit in it and Ministers
are up somewhere else discussing their problems among th. eseve-
On a few occasions the Minister may have had parliamentary experience
but on most occasions he has never had any. He has
been selected because of his capacity in his particular field,
which is of course, to that extent, a great advantage. And the
result is that Congress has established a series of committees.
They have, for example, a Foreign Relations Committee of the
Senate and a Foreign Affairs Committee of the House of Pepresentatives
and they occasionally sit together.
If the Secretary of State, the late Foster Dulles or
today, Mr. Hea-ter, the most important Minister in the United
States, is engaged in international negotiations of some kind
can be, and is, called before a committee of Congress, and crossexamined,
perhaps all day, about how his mind is working, what h
thinks may be the result of his thoughts. ' Tell it i. s very
interesting. It is all done in the presence of the Press and
frequently with Television. It is very interesting. But it
seems to us to be an odd way of evolving a policy because here is
the Minister " tho hasn't been able to work out what his policy is.
to completion, and he is being asked to analyse his own mind in
the presence of the public. And therefore, like any other man
appearing before a committeeo, he will think aloud, He will say:
" Well, of course, that's one way we might deal with it" and then
later on he sayd: " That's another way we might deal with it" and
these little bits and pieces come out to the world and get on to
the cables and people in London and people in Melbourne and
Canberra say: " What sort of a man is this? He doesn't seem to
know his own mind".
This was said about John Foster Dulles, you know. It
was wickedly untrue. If ever I knew a man who knew his own
mind, it was John Foster Dulles. But before a committee he might
express ten minds in the course of ten hours of questioning, all
in the process of making up, ultimately, his own mind, 
6.
You see I hope you follow what I'm moaning by this
that means it is easy for us to misjudge what's going on in the
United States. It is easy for us to got false ideas about
American policy, or about American standards, terribly easy,
disastrously easy, unless wo understand that their system of
Government, and their system of policy-making, is completely unlike
ours because we have a Cabinet Government, with Cabinet
sitting in the Prliament. and directly responsible to Parliament
on the floor of Parliament. These are two utterly different
systems. I prefer ours, if I may say so. They prefer theirs.
They are a very great country, with a great number of extraordinarily
able men and women and they arc well entitled to
prefer their system. All I amasking is that we shouldn't go
blundering along assuming that our system of GovernAent is the
same as the system in any other democracy.
So that you see that there are two parts to this little
lay sermon of mine: firstly, don't assume, when we talk about
the democracies of the world that we all have the same machinery
of democracy, because if you do, , we will fall into misunderstandings
every few months. Secondly, don't let us fall into
the error of thinking that we can say to millions and millions of
people who have emerged, or are emerging, from an entirely different
state of life, that our system of government is necessarily
the best for them.
All these things, all these international problems,
call for a degree of tolerance, a degree of intelligent understanding,
ahich, so far, we haven't achieved nnd it is because I
kno how important understanding and tolerance are in the world,
that I am always delighted when I see that the head of some
Government has talked to the heads of other Governments.
I know there are people in Australia who are inclined
to regard these personal contacts as a jaunt or a dcscrtion of
duty. On the contrary, they are the performance of the highest
form of duty. It will be a sad day for Australia rhen the heed
of the Government of this country cannot go and be a knom and
recognised friend and intimate of the leaders of the major Governments
of the world a very sad day.
And now that the President has come anay from the
' hitohouse, and has been travelling in London, in Bonn, in Paris,
I am delighted. And perhaps the way to sum it up is to say that
I am most of all delighted because I think it is rather sad that
in a world of human beings contacts between the most prominent
human beings should be regarded as the exception rather tian the
rule. I would like them to happen every few, weeks, without
brass bands, or trumpets, or television sets or all the other
impedimenta of publicity. I would like them to happen just as
matter of normality so that we Till all know each other better
and bettor, Lnd particularly these great men in the world, kao
each other better and better and better, because and hee . Ls
the great and closing comfort the more the ordinary people anA.
the extraordinary people of the world know each other and arfriendly
with each other, the less dense will be the cloud o,
possible war, the greater will be the chances of a-" nvrirpeace.
I I 



NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE 7.10 P. M. MONDAY, SEPT.?.
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND ACTING TREASURER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES, C. H. 0Q. C. oM. P.. ON MONDAY, 7TH SEPTEMBER. 1959.
P. M. No. 32/ 1959
COMMONWEALTH LOAN
Tomorrow a new Commonwealth loan opens. It is the first loan.,
this financial year. We hope that when the loan closes on 23rd
September, we will have obtained œ 50m. or more towards the borrowing
programme of œ 220m. approved by the Australian Loan Council for
1959/ 60, and that we will have secured conversions of a large amount
of the œ 195m. of maturing securities.
The success of a Commonwealth loan is of absolutely firstclass
importance to you.-I would like to see this fact more widely
understood. you may say, " I hold no Government bonds, and,
as for buying any this time, well, I can leave that to rich people!"
To say this would be wrong. Everybody who pays a tax, whether it is
on his income or on a packet of cigarettes, has an interest in the
success of our loans; for if they don't succeed, more money for
public works will have to come out of revenue which means out of
taxes. Everybody who wants to see more school buildings, more
housing, better roads, greater water supply, and the like, has a
lively interest in the success of our loans, which represent the
investment of some of our savings in the material progress of our
country. Those of you who hold bonds which mature on September
will, I profoundly hope, convert and not call for the cash, Your
own circumstances may compel you to do so. But if they do not,
please realise that the money to redeem unconverted bonds comes to
a real extent from revenue9 iCe. from taxation.
We arc offering the usual variety of bonds and inscribed
stock. In addition, Special Bonds Series B will remain on
issue until further notice.
I make a special mention of the Special Bonds. They show an
attractive ratu of interest, They permit the smaller investor,
should he need it, to realise his holdings w. ithout loss before
maturity. They give a bonus to anyone who holds his bonds until
October 1962, and this bonus increases until the bonds mature in
1966. The rate of interest increases in stages from 4 per cent.
in the earlier years to 5 per cent. over the last three years.
Special Bonds have in the past proved most popular.
And now a word more to the holders of maturing bonds and
stock. We place the greatest importance on your converting to the
new securities. œ 195m. of 3 1/ 8 per cent. and 3 1/ 4 per cent
securities mature on 15th September. That amount is little short
of the entire borrowing programme for Commonwealth and State works
and housing approved for this year. You can see what a problem
the Governments of the Commonwealth and States will face unless
most of you convert. The new securities carry much higher rates of
interest than those you now hold.
In the now loan there vwill be interest at per cent, for
1962 securities, 4 3/ 4 per cent. for 1968 securities or 5 per cent,,
for 1979 securities. Or you can subscribe or convert to Special
Bonds. Interest on all of those securities carries a in the
income tax rebateo
You are thus being offered a sound investment and at the
same time an opportunity to advance our country.
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
September 7, 1959, 


LAOS - MELBOURNE - 8TH SEPTEMBER 1959
LAOS
Cabinet at its meeting in Melbourne considered in detail all aspects of the Laotian situation in which it received a comprehensive report from the Acting Minister for External Affairs. It had before it analyses and reports received from Australian diplomatic missions abroad and the views of Australia’s allies and Commonwealth partners. In the course of the meeting teletype reports of the then current meeting of the Security Council And of the most recent reports of events in Laos were received.
Cabinet studied all this material and considered the likely development of events including courses which might be taken in the absence of prompt action on the part of the United Nations.
Cabinet endorsed the view that the resolution for a fact-finding mission propounded in the Security Council by Mr. Lodge on behalf of the United States and supported by so many countries including in the Council itself the United Kingdom, France, The Republic of China, the Argentine Republic, Canada, Italy, Japan, Panama and Tunisia was most timely and welcome, and if carried by the Council and promptly implemented would constitute a distinct advance in the resolution of a situation which had become acute for the Royal Laotian Government.
Cabinet decided that Australia's representatives overseas should be instructed to give any support within their means to any United Nations effort which resulted from any such resolution.
At the conclusion of the Cabinet meeting advice was received that the resolution for the appointment of a four-nation sub-committee of the Security Council to investigate and report on the situation in Laos had been carried by the Security Council and that the members to form the Sub-Committee are Argentina, Italy, Japan and Tunisia.
The day to day developments of the situation will be kept under constant review by the Ministers concerned and dealt with by them in the light of the Cabinet discussions which took place. Appropriate communication and consultation with our overseas posts and with our allies in SEATO and Commonwealth partners will of course continue.
&nbsp;
Melbourne,
8th September, 1959.


P.M. No.33/1959
&nbsp;
DENIAL ON&nbsp;TAXATION APPOINTMENT STATEMENT
BY THE PRIME MINISTER
&nbsp;
The Prime Minister today commented upon a report which appeared in some newspapers last week to the effect that the Government had appointed Sir Alexander Fitzgerald as Chairman of a Committee of Inquiry into Commonwealth taxation laws.
&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said that no such appointment had been made and that the Commonwealth had not yet considered the composition of the taxation enquiry committee. The Government was looking at the terms of reference for the committee,.
&nbsp;
Melbourne,
8th September, 1959.


10th&nbsp;September, 1959
The Premier, and gentlemen, that, really, is one of the warmest receptions I have ever had in this room. Some of you with long memories will remember why I say this,,
Now I must say at once that when I have finished my little talk I will propose the toast of " Australian Industry" and as, with all the exuberance of the politician, I will probably forget that before I finish, would you please understand that when I end up I am to be regarded as proposing the toast of " Australian Industry". My friend Burnett, won't forget it because he has to reply. Poor fellow! He has been working for four or five days with the dubious assistance of comrade Hall in the preparation of this speech. Anyhow that is the drill.
When I was a very young lad, quite a boy, if you can believe that throw your minds back to it no, not the Great White Father, nor even Uncle Bob, nor even Pig-iron Bob, but quite a boy, I was disciplined by my late father about manufacturing and protection. If I had said to him, and I didn't have the slightest disposition to say it when I was 14&nbsp;or 15, “Sorry Dad but I believe in Free Trade,&nbsp;that strange old-world, forgotten idea"', he would have expelled me from the house&nbsp;he would have said to my mother " Robert, you know, was quite intelligent".
And so I was born and bred into the idea of a protection which would make Australia a great manufacturing country, Of course I know, Sir, that your Mr. Hall., your Mr. Anderson and. other people, occasionally have their doubts as to my orthodoxy on this matter, but I'm accustomed to people's doubts and I don't mind being accused of being unorthodox, because that will give me great merit in some quarters, But from first to last I have always believed, and have always understood, that the great virtue of the future of Australia in my life time was that it would be an economy if I may use that horrible word standing on both feet primary industry, secondary industry, and that has been, in fact, the remarkable feature of the development of Australia, I look at some other countries in the . world who live on exporting what they grow and who buy, with the proceeds of their exports, the things that they need to buy, The whole character of Australia in the last 10, 15, 20 years has been that it has developed a balanced economy, so that we grow the best wool in the world, we grow all sorts of other things extraordinarily well, we buy from the rest of the world, most of it. I'm happy to say, in aid of our own production in Australia, and we have more and more provided for ourselves in factories in Australia, Now that, I think, is a remarkable development in our country,
Twentyfive years ago, thirty years ago to be precise, a depression hit Australia; a depression which was produced in the rest of the world. Thirty years ago, when we had a great depression in Australia a lot of people thought that we had got it, nobody else had, but in point of fact we received it from other parts of the world and at that time we wore predominantly balanced on one foot and in these last thirty years we have found our balance on both feet so that we export, an -thank God, we export more and more of what our factories produce and we have developed an economy in Australia which is well balanced and I believe one of the strongest economies in the world. Well, when I say that to a bunch of Manufacturers, don't think for one moment that I think that everybody will agree with everything that I say, because I know you so well, But underneath all the reviling that goes on, all those rather naughty remarks that are made in the Club when the last Budget has been produced. I know perfectly well that you gentlemen, who are so vitally concerned with manufacturing production in Australia, are, like myself, &nbsp;proud to feel that this Australia of ours is growing to economic maturity; and that is so true.
I suppose, Sir, that there have been various reasons for that. I don't expect all of you to agree with all of them, but No. 1 might I say we have had, by and large, a pretty sound tariff policy in Australia. I know that every now and then somebody thinks that the Tariff Board has gone mad, or that we have gone mad or that something else ought to oe done, but, by and large, we have operated in Australia for many years now I'm not talking only about my own Government, but about its predecessors under a pretty sound, sensible tariff policy, not protecting the incompetent but giving proper protection to industries that are efficiently conducted and ' which contribute something to the economic life of Australia, And that has been one of the things,
We have had another great advantage. We have, believe it or not, had the confidence of investors. Now, not being much of an investor myself, but knowing something about what goes on around the world, I've always been interested to know why investors have, increasingly, a feeling of confidence in Australia. And the answer to that, I think, is very important,
On this last extravagant journey of mine around the World I didn't know how extravagant it was until 1 looked at the estimate but on this last journey I sat in that frightful, forbidden place, Wall Street, with a number of people whom &nbsp;I can describe only as "tycoons" that is to say, the group of people that either you belong to or you hope to belong to and the one thing that interested them was, how it came about that with all our passing difficulties the fall in the price of wool~ this and that, the trouble about lead and zinc Australia had kept on an even keel and was developing so fast. ! nd, of course, when they asked me that question, naturally I b-lushed a little, and said: " Well, of course you know modesty forbids,,,." All this is horse feathers, you see, But they were fascinated about something that had happened which really has not so much to do with me, or with my colleagues, as it has to do with the good sense and balanced judgment of the Australian people, We had refused to be stampeded into some odd courses and, believe me, these men didn't come down in the last shower they understand about these things and they said " s! ell this is really a remarkable thing that the Australian people, as a whole, should have behaved with such balance and good sense and good judgment, so that today we can say to our clients ' You want to invest somewhere?' ' Yes'. ' well invest in Australia, This is a sound place''.
Now I'm not saying that to you gentlemen, because I want you to think that I have done something clever&nbsp;about it I've never done anything clever in my life but, because I want you to know that between us all, politicians, my friend Mr Cahill, myself, all the rest of us oh yes, we have all had a hand in this business because between us all, manufacturers farmers, graziers, we have managed to do something in the sight of the world which the world, the critical world, hadn't quite expected. And that is why Australia is, today, receiving investments, confidence from the rest of the world that nobody would have thought, quite likely.
There is another reason for all this, I am not going to tell you that Australian employers were always vastly competent in management all I know about most of them is that they run their businesses rather better than I would under the same circumstances but I'm not going to flatter you by saying that all this has always been perfect, I do profoundly believe, however, that, increasingly, as the years go on, there has been an increase in the skill of management, in the sense of responsibility by management which has, I think, done immense things for the development of Australia.
We have had, of-course, an enormous increase in population, at once our advantage and, in a slight sense, our danger, because we may be disposed to gamble on it, but we have had over these years beginning with the predecessor Government of mine when Mr. Calwell was the Minister for Immigration had the most remarkable increase in population in Australia by migration. This is a bi-partisan matter and the result is that every business man, every manufacturer, whatever he may be, every retailer, has been able to say " There'll be 21% more people next year; we have an increasing constituency", and this produces confidence; this produces that forward-looking idea in the minds of people which means so much to a young, and to a growing country. That has been a great factor.
The next factor I'm not putting them in order of merit is this, and I would like to remind you of it. Two wonderful things have been happening in Australia: one is that we have had a period of industrial peace, a period of continuity of employment which is quite remarkable and that has gone, hand in hand with the fact and I firmly believe this that the Australian employee, of whatever grade he may be, in any factory or any undertaking, is second to none in the world. He is a lively man, he has humour, he has character, he has a native degree of skill which is not to be surpassed, and if I took any one of you employers in a factory, tonight, and took you on one side and said: " W4hat are these men like who work for you?" you would say: " Well, if there's as good as that all round the world, they'll do me" And that is quite right, tle argue the toss about this and that, but in a moment of difficulty, in a moment when resource is needed, in a moment when good-humoured courage is needed, give me, and give you, an ordinary honest Australian, And all those things have been built into it. We've had industrial peace; we've had superb industrial resource.
Now, Sir, if I might turn away from those selected reasons for our advancement, might I just say a word about the pessimists, because, you know, the world is full of them. Oh dear! There are so many fellows who always know well you remember the old poem " We'll all be ruined" said Hanrahan " if rain don't fall this week" you know that lovely thing " Around the Boree Log". So, therefore, it's not a bad idea to take an example I hesitate to mention Port Kembla, because everybody except myself knows that I am the humble and obedient servant of the Broken Hill Proprietary Company-( laughter)-but after an interval of years I did manage to catch up with one of the Broken Hill Proprietary people the other day and I said " Put on a false beard dear boy, and come in and I'll talk with you". Very nice man indeed, and a Scotsman. ( That's a jolly good thing to be Ted). And I said:." Now talking about the " Apostles of Gloom" could you give me a few facts.". Now when I was fighting my battles in the High Court with Dr. Evatt, you know years ago when we were both regarded as promising we're not any longer now: on both sides of the House they're saying " I wonder when the old boy will give it away" but anyhow, Bert Evatt and I were fighting out battles and I must tell you, in retrospect, in a highly intellectual way in the High Court, these things used to go on and people were gloomy. Well at that time Port Kembla was just a funny little place down there, chiefly immortal because 20 years ago it was at Port Kembla that I acquired the pseudonym of " Pig-iron Bob", and therefore, you know, imperishable in my memory. But it was the minor factor in the Steel world. Well now, in 194+ 7 at Port Kembla they produced 478,000 tons of steel and this year 2,000,000. No very conclusive evidence of decadence is it? In 1947 they produced 719,000 tons of coal and this year over 13 million tons of coal. In 1947 they employed 5,000 people and 4today 14,000 people.
Now I mention those facts to you, not because I want to advertise the Broken Hill Proprietary, because it doesn't need much advertisement anyhow, but because here is one of the basic industries in Australia which has shown in terms of production of coal , production of steel in employment of people what almost illimitable opportunities there are in Australia. The one kind of man I can't tolerate is the man who's always crying " Stinking fish" and who says " O0h, yes, but I mean it'll be different next year. There are all kinds of factors that are operating". I don't believe it for a moment. I believe that in years' time somebody who then occupies the post which I precariously occupy will be heard to say something about the volume of production, the development in Australia which would, if I could sit up in my coffin and hear, stagger me.
And therefore I speak to you as a complete optimist, not a blind optimist because, before I sit down I just want to say one thing to you about the other side of the middle.
It is quite true that our industrial development has been enormous. It is quite true that we have this enormous increase in population, this enormous increase in employment, but it is also true that wo, like any other country in the world, live under the shadow of inflation.
The other day I was going to say, but still, it's only the other week I was in Paris and I had a long talk with the man who had written the Economic Report for de Gaulle which was then adopted by de Gaulle and by Pinay and became operative in France, That was the report under which France has made the greatest economic recovery in modern history. Don't let's ignore that as something unimportant, Two years ago France was -the weak member of the Massina Agreement, the power seat, the European common market, and today, rather less than 18 months since do Gaulle came into Office, France is developing strength and power, economically and significance and that marvellous report that was made to 1hem, and which was adopted was fundamentally based upon beating inflation, because inflation let's face up to it has destroyed France, economically, at least three times in modern history. And so I was very interested in this.
And as I look around my own country I'm bound to say, and I say it to you manufacturers with particular point, a steady growing inflation, 2% a year, 3% a year, may appear to be all right if you're dealing in equities, if you're pursuing the price up, but from the point of view of the Nation, not a very healthy thing, Why not a healthy thing? It is not a healthy thing because if you have a steady growth of inflation then the financing of public works will become more and more difficult, because people don't normally invest on Fixed Interest securities if the value of the currency is falling,, " Well" somebody may say " WIhat of it? W1hat we want is more investment in the private sector and, I suppose, less investment in the public sector."
And that, Sir, brings me to the last thing that I want to say to you. These boys who talk about the public sector of investment and the private sector of investment as if they were utterly different, are utterly wrong. There is hardly a business represented here tonight that hasn't expanded of recent years. How does it expand? It expands by saying to the Premier of the State: " Let's have more houses, Let's have more roads,, Let's have better transport facilities. We must have more schools". You can't put another thousand people into some industrial occupation and deny to their children the schools that they ought to attend or the roads on which they ought to travel, or the electric light or the electric power, Look I tell you this, and I have always said it, as my friend the Premier knows, that 95% of the public investment in Australia is essential to private capital development. And therefore people who say: " Well it's the public sector or the private sector" arc setting up an utterly false dichotomy. All of these things, there may be 5% of extravagance who knows I don't know but you may take it from me that 95j% of the Public Works expenditure in Australia is directly in aid of that kind of development which will enable industry to expand and to become strong and to employ people and to have their children taught, and to have their employees brought to their work. And that being so I beg of you, forget about this alleged difference. We are all acting in the same way and if we have inflation going on year by year by year then we will raise less money on the public account and you will have less schools, and less roads, and less power, and less light and you will find that you are suffering from inflation.
I know that there are plenty of people who occasionally say to themselves: "It doesn't matter about inflation. We are equity men; we'll chase it up" and that is why I mention to you that you can't chase it up in the field of public works and this drivel that is talked by people who ought to know better, about public works being hostile to private enterprise is drivel because unless we have both we will never become the great country that we are becoming and which to the limit of my capacity I'm determined we shall become.
Now that is rather a pontifical speech, but it all ends up by me saying to the President who is a great friend of mine, and he represents a great body of men here tonight, who are constructively engaged in the development of Australia, Sir, we are grateful to you and I'm going to ask everybody to drink your health.


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER RT. HON. R.G. MENZIESAT THE OPENING OF THE JANET BIDDLECOMBE WING OF THEQUEEN ELIZABETH HOME, BALLARAT, 12TH SEPTEMBER 1959
Sir, I would like to make it quite clear that I am here today by the direct orders of a man called Dudley Erwin who had ascertained something of my past and who said I had to come. I claim no virtue for it, because when I said "Yes" I hadn't realised that the second semi-final was on, and perhaps I’m happier here than I would be there, having regard to the scores that have been announced.
This is quite an occasion. I am not going to spoil it by making a long speech to you, but the Queen Elizabeth Home, commemorates a great woman, and the Janet Biddlecombe Wing (and I have listened with fascination to what Major Russell has said about her) commemorates a great and kind-hearted woman. So this is an occasion, and a particularly interesting occasion for me, because from the outside I've known a good deal of the history of this place.
When I was a small boy, as you've been reminded, I was schooled for some years in Ballarat, sometimes very successfully and sometimes not. And I lived with an old Scots grandmother in Dana Street just over the road, and at that time this place, was known as "The Benev" to us who were bouncing boys in the neighbourhood. And I must tell you it wasn't a very attractive place. I know that a lot of kind people took an interest in it but it was a depressing looking place; it depressed me, even when I was a boy, and a boy takes a lot of depressing, A corrugated iron fence on the other side of the road from my grandmother's house, had on it, even when I was a boy of 12, the last scrolled scores of the street cricket match engaged in by my father and by his brothers, so you see it goes back a pretty fair way.
The fence has gone and the old benevolent institution is not recognisable any longer. Now this seems to me to be a sort of microcosm of what's been going on in the world, because honestly in those days, and I don't think that a long memory exaggerates the facts, one felt, even as a child, a sense of pity for the people who lived there the old men who sat on forms outside the old building, or walked somewhat precariously down Ascot Street to the corner for some purpose that wasn't allowed to enquire into at that time. But everything was well, I think the right word to use is this, that it did not seem to me, even as a child, to be consistent with human dignity, and-what we have learned in these modern times, with these wonderful. places, is the importance of individual human dignity nobody looking down, but everybody looking across, meeting people in a perfectly normal, social sense; people living in quarters, not shabby quarters, not the poor things that one can remember, but living in bedrooms and using dining-rooms, and using sitting rooms and sun balconies and so on. Which are good and in which they can meet each other with pride and receive their friends with pride.
This is tremendously important. I'm perfectly certain that in the 19th Century a great deal of what they were pleased to call "charity" was almost a loss of dignity on the part of the recipient. We have, with all our blunders and we've made many at least realised that human dignity matters and we must never undermine it. And that is why I like these things that have developed, because people go on living, meeting their friends, living their own lives, not in an institutional atmosphere, but as they would like to have lived their own lives if they had been able to retain their own homes and maintained them. This is tremendously important; this, I venture to say, is one of the great social revolutions of our time, and that is why I am here, and that is why my wife is here. We think this is one of the proudest things that we have been privileged to witness in our own public life.
I must tell you that the Commonwealth provision for Grants for Aged Persons' Homes which began only a few years ago, began with a conversation at a table in my own home in which my wife was the talker and I, for once was the listener. And she said something to me "Look" she said "Don't ask me to understand a lot of these things that you're doing, but I tell you one thing about aged people in Australia a home to live in, a house to live in, a flat to live in, a roof to live under, their own vine and fig-tree, - this is the most important lot in Australia. Now why don't you do something about it?" Well I know there are a lot of men here who think they're ruling the roost when they're at home but I've never suffered from that illusion. The moment I was told "Why don't you do something about it" I said "All right, dear, Yes", swallowed two or three times went over to the Cabinet and propounded, having done a little thinking about it on the journey, propounded this idea of the Commonwealth granting £ for £ on Homes for Aged Persons. And such a success did it become ‘that within two years I think it was but Senator Wedgwood will recall we made it £2 for a £. Never was money better spent. It didn't discourage individual effort. Nothing that the Government of Victoria does, or that the Commission does, or that the Commonwealth does, ought to discourage individual effort, because Government Departments, with all the wisdom of their outlook which they occasionally achieve, cannot build into the bricks and mortar of a place like this, that spirit of kindliness which only individuals can produce. And every individual who does something for a place like this, every individual who comes to it, who sits and talks, not condescendingly, but on ordinary normal terms, distils a feeling of humanity which is of the very essence of this home. I hope it will go on like that.
I think we have shaken ourselves free of some of the old ideas of charity "Now abideth faith, hope and charity" I think that is a wonderful chapter in Corinthian - but I don't like the word "charity" because it has changed its meaning in the course of centuries, and therefore, I prefer the newer version "Now abideth faith, hope and love and the greatest of these is love". It is so true. It is so easy to find a little money and think that we've done our duty to pay our taxes and say "Well, after all, I pay my taxes, let the Government look after it”. I don't want somebody to say to me some day, nor to you, "Well we've paid our taxes, if you're in trouble let the Government look after you". I would like to think that a few human beings were interested in me, wouldn't you? And if we all think that way, and if everybody in Australia manages to think that way, then it won't be only Governments that find the money, though they will undoubtedly go on finding more and more, but it will be individual human beings who will feel, Sir - as they respond to your prospective appeal for £50,000 - &nbsp;"Well, at any rate I'm paying my little mite" towards a place, which, as I began with saying and as I end with saying, embodies in itself a complete revolution that has occurred in our country in relation to social service, in relation to the care of elderly people. Perhaps I speak with perhaps some warmth on this matter, because I think the last remark I ought to make to you, Mr Nicholson, is that, by Christmas time I'll be qualified to enter.
So my wife and I are both delighted to be here; I have the greatest honour in the world in declaring this Wing open. I mention with honour the names of the two great ladies, one our Sovereign, and the other your benefactor, whose names are asocial -ted with this home. I shall now, having done that, step down, with all the comfortable feeling that a husband has when he knows that the things which remain to be done must be done by his wife,&nbsp;


Sir, I think that every speech on an occasion like this ought to be,; in with a species of confassion, and my confession will begin kby the telling of a story which has a moral but it happens to be exactly ttw opposite moral from the owe that Itm supposed toXG'ntLn I remomber, that man, years ago it must be mny yearsago. because I vas a lawyer mid quito respestablej I was a mw)ber of the Bar' Oo~ ineil in the State of Victoria and a omplaint, hadbeen made against a rather wesl~ in member of the Bar. It qmmebefore the Cinittee of Coumail and a very respected and respetable,senior mamber or the iA r, who was present put his stol-eimispectacles on, looked at the rest of us, tok thm off, vithdzev hischair 6 Inches from the airele and said " I want to make It quitsclear that the man about whom this coplaint is made is a man forwhom I don't oars, and therefore I declare myself disq Mlfod bFbias and Iwiii take no further part in the proceedings'. He 0elsbratedthat br doing back another 6 inches but,, of course not lyleaving the room. Those are the naosties of life. that I thinkyou all ought to orn to understant.W* ell an this ocession I's disqualified Or bias. But ItIs the other ; in of biLas, because Lord and Lady do I&amp; Warr areervery old friends of mine. We have knweach other and ifImySay 8o# liked each other for a quarter of a century. It isoeof the hepwna things in myown life$ and In the life of my wife,that vs should fa vs them : oth In Australia and that he,, a dubiouscharacter ( Laughter) was once described tw a former Country Partrcolleagne of mine as the best pig-farmer In jroat Britain. And Irembr being delighted to know that he was a very go04 pig.. fazmerSI had no reason to doubt It but I was particularly pleased be.cause in spite ofthat unpromising beginning he did not propose, astabilization scheme for pips. But really, we are old friends. Icouldn't tell you how delighted I an that he has orn out here, andthat he has come as Chairman of this 4reat Society.You know It is a great mistake to take it for grantedthat people take up posts of this kind just for' fun. They take upr * to of this kind because they have something In them that tellshem that this particlar thing is important. After all, myfiriend lord do I&amp; Warr at fiva, an I imagines esablishing theRed Mban tuibe Mom a; the DelaWUTe Indians' always Imaginedthat thoug&amp; the features haven't persisted as much as one mighthave supposed has had a rich and varied experience of U1t. ItI saWo to you about his biograplW you would all be fasoinated. andhe as had a lot of experience of polities and he knows how pollticiansthink. That is not a very easy thing to know. For exemplo,the Oceissionar lpf Taxation over there, he doesn't know bow politicians&amp; think, but we always know, or we think we knw, how hethinks, which is perhaps all the more imprtant.ilut Lord do la ia" r has really had a restarkable aii'rond* xp-! rienoe of plitical. affairs and vtien I found that he was to beChairman of the Royal = CooWveaIth Society I can't tell you howpleased I was because this is no task of theocqi this Is a task ofpractice, of somebody who understands what's jo o n.A" d so having discharjed my obligation to declare my biasjas any Company Director, I believe, would the next thing I want tosay to you in that his arrival here and Uis mission around Australia,helps to remind us, if we need to be reminded that the Crc eathothis British ~ owath of owe, has ibeat thinga, we..maxiable thiug stirring tishave happened to It and, In perticularphave happened to it in the ladt l't or 15 years. And vs
2.my easily find ourselves divided into two schools of thoughtsThose who sy 0" ell we know the old* Ran it changed?' and thosewho say * We no-begin to understand the no which is quite diftbrent,in 3507 ways, but which is enriched bor the meories and pr-4ctioes ofthe past'. And this is the cwuoial question. Are wo to go on chan&amp;.Ing an little as possible, being as reluctant as possible, or are weto 2147 e " w we are, There are maydiffer enoes. There areindeed s &amp; Aties different prsonal alleglanme but we are a re-BaabU &amp; of. s nots'resembling too intimately the stateof affairs of 25 years agog or 50 years aip, or 75 years agop butan association of countries with certain omn feelings and* as Ialways hopes with certain oomon passions and faiths*. And Ifthat Is the position then the C I Mlt has not looked backexcept to derive pride from Its past._-It looks for~ rard to see VLat itcan do for the world and in the world# not only in your lifetimes,and am, but In the lifetimes of many# zany millions of people inthe future. And Lord de I&amp; darr is a Chairman who has that forwardlooking mind; not anchoring himself by regret, buit propelling him.-self bF a clear' vision of the future and that,, Sirs is th* secondreason why I'm delighted to see him.And the third reason is really involved in the sooo.. Irememiber a few years ago, I hop nobody will quote this against me,though that wouldn't be a novelty, 9 but I remember saw years ageaddressing a patriotic society in London and feeling rather horrifiedby the fact that 9% of those present were old dodderers like mefou sees this was a sort of old sen's and old womm's association.We we" e all mietyrespectable people. We ocouLdn' t have beenbetter. Oie said the proper things and we listonodto the prorthings* The Stitish Commnwmealth is not an old ommuity. M Brit.ish Ctath In point of faat, viewe In the eyes of historyisone of the young, vigorous things in the world. [ et's pet that Intoour minds, True we've gone through a phase. We've seen all sortsof chanoos, but It Is the future that matters. And I hope that oneof the results of i-ord do la Warr's visit to Australia will be thatall over thisContineat, and not least in Canberra, we will aee sooresand hundreds and thosands of young amn md young women who arepodto be British who have a sense of the destiny of the BritishCoiaanealtt, wo, 2ill join this Society and work. in it and with itso that our grand.. 4hildren m or two of whom already show a dispositIonto be rather offensive so that our grandchildren wat beheard to say in a few years' 1imZ ' Poor old follow. Bit of a G. M. torew' but vill coe to believe that they've Inherited something,something of pride, something of responsibilityq something ef passion,that means so much to the world. And for those three reasons, amof bias, and the other two of reason, I = delighted, Sir, to acoeptyour invitation to speak in support of this toast*.


P. M. No. 34/1959
Statement by the Prime Minister and Acting Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies,. CH, QC, MP.
The Prime Minister and Acting Treasurer, Mr Menzies, today announced that Mr H. N. Giles, one of the persons who were recently appointed to the Commonwealth Banking Corporation Board under the 1959 banking legislation, has been appointed as Deputy Chairman of the Board. As previously announced, Mr W. D. McDonald, has been appointed as Chairman of the Board.
Mr Menzies also announced the appointment of the following members of the Board as members of the three Executive Committees of the Board:
Executive Committee for the Commonwealth Trading Bank
MrA. N. ArmstrongMr H. N. GilesMr G. H. RushworthMr A. Burton Taylor
Executive Committee for the Commonwealth Savings Bank
Mr R. G. BaxterMr G. H. RushworthSir Francis P. Selleck, M. C.Sir Roland Wilson, C. B. E.
Executive Committee for the Commonwealth Development Bank
Sir Albert E. Axon, K. 3. E.Mr R. G. BaxterMr H. N. GilesMr E. T. Loton
Mr Menzies said that these appointments to the Executive Committees had been made following consultation by the Treasurer, Mr Harold Holt, with the Corporation Board before his departure for overseas.
Mr Menzies explained that under the legislation the Managing Director of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation ( Mr E. B. Richardson, will also be a member of each Executive Commit -teo. The Chairman of the Board is not eligible for membership of any Executive Committee but has the right to attend any meetings of an Executive Committee. The Executive Committees will have the duty of ensuring that their respective Banks give effect to the policy laid down by the Board for them and to any directions given by the Board inrelation to their affairs.
All the appointments provided for under the 1959 banking legislation have now been made. The appointments will take effect as from the date the legislation is proclaimed to come into operation ( which is likely to be about the end of the year). In the meantime the appointees will carry on withthe planning work that is necessary before the now banking structure can be brought&nbsp; into being.
Canberra18th September, 1959.


P.M. No. 35/1959
FOR PRESS:
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
SOVIET UNION’S DISARMAMENT PROPOSAL
Since in the free world we all wish to see the end of war, Mr. Khrushchev’s speech was beyond question brilliantly clever. But what we have to consider is its concrete significance.
The existence of armaments in the world is not the cause of international tension; international tension is the cause of armaments. Had it not been for the Soviet Union's post-war activities in respect of Poland, East Germany, Hungary and other Middle European countries, it is very doubtful whether the weight of armaments in the United States or in British countries would have been more than a fraction of what it is.
There is something rather ironical in the Russian dictator offering disarmament now that he has achieved so much conquest and made so many millions of people his slaves. Another odd feature of this latest pronouncement is that it comes after a long series of discussions in the Disarmament Commission of the United Nations in which the Soviet Union has steadily refused an adequate system of international inspection to see to the observation of any programme of reduced armaments. What system of inspection is now offered? Here again we come to a matter which should prevent us from being too naive about this offer. For in Democracies, the existence of armed forces and of weapons is and must be a matter of public knowledge. In a vast country which has no democracy, in which the press is muzzled, in which people are allowed to listen only to the views of the Government and in which communications with the outside world operate completely according to orders, inspection behind a disarmament programme is not easy.
The world will want to know a lot more of the practical aspects of Mr. Khrushchev’s offer and will need to have some very large guarantees of good faith before it will ,i ye three hearty cheers on this occasion. For example, what is Mr. Khrushchev proposing to do about Berlin or East Germany? So long as such matters of acute difference remain, Hr. Khrushchev is dealing merely with the symptoms and not with the disease.
ADELAIDE, 20th Sept. 1959&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. fl. G. MENZIES,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 24TH SEPT., 19 ' 9
Mr Chairman I just want to intervene very briefly to
say something on behalf of the Government in this matter. The
honourable member for Scullin ( Mr. Peters) appears to be under
the impression that the point that has just been under discussion
has never been considered. I can assure him that he is
wrong. Very many aspects of this law have engaged very close
attention, But I think it is necessary to point out that when
a Government produces a budget, it does not consider social services
alone; it considers the whole range of financial and economic
activities in the country, and it has to arrive at a
balanced conclusion as to the terms of a budget which it thinks
will be best for the country. In doing that, it cannot concentrate
on one matter to the exclusion of others. It does something
useful, as it hopes, in relation to each m--atter and on
this occasion, we have done something useful as I believe, and
as I think most people believe, in relation o the rate of pension.
In previous years, we have made changes in the means
test and we have dealt with other aspects of the social services
law. I know, Sir nobody knows better that there are
great differences dm..' pinion around the cham--ber on the matter
of the m--eans test. The property means test has been very much
discussed of late. The honourable member for Port Adelaide ( Mr.
Thom.-pson) has given notice of an armendmaent in relation to it.
Another amendm-ent is down in the name of the honourable memlber
for Mackellar ( Mr. 1; entworth). I am very well aware of these
differences of opinion. Somie of miy own friends have very
strong views on them.
Aill I want to say, Sir, is that we gave considerable
thought to these matters as part of the general Budget preparation.
The Budget has been presented; this is one of the
Budget measures, and, naturally the Government stands by it. A
vote against it is a vote against the existence of the Government.
That is elementary in parliamentary practice.
Mr Curtin: Look at the sour faces on Government supporters now.
I thought that some of the new boys opposite might not
know that. That, of course, is an elementary observation, Sir.
I apologize for having felt obliged to state it. But I want to
say this: Although the Government has not felt able to deal
with the means test, or, in'particular, the property means test,
in the Budget and in this measure, that does not mean that we
regard the problem as closed or as finally disposed of. On the
contrary, there are still many problems to be worked out, and
this, no doubt, is one of the most contentious of them.
I have, some timae since, agreed with m y colleagues in
the Cabinet that it is not always satisfactory to deal with the
intricacies of the social services structure at the time when
you are considering the broad sweep of Budg et preparation, and
I therefore propose to have this problem, and those problems allied
to it, very carefully examined by the Government well before
the preparation of the next Budg et. I say that because I
know that the problem is difficult, and I believe that it requires
concentrated attention and a Egood deal of close study.
I want to muake it quite N~ lear, Sir, that when I say
that, I am making no commitment. Ido not undertake to say
what the result will be.
Mr Reynolds: Two bob each way.
Of course, if I undpp'. took to say what the result would
be, it would be mere humabug to engage in the investigation; and
I do not propose to engage in humbug at this late stage of my
political life. 



BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( MR. MENZIES)
for the
OPENING OF WORLD REFUGEE YEAR IN AUSTRALIA
1959 has been named World Refugee Year by the United Nations.
In the resolution carried in November of last year, it was
decided to focus interest in the refugee problem and to encourage
additional financial contributions from Governments, voluntary agencies
and the general public.
An Appeal was made to all Member States to promote World
Refugee Year. This humane resolution was carried against the votes
of the Soviet Bloc. Australia has fully accepted and is participating
in it. Since the war the problem of refugee has been both melancholy
and acute. There are many thousands of refugees in Europe
and these are added to every day. In the Middle East there are a
million Arab refugees. From China have come thousands of refugees
of European origin. In Hong Kong there are at least a million Chi-.
nese refugees. We, in Australia, have in earlier years brought over
200,000 refugees to our shores. Our country is, on a population basis
the leading country of refugee settlement. Living unler good
conditions and with complete freedom, we night have had little reason
to understand the heart-breaking experience which has been undergone
by so many people driven from their hones and occupations
into strange countries, there to eke out a miserable and precarious
living in completely unaccustomed circumstances. The refugee problem
is in that sense one of social and eccnomic resettlement. In
another sense it is a moral problem.
It is to Australia's credit that she has, in fac,, understood
such matters very well, In one sense this, of course, is a
problem for Governments; in another, a problem for the Churches;
but in the major sense it is a problem for pivate citizens who desire
to make some humane contribution to its soluticn.
The Commonwealth Government gives a lead. We have promised
a cash contribution of œ 50,000. and also that ' public donations
to this fund will be allowable deductions for income taxpurposeso
The matter is non-party. The Right Honourable the Leader of the Opposition
is supporting it. But bearing in mind the splendid tradition
of generous giving in Australia for -ood causes, I e no
doubt that the public response will be immediate and great,
It has not been easy for organised world opinion in the
United Nations or elsewhere to act directly in respect of some of
the dreadful events which have driven so many people from their own
hones and their own fatherland, but at least \ e can in the : most
practical fashion show our sympathy for those less fortunate than
ourselves who have been the innocent victims of conflicts and upheavals
of which in our own land we have been happy enough to kn. w
nothing. It is a good thing that Australia should have earned a
reputation for a sensitive understanding of the problemsof people in
other lands; that we should not come to be regarded as people who
are detached from the miseries of the world. I know that we will
not come to be so regarded, for I believe that there are no people
anywhere with warner hearts and more generous imprl' ses, This aprea"
therefore, is at one and the sane time a challenge and an opporlun--
ity. I am confident that we shall make a contribution which
will serve as one more proof of our instinctive national and individual
understanding and genercsity.
CANBERRA 27th September, 1959. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT THE OPENING OF THE OVERSEAS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CONFERENCE, 12 SPRING STREET,
SYDNEY, 28TH SEPTEMBER, 19529
Sir, I am very grateful to you for your very kind
words, but you struck a chill into my heart when you referred
to what I an about to say as an " inaugural address", because I
don't mind telling you that I said cheerfully to one of your
Masters here today " How long do I go, about 12 minutes?" and I
distinctly got the impression that that would be acceptable unless
I could improve on it and make it eight. And to have
this signified by you, Postmaster-General, as an " inaugural address"
is really rather terrifying.
Still it is a family conference. I hope you will allow
me to talk to you in a family way. I have been attending
family conferences, meaning by that, conferences in which have
been represented Great Britain anid Canada and Australia and
New Zealand for more years than the locust has eaten. In fact
you wouldn't think to look at me, with my boyish outlines
( laughter) that the first one I attended was just on a quarter
of a century ago at No, 10 Downing Street.) and I have been,
by some accident or other, at many of them since and I enjoy the
family conference. And particularly is it a good thing when you
don't just meet to exchange a few ideas and produce one of those
famous communiques with which I have been associated in the past,
from which all meaning is religiously excluded. After all,
this is in a very true sense a business discussion. You are go
-ing to deal with a great enterprise, which I am sure we will
all approach in a most co-operative way. It is a reat enterprise
that will bring us even closer together and more securely
together in the field of oornmuni cations.
When I knew that I was to do this and I knew because
Charles Davidson ordered me to do it, and he's a Colonel, and I
therefore treat him with a certain amiount of meretricious respect,
I allowed my mind to play on the subject of'corimunications,
Well, it is, I think one of the remarkable things of
this century to look back I look back over my own lifetime
and to ask oneself: " In what field of humian activity is it that
the greatest developments have been m~ ade in my lifetime?". I
put on one side the subtle mysteries of the bio-chemists and the
people who have wrought their own miracles, but in ordinary human
relations the most remarkable miracle that has been wrought
has been in the field of communi cations.
One has only to look back on it, I am old enough to
remember the first time a telephone appeared in our village at
any rate and it filled me with such horror that I've never
quite got over it. My staff tell me that I'm tho rudest man on
the telephone they've ever known, Well that's only because,
when you pick that thing up and you're asked a question you say
" Yes" and hang up, or Then the other fellow hangs up.
But they tell me I am not very good at it, that it is all rather
abrupt, and perhaps the reason for that is that in my later
youth, which some of you will remember very well, it was a great
thing to get on to the telephone in the evening and talk to some
young woman with whom you were passionately in love, or thought
you were, Those conversations used to last about three quarters
of an hour. They were not conversations they were interrupted
by long silences while each partner to this curious transaction
tried to think of something amusing to say, and failed hopelessly.
But the telephone well, look at it, you find yourself
on one side of the world and you say " I'd like to speak to somebody
in Australia", or " I'd like to speak to somebody in the 
United States" or " the United Kingdom" and quite frequently you
bet through. That, I think, is fascinating and not infrequent
-ly, when you have got through, you hear wha the other man has
to say! They tell me it's very " good, and of course it is a
miracle. The other day I had occasion to answer the telephone
in the morning.. They put a call through to me and it was my
wife and she was travelling to Tasmania aboard the new ferry
" The Princess of Tasmania". She launched it and they gave her
a free journey the first time. And I said to her " Hello.' Did
you have a nice voyage?", you see one of those fatuous remarks
and she said " We are at sea" t. Well that is a state
that I have been in so frequently that it took me nearly a minute
to realise that they were still on the water, using a radio
telephone, and really, it was as if you were in the same room
carrying on a conversation.
The telephone the telegraph, wireless, broadcasting,
television, those are all matters of communication, these are
all matters that bring us nearer to each other and now they
have discovered a now way of communicating wih ' the moon, by
hitting it. Well that is ag-ain an essay in the field of communication,
because it is perhaps occasionally overlooked that
all these satellites are sending their owm nessages just as
pilotless aircrafts send their own messages. We have the whole
of this simply phenomenal development of communic,: itions. You
exports take it for granted because you understand about it and
you can see the next step arising, but I assure you that when I
sat down and said to myself " Well there's the telegraph,
there's telephone, wireless, there's broadcasting, there's television
and there are satellites isn't this the most remarkable
revolution that's occurred, humanly speaking, in -the last quarter
of a century?". And I an sure that it is. I was talking
to a very distinguished business man the other day from another
country and we agreed that if understanding between countries,
and business contacts between countries could advance in the
next 10 or 20 years as phenomenally as communications between
countries and individuals have advanced, the world had a fair
chance of improving itself before this century is out. And
that, of course, is so true.
You have made the world smaller. It isn't your fault,
nor, I hope, is it m-. ine in particular, but it certainly isn't
your fault, that in the very period in which you have enabled
people almost literally to stretch out their hands and touch
each other, and speak with each Uther, as if they were face to
face, in that very period tho."* Cld has'% boen very busy
building up divisions of other kinds. We have had one of the
greatest waves of acute nationalism since the War that the World
has ever seen. Prejudices have been exacerbated, hostilities,
sometimes very bitter ones, have been played on, some of the
most barbarous things in modern history have occurred, and all
this, in spite of the fact that you have put into the hands and
minds of men and women these priceless means of talking with
each other, coimmunicating with each other, 7, etting,, to understand
each other. And therefore I hope that we are going~ to have a
second revolution coming on top of yours indeed the World
needs it very much,
Anybody who is concerned with politics, anybody who
attends, as I do myself, International Conferences in which we
discuss the grave issues of peace and war and of International
understanding, can't help being struck, time after time, that
while we have had put into our possession the whole mechanics of
International understanding, we have, so far, not yet acquired
the spirit. Our hands have been, to that extent, more adroit
than our hearts, or than our minds.
But, Sir, I believe that when we have broken down
some of the barriers, when Leaders of Great Nations have come to 
3.
regard their meetings as a commonplace and not as some phenomenon
which requires massive headlines, when they have got into
the habit of saying " Well I'm so close to this man, my means of
communication are so easy that I'll have a talk with him tonight,
I'll ask him to come over tomorrow.." don't forget that
the Jet Aircraft is one of the great means of communication, and
not merely a means of destruction think we ought to have a
chat next week-end". This kind of thing which is commonplace in
your own country will, I hope, become a commonplace, internationally.
And when it does I think great changes will come to the
world. You know, if you can stand right off and be at arms'
length it is terribly easy to nurse your prejudices and to
nurse your hatreds and to say " That nan's no good"'. I have met
a lot of fellows in the world in my lifetime that I thought were
terrible fellows. I became quite fond of them after I met them.
I even can remember this is very confidential having a deputation
come to me once from a few sturdy characters and at the
end of it, one ofthem stayed back and said: " I think I'd just
like to tell you that you're not half such a big so-and-so as
they told me you were". There you are, that was the benefit of
direct face to face cormmunication
But, really Gentlemen, it is, I think, a great and con
-structive piece of work to be able to sit down to discuss this
Cable, to discuss this great enterprise which will bring our
family closer together, and it is a jolly -ood thing to start
with the family, because not one of us is contemplating fighting
the other and we all know that on all the great occasions of
trial, we are the one people and we stand together, We know
that, and therefore something that brings us closer together is
a great thing, but it doesn't only bring us closer together it
is another stop in this remarkable development which has put into
the hands of the people of the world one of the greatest instruments
for peace that the world has ever had. I would like
you to think of it in that way. These are great instruments
for peace, because they are great instruments for mutual understanding,
and if we are such fools in the world as not to use
these implements as we shoid, well then, that's a reflection on
us, but, I venture to say, not a reflection on you,
As far as we are concerned in Australia, we have an
undiminished belief in the significance of the British Commonwealth
in this world, and if I may say so, we have the oldest
associations in the world, with the countries that are here represented,
indissoluble associations, We can have an argument,
occasionally, but the argument is never fatal, it is an enjoy
able argument.-we are all argumentative people, except New Zealanders,
and of course they take it for granted that you will
agree with them anyhow.
But to get together in this fashion in this new exhibition
of co-operation in the communications field will, I
believe, be a very powerful contribution to the sanity and civilization
of the year. To tell you the truth, and this of
course is very secret information, I'm much more interested in
what you are going to produce out of this conference and the results
which I hope will flow from it, than I am in the question
of " Who next hits the moon with a rocket?". I don't like this
monkeying about with the Moon myself. The moon has been quite
useful to you and me in its day cnd of course it has other trifling
advantages in the world's geography and oceanography.
But these are the straight, simple means of bringing
people closer togethor. Many things that have been happening
since in the International world, though they would be great instruments
of bringing us together, are thought of, and written
about, as if they were instruments to divide us, to make us 
jealous of somebody else and to stir up hatred in our bosoms.
Indeed, to no, it is one of the reflections on our tine that
whereas even I can remem. ber the tine when, if some scientist
produced sone new wonder, the whole world applauded it the
whole world wanted to take advantage of it. They didn~ t say:
" What side of an Iron Curtain was he on?" or " What country was
he The people who pioneered the great anti-biotic drugs,
these fellows, the marvels, the Flemings and all those people of
the world, they wore International property, everybody was proud
of them, everybody was delighted with what they did, and I think
that one of the things I hold most against certain people in the
world is that they have now set out to teach us -to believe that
a great piece of technology, a splendid piece of Applied Science,
in whatever field it nay be, is to be regardod so~ lely in terms
of rivalry, so that we get our tails dowm if the other man wins
the first heat, or the third heat. What a lot of nonsense it
is. I have no sense of shamie about what people of our kind,
not me, I'm the least scientific of mortals, but the record of
people of our kind in the world, in all those discoveries of
science which have brought untold benefits to hum--anity, will
take a good deal of knocking about by somebody who in some particular
or specialised field manages to do something, and do it
extraordinarily well, that nobody else has yet done.,
And so, Sir, I commwend your task it is perhaps pedestrian
from the point of view of those engaged in rocketry, but
it is vastly important and I believe that as a result of all
these discussions, and what gYoes on, we will find ourselves able
botween ourselves, to make this new developruent and to forge
another link in the chain of communications that will bring us
closer together, and, in due course, bring the people of the
world closer together.
And so, Charles, I have the very reatest honour indeed,
not in delivering an address, but in declaring the Confer-~
ence open, and I think, Sir, that you won't be entirely irregulawhich
you frequently are I ought to propose, quite impertinently
to this meeting that when I have sat down you might
perhaps instal the Postmaster-General in the Chair, so that the
business hereafter m~ ay be regular. 



EMB; ARGO: NOT FOR PUBLICA'TION, BROADCAST, or CABLING
BEFORE P. M. 28TH SEPTEMBER, 1959, PM o 6l~
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF MALAYA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
The Prime Minister announced today that the Prime
Minister of Malaya, Tunku Abdul Rahman, had accepted an invitation
to visit Australia between 30th October and 14+ th November
of this year. He would have discussions with the Australian
Cabinet in Canberra and fulfil a number of important engagements.
He would attend the opening of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association meeting in Canberra and in the course
of his stay there would also open the new offices and residence
of the High Commissioner for Malaya. He would also visit some
Australian States. Mr. Menzies said that he greatly looked
forward to seeing Tunku Abdul Rabman who would be most welcome
in Australia. Mr. Menzies added that he would visit Indonesia from
about 2nd to 7th December. After that he would go on to visit
Malaya between 7th and 12th December. He will be accompanied
by Dame Pattie Menzies. He would have discussions with Government
leaders in Indonesia and Malaya as well as seeing as much
as he could of both countries which were important neighbours
of Australia. Mr. Menzies said that his forthcoming journey
would enable him to have firsthand contact with Indonesia which
he had previously visited only for a very short time during the
recent war. It had been necessary to defer the plans which
he had made for Zoing there in 1956. It would also be his
first visit to Malaya since that country achieved its independence
in 1957. Mr. Menzies said that he had not set down any particular
subjects for discussion withthe Indonesian and Malayan
Prime Ministers nor had they proposed any to him. He-greatly
appreciated both invitations he had received and he regarded
the visits as falling into the general pattern he had been following
of extending his personal contacts with the leaders of
South and South-East Asian States.
CANBERRA. 28TH SEPTEMBER, 1959. 



DEATH OF PRIME MINISTE'L OF CEYLON
Tributes in the House of Representatives by the Rt. Hon. R. G.
Menzies and the Leader of the Opposition, the Rt. Hon. H. V. Evatt
Mr. Speaker, before the business of the House begins I
wish to refer very briefly to the tragic loss that has been suffered
by our sister member of the Commonwealth, Ceylon, by the
assassination of her Prime Minister, Mr. Bandaranaike. I knew
him, of course, very well. At an earlier date I knew his distinguished
predeccssor, Don Stephen Senanayake, who was accidentally
killed. Now this horrible event has occurred. I took
steps at once to send expressions of sympathy from the Australian
Government and from this Parliament, but I am perfectly certain
that the House would like me to associate it with an expression,
not only of horror at this crime, but also of the profoundest
sympathy with the people and the Government of Ceylon.
It is unfortunately true that in the early days of independence
some turbulence manifests itself. file have had this
tragic event in Ceylon and on an earlio r occasion) in Pakistan,
when that very great man, Liaquat Ali Khan, was assassinated.
Of course, it is a particularly severe blow for Ceylon to have
lost, by sudden death, two of her Prime Ministers in the very
brief history of her independence. The existence of turbulence,
danger and disorder is, I believe, something that we always must
bear in mind when we consider the history of these new and independent
countries. It emphasises the fact that we must have a
6rezat deal of sympathy for them and show a great deal of undorstanding.
On this occasion, our sympathy goes out very strongly
to the family of Mr. Bandaranaike and to the people of Ceylon.
This was a tragic event. One can only hope that it
will not leave too deep a mark on the future history of a country
with which we are so closely linked, and with which we have
always enjoyed the most friendly associations,
Dr. Evatt: Mr. Speaker, I wish to say a word or two in support of
the Prime Minister. Ceylon is a nation that is very close to
Australia. Our friendly relationships with Ceylon were confirmed
during the war. This tragic event must arouse our sympathy
for the people of Ceylon.
I think that everybody must have been struck with the
heroic qualities that were displayed by Mr. Bandaranaike in
speaking to the people of Ceylon from the operating room, and even
urging that somo patience be shown with the alleged assassin. It
appears also that he defended his wife ag; ainst assassination.
As the Prime Minister has pointed out, in throo
nations, all previously British colonies and now belonging to the
British Commonwealth of Nations, suchsad events have occurred.
There has been the assassination of the Prime Minister of Pakistan,
Liaquat Ali Khan, of the Prime Minister of Ceylon, and of
that very great and extraordinary man, Mahatma Gandi, during the
critical per-iod of the history of India end Pakistan. The road
to democracy is sometimes strewn with great difficulties and our
best course is to give our sympathy and understanding to these
people and their leaders. I entirely join in the message proposed
by the Prime Minister.
Canberra,
29th September, 1959 



P. M. No. -37/ 1959
RESULT OF COMMONWEALTH LOAN
Statement by the Prime Minister and Acting Treasurer,
the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister and Acting Treasurer, Mr R. G. Menzies,
said today that cash subscriptions of œ C58.5 million were received1
to the Commonwealth loan which closed on Wednesday, September 23.
The loan target was f-50 million, and the over-subscription was
therefore million.
Mr. Menzies said he considered this to be a very satisfactory
result. A feature of the recent loan was a number of large subscrip
-tions from savings banks. This was no doubt associated with the
substantial increases in savings bank deposits which have occurred
in the last few months. Relatively little was received from
trading banks on this occasion.
Mr. Menzies said that nearly three-quarters of the subscriptions
were made to the medium and long-term securities on of
-fer, including about 60% of the total into 5% 1979 securities.
This meant that little more than one-quarter of the subscriptions
were made into short-term securities whereas, in the February,
1959 loan, nearly 60% of subscriptions were made into short-term
securities. During the three weeks since the opening of the
cash loan, cash subscriptions of œ 3.6 million were made into
Special Bonds. This was a little higher than subscriptions made
in the periods during which the last two loans were-open and shcis
that there is a continuing interest in these securities by the
small investor. Total subscriptions to Special Bonds Series B
since 1st July, 1959 are now œ C7.4 million, including œ 3.8 million
raised during the ten weeks preceding the Commonwealth cash loan.
During the thirteen week period since 1st July, redemptions of
Special Bonds Series A totalled œ-800,000, and net receipts from
Special Bonds during the period have accordingly been œ c6.6 million.
Mr. Menzies said that approximately œ C76 million has been
raised in Australia and overseas towards the financing of the
Commonwealth and State 1959-60 borrowing programmes of œ C220 million
approved by the Australian Loan Council œ 10.8 million from
the % 25 million loan floated in New York earlier this month,
œ C58.5 million from the internal cash loan, and œ C6.6 million from
Special Bonds. He added that the Commonwealth is unlikely to
come on to the Australian market for a public loan before the end
of 1959 but will probably be making two cash offers during the
first half of 1960. However, advan ce subscriptions may be made
immediately to the next Commonwealth loan, and Special Bonds will
remain on sale until further notice.
There were more than 250,000 individual holders of the
œ C194.8 million maturing September, 1959 securities for which a
conversion offer was made concurrently with the Commonwealth
cash loan. It will be some time before final results of this
loan are available, but conversions so far total œ 137.0 million.
Redemptions so far are œ 33.8 million and an amount of
œ-24.0 million is still outstanding.
CANBERRA.
29TH SEPTEMBER, 1959 



STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER
The final meetings of the International Monetary
Fund, the International Bank of Reconstruction and Development,
and the International Finance Corporation held in Washington
on Friday unanimously adopted a resolution that the
Australian Governor be Chairman of the Board of Governors for
the ensuing twelve months and preside in that capacity at the
series of annual meetings of these institutions to be held in
iUashington in September, 1960.
The Australian Governor was nominated by the United
Kingdom and seconded by the United States. There was no
other nomination. The present Australian Governor of each
institution is the Commonwealth Treasurer, Mr. Harold Holt,
who has been representing Australia at the meetings just concluded
of these institutions. This will be the first occasion
in their history that an Australian will be serving as
Chairman of these important international bodies whose membership
now includes 68 governments and whose work is of growing
significance for the world economy and that of all the countries
directly participating.
Melbourne, 4+ th October, 1959. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT THE MASTER BUILDERS FEDERATION OF
r AUSTRALIA CONFERENCE, ILSON HALL MELBOURNE UNIVERSITY,
MONDY. TH OCTOBER 19
Sir and ladies and gentlemen, I was very interested to
be reminded that I was the number one ticket holder. I am the
number one ticket holder of the Carlton Football Club. I hope
I bring more luck to the builders.
Now I want to begin with a complaint. We have a practice
in Parliament of having questions without notice, and if anybody
has a complaint to make about having been misrepresented he may
get up and utter it. Well I am uttering mine. I received two
or three days ago, some time ago a mass of most informative
notes about the Federation, its fusion for this purpose with the
Asian group; the history of it, together with a few rather encouraging
points about the building industry as a whole. The
Secretary sent these to me. It is quite obvious to me that he
also sent them to the President, and the President has used them
first. So everything that I have to say to you is really a rehash,
but before I say it, might I tell you that it is a great
experience for me to come here and be in this hall, believe it
or not for the first time. I knew a great deal about the old
one from the inside, having sat many anxious hours writing violently
on pads of paper when I was doing my law course. But I
am not at all sure that there is not one thing that I miss. I
do not know where you are going to hang the portraits Sir George
of the Chancellors. W! e used to look at them in my examination
days and try to extract some inspiration from them. As a source
of inspiration they were hopeless, and therefore I suppose that
explains why the architects, egged on by the Council, decided
that they would have no room left to hang any of these worthy
gentlemen again. Now, Sir, I am a great believer in the master builders
of this country, and really very largely for reasons that you
have already mentioned. This organisation, as one realises by
contact with it, by reading its papers, its constitution and its
proceedings, has a most helpful and constructive prposo. I
really believe that this organisation does not exist in order to
prefer the interests of builders to the interests of the community,
but to improve the contribution that builders make to the
community. And that is of course a tremendous contribution.
Right through the piece I have been struck by the fact that so
long as I have known it, and that has been over a fair number of
years now, though not back to 1890 this Federation has set out
to raise the standards of performance and the standards of community
service. If we could all do just that thing, all of us,
whatever our occupations may be, it would be a pretty remarkable
country, even more remarkable than it is now. Jo have, of
course, in Australia and I say this, not that it is news to Aus.-
tralians here, but that it may be to some of our notable .' Tsitors
whom we are so glad to see here we have been passing through
an era, a very remarkable era of prosperity in Australia, prosperity
and advance. VWe have been able to protract investable
funds. We have had, on the whole, good prices for our exports.
We have had, a largo movement into this country of migrant people.
Population has risen in the most remarkable fashion. All of
these things have boon in themselves, good. They have produced
some of dangers, one of the dangers of course being that in a
period of expansion we live under the constant throat of inflation,
as one of the by-products of an expansion , rhich occasionally
may move too fast. But those things are, one hopes, manage--
able, and on the whole they have been managed. But in spite of
the fact that we have boon going through this rumarkable period
of expansion we have also had remarkable stability inAustralia.
We have been able to conduct our affairs successfully because of
the existence of confidence in this country, and of course all of
these things, stability, good sense, confidence, high prices for 
the things that we grow and sell all of those things ultimately
have been translated into what I believe is the greatest period
of development which we have had in Australia.
Development: when one thinks of development what does
one think of? I regret to say not of lawyers, though we are a
very useful commodity. I can remember vividly when in my very
young days at the bar, being greatly pleased to got into a few
cases which involved building disputes, because they always lasted
such a long time. But having said that kind wori for the
lawyers, I turn to say that development in Australia is associa-
-ted, essentially, primarily and in fact in some respects, almost
exclusively, with the industries that are represented here this
morning: engineers, buildings, contractors. These are the
people through whom the urge and capacity to expand in a country
like this expresses itself. We go to the country and we look at
great works of development. What are they? Irrigation, hydroelectric
schemes, great road works, great works of agricultural
improvement of a physical kind. All of these things express
themselves in terms of engineers and contractors. ' Je look back
over the enormous increase that we have had in our population,
and we say that that must have presented a remarkable problem,
not only in housing but in business construction, because we
sometimes forget that it is a balanced ration that you need in
these things and that groat office blocks and great factories
are in their place as essential as housing is. And wrhat do we
find? This Federation, as the Secretary reminded me, conducted
a spirited interchange of ideas with my colleague, the Minister
for Development, early in 1958 and I read of it with groat interest;
very carefully prepared views of the Feder. tisn, and the
very carefully prepared replies and commonts by my colleague,
But there was at that time a feeling that some particular stimulus
ought to be given to housing, because a year or two before,
for a variety of circumstunces, there had been a slight falling
off in the rate ofconstruction. And I therefore really interrupt
myself to say that whether it was the result of your vigorous
prodding or not, I do not know Mr President, but in 1957-58
there were 74,000 houses and flats completed in Australia. That
is a very remarkable number I think. Andin 1958-59, not 74,000
but 84,000: a most remarkable increase which all the indications
are will continue in the rate of construction, and one which, related
to the population of Australia, must be regarded, I think,
as a very satisfactory one.
Now, Sir, I have just said in general that the building
industry, the constructional industry, are at the very heart of
the material progress of the country. And they are, not only
because they build dams or houses or factories or office blocks
or whatever they may be, but also because the building industry,
using that expression comprehensively, is at one and the same
time the index of social prosperity and the cause of social prosperity.
In other rords this is a crucial industry,, You may use
it as a measuring stick. You say: " Well let us consider whether
we have circumstances of depression in the country, Do not
lot us look at a few little single instances you get nowhere by
that but take an industry like the building industry, in all
its ramifications and say: : How do things go here? How is employment
here? What is the volume of business here?'". If they
are both high, you may be certain that the country is prosperous.
They are the very index of prosperity or depression. And, at the
same time, because of their very nature, they are one of he
cardinal causes of prosperity because a great success in building
and construction grows on itself. It employs more people; it
enables more people to come here and live; it enables more peopl
to establish themselves in well-paid work; it enables more
people to set out to get their own homes, and therefore a great
movement in the building industry tends to perpetuate itself for
the benefit of ordinary people and is one of the causes of economic
. advance. And therefore building, Sir, thoroughly deserves 
3.
to attract the attention of anybody you care to invite to come
here, because it is an index of prosperity; it is one of the
main causes of continued prosperity and it is certainly in calm,
clear, physical terms, the main instrui. tent in national development.
Now, Sir, having said that, which after all you have already
yourself said this morning, though I have endeavoured to
put it in my own way, just let me add one thing which is put into
the mind by the fact that this cohvention is, as it has been described,
a fusion between the Master Builders' Federation, for
this purpose, and the Federation of Asian and Western Pacific
Contractors Associations. Now that is a rather arresting conjunc
-tion of the planet. You know one so readily thinks of building
as essentially local I remember many years ago it was weightily
argued, if I remember correctly, in the High Court of Australia,
that you could not have an inter-State industrial dispute in
building because no building was in more than one State a purely
local form of activity, building and that of course is something
that we can very easily get stuck into our minds, that it
is a purely local matter and no connection with the firm next
door. Each of us has his oim knowledge, his own methods. What
does it matter about what goes on ulsewhere. And therefore, it
is to me, a most imaginative thing that there should have been
this Association between builders, constructional people in Australia,
and those in nearby, or comparatively nearby, Asian countries.
It is at once a demonstration of the fact that building
and construction are not to be looked at solely in local terms,
and of the even greater truth that however clever we may think we
are, . re always have something to learn from our neighbour.
This is a move calculated to stimulate thought, to
stimulate an emulation of each other in our various countries,
and to stimulate a rise in technical and technilogical standards.
And this is a good thing for everybody; it is a good thing for
us in Australia. ! e must not detach the problems of life into
water-tight compartments and say: " Well, we'll just deal with
one". You think of it. Uhat is it that does so much social good
in a country like ours, that produces so much of that sturdy
fibre which has already made Australia and which must be preserved
and encouraged? That note of independence in the mind and
in the heart. What is it that does it? Nothing more remarkable,
in my opinion, than the creation of homes for ownership and for
pride. It is a wonderful thing for me to look back over the
last ten years and to realise that the percentage of houses
built for oiwmership in Australia has, in that period, increased
enormously and that we should have a population living under its
own vine and fig-tree, proud of its home, earning its home, its
place in the world. This is one of the greatest things that can
happen to a country. And if we are to have ownership and pride,
with all the solid citizenship that goes with these things, then
it is for the building industries constantly to strive to become
more and more efficient; to pursue every advance in quality and
economy, because you cannot have a home, you cannot have its
ovmership or its pride unless the cost of it and the quality of
it are able to attract you, having regard to your income and your
prospects in life. Cost and quality, and both of these things
depend upon an almost religious fervour in the pursuit of more
and more efficient methods. After all, a house, a bridge, a
great office block, some great works, may be and will be the
visible and enduring memorial of the builder the engineer, the
contractor. That is one of the great advanLges that he has.
His memorial is visible, it is enduring, but the greatest memorial
that the Building Federation can have is to know that year by
year it is not only by using its own resources, but by cultivating
the knowledge and friendship of people from the other countries
around the world, that it is . improving standards, that it
is building better, that it is putting quality into the work and
that efficiency has meant that the cost of a home is not prohibited
for the very man himself, who works onthe job. 
4.
I am a great believer myself, in the constant battle
for the raising of standards. There is a great temptation in
every democracy to lower then, on the ground that to lower the
standard is democratic because more people can achieve it. This
must be resisted. This Federation, and its allies for this purpose
this morning, exists I venture to say, primarily to raise
standards. I believe that it has worked in that sense with
great vigor and with great honesty. I have a very profound respect
for this work and for the people who are engaged in it. I
wish it aell. I declare this Convention opened. 



P. M. No. 38/ 1959
RE-APPOINTMENT OF PROFESSOR WILFRED PREST
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) announced today
the re-appointment of Professor Wilfred Prest as a member
of the Commonwealth Grants Commission for a further period
of three years commencing on 1st October, 1959. Professor
Prest has been a member of the Commission since October,
1953. The other members of the Commission are the
chairman, Sir Alexander Fitzgerald, and Mr. A. J.
Reid, I. S. O.
Canberra,
8th October, 1959. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
AT THE CANB~ iRA UNIVERSITY C6LLEGE, 12TH-OCTOBER1959
. Get~ mn. Mr. Chairman, Principal, Vice-Chancellor, Ladies and
As a rule when I'm required to wear one of these
funny hats, and I've read the instructions that the hat should
be kept on during the speeches I make a mere token of it and
I take it off, but, funny as itis, I think I'll keep it on today,
under the circumstances.
I think we've all been delighted to hear the narrative
given to us by Dr. Dickson: it's a very checkered history,
but it's a very brave one and a very good one, and of course the
development of the student body in recent years has, I think,
been quite remarkable and perhaps, a few years ago-, it might
have been quiteunexpected.
Now you've been told that in the near future decisions
will be made I don't propose to anticipate them. I'm
fairly familiar with the views of Professor Burton on these
, matters he has a persuasive manner I've heard views from
other people and all I can say is that we hope that whatever de
-cision we take, whioh must be taken nov~ within " he next week
or two, will be in the best interests, as they say, of all concerned.
But in the meantime I just want to say this to you at
this particular occasion., whatever the future form of Government
may be, there can be no doubt whatever that the time is
oveicdue for the provision for this body of barning, whatever
its actual structural future may be, the provision for it of
proper accommodation, and by proper Accommodation I mean, in
the first place, plenty of space. I dare say in the case of
my own University the one over which Sir George Peyton operates
with such distinction, those who founded it many years ago
thought that they were being almost extravagant in their allocation
of grounds and today it's rather hard, as I discovered-the
other day, to find your way through the interstices between the
buildings, all of which to add to thc confusion of the lay
mind, has been constructed in strangely varied architectural
s tyl e. Sydney University is another example of how the passage
of * timeio and the -growth of the corimunity, and the demand
for space can render all early anticipations quite inadequate.
And therefore I'm very glad to know that as a result of the
variety of discussions that have occurred there is, at any
rate, in hand, a proper allocation of space. That's very important;
a little substracted from, I think, by the Working
Men's Club, but as I came along here today I thought: " Well
there may be soiiething in this", because, knowing what I do
about students, I'm sure that it would be very easy for them to
establish a Students' Union, not the usual Students' Union but
a Trade Union, though that, of course, might connote a certain
amount of useful labour, and they will form a Students; Union,
affiliate themselves with the local Trades Hall, become memibers
of the Club and ultimately squeeze out all the other occupants.
I just throw out that suggestion without any malice and without
prejudice, but at any rate on space, thank Heavens, we don't
need to be very maean about it in this City and I hope we never
will be, In the second place, of course, it is essential
start putting on one side all these intangible elements which
make a University, these great things which make a University,
and which could make a University in a series of tents, if it
caxie to that, it is essential, in my opinion, that there 
* 00 
2.
should be adequate academic buildings and here is a good start:
this block, the Science block, these, I hope are merely the beginning
of a series of building operations which will give to
this institution an adequate home, adequate accommodation, something
that will not only provide all the things " hat are needed,
but will provide them with dignity and with permanence.
And in the third place and this, I think, is a matter
that we must pay more and more attention to if Canberra is
to attract into itself a body of full-time students, it can't
expect, and I hope it won't expect to attract them only from
the local citizenry. It is not a all desirable that any University
Foundation in this City should be regarded as a purely
local affair; it must provide its attraction for people from
all over New South Wales, from older Universities that are overcrowded,
and if it is to do that, then there must be, of course,
residential accommodation. I have from first to) last been tremendously
keen on that, that we should have, not only the Arts
building and the Science block and the other academic buildings,
as I'll describc them, but that we should also step out to provide
accommodation for the student body.
And at best I would just like to make one remark which
I hope will prove provocative. Just as it would be a calamity
for any University, whether it's one or two, in this City to regard
itself as catering only for an official Capital, so I believe
it would be a very great calamity if all residential accomamodation,
if all Colleges of residents, should be regarded
as Government Institutions, which might just as easily be referred
to as Hostels, as by any other name. This is not just
a matter for Government. Just as in the Universities, the older
Universities, you have splendid residential Colleges which
have been established by the Churches in Australia, which provide
the foundations for residential studies, which Church
foundations can do so well provided they have, as indeed they
have., an instinct for scholarship and quality and character so
I an hoping that, as times goes on, we will find the great 6hurches
of Australia willing to recognise the inevitable future of
education in Canberra and to take their part in establishing
residential Colleg es on the lines of these with which we are
familiar in the other Universities.
So I think all those remarks may be made, getting wetter
and wetter as tine goes on, irrespective of what decision
may be made on the structural future.
All I want to say is that nobody, least of all myself
regards the position of this College as being static; it has
developed; it must grow; it must more and mere provide for
the student body, primarily, in the first instance the undergraduate
student body, opportunity for the higher learning. It
is indeed one of the unforeseen results, I think, of the increase
of our population and of the stirring of minds in the
course of the ' lar, that the population of Universities, the
number of people willing and anxious and competent to receive
University instruction has grown so enormously.
I can remember the tine when, believe it or not, I
was President of the Students' Representative Council at the
University of Melbourne and the total student population was
fourteen hundred Perhaps that explains how I was elected
( laughter) but that was the total constituency, fourteen hundred,
and now where we used to talk in hundreds, we talk in
thousands. ihl the developments even since the Murray Report
have shown that the growth of student numbers, or desired
student numbers is far g roater already than even that highly
competent coni~ tee imagined would be the case.
And therefore we are not here, taking part in some-
0
0 0 
3.
thing that is small and is, perhaps, expected to remain smail,
we are, I believe, taking part today in a ceremony which will
be regarded as quite historic in the developrment of Canberra,
the first of a number of steps to be taken which will bring
distinction to this place, which will provide proper facilities
for instruction and association, for conversation as well as
for study, for playing as well as for work, and therefore, Sir,
I have the greatest pleasure in the world in taking part in
this proceeding I must say that I was relieved when I heard
my friend George Peyton say a few kind words about my activities
in relation to Universities, because only this morning,
in an eminent Melbourne newspaper I read that some man, occupying
some official position, and therefore qualified to talk,
said that it was high time that the Prime Minister woke up to
the fact that there was a University problem in Australia and
so George I will use your testimonial i~ f I commit the unpardonable
error of making a reply.
I have the greatest pleasure in being here, Ladies
and. Gentlemen and I deeply sympathise with you for having had
to become , retter and wetter as the minutes have gone by. I
will now step across is that right? and perform that mysterious
act known as " Setting the Fonair ~ sir õ yccfrom
all my past experience that if it is leo. to mie to set it
prope3rly, it will never be set at all. 


PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER RT.HON. R. G. MENZIES, AT CANBERRAON THE 1ITH OCTOBER, 19 9 at 11 A. M.
QUESTION: Sir, yesterday it was announced that the Commonwealth&nbsp;was financing a Grant to the Monash University of up to&nbsp;about œ 500,000 and referred to a report by the Universities&nbsp;Commission. I was wondering if we could have a&nbsp;copy of the Report.
PRIME MINISTER: When I had the application from Victoria for a verysubstantial increase in the amount that was being provi-ded under the Murray Report for the Monash University,I told the Premier that I would get the UniversitiesCommission to have a look at it because, after all,that is the kind of thing they are there for. They examinedit and made a report to me and I sent it to himwith an indication that we were prepared to act on therecommendations in the Report. There is no reason whythe report shouldn't be published but I notice in thepaper this morning that he's indicated, from his pointof view, that the Report should not be published untilafter the Interim Council of Monash has had a chance tolook at it. Well, I don't quarrel with that, but assoon as the Report has gone to the Interim Council Iwill have no objection to publishing the report: infact, I think it ought to be made available. As a mat-_ter of fact I have got, I think a supply of the necessarycopies so . that at a moment's notice they can go out,
QUESTION: Apart from the questions of Monash, Sir, does this Reportdeal in any general terms with University enrolmentsand extensions and so on, or any ratters on Monashapart from what we have now?
PRIME MINISTER: No, this is a Report which relates to the MonashApplic-tion. It does nontain statistics in relation tothe Melbourne University which are quite interesting.Yes, I'll be delighted to have the report made available,but I don't want to appear to be discourteous to theCouncil
QUESTION: The Leader of the Labour Party in the Queensland ParliamentMr Duggan, has described you as one of the outstandingpublic men Australia has ever had
PRIME MINISTER: I bet there's a catch coming ( Laughter)but he says that you are politically lazy he said:" Mr. Menzies had done great dis-service to Australia becauseevery international Mission with which he had beenassociated had been a colossal failure. Would you replyto his statement?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I wouldn't dream of sitting in judgment on Mr.Duggan; I doubt whether I'm equal to that task.
QUESTION: Any announcement yet, Sir, on the Governor-General?
PRIME MINISTER: No.
QUESTION: Could you say what sta,-oe has been reached on the appointment.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I'm in communication with the Palace about it,
QUESTION: Do you expect it to come soon, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I hope so.
QUESTION: As a result of Dr. Subandrio's visit to China, Sir, andthe agreement that has been reached between Indonesiaand China for mutual support in respect of Territorialclaims, Indonesia's support of China on Formosa andChina's support of Indonesia on West New Guinea, haveyou thought about that?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I've read what has been published on thematter and we have no official information. But allthose declarations, you know, may mean one of two thing;they may simply mean ' Well, we give you moral support;we announce our beliefs that you are entitled to WestNew Guinea if you announce your belief that we're entitledto Quemoy or Matsui or Formosa' I suppose thereare a number of people who support the claim in thatsense but the alternative meaningthat they are preparedto support the claim by force is a very differentmatter. Indeed, it will be remembered that Dr. Subandrioin Australia went on the record to the effect thatIndonesia did not propose to establish its claim byforce and there is no reason to assume that he haschanged that ground, and therefore this mutual declarationis, no doubt, one of sentiment or opinion itdoesn't necessarily involve military support.
QUESTION: A Conference in Germany, Mr. Menzies, has asked allcountries to co-operate in a world-wide survey on radio-active fall-out and the effects on food, etc. WillAustralia co-onerate in that survey?PRIME MINISTER: But Australia has been doing a iLot cf work inthat field already; we have a special commitoe, anexpert commit oe which, quite recently, made a report,It's report showed that net only was the amount of falloutin Australir insignificant ascompared with some othercountries, but that it didn't present any danger.You remember the report wa3 published not long ago.Well, that's a highly competent committee..QUESTION: I presumc, Sir, that the information we obtain here isavailable for internationalPRIME MINISTER: Oh, yes.. Copies of our reports are made available,and, of course, we ourselves have had reportsfrom the United Nations bodies which have gone intothis kind of thing. It stands to roaso:. hat in Australiathe amount of fall-out might be expected to benegligible. Perhaps the Soviet Union, for example,where there has been a great activity in these matters,the fall-out might be much more considerable.QUESTION: Now that Mr MacMillan has been returned is there anysuggestion of a Commonwealth Conference early nextyear. You did mention earlier in the yearPRIME MINISTER: Oh, give them a chance,QUESTION: Next April?PRIME MINISTER: Well we've never had one in April. but keep ongoing; you know as much about it as I do. I haven'ta clue,QUESTION: Supplementary to that question, Sir, it has been reportedthat Mr. MacMillan is planning to create a Ministryof Science in his Governnent to bring it in line withthe Technilogical Age, Have you contemplat-d such aMinistry here, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I can't say that I have. A good deal of ourtechnical resources are dealt with by the Departmentof Supply and its a little premature to know what heisgoing to do. It may be that he'll establish a Departmentof Science or a Ministry of Science, but theinteresting thing will be what re-construction occursin other Departments.QUESTION: It has been suggested that Supply Departmentmay go.PRIME MINISTER: Quite so, If it were merely a matter of takingover the Department of Supply it wouldnt be very radi.-cal, but there may be that other things that are donein other Departments there which could be aggregatedunder one Minister. It's only guess work at thisstage. I'll be very interested myself to see the waythat's dealt with.QUESTION: At the moment, Sir, it is true that our chief scientificactivities are under two Ministers, one from C. S. I.R. O. and the Department of Supply?PRIME MINISTER: Yes, that is quite right,QUESTION: Do you see any advantage in the combination?PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I haven't given any thought tocreating a new Departmunt or an amalgamated one butIfm always willing to learn and I'll be interested tosee what goes on in England.QUESTION: Can you tell us whether you have any specific programmefor the Divorce Bill? Do you hope to have it throughby Christmas?PRIME MINISTER: I can't tell you. You had better ask the Attorneythat.QUESTION: Does that not raise the questionPRIME MINISTER. Well thats a genuine consideration, but I knowthat both the Attorney and I were hoping that thisBill would be disposed of this year. but whether anythingthat has happened affects that I don't know/; he'sjust circulated a number of amendments. They may bemuch less formidable than they might appear on the , urfaceand a great number of them will no doubt be quiteverbal, but ask him. I think he's still hoping.QUESTION: Have you given any thought as to whether there shouldbePRIME MINISTER: None whatever. As a natter of fact one reasonwhy I made it clear to my people that it mustn't bo nosumed that the Session was going to end on th,; ddethat rumour had originaily mentioned, chat I hadhopes of disposing of the Divorce Bill; it's had a verylong airing and the Attorney's done a phenomenal amountof work in relation to it, you know, in dealing withgroups of people and organizations.QUESTION; There doesn't seem to have been a great deal of oppositionPRIME MINISTEI.: Not so far as I can sce.QUESTION.: Didn't Mr. Holt make it clear, Sir, that the Government'sprograimme was in future always to prorogue theParliament and have an opening once a year at the begin-ning of the year?
PRIME MINISTER: Frankly, I've forgotten whether he did.QUESTION: Would the question of pro-rogation be contingent onthe date of arrival of the new Governor-General.PRIME MINISTER: Well I suppose if we were to plenty of " ifs" inthis question if we prorogued, which I don't knowand if the new Governor-General can't be here at a timewhen the house would normally meet, then no doubt wewould then consider whether the meeting of the new Sessionafter the pro-rogation would occur after his arrival.All this is very elementary, my dear Watson,and highly conditional.QUESTION: There is no occasion that I can remember of an Administratorhaving opened Parliament?PRIME MINISTER: No. I can't recall one.QUESTION: A rather interesting situation?PRIME MINISTER: Mm.QUESTION: you mentioned in an article that communicationswere taking place between you and the Queensland Pren.ier on Mount Isa. Are there any new developments cnthat7 Could you say whether the visit of Sir Rol. a,Wilson and Mr Holt overseas may have any results?PRIME MINISTER: The last communication I made to the Premier uasthat as Holt and Wilson were investigating certain naL**ters and they would be back fairly shorcly, perhaps itwould be mo: e satisfactory and save time in the l! ongrun, if we had a further discussion after their returnWell they come back, tomorrow isn't it?PRESSMAN: Due tomorrow in SydneyPRIME MINISTER: They won't be here; well Holt won't be here, butthey will at once bring us up to date on this matterand then I'll ask him to get in touch with Mr Nicklin.QUESTION; Mr. Menzies do you hope to announce the Governnentistew 3-year Defence Plan before the Parliament rises foMthe year?PRIME MINISTER: That's a difficult question to answer. I certainlyintend that it will be determined and announceablesome time in November because I have to go awayat the beginning of December and I want this matter tbbe fixed before I go, Whether that means actuallywhile the House is still sitting or just afterwards,I don't know; it will be done as soon as it can be,but it certainly will have to be done in November.QUESTION: Have you had any final judgments from the Technicalpeople?PRIME MINISTER: Don't ask me; I: m having a Conference with Mr,Townley about it today. A lot of work, I know, hasbeen done on this.QUESTION: Could you tell us anythingnow following Mr McElroy'svisit Sir?PRIME MINISTER: No. There is nothing realoly.QUESTION: It was more a goodwill visit was it?PRIME MINISTER: Oh, yes, we didn't discuss any of the techniquesof the business with him.
QUESTION: Now that it is in retrospect, Sir, do you think thatwe have learned anything from Princess Alexandra's visitthat can be useful in future? It seems to havebeen extraordinarily successful..PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. She did a lot to make it extraordinarilysuccessful herself, of course, because sheis a natural person. I think the thing we have todo more and more in Australia is to get away from theidea of long, formal, royal tours, you know everyState committees and organizations all that. Theyare all right, and you can have one or two of thoseoccasionally, but I much prefer to think that we occasionallyhave a Royal Visit, that's a very differentthing a Royal Visit from a Royal Tour. Somebodymight 0me out and visit one State for some particularpurpose; somebody might come out and actually have afew weeks' holiday, but if it is to be every State forevery visitor, then we certainly won't have as manyvisits. There people would say " Oh, this is becomingtoo much". I'm hoping to encourage the idea of theoccasional, informal easy visit. This Princess went tothree States. I don't think there was any really bittercomplaint from the other three. The next visitormight go to two or one. Let's get the formality outof it. By formality I don't necessarily mean that theyhave to shake hands with Prime Ministers and Premiers,because they'll do that in any case, but that theywon't have these great programmes in which every day.brings forth its visit to so-and-so and its this orthat, in some other locality. There is no escape fromthose when you have a first visit from the Queen, forexample, a visit from the Queen Mother which has someparticular historic and personal interest for Australia.But I'm hoping that in future we'll be able to eliminatesome of the aspects of a highly organised tour and substitutesome of the aspects of a personal visit.QUESTION; Did the military advisers of SEATOactually, at thetime of their meeting, recently, get some actual concreteschemes agreed on to intervene militarily if thesituation required it in Laos?PRIME MINISTER: Oh, you wouldn't expect me to answer a questionlike that would you?QUESTION: Well, did they just " waffle", or did they have anything-PRIME MINISTER: I've no statement to make.QUESTION: Senator Spooner said in the Senate the other day, Mr,Menzies, that he would confer with you on Members'p: ivileges. I was wondering if he had spoken to youalrout it yet?PRIME MINISTER: Senator Spooner, unfortunately, is on the SickList. He's in hospital.QUESTION; SEnator Aylett said that he wanted the Parliament andGcvernment to protect him from the criticisrisof thekind that he has been getting. Have you any commentt: make on-Senator Aylett's position?PRIME MINISTER: Well, we've all felt that way occasionally.QUESTION: Were you surprised, Sir, when you heard of the ChristmasIsland rackets?PRIME MINISTER: I concurred with the action taken by the Ministervery swiftly. Yes.
QUESTION: Do you thinlc Sir that it's likely that there will beany anendrient to the rules relating to thle Secretariesand Offices to require they be in the State of a member?PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. We are going to have a discussionon this business and it would be premature to bespeculating about it. I don't seen to be very wellinformed on a lot ofthese things because there arepeople around here who are far more familiar with thesethings than I am and the fir-st thing I had to do wasto say: " Can somebody give me a list of all thesethings", And I'm getting that, and then. we'll have ago at it, in a perfectly reasonable spirit, I'm not beingunpleasant about it.QUESTION: Sir, when you say " We" l do you mean the Cabinet orPRIME MINISTER: Well, one or two Ministers and myself, at anyrate.QUESTION: When you say " it" Sir, do you mean the whole range ofMembers'I amienities?PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I haven't seen thle list yet so Idon't know which ones I want to have a look at. It'sreally in transit.QUESTION; Does that include the question of residence, Sir?PRIME MINISTER: You fellows are asking mae questions about a matteron which I an the worst informed man in Parliament,you see, so I'm taking steps to inform myself.QUESTION: Will you consider this point then, Sir, thatPRIME MINISTER: I'll consider anything you care to put to me,but I'll make no statement about it.QUESTION; Well, where the Parliament is in recess for less than14 days Memibers who remiain in Canberra are entitled toœ C4. a day -allowance. Do you think that's a fair thing?PRIME MINISTE I'ma making no statement about any of these matters.QUESTION: Will you consider that point, Sir%PRIME MINISTER: Look, I'vc told you I'ri making no statement aboutthat matter, I'm in the process of informing my nind,QUESTION:. Can you give us details of the Superannuation Scheme. that has been mentioned a couple of times in the House,PRESSMALN: You answered a question onthat,PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but he wants some details of a Bill.QUESTION; Well could you say when it might be brought dox~ m?PRIME MINISTER: Well, I can't tell you precisely because I don'tknow off hand,-whethcr it's boen through the Legislation.the scrutiny of the Committee, but I would take it forgranted that it would come down in this Session and bepassed in this Sossion.QUESTION; Sir, have you yet roceived the proposals from-the Acad--emy of' Science on Spac~ e Research?PRIME MINISTERt No I haven't.
QUESTION: On Space Research, Sir it has been suggested that theUnited States nay undertake work of that nature atWoomera in a bigger way than was already indulged induring the Geophysical Year. Could you tell us anythingof that Sir?PRIME MINISTEI*: I don't know,QUESTION: Do you expect any Government Legislation arising outof the Hursey case Sir?PRIME MINISTER: I couldn't tell you.QUESTION: Have you any comuent to make on the decision by tncUnited Order of Oddfellows which provides that Austra.-lia's first Dental Benefit Scheme within the next fewweeks in New South ales should cover children andteen-agers from the age of 3 to 17 and further, hasthere been any discussions at Government level to en.-courage or embrace such a scheme in the National Heal'; nScheme?PRIME MINISTER: There have been no discussions to which I an aparty. Whether the Minister for Health has given itany thought or had any discussion, I wouldn't know, b:.it hasn't come to ne,QUESTION: Does the removal of this hill outside Parlioment Houseindicate that there is any move towards a new Pc. rlia.-ment House at all? It's gradually been disappearing.PRIME MINISTER: I think it-s sort of an embodiment of the Scrjtures ' If you have sufficient faith you can movemountains7 and this is very encouraging to Members cfParliament; when everything seems black, when thePress have turned them down, when the Mirror', boughtout the Sydney Morning Herald and all these terriblethings have occurred I lock out and there's the embodimentoffaith.QUESTION: Could you give us any indication, Mr Menzies, of whetherthere is any prospect at all as to the results ofMr Holt's and Sir Roland V4ilson's activities overseasof getting a loanPRIME MINISTER: No look don't ask me to say any more tha.. thatbecause Ill. be ruch better informed on that in two orthree days.QUESTION: Could you give us any background, Sir, to the Government'sdelay in the appointment of a Committee of Enquiryinto the Taxation Laws which you mentioned inyour Policy Speech?PRIME MINISTER: Well the delay is on the side of getting themembership established and as we want to have the verybest kind of committee, after a long exaymination of alot of names we decided that I, myself, would have achat with a couple ofrepresentative bodies, particularlyin the Accountancy and Business world, in order tosee that we wore getting somebody who carried weight allround. I expect to have those discussions in the nextfew days and the moment that has been done we'll be ina position to. o ahead., QUESTION: To announce the names?PRIME MINISTER: Yes, and the torms of reference,QUESTION: And the Post Office committee?
8,PRIME MINISTER: I'n having a meeting this afternoon with bearingon that matter and therefore we'll be able to announcesomething in the next few days on that.QUESTION: Could you give us any guidance before that cones out,Sir, as to the terms of reference of the Post Officecomnittee? Are they likely to be geared to the recomnendationsof the Public Accounts Comnittee Report onthe Post Office?PRIME MINISTER: The terns of reference have not been settled.They are not very easy to work out. It's very easy tosay in a broad way: " Well what capital is engaged inthe Post Office in real terms?" and you start to elaboratethe terms of reference to see how that gets workecout, well it's a veiy very different matter, but I'nhaving a discussion about it this afternoon.QUESTION: The enquiry will be confined to the ( inaudible)PRIME MINISTER: Yes.QUESTION: It . on't be extended, as sone Members h. ve asked for,to cover the whole functioning of the Post Office?PRIME MINISTE.: Oh, dear, No. I should have to appoint an entirelydifferent kind of cor. ittoe.SQUESTION: Sir, has the Government got any prograrneo in nind forshifting nore Government Departments from Melbourne toCanberra?PRIME MINISTER: I think that, you know, the process of digestingthe las' move will take a little tine, but that's noreallya , ouction that I can answoer T think you ha1better ask the Minister'for the interior P. use theymay te working out wT. Lh the Canberra Comnission a sortof future time-table on t-mis natter, but I wouldn't knc.about that. Ask him if he's got any knowled;,. -nthlL ' m cure he would be glad to tell you,QUIESION. On pro,,. nt indications, Mr Mnzics, it looks as if itwill be anything up to two years before television servicesa:' e operating in counLry areas. Has the Governnentanything in mind to speed up this enquiry that'staking placo, and for the applications for licences ortoPRIME MINISTER: Yo. had better ask the Postmaster General that,You see t. ore appears to be a mass of applicants. WclLI suppose ifyou have lots of applicants they all haveto be heari, they all have to have a chance to puttheir case: c. l have to have questions put to themnit's very ciffi. cult to speed up a thing like that,QUESTION: The Board is proposing to make all its recoLmendationsin one piece rat-er than deal with the applications fo:one area and one State and then make recoruendations,Would you conside. getting them to deal with then inStates or in area"?PRIME MINISTER: I don't kno: what the Board is proposing to doon that. Thats a -atter on which you really ought toask the P. M. G. I hWve been concerned only with overallpolicy on that.QUESTION: In view of recent rc--crts that Russia is willing to scoil to Australia, do you feel that it would be advantageous for Australia take up any further trade withRussia or its satellites to promote peaceful co-existenceor trade ties?
9.PRIME MINISTER: I don't know that I understand that.. We have acertain amount of trade with then the Minister forTrade has been asked questions about this repeatedlyand I see no reason to alter what has been our approachin the past.QUESTION: Have you any new views on Summit talks, Mr Menzies, followingMr. MacMillan's return and the visit toPRIME MINISTER: No. My views remain the sane and therefore whatyou are really asking me to do is to make a proph) cy. avery uninformed prophecy. I think there will be one,I'll be very surprised and disappointed ifthere isn't,QUESTION: Has the Cabinet considered the Draft Trade Treaty withIndonesia, Sir, prepared by officials in the two Governmentsearlier this year yet?PRIME MINISTER: A Draft Trade Treaty? I haven't seen it, butthen I was away at the relevant time.QUESTION: Have you any views on your omwn future Sir?PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I should think my future is very murky, Ar'you speaking now in terms of the " hereafter" or in thisworld?PRESSMAN: The immediate and near future.PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no) Ive got plenty of occupation thanks,, ijust going along, living mny idle liferQUESTION: When will you appoint an Ambassadoro to Moscow. Sir?PRIME MINISTER: I don! t know. You had better ask 3xternal Affaf.::about that. They deal with that.QUESTION: Do you consider any extension, Sir,, to your' own trip tcIndonesia and Malaya?PRIME MINISTER: No.QUESTION: How long do you expect to be away, Sir?SPRIME MINISTER: Only about l4 days altogether five c-day3in Indonesia and five or sixdays in Malaya plus trave..I might come back through Cocos Island, if that is anextension.With the ccpli-nts of:Hugh Dash,Press Secretary to the Prime Minister.


TATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER. MR. R. G. MENZIESPOSITION OF CHAIRMAN OF PUBLIC SERVICE BOARDThe Prime Minister, Mr Menzies, announced todaythat the chairman of the Public Service Board, Sir WilliamDunk, had informed the Government that he wished to retirefrom the position of chairman early in 1961. Mr. Menzies emphasisedthat Sir William had taken this step in order to assistthe Government in arranging the succession to this importantpublic service office.
The Government has decided to appoint Mr F. H. Wheeler,who is at present a Director of the InternationalLabour Organisation at Geneva. Before taking this appointmentin 1953, Mr. Wheeler was First Assistant Secretary in theDepartment of the Treasury and one of the key Treasury advisersto the Government through the War and in the Post-Warperiod. His experience with I. L. O. will be valuable in thepersonnel administration field of the Public Service Board'swork. The appointment will date from January 1st, 1961,Sir William Dunk, who will be 62 years of age thisyear, joined the Public Service in 1914 and has had a distinguishedand varied public service career, including highly responsiblework in War Administration as Assistant Secretary inthe Treasury and Director of Reciprocal Lend Lease. Immediatelyafter the war he was appointed as head of the Departmentof External Affairs, where he laid the administration foundationsfor the Post-War work of the Department. Hu acceptedhis present appointment in 1947 and has given outstanding servicein gearing the public service to its greatly expandedPost-War tasks and in adopting a modern approach to the managementproblems of the service.Mr. Menzies said that Sir William's departure fromhis present office would be a severe loss but his characteristicallypublic spirited attitude to the future of the sermicewas 1eenly appreciated by the Gyoernment. He had offeredto make himself available to the Board for assistance and consultationduring the early period of the now Chairman's a'pointont, Canberra, llth October, 19 9.


The Prime Minister to-day replied to criticism&nbsp;by the Premier of Victoria of his action in releasing&nbsp;the report of the Universities Commission on Monash University.&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said that, acting on his instructions, &nbsp;his Private Secretary, Mr. W. Heseltine, spoke to&nbsp;the Secretary of the Victorian Premaier's Department at&nbsp;about 2.15 on Wednesday afternoon. Mr. Heseltine told&nbsp;Sir John Jungwirth that it was the Prime Minister's intention,&nbsp;if the Prem~ ier saw no objection, to release the&nbsp;report to the press on Wednesday afternoon. Sir John&nbsp;said he was sure the Premier would have no objection.&nbsp;Mr. Heseltine said " In that case we will arrange&nbsp;for the release of the report", and Sir John said " Yes,&nbsp;that will be all right."&nbsp;
The report was released to the press by the Prime&nbsp;Minister's Press Secretary about 3 o'clock on Wednesday&nbsp;afternoon.
Canberra,15 October, 1959&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES AT THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
INC. DINNER, SATURDAY, 17TH OCTOBER, 1959
Sir, Mr. Premier and Gentlemen:
I don't know that I liked that last passage very much
about a " fatherly talk". Looking around at some of you I
should think you could give me years! ( laughter) But I am
delighted to be here because as the President has rightly said,
in my opinion, this is just about as big a dinner of its kind
that I have ever seen in Australia in my life, No doubt the
expansion of the business of General IMotors-Holdens, under the
benign auspices of my Government ( laughter) may have something
to do with it. A rather contentious fellow called Horn,
who is one of their directors, has niever been known to admit it
when in Canberra.,..
But it is a marvellous thing to be able to stand up at
what is primarily a manufacturers! dinner in Adelaide in the
State of South Australia, because quite frankly looking back
what? 20 years? I would have thought an attendance like this
under these auspices practically impossible. And therefore this
proves what has been going on in the State of South Australia.
I picked a period of 20 years, not because I had any more desire
than usual to flatter the Premier of this Stat11e but because
I did hope that when he comes, later on, to speak he might say
to you that of the 20 undoubtedly the greatest 12 well,
you know what I mean! ( laughter).
In point of fact, gentlemen, I want to tell you this
so that you will be prepared for anything. Sir Thomas and I
have a little ' working arrangement'. It has endured now for
many years. We take it in turns to have the last word.' When
he has the last word as he will tonight he takes strips off
mej and when I have , he last word as I do every other time
well I do my best, Though it's very hard to ' take a strip'
off this political pachyderm'! ( Lau,-hter) I don't say that
offensively, but because there he is: he has been there for
years, and I like to recall that over these 20 years he has
occasionally thought of the then state of affairs at the opening
of the account so to speak, in the State of South Australia.
I was reminded of it very much today flying across,
contemplating this really disastrous drought that you have been
having in South Australia, A worse drought here than in any
other part of Australia, and if I were to go back for 20 years,
as he can so readily, I think we would both agree, Tom, that
years ago the impact of a dry year with 71 inches of rain, the
impact on South Australia would have been disastrous, and in a
large sense not capable of being resisted because there was no
other balancing factor in the econcrm. y of the State no other
big balancing factor at any rate. So that one would have expected
to find a great deal of unemployment, a good deal of
misery, tremendous problems of Government and private finance.
And in 20 years, if I may say so, largely owing to the unceasing
drive and sometimes the tiresome non-conformity of my friend
the premier ( laughter and applause) but largely owing to
his unceasing drive, with a little co-operation from me in the
earlier years as he will recall .,( la~ ughter) but only a
little, it was... well, I won't elaborate that in case it giv-os
him ideasJ But anyhow ( and he doesn't need them) ( Laughter)
. But you know over this period of 20 years this State has got
both economic feet firmly on the ground. And that uas why I was
so struck tonight, as I was the last time I came hero, at the
idea that you could have 600 men of significance in this city
and in this State meeting to celebrate another year of enormous
development in their own State, and therefore ih the Commonwealth.
This to me is one of the groat things that has happened in
Australia. 
I was born in the northwest of Victoria in a section
which was then called the Mallee, until somebody coined that
highly intellectual phrase: " Is the Mallee worth saving?"
whereupon we promptly called our section the VJimmera ( laughter).
4e11, I mean, reasonably enough we had an acute desire to be
savedi But in 1902, when I was a very ripe age indeed 1902
one of my earliest memories is the great drought of that year,
when in that district ( Jeparit, from Horsham up to Dimboola and
Rainbow) 2J inches of rain fell! The whole earth was brown,
and half of it was blown around in the north winds. Starving
cattle and other stock were brought in to Lake Hindmarsh because
out of the dry bed of the laka there began to sprout a rather
succulent weed as you might say which had moisture in it and
which saved a few thousands of them. At that time a drought
was and still is of course for those who are under its direct
impact an utter disaster. It seemed to be so irremediable
that I began very early in my days to understand what water
meant to people who are in the outback country of Australia.
But oddly enough, though that's my first juvenile memory,
my second juvenile memory not so long after , ards was of hearing
my late father, who was subsequently a member of the Victorian
Parliament, and from whom I inherited a certain degree of contentiousness
and of willingness to enter into a dispute you
will forgive me for that I'm sure but I can we: ll remember
him laying down the law to some, I thought, rather tolerant and
patient wheatgrower, on the subject of the vital importance to
Australia of the protective tariff. They were fighting words
in those days, weren't they? Tremendous! And the old man used
to be at this, as it seemed to me, almost day and night, and in
my juvenile innocence I thought he was wrong.
But that really wasn't a very comforting way in which
to speak to men on the land who suffered all the vicissitudes of
wind and weather. But I didn't take long to learn that from an
Australian point of view he was right that for Australia it
i~ as not sufficient to be exposed naked to the forces of wiind and
weather, that we must develop ourselves as an all-round community,
growing things from the soil, grazing stock on the soil,
manufacturing things in our factories, learning to stand robustly
and in an all-round way in the presence of whatever the world
might choose to do to us, And that's quite right! And you are
tonight the proof of it, And the history of this State is the
proof of it. If the distinguished Premier of this State had
taken a small, narrow view of these matters, South Australia
would not today be able to stand up against these difficulties
and move forward and continue in the broad the prosperity of
her growth, and her development. And therefore I don't belong
to the school of thought though I'm afraid some of my manufacturing
friends do who think that secondary industries in
Australia ought to be apologised for, or in some strange way
defended as if they were exotic from the point of view of Australia.
All that's gone. tie are today living in a community
which has long since decided that every aspect of 4ndustry,
whether it's primary or secondary or tertiary, is in alliance
with every other in order to give the greatest stability and the
greatest chances of growth to the country. That's a simple and
rather comprehensive statement of my owm feeling about these
matters. But I wyant to say a little more about today and the
future. It has been very much in my mind in the last few days
it was brought more acutely to my mind when I learned, as you
did, this afternoon, of the death of George Marshall, that very
great American and very great citizen of the world. Now you
may say: " What has George Marshall to do with the Chamber of
Manufactures Dinner in Adelaide?". I'd like to answer that
question if I may, because I knew him a little enough to know 
3.
of his greatness, of his outlook. But I want to remind you that
George Marshall will go down in the history of the Twentieth
Century as one of the very greatest men of our time. And for
two reasons one was that it wasn't for him to have the picturesque
tasks even though they were vastly dangerous of
command in war; but it was his task as the head of the general
provisioning for the Services in the United States, to be responsible
basically for an * enormous part of the American effort in
the late War. And he attended to it with the most astonishing
courage and the most r~ akbeintelligence, And then when
the War was over he di1. n't fail to understand that there had
been a Wiar before, and that it had produced American ideas in
the League of Nations of an International kind, and that these
had been dropped and defeated at Washington, and that the United
States of America had for a time gone back into a state of isolationism.
George Marshall was well aware of this. He, of
all men in our time, was the man who led the United States into
understanding that the economic development of other countries
in the world was of the greatest importance for peace and for
an intelligent resistance to Communism. And so we had the
Marshall Plan Marshall Aid even though today he is dead, and
for years he has been out of the picture, we ~ xilfind ourselves,
don't we, talking about Marshall Aid as a sort of generic
term. All these thousands of millions that have been
poured into the rest of the world for economic strengthening by
the United States have not only exhibited the end of isolationism,
but they've exhibited the statesmanship which in my opinion does
groat honour to the greatest power in the Twentbth Century. And
so George Marshall and his memory and his work are not irrelevant
to what I am thinking about and talking about tonight.
I believe that the development in Australia over the
last twenty years in particular over a period which began
perhaps a few years after the end of the first World Vlar the
development of Australia in manufacturing, in all-round political
and economic activity has been a source of strength to us
that we don't always rc alise. I was asking the ether day for
a few figures because figures are occasionally interesting.
Boards of Directors have, I believe, been known occasionally to
pay attention to them ( Laughter) and occasionally I do. But I
asked for a few good round objective figures, because I had it
in my bones that there had been the most astonishing development
in this, what I'll call, the industrial field, Aid t'jlo answer
is that since the War there has been invested in manuf'acturn
industry, in what I'll call the fixed assets of manufacturing
industry, since the war, no less than œ 1,750,000,000 in Australia.
And for years now it has averaged about œ C200,00, OO a
year at least. This is remarkable! If it stood by itself it
would be remarkable. If it stood by itself it would exhibit a
degree of confidence in the country which I think is of the very
essence of national development. But if doesn't Stand by itself!
We have now for some time been receiving capital needed
capital from overseas. Some of it, of course, on the public
account public Government borrowing and a great deal of it
on private account. We have had now, for the last few years,
something over a hundred millions a year coming into Australia
on private account for capital investrment. And contrary to some
public impressions the better part of it from the United Kingdom,
but a gruat deal of it from the United States far more on
private account than on public account, though I wouldn't apologise
for what has come in on public account, because as I think
I have said to you once bofore, there is no greater fallacy entertained
by many people including business people than the
idea that Government expenditure on works is in somae way a competitor
with private expenditure in the development of industry,
whereas, of course, it is nothing of the kind! But for Government
expenditure on roads and water and power and all these
things there could be no adequate industrial development in Aus-
tralia. These are two facets of the same thing; and from my
poftft-of view, as one who has been by some chance made the
Prime Minister of Australia, I find nothing that fills me so
much with pride not with complacency as some people say but
with pride a decent sentiment pride is and every Australian
ought to have it and nothing fills me with more pride than
the knowledge that this confidence is being shown not only by
investors in Australia but by investors outside of Australia,
in our destiny, in our capacity, in our future both near and
distant. These are, I think, tremendously exciting days. And
when I think about them I say to iyself: " dell, how is it that
when we contemplate the state of our economy how is it that
when we follow out the enormous growth of industry in Australiathat
we so frequently sit down and engage in a gloom session.
Oh things are not what they might be! We're having a little
trouble about this! The Government isn't doing enough about
that." Well I don't mind a bit of moaning; I think that it's
very good I'm not unaccustomed to is ( laughter) near home.
A little bit of moaning now and then it relished by the wisest
men if I may misquote ( laughter). But what about taking a
little stock occasionally and forgetting to moan, and feeling
glad? What about feeling happy about this country of ours?
! hat about saying to ourselves every now and then: " Bliss was
it in that dawn to be alive, but to be young ' twas very Heaven."
Wouldn't it be very Heaven to be young in a country like this,
with all these achievements to its credit, and with this almost
illimitable future in front of it? Let's be proud; let's be
cheeful about it! And it's very important that we should be
for a reason that I want to mention a reason with which many
of you are no doubt familiar.
It isn't very long ago that it could be said with
complete accuracy that the export income of Australia was
derived almost entirely from primary products. And the manufacturer
was a fellow who under the advantage of all that, was
enjoying the benefits of a protective tariff. But he wasn't
exporting anything! Now, I've got a figure or two on that
I'll see if I can find it; yes, five years ago only five
years ago manufactured goods and semi-manufactured goods
represented eight per cent of Australia's exports. Last financial
year they represented fourteen per cent of Australia's
export income. Five years, you know that's a very remarkable
development. I believe myself that the time will come I won't
be here, but a lot of you will be: you sprightly fellows will
be here I believe that the time will come, and that before
many years, when the products of our factories will represent
a massive proportion of our export income. I'm not contemplating
that we're going to grow less wool or sell less wool or
that these great staples of export are going to be less significant,
They will go on, providing the bedrock in many ways of
our overseas earnings they will remain most vital industries,
and we are not to forget it but I believe that eight per cent,
fourteen per cent, will becom twenty, will become tw: entyfive,
will become thirty per cent until the old idea that the manufacturer
provides only for his own people under the shelter of
a tariff will become almost as dead as the dodo. And why
shouldn't it! What kind of people are we in Australia? There
are none bettorl Let's have a little bit of Scot's modesty
about this matter ( laughter, applause)
" Here's tao us
Wha's like us?
Da'd few, and they're a' doid."
Well that's good; it's a good Scots motto, and I commend it 
' even to my Irish friends ( laughter) who may be here. But this
is really a matter for pride and for ambition. All we need to
do is to realise that if we're going on increasing our population
by a quarter of a million every year, so that by the end
of this century there will be far, far more millions here than
any prophet ever thnought of fifteen years ago if we're going
on like that, then let us realise that we are and must continue
to be one of the greatest trading nations of the world. We are
indeed! We're in a limited few of the great trading nations.
Far greater traders than our population would suggest or require.
And when we have twenty million people, when we have
thirty million people, are we going to be ontent to be exporters
only of the things that we grow? Are we going o look back
and say: " Well we had a marvellous opportunity of doing business
with hundreds of millions of people whose standards of living
were only beginning to emerge, whose capacity to buy was
only beginning to be significant"? Or are we going to say to
ourselves: " Look, it's of much greater importance to know how
we can export things that we make in Australia, how we can
export them in large measure, in fifteen years'time." That's
a much more important question than whether we can raise the
dividend rate next year from nine to ten, or from ten to
twelve. This is a matter for imagination, for understanding,
for a bit of true pioneering. I've said it until I'm well
I was going to say until Il'm sick of saying it until some
people are sick of hearing me say it, much more accurately but
I have said more than once that there's nothing I object to so
much as this old bogus idea that pioneers had beards and bowyangs.
All that's gone! Some day they will look back, and
they will look back to you people and to me and to all of
us who are here and so be it that we do the right thing
they will say: " These people were among the pioneers of Australian
export to the rest of the world of things made in Australian
factories by Australian artisans." And that will be
a great day for Australia. ( applause)
Now, Sir, it's taken me a long time to lead up to it,
but that's really all I got up to say to you. This is our
moment! You never know this may be the year or the decade of
our destiny. I don't go so far as to say it's the year of our
destiny, but I'm sure that we are living in the decade of our
destiny. If we huddle up under our protective clothes, and
say: " Well, we're doing very nicely, why worry aoout the market
in other countries, we're doing quite nicely thank you" then no
doubt we can go along quite comfortably, but our race didn't
become what it was and is in the -Jorld by going comfortably.
Australia might have wanted to go comfortably when she had a
small population and an acute sense of dependence, but what's
the use of taking pride in your independence unless you determine
that all the things that have to be done to maintain it
and extend it, and make it useful, will be done?
And so, I'm saying to you what no Prime Minister
would even have thought of saying at a Chamber of Manufactures
dinner twenty years ago I'm saying to you: don't just be
satisfied by filling the local market; don't just be satisfied
by fooling that circumstances are not too bad and there's a good
level of prosperity. Be dissatisfied, grossly dissatisfiA until
you feel that we are capable of exporting to other people
in the world and selling to them in fair competition, masses of
things that are made in our factories. We do it'I Australia
sells stool on the west coast of the United States at a price
advantage.! Not bad for Australia is it? Somebody would have
said once that it couldn't be done. Somebody once said that it
was impossible to manufacture motor cars in Australia it
couldn't be done! The world's full of these wretched creatures
who know that it can't be done. I am addressing six hundred
men who I hope know that it can be done, and are determined
that it will be done. 



COMMONWEALTH TAXING POWERS
REPLY BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, ON
WEDNESDAY 21ST OCTOBER, 1959
MR. BIRD: Has the Prime Minister noted the remarks of the Victorian
Premier, Mr. Bolte, to the effect that the Commonweal th
Government had financially throttled the States by using taxing
powers that it no longer had the right to retain? In view of
the seriousness of this statement will the Prime Minister arrange
for a debat7e in the House on Commonwealth-State financial
relationships and also on the charge made by Mr. Bolte that
through the power of the purse the Commonwealth dictates State
policy in most subjects.
MR. MENZIES: I noticed a report in the press that the Premier of
Victoria had had some critical remarks to make which, unfortunately,
were based on remarks attributed to me Awhich I had not
made. In a speech in Melbourne I pointed out that there is a
paradox in Australian public opinion, I did not refer to
States or State Governments. I said that the paradox was that
whereas every time there was a proposal to increase the powers o:.
the Commonwealth Parliament, the people found it possible, and
indeed necessary, to vote yet the very people who opposed
the granting of such powers would next day perhaps be on a deputation
to the Commonwealth Government to ask it to accent financial
responsibility for a matter that lay within the pcier of
the States. I thought that was paradoxical. I an a federalist
and I believe in the division of powers, but I pointed out that
I thought there was a little strange and incohsistent thinking
on that matter. Some newspaper was kind enough to say that I
had criticized the States for wanting to retain their powers. I
said nothing of the kindø
As to the question of the States retaking their direct
taxing powers, I remind the honourable member that in March
of this year we had a conference with the Premiers, I had promised
such a conference in the course of my policy speech and ve
had a very long, careful and valuable discussion on this very
problem. The upshot of the discussion was that certainly four
States exhibited a complete want of desire to be asked to raise
their own taxes and to live on the proceeds of those taxes, I
pointed out to them Ithink honourable members "-ill ? agreo ith
me that you cannot have a hybrid system in Australia, Either
the States have their taxing powers and exercise them I have
always said that in principle we think that is right or they
do not, but the idea of the Commonwealth raising taxes under a
uniform system in four States and abstaining from raising taxes
for State purposes in two States is not only financially absurd
but I would doubt very much whether it had any constitutional
justification. The result of this very long discussion was as 1
have indicated. The Commonwealth's attitude remains the same,
When the State Governments say that they would like to have
their taxing powers back on suitable terms that have been indicated
to them by me on repeated occasions, we will be most
happy to engage in negotiations to help to produce that result,
In the meantime it is quite beside the point for any individual
State to attack us for retaining scmething against the ,; ill of
the States, I point out that 66 per cent of the States I knov
it is nice to put these things in terms of percentages in
March, 1959, did not want direct taxing powers handed back to
them. 



TRIBUTE TO THE LATE MR. -CAHILL
BY THE PRIME MINISTER IN THE HOUSE OF REPRES8N-
-TATIVES ON THURSDAY, 22ND OCTOBER,. l9a9
Mr. Speaker, honourable members will be aware of the
fact that after an illness which it was hoped was purely minor
and temporary, Mr. Cahill, the Premier of New South Wales, died
this morning, I think none of us would wish this unhappy occasion
to pass without reference to it being made! in this House.
Mr. Cahill was, of course, much too young to die, but he had for
many years worked with great devotion and great energy for the
causes that he believed in and for the State over whose political
fortunes he was called to preside.
During the time I have been Prime Minister I saw a
great deal of Mr. Cahill. I will always be pleased to remember
that I had the greatest respect for him, and that we lived,
though on opposite sides of politics, on terms of close personal
friendship. I think he was a man of integrity and a man of
devotion to the cause that he understood and which he did so
much to lead. When one knows a man of that kind one inevitably
expresses sadness at the news of his death.
It may perhaps be of some comfort to those he has
left behind to knew, as they will know when the record of these
few minutes is produced, that though he was strongly attached
to his party, and never unwilling to break a lance in the political
lists, he died, nevertheless, holding the respect, and, I
think, the affection of everybody in this place. I make only
those few remarks. It is difficult to say very much. I have
been shocked by this news; so have we all. 


P. M. No, 40/ 1959
GRANT TO ADELAIDE ARTS FESTIVAL COMMITTEE
The Prime Minister announced today that a Grant of 7,000. had been given by the Commonwealth towards the Festival of Arts which is to be held in Adelaid in 1960.
The Prime Minister said that in so doing the Commonwealth recognised the contribution the Festival would make in focussing attention on Australian cultural achievements.
Canberra, 22nd October, 1959.



COPY OF LETTER TO PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND
THE HON. G. F. R. NICKLIN, M. LA.
DATED 26TH OCTOBER, 1959.
Dear Mr. Nicklin, Mr. Holt having now returned and given us an account
of his very extensive enquiries into the possibilities of
overseas borrowing, I am now able to convey to you our considered
views as to the part the Commonwealth is prepared to play
in financing the rehabilitation of the railway from Collinsville
to Mt. Isa in North Queensland.
First, I should say that we have concluded that
there is no immediate prospect of raising finance overseas specifically
for the Mt. Isa Railway project. We do not by any means
rule out the possibility of obtaining some overseas money for the
purpose at a later stage, and that is a consideration we have had
to keep in mind in framing the proposal I am about to put to you.
It is clear, however, that no such pportunity is likely to occur
for some time ahead and that, even then, we could not rely upon
obtaining more than a part of the total sum required.
In the light of this conclusion we have turned
our minds to the problem of finding sufficient money from other
sources to enable the comprehensive railway project to go ahead
and be carried through to completion in a satisfactory manner,.
You told me in your letter of the 24th July last
that your Government had decided to proceed with the limited
project of re-building the line fro~ m Richmond to Duchess at the
standard envisaged by Ford Bacon and Davis in their report. The
advice you obtained from that firm was that the cost of that
work would be from œ E8 million to œ 10 million and you said that,
spread over five years, this would be within thle financial resources
of your State. On this, I said in my r, ply to you that, while
the more limited proposal was naturally quite unobjectionable
from our point of view, I could not help feeling that it was a
relatively temporary expedient, and that I would like to see the
whole line done, thus bringing about a development of great importance
to Queensland. That is a view to which I have held steadily,
My colleagues and I have always seen the compreilensive railway
ptrioesj ecotf adse vael moepamnesn t ofw hipcrho muontdionugb ttehde lyi mmeexnisset ainnd Novratrhieerdn poQsuseiebnisl--L*
land. This is indeed an aspect of the matter which may have had
too little emphasis. ' We all started thinking and talking about
the railway primarily in relation to mining at Mt. Isa and, of
course, it probably remains true that the prospective mining and
smelting expansion at Mt. Isa itself constitutes the chief immediate
need for the railway work, But, as we know from what you
and others have told us, and from our own investigations, the
whole of the North-Western region is rich in possibilities of
other developments, some of them perhaps being likely to materialise
in the not far distant future. I have therefore come to
think of the railway as being vital not only for the Mt. Isa expansion
itself, but for the whole future of Northern Queensland.
Hence, it is clear to us that the financial problem
to which we should look is that of meeting the cost of rebuilding
and re-equipping the whole Collinsville-Mt. Isa railway
at an adequate standard. That, at any rate, is the basis on.
which we have worked, and I know that you see eye to eye with us
in this. Coming now to details, I remember that the estimated
cost of the railway project as a whole, as originally conceived,
was of the order of œ C29 million to œ, 30 million. Those 
4 2.
figures, I believe, allowed fairly substantially for increases
in construction costs that might occur during the time the railway
was being built, for interest on capital during the construc
-tion period, and for certain improvements of a general nature
which the Queensland Railway System would, sooner or later, have
had to face. Next, as I recalled a little earlier, you said
that your State would be able to find from its own resources
over a period of five years, from œ E8 million to œ 10O millionto
wards the cost of the railway. You thought that this might entail
some sacrifice of work elsewhere but you plainly rated the
importance of the railway improvements so highly that you were
prepared to face up to this.
It appears, then that your essential unsatisfied
requirements is for a sum of HO0 million over the period it may
take to carry out the railway rehabilitation work. My collagues
and I have now decided that the Commonwealth will offer
to underwrite the provision of this sum on the terms and in the
manner I shall now state.
We would provide the money initially by way of
advances from the Commonwealth to the State of Queensland as the
railway work proceeds and pro rata to expenditure on the project
by Queensland during that period from -its own resources.
The Commonwealth would charge interest on these
advances, as from the date at which each advance was made, during
the construction period but it would not expect repayment
of the principal to begin until the designated date for the completion
of the railway work. Thereafter, it would require equal
annual ~ instalments of interest and principal sufficient to pay
off the total amount advanced over twenty years from the designated
date of completion of the railway.
While not wishing to become involved in details of
the project, the Commonwealth would naturally desire to be satisfied
that it would be carried out at an adequate standard of
construction and equipment. We envisage in effect, that in
essentials, though not necessarily in all particulars, it would
follow the broad lines set out in the Ford Bacon and Davis reports.
On this basis there would have to be an initial estimate
of total cost to which your Government and ours would work in
providing finance pro rata as expenditure on the job required.
In determining the standards, your Government would naturally be
guided by the knowledge that the Commonwealth's contribution
would be œ-20 million. I may say that in making this offer we have had
very much in view that it was just such an arrangement we had
under discussion when last year, we were negotiating for a
loan from the International Bank. I believe I am quite right in
saying that you then regarded such an arrangement as both suitable
for the financing of the railway and as acceptable to your
Government. Hence it seemed to us that we could not do better
than to revive the arrangement which had so much thought at that
time, and on which both your Government and ours were agreed
both as to broad principles and as to the main details. If I
could put it so, we are now proposing to place ourselves in the
position we would have occupied had we been able to secure a
loan from the International Bank but with the substantial difforence
that we ourselves will now be assuming in addition the
obligations which earlier we had hoped would have fallen upon
that institution. The same consideration has guided us in determining
the matter of interest rates. While it is not easy to find a 
4 3.
generally satisfactory criterion for this, we think it fair to
propose that the rates of interest the Commonwealth should charg3
on the advances made from time to time to Queensland should be
the same as those currently set by the International Bank for new
loans to member countries. You will readily appreciate that the
Commonwealth will still have ahead of it the job of raising money
for the advances it makes to Queensland, and we will certainly be
following up all possibilities of raising such money abroad.
This is for the very good reason of importance to the States
as well as to the Commonwealth that anything we can raise
abroad over and above what might be called normal loan raisings
will enable us to avoid any diminution of the amounts that would
otherwise be available to the Commonwealth and the States for
other developmental purposes. It is, of course, quite impossible
to foresee what any money raised abroad will cost but, as a
broad judgment, the rate currently charged by the International
Bank ought to provide a fair reflection and index of the cost of
international loans to Governments. Should it subsequently
prove that some part of our advances to you can be recouped from
special borrowings overseas on better than International Bank
terms, we should be propared to negotiate an adjustment on the
interest charges to give you the benefit of any advantage so
obtained. You will have observed that we wish to make no condition
about the terms of any freight agreement that may be made
butween the Queensland Railways and Mt. Isa Mines Ltd. for the
carriage of their goods on the railway. As I said to you in my
letter of 28th August the Commonwealth regards the ultimate responsibility
in this matter as belonging to the Government of
Queensland and we for our part are not divposed to insist upon
specific legal undertakings from the Company as a condition of
our helping to finance the work on your railway system. However,
I am sure you will have very much in mind the importance of securing
such terms and conditions for the carriage of goods upon
the railway as will guarantee that the large financial outlays
on the re-building of the line will produce an adequate return
of revenue. The main points in the Commonwealth offer are restated
in the Annexure, There will be numerous matters of detail
to clarify between your Government and ours. I am bound to
say, however, that in making the above proposal to you we feel
that we are fully recognising the great national interest involved
in the projected work and that the terms I have set forth
are, in all the circumstances, both fair and practicable.
Yours sincerely,
( Sgd) R. G. Menzies
PRIME MINISTER,, 
ANNEXURE
SUMMARY TERMS OF THE COIAMONIEIATH OFFER
The State will as soon as practicable, determine the nature
and extent of' the works to be undertaken and the estimated
total cost thereof.
The State will provide the Commonwealth with a general de
scription of the works and an estimate of the phasing of
expenditure within each year of the construction period.
In the light of this information the State and the Commonwealth
will agree upon a designated date for completion of
the project.
( L4) The Commonwealth, provided it is satisfied that the works
to be undertaken conform generally with its present understanding
of the nature of the project, offers
to underwrite the provision of funds to the State aggregating
not more than œ-20 million for expenditure on
the project;
to make advances in each year of the construction period
equal to that proportion of actual expenditure in
that year on the project which œ 20_ million bears to
the initially estimated total cost of the project.
() The State will agree
to carry out the project as described to the Commonwealth;
to pay interest during the construction period on each
advance at the lending rate of interest ( and commission)
determined by the International Bank from time
to time for new loans of not less than twenty years
currency; to repay, in equal annual instalments over the twenty
years commencing from the designated date for completion
of the project, the amount necessary to amortize
the aggregate amount of the advances made up to that
date, including ( subject to paragraph 6( a) hereof) interest
on the outstanding balances at a rate which
shall be equal to the weighted average rate of interest
payable on advances made in each year of the construction
period.
The State and the Commonwealth agree
to negotiate a reduction in the rate of interest specified
in paragraph 5( c) if the Commonwealth is able to
borrow the whole or part of the advances overseas on
more favourable terms than the average rate specified
above; to negotiate the terms of any further advances if the
advances made before the designated completion date
fall short of œ-20 million and the project is still
uncompleted. 



P. M. No. 41/ 1959
TRIBUTE TO MR. HASLUCK
A tribute to the work of the Minister for Territories,
the Hon. Paul Hasluck, has boon received by the Prime Minister,
the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, from the Board of Missions of the
Methodist Church of Australasia.
The tribute came in the form of a resolution passed at
a meeting of the Board early in October.
The text of the resolution, conveyed to Mr. Monzies
read " Having regard to the fact that this Board of Missions
of the Methodist Church of Australasia is charged with the
carrying out of policy which makes for the well-being of the
people of the islands of the Pacific, the Board welcomes the
general policy in this regard carried out by the present Government
under its responsible Minister, the Hon. Paul Hasluck.
The Board records its appreciation of the service rendered
to the Territories of Papua New Guinea by the Minister.
The Board believes that Mr. Hasluck has brought to his office
a well-informed mind and a sympathetic appreciation of
Australia's obligations to the peoples under its trust in the
Northern Territory, Papua Now Guinea and other areas under the
Department of Territories.
The Board notes with gratification the co-operation which
the Minister has at all times encouraged between the Administra-
-tion and the work of the Board of Missions in the Territories."
CANBERRA. 26th October, 1959. 



MELBOURNE " PEACE" CONFERENCE
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ON TUESDAY, 27TH OCTOBER. 1959
Mr. Deputy Speaker the function of the Australian security
ihtelligonce organization is perfectly clear. It was established
by the late Mr. Chifley; it has been continued by us.
It operates in a direct sense under the Prime Minister but it is
attached to the Attorney-General's Dupartment for certain admihistrative
purposes. It reports to me on matters about which it
thinks I should be informed. It undoubtedly maintains contact
with the Department of External Affairs. It would be a very remarkable
state of affairs if it did not, since the Department of
Externa Affairs is charged with responsibility for our relations
with other countries and is in charge of a general policy which,
in one of its major aspects, consists of resistance to Communist
aggression. The security intelligence organization is our principal
weapon for gathering knowledge about Communist activity,
and I will continue to encourage it to perform its duty in that
respect in spite of anything that may be said about it.
It is quite true that in one exceptional case, the circumstances
of which were referred to by the Attorney-General ( Sir
Garfield Barwick) this afternoon, and on request, information was
given to one gentleman in Sydney who was a sponsor of this congross.
It is not the function of the security intelligence organization
to go around persuading people. It has no instructions
to do so and, with that one exception on request it has
not done so. But it keeps me informed and, through me, it keeps
the Government informed of what goes on. I am happy to say that
there is very little that goes on in the Communist Party organization
of Australia with which one is not familiar as a result
of the activity, loyalty and zeal of the officers of the security
service. This particular congress that is to be held seems to
have been the occasion for this trouble. In the very few minutes
that I have, let me say one or two things about it. There is
nothing very mysterious about them. They have only to be stated.
They have their effect on the minds of sensible people.
This congress issued a printed pamphlet describing what
it was about and what its functions were. It made no secret,
because on the very first page it said
" The idea for the congress arose from the post-war history
of the struggle for peace.."
That is a phrase that we have heard so frequently from those who
have conducted the cold war. The statement went on
the post-war history for the struggle for peace and in
particular from the Stockholm Conference for Disarmament and
International co-operation last year."
Does anybody, with any wits about him, suppose for one moment or
have any doubt that the Stockholm Conference was a Conmunist
front? The Stockholm Conference, which then began to operate
through the World Peace Council and, as it comes to Australia and
New Zealand, through the Australian Peace Council, enlisting the
aid of those remarkable bodies like the Eureka Youth League and
a half a dozen bodies of that kind, notoriously Communist or
Conmmunist controlled or made up of Coraunist fellow travellers?
There is no mystery about that.
The marvellous thing to me is that anybody should suppose
that the eminently respectable people xihose names have been
put forward as sponsors are actually those who have promoted the 
2.
conference. They are not. This conference was promoted as a
result of the Stockholm Conference. It is perfectly clear that
this conference has been made the main 1959 activity of the Communist
Party of Australia. This is their great effort for this
year and if it succeeds in attracting the attention of a sufficient
number of thousands of non-Communists, they will regard
that as rather a propaganda victory.
Those are the simple facts about the matter. These
are the people who have promoted the conference. What they have
done is to go to a number of eminently respectable people and
say: " Would you mind having your name used as a sponsor for this
conference?". And a lot of people, who, like everybody in this
House, desire peace and who would do much to secure it, have
said: " Yos, if this is for peace, you may use my name." But there
is a very great difference between being an invited sponsor and
being an invitor, an orgarizor, a promotor, and I say, with no
hesitation, that the whole of the initial promotion of this conference
goes back to Communist, and Communist-allied organizations.
Indeed, anybody who cared to examine the list of the executive
officers would, without knowing too much, know that the
list embraces a number of well-known and notorious Communists,
Therefori Sir, I want to say this: If it is the desiro
of the Labour Party to promote a peace conference, good. Let it
do so. That is intelligible. If it is the desire of the Churches
to promote a peace conference, they have an enormous constituency
and a powerful spiritual influence on the people of Australia;
let them do so. But itis very odd to me that some of
them should allow themselves to be drawn into the organization of
a congress which they have not promoted at all but with which,
unhappily, they have allowed their names to be associated,
I wonder if honourable members ever cast their eyes on
the " Tribune", the Comnunist official journal? They will find
that that has given a powerful boost to this conference and well
it might because this is the task for this year,
Now I must confess that I was surprised to hear my
friend the honourable member for Melbourne Ports ( Mr. Crean), who
just concluded his speech, and whom nobody would accuse and I
thoroughly agree of being a Communist, and whose intentions on
this matter are of the highest. I am surprised that he should
take some pleasure in the statement that the Labour Party in Victoria
is supporting this congress. At the risk of occupying a
minute longer than I should, I just want to say this: The Labour
Party has spoken about this matter twice. The Australian Labour
Party through its Federal conference and executive in 1951 gave
consideration to the Australian Peace Council, one of the active
promoters of this Conference. What did they say? They said
" Your executive gave consideration to the standing of the
Australian Peace Council in relation to the Australian Labour
Party and determined as follows
That this Federal Executive, being of the opinion that
the Australian Peace Council is a subsidiary organization
of the Communist Party, we therefore declare that it is
not competent for any member of the Australian Labour
Party to be associated therewith."
If that was true in 1951, when did it cease to be true? It certainly
had not ceased to be true in 1955 because once more the
Partycame back to the same problem and this is something which I
will quote and, having quoted it I need say no more. What they
said was this:
" The Executive now declares that it is Communist stra':. gy
to use these functions to represent the West as aggressive
and the exclusive centre of danGer to world peace to conceal 
the aggressive actions of Communist regimes in Eastern
Europe and in Asia and to bring about negotiations between
Communist regimes and the ' elst under circumstances when
territorial concessions will be made by the West in return
for concessions which have no substance."
Sir, that is a
ent position.
by quoting it. pretty clear and powerful exposition of the pres-
Therefore, Sir, as I said I can satisfy myself
I agree with it. I stand by it. 



COPY OF LETTER FROM THiE PREMIER OF QUEENSLAND
TO THE PRIME MINISTER DATED 28TH OCTOBER, 1959
My dear Prime Minister, My Government gratefully accepts the offer
to finance the construction of the Mount Isa Railway Project as
outlined in your letter of the 26th instant.
In order that there be no delays in
reaching final agreement on all points, we have already commenced
to prepare the details as set out in paragraphs one to three in
the annexure to your letter. At this stage, all our advices are
that the Project will broadly encompass the full scheme as
outlined in the Ford Bacon and Davis reports.
We are firmly of the opinion that Mount
Isa Mines Limited should complete a freight agreement with my
Government and have no doubt that they will acquiesce in completing
such an agreement, substantially along the lines tentatively
agreed on previously. I agree with you that minor matters can be
clarified later when your proposal is being written into agreement
form. You will be pleased to know that Ford Bacon
and Davis will be asked by my Government to not only act as
Engineer-Managers, but also to prepare an operating schedule for
our northern line. Additionally, they will be asked to make a
review of the entire operation of our complete railway system.
This project will I believe, be of tremendous
benefit not only to Queensland but to the whole of Australia,
as it will open wide to development one of the richest mineral
and pastoral areas of the Commonwealth. It is particularly
significant that this agreement should have be-en -brou-ght to
fruition in Queen-sland's-Certenar--Year,-
My colleagues and I deeply appreciate your
Government's interest, and particularly the part played personally
by yourself and your Treasurer in making such a material
contribution to the successful conclusion of the ' Lengthy and
difficult ne., otiations that have taken place in connection with
the Project. Please accept our sincere thanks.
I would suggest that you be responsible for
the release to the Press, but would appreciate it if you would
advise me when you are making such release.
Kind regards, Yours sincerely,
Frank Nicklin
Premier 



P. M. No. 42/ 1959
VISIT OF TUNKU ABDUL RAHMAN
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
MENZIES
The Prime Minister today released details of the programme
for the visit to Australia of the Prime Minister of the
Federation of Malaya, Tunku Abdul Rahman.
Mr. Menzies said he greatly looked forward to meeting
Tunku Abdul Rahman especially since he would be visiting Malaya
for the first time with Dame Pattie Menzies in December, when he
would again meet the Malayan Prime Minister.
Tunku Abdul Rahman will travel by Qantas from Kuala
Lumpur to Sydney via Singapore, Djakarta, Perth and Melbourne.
The Minister for the Interior and for Jorks, Mr. Gordon Freeth,
will meet Tunku Abdul Rahman at Perth Airport on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government. The High Commissioner for Malaya, Dato'
Gunn Lay Teik, Australia's High Commissioner at Kuala Lumpur, Mr.
T. K. Critchley and a representative of the 4estern Australian
Government, will also be present at the Airport.
Tunku Abdul Rahman will stay informally in Sydney at
Kirribilli House on Saturday, 31st October, and will arrive in
Canberra at 4.15 p. m. on Sunday 1st November where he will be
met by the Prime Minister, Mr. A. G. Menzies, and will inspect a
Guard of Honour provided by the Royal Australian Air Force. He
will dine that evening at the Prime Minister's Lodge.
On Monday morning the 2nd November, Tunku Abdul Rahman
will attend the official Opening of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association Conference by His Excellency the Governor-General,
and in the afternoon will travel to Melbourne in the Commonwealth
Government's V. I. P. aircraft Metropolitan
Convair). In Melbourne he will attend the State Governor's late
afternoon Reception and in the evening will attend " My Fair Lady"
at Her Majesty's Theatre.
On Tuesday, 3rd November, Tunku Abdul Rahman will attend
the Melbourne Cup and will be a guest at the Governor-General's
Buffet Luncheon at the Racecourse.
On ednesday, the 4th November, he will trqvel to Portsea
and visit the Officer Cadet School whore he will inspect a
Guard of Honour and remain to lunch. In the evening he will attend
a Dinner Party in his honour at Government House and afterwards
attend the Naval Ball in the Governor of Victoria's party.
Thursday, 5th November, will be spent informally in
Melbourne taking in a sightseeing tour during the day. In the
evening Tunku Abdul Rahman will give a Buffet Dinner to Malayan
students. Tunku Abdul Rahman will visit the Snowy Mountains
Scheme from Friday, the 6th, until Sunday, the 8th November.
Tunku Abdul Rahman will re) turn to Canberra in the late
afternoon of Sunday 8th November and for the following three days
will stay at Government House as the guest of Their Excellencies
the Governor-General and Lady Slim.
On Monday, 9th November, he will have official discussions
in Canberra and attend a Luncheon in his honour given by
His Excellency the Governor-General at Government House. In the
afternoon Tunku Abdul Rahman will officially open the Chancery of
the High Commissioner for Malaya and later attend a Reception in
L 
his honour given by His Excellency Dato'' Gunn Lay Teik.
On Tuesday, 10th November Tunku Abdul Rahman will
give a National Press Conference and later lay a wreath on the
commemorative stone at the Australian War Memorial. He will attend
a Parliamentary Luncheon at Parliament House given by the
Commonwealth Government. After the Parliamentary Luncheon Tunku
Abdul Rahman will attend question time in the House of Representatives
and in the Senate. He will be invited to take a seat on
the floor of each House. In the evening he will attend a Dinner
in his honour given by the High Commissioner for Malaya, Dato'
Gunn Lay Teik. Guests will include the Prime Minister, Mr.
Menzies, Leader of the Opposition, Dr. Evatt and some senior
Ministers. On Wednesday, llth November Tunku Abdul Rahman will
leave Canberra for Sydney where he will attend a State Luncheon
given by the Government of New South T-* ales. In the late afternoon
Tunku Abdul Rahman will attend the Sydney University and
will receive the degree of Doctor of. Laws, after which he will
attend the University's Annual Reception. That evening Tunku
Abdul Rahman will tender a Buffet Dinner to Malayan students.
He will spend the next throe days ( 12th to 14th November)
informally in Sydney.
Tunku Abdul Rahman will leave Sydney for Kuala Lumpur
on Sunday, the 15th November.
Tunku Abdul Rahman will be accompanied by his Minister
of the Interior, Dato' Suleiman, and four officials.
CANBERRA
28th OCTOBAjR, 1959. 


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.R. G. MENZIES AT THE COMM~ lvONWEA~ LTH PARLIAMENTARYCONFERENCE CANBERRA, THURSDAY, 29THOCT6BER3 1,959Your Grace, my Lords, Your IZxcellencies, Ladies andGentlemen: My task is a very pleasant one and, you will berelieved to know, a very short one. My task is to propose thehealth of our visitors, and in doing so I will be supported byDr. Evatt, representing the Opposition. That simple statementperhaps explains almost all that has to be explained about theCommonwealth Parliamentary Association and about this gathering.qe are speaking now as Australians, completely bipartisanon this occasion, We have no differences when wedeal with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and itsdelegates. I have looked round the room and I have seen staunchsupporters of mine, hardened tories like myself sitting cheekby jowl with gentlemen. of advanced ideas from Lhe Opposition,giving every possible appearance of being friendly, as indeedthey are. That, after all, is the great secret of parliamentarylife, and that is perhaps he greatest thing to be learned aboutS parliamentaSor y tlhiafte , i isnt hea llf ircsotu ntcroimemse nto ldt haotr nIe ww, anted to makethat there is something superbly bi-partisan, if I may use thatterm or non-party, to use a better one, perhaps, about ourmeetng. The second thing that has been very much in my mindand I am not going to say all that I have in my mind is that Ihave been instructed that this is only the first of threespeeches I shall make to precisely the same audienice on preciselythe same topics. So, naturally, I must keep something inreserve. So the second thing, and the last thing, I want to sayon this particular occasion, which is a pipe-opener is just toask one question. This is the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.What is there that makes us an association? Whatis it that makes us all feel that we have so-me profoundly greatelement in common, with all our differences? Some of the oldfoideas are no longer valid for that purpose, Take the Crown, foexample and its relationship to the people of Australia. Weare Her Majesty's subjects, externally and internally. Thereare other big countries representeO. in the Co-q-. or-' A t h Parlia-S mentary Association who recognise Her Majesty as the Head of theCommonwealth but to whom the Queen is not internally the sameconstant presence. So there is a difference.There are differences in our law. We all hope andstruggle to have the purest of legal administrat~ bn. But everytime I begin to persuade myself, with all the natural arroganceof a common lawyer that the Common Law is the secret, I encountersomebody from South Africa who, I find, is a stranger to theCommon Law and all messed up with Roman Law, Therefore, Icannot have that as an element of unity.Really, the more you think about it, the :. jreat thingwe have in canmon is that we are all Par] liament men and women.v! e know about Parliament, we live in a parliamentary system, Weare all of us, or practically all of us, members of some parliamentor another, all of them, interestingly enough, modelled onthe great model of Westminster, all of them with departures andmodifications which depend on local history and local characteristicsor the inexorable march of events. But underneath it allwe are parliament men. This is our great link,I know of no other body or association in the w'orld inwhich everybody participating can say: " I am a. man or womanof Parliament. I believe in Parliament. I am part of Parliament,and Parliament is part of This is a unique body,
2.and that is a unique link.Therefore, we in Australia who practise our politics,as Winston Churchill once said, writh a fine Eighteenth Centuryvigour, are delighted to meet peopleiall of them people ofParliament, some of whom practise politics with more vigourthan we do some of w'hom have achieved that state of Nirvana inwhich cour~ esy prevails always, which we can only envy.Before I propose the toast " Our Guests" I am going toinvite my distinguished opponent, the Leader of the Opposition,my bi-partisan friend for this occasion, Dr. Evatt, to supportme.



P. M. No. 4+ 3/ 1959
MT. ISA RA LWAY
Statement by the Prime Minister
In August I concluded a published statement concerning
the actions of teCommonwealth in relation to the Mt. Isa
railway project with these words:
" All that need be said at this stage is that the Queensland
Government and my owm are both active and co-operative, since
we are both enthusiastic about the project, and will do all
that we can to see it completed as a whole, in the interests
of both mineral and pastoral development in Northern Queensland."
Today, I am, able to publish a letter from myself to
Mr. Nicklin, Premier of Queensland, dated 26th October and a reply
from him which I have received today. Some details will
have to be worked out on the official level but they will not, I
imagine, create any difficulties.
In effect, therefore, the great problem of the financing
of the rehabilitation of the railway from Collinsville to
Mount Isa in North Queensland will be solved and a new era of
North Queensland development will be opened up. When it is realised
that in addition to the œ C30m. which will be spent by government,
the Mount Isa Company will spend substantially more
than that sum in developing its mining production, it will be
seen that the total project is of immense magnitude. When both
the mine development and the railway rehabilitation are complete,
there will be not only groat improvement in Queensland railway
finances and in employment in many ways, but there will also be
a very large addition to both Queensland industry and to national
export income. I do not need to recapitulate the actions of the Commonwealth
on this matter. Up to a very recent point, I explained
them fully in a statement which was widely published in
the Queensland press.
Mr. Holt, on his recent journey abroad, conducted,
with the Secrotary to the Commonwealth Treasury, Sir Roland Wilson,
a close examination into all possible sources of special
borrowing for the Mount Isa railway, including those which had
been suggested from the Queensland end. It turned out that
there was no imrnadiate prospect of such a loan-raising. This
was, from our point of view, unfortunate; since to obtain the
money overseas would have had the dual advantage of strengthening
our overseas funds while at the same time helping to finance
this great enterprise in Australia.
I want to make it quite clear that from first to last
we have been tremendously keen on seeing this job done. I myself,
as is well known, have devoted a very great deal of time
and effort to solving the problems involved.
Upon considering Mr. Holt's report, we were naturally
disappointed. Since the Commonwealth Budget is already in deficit,
it is no simple matter to accept added burdens. But we
felt that the time had comeo when a very special effort should be
made by us to assist Queensland in this matter. After close deliberation
with the Treasurer, we agreed that we should in effect
put the Cormmonwealth in the position which the World Bank
would have occupied had the recent lean negotiations succeeded;
except that we would not, as the lender, insist upon the conditions
which the World Bank found it necessary to put forward.
This is not a criticism of the World Bank, which has treated 
Australia's requirements with marked consideration over a long
term of years. But we are not the Bank's only customers by a
long way; and it found it impracticable to give terms in respect
of the Mount Isa railway loan which it had denied to other customers.
In the result, the Commonwealth will find œ C20m, in the
earlier stages from its own resources but later on, if that
turns out to be possible, by some borrowing abroad at a future
date. As between the Queensland Government and ourselves we
guarantee to underwrite the œ C20m. on the basis set out in my
letter to Mr. Nicklin and which he has told me is satisfactory
to him. It will be widely realised that this has been a big decision
for us to take. W~ e have taken it because we have a great
faith in the future of North Queensland and have felt all along
that this railway undertaking is the key which can unlock the
door to major developm~ ent.
I would like to be allowed to add for myself that I
ara very happy to be able to announce these arrangements, and
that I am confident of the great State and national benefits
which will flow from them.
CANBERRA, 29th October, 1959. 



P. M. No. 44/ 199
MR. MENZIES TO VISIT COCOS ISLANDS
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
The Prime Minister ( the Right Honourable R. G. Menzies) announced
today that, on the return journey to Australia after his
visit to Indonesia and Malaya he proposed to pay a short visit
( December 12th-13th) to the Cocos Islands an Australian external
territory which he had not visited previously.
Mr. Menzies said that he was looking forward to visiting
the installations there and meeting the Australian people who
maintain them. He was also looking forward to meeting Mr. J. C.
Clunies-Ross, who is a direct descendant of the original settlers
in the Cocos Islands.
Mr. Menzies said that he and his party would be travelling
in an aircraft chartered from Qantas and that he would be accompanied
by a small number of representatives of the Australian
press, radio and television.
CANBERRA, OCTOBER, 1959.
L 



iiU AtTO M O fD 19B3 TIM OU TION
Sir# Zi" 08 Md camtlines
TUO to a uemeble Oesesn to ftet It to Ms Iaspiuw
afte a thusbw rn Mses otU &amp; is tiMopie
tisoiew Mei, the low of " M Oppeetlemp mei I sw of be u
tWe 044a~ Ws" t Wo ees. 4e fer t" ri tu t e i hus mmimd
hr mn o seot a* I No pt" tos~ m . aat If hmw rnrnuaesl
mesd 46 VW -ew hwb hem fti O befte tudqp S Owl * I
Sama s. 4 hee sthia to No It 4a.* sw a bessm. I M s
opoathti With 1W wit ft MW Satf lt" i ti1e, I booim% tVMS We ave
tehig up, to ueboWAN saw to Ipia to OW wheusf
Mo to reall In as not tampiag 9002818s6 1 e. lett
mene * M t Mq as aw elsoam has esla, uss ts to M OMa.
1110 fewo of M. esettew eo I&amp; the 4&amp; Vi history of ~ Awgej&amp; 6a
vft mdPet is Over bite* W thMtu bweo is ha rwwmrto s
Openstim so em luent me of Oww him. IV eeupt 2mtr
OPeSO, has b~ f er inrn* to Ow pAfts " 4his we on emal
ulsws, s a" viaqei am I qwosiatenus . te all* this1
sm of ten stsows i oulat sisf~
n** a
.000 sew arssineu ~ ed " Ohr % aiut p fegwvsde n
It 1i084slWew0. itU elbf
ISO 0600 4WS to O oft-of Us" stwlas ye leek est
et a wandaw as a urawbatu 4 at wbww" s y" s m a s usmtaIms
P4141m up Se theS VaLlWq eei lowe the st,~ Sd It you a
2awu sli eaet owl streft or Not is to " hat amuse
pu to, oft tbw qwi th the op's" of lmmgj. 4s thwo*&amp; the" e ~ us
SomaaLA dwial3 twoela, inber ewe Oiern, pest dae
ths svee st o p. 4les. th1e0 S t Ow4uf0 61110000 Thgisef"
ampl&amp;" e&amp; nnm som to in toeal apes" a " Ktia OWAt agm" o
It No t msoo Ine va~ st adu is Awtstra
timet peoeev stat aow * sito a it wat' hMeAr tPeriodst
pies. of do Mvemag$ mAe -4m eawmittee pnessed ~ n 1W Di
I" W itWMb h Isw et. ha t sv s s w m-h Wt e a o t Io
Zii a esletssto uw w" ma m. s still aws be bemsrably
Meslio Am after that, lesaustow use dives to t" heinam e
the Odom wef is ft, bom hAw themsw am ovavereus one tawe
* Me* We here, as I" bwe beow VOMAOei was is WMe a TM r we
sui n .4 S s eoo " hA" r to tab" s aul the 0 ausIn steps~
to boa t" i sebem bath With ftime sam mbare a" a" fe" O
SO a emsheis" Ubke air Villm Olden " a &amp; eni" fte MMe podeetuia
poeloira m we he dowis hbeoagt . pass ~ m how bows ePON
t we Smaes itself, .4evr WIU la biasa, 4 hu
taa PUM * s vwr sot Is thseluree aeplte$ or fleal me mes giVe
thes Ummiu opplisiea s Win torolvd Mfitase MA hs ewueses
thus. AM tbwehwe the west thm". a" a st ele toiq,
I thab 1060 as to the POple0 vw ha" tIe gsme th4 s" h sil to
" Oda" * e we vhliam" d* t o ttsaint" eeta swe. 4smo a. 1Wi 
~ 0@ 0
IdI 1,
II ii ' 1
ii 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES AT DINNER IN HONOUR OF THE
DELE GATES TO THE COIM'MONWEPL TH PARLIAMENTARY
ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE CANBERRA, 2ND
NOVEMBER, 1359
Sir, we have all this rather neatly worked out; I begin
by saying Mr Chairman, Your Grace, My Lords, Your Excellencies,
and Ladies and Gentlemen a form of address which I find
rather tedious because it always reminds me of the fact that in
London when this happens the announcement is made by a gentleman
in a red coat, and one gentleman in a red coat, a very highly
priced one because he was always employed, came across to me one
night when I had made an almost intolerable number of speeches
under these rather melancholy circumstances, and at the last
moment before dinner, saying " My Lords," 1 right down to " Justices
of the Peace" you know what I mean. He said to me, in a fine
Scots voice, which had not been obvious up to that time, " Excuse
me, Sir, but will I announce yer as ' Menzies', or by your proper
name?". In consequence, I was introduced as " lMingies" which,
mark you, is quite right and I don't care who denies it.
Sir, this is my third innings. I had the opportunity
of a very brief and not adequately alcoholic contact with Learie
Constantine before dinner; he is a great cricketer and I am a
great fan is that the word? But in that game you don't get a
third innings except in the newspapers, and I am not going to
assert myself peace to our American friends for getting into
the baseball game; and therefore here I am, third time up.
What I find very hard about this matter is that it is very
difficult. VWhat can one say?
The first thing I want to say to you, of course, is
in spite of evidence to the contrary that we are all the
same; that I think, is the most interesting thing about us.
4~ e are all the same. 1We are all men and women of Parliament
and if'I may forget the stronger sex for the moment, we are all
Parliament men here tonight. This is a great bond of unity and
yett of course, Sir, at the same time we are all different.
That, I think, is something that we have to learn to live with
we are different. 4Je are all different races, we are all of
different religions, we all have different histories and different
backgrounds and yes, if you wanted to dwell on
differences you could find a whole universe of difference between
us who sit down here together as friends tonight. In
point of fact, every one of us here tonight is different. I
find that there are not too many people who have come to understand
that every man lives in a different world. That is rather
an interesting reflection, I think.
I was born in the bush, not long before a drought
year, and I nwer hear rain falling on the roof particularly
on a tin roof without feeling a surge of joy through me that
no man born in a city could ever understand. Somebody else born
a week later in another place is born into another world. This
is so profoundly true that it ought to restrain us from being
dogmatic. Every one of us is born into a different 4iorld, has
different early memories and has a different setting in the
community. I find that a wonderful and an exhilarating thing.
So here we are tonight, all the same as people of
Parliament, all different, every one of us, by reason of our
birth and our upbringing and our early experiences and all the
things that have impacted on us in the course of our life. And
that after all, Sir, is the great thing about this magnificent
Association. Here we are, what 200 of us? all different;
not one of us can put himself or herself inside the experience
of another all different people, all with our own memories
and our own hopes, our own despairs, our own vanities, our own 
a, 2,
follies and our own frail-.., all different and yet we meet
here as one group of people united by a common bond because we
are all people of Parliament, and Parliament though the word
has a sort of dubious Norman-French derivation is one of the
great words in modern history.
Sirthere is another thing that I would like to say:
many years ago so many that I read the book as a student
Lord Bryce wrote a book on the Amnerican Commonwealth many of
you will recall it and he said a profoundly true thing about
all systems of federation, 4e have a federal system in
Australia; there are others in the world. The Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association does not call itself a federation,
but those are in common with it, arc! Bryce writing about the
American Federation, about one of trio grcat things that must
always be remembered, 3aid that in every federal system there
are two forces of opposite kinds always operating one,
centrifugal, one centripotal and therefore in a federation
power will tend to aggregate itself at the centre or it will
tend to disperse itself to the perimeter,
This is a great problem, and I think that anybody who
observes federation in the modern world would agree with me that
the centrifugal force has been the greater, that more and more
and more as time has gone on there has been an aggregation of
power at the centre, And the same kind of conflict, the same
kind of issue exists in the international i'orld, and it is in
the international world that we are tonight most vitally concerned.
It is a romarkable thing that, internationally, two
things have been going on one centrifugal, one centripetal
and perhaps we have not observed them as much as we might have
done. Let me say, as I understand it, what they are.
Since this last war in particular there has been a
tremendous resurgence of national feeling the struggle for
independence, the assertion; the very proper assertion of
national prestige and right and self-government. That has gone
on and somebody looking at it may very well say how odd it is
that after a war which was, in a sunse, fought to produce some
kind of international and co-ordinated order, we have had
country after country after country asserting and claiming and
achieving its national independence. There are scores of
people here tonight who represent such countries and are proud
to represent such countries; think of them! You have only to
go back for ten years to see country after country after
country asserting and obtaining its independence, and some
onlooker may very well say " Well, that is a dispersing effort";
this is something that is centrifugal. Ie are going to have a
world in which there are scores of countries each one with no
connection with the country next door, each one living its own
life, living separately its own existence; and yet at the same
time and this is the glory of it the other forces have been
at work and the glorious paradox of the last ten years is that
the more countries who were once mombers of the British anpire
who are today independent, poworful, self-respecting countries
conducting their own affairs the more of those we have had
the more they have come together for comnon purposes. This,
Sir, is at one and the same time the expansion, the separateism,
the fragmentation if you like of an old world and the regrouping
of an old world with honour and self-respect for
common purposes a groat paradox, if you like, and a glorious
paradox as I believe.
Every now and then some clever young man will sit down
and write a book that happens, I am told. And every clover
young man who sits down to write a book discovers that silly old
fools like me were always wrong. That is all right, because the
great comfort is that twenty years afterwards another clover 
young man will sit down to write a book to prove that the first
was wrong and that I was rather a great fellow. Therefore it
works itself out. Every time I am tempted in my own heart or
in my own mind to engage in theories about the Commonwealth,
I was going to say our Commonwealth, I find that theories don't
matter, that the fact is that we may argue till Kingdom come.
Ide may disagree about all sorts of things but we all come within
the same tradition whether the tradition is in one country or
another the same tradition of honest self-government, Cf
Parliament, of the rule of law, and all these things that mean
so much to every one of us, and bccause we do come out of that
background then I am quite prepared and you are all quite
prupared to sit down one with the other and remember that
underneath all this extraordinary diversity what the outsider
may regard as separate-ism we are in reality one people because
we think just the same way about all the matters that come
in the world of froe men and of free women. And therefore I
pronounce the paradox it is a paradox. I rejoice in the
paradox, and because I know that you rejoice in it, I have the
greatest pleasure in the world in proposing the health for such
of my Australian customers as are here tonight, in asking them
to stand up with me, which they will with great goodwill after
I have called on Dr. Evatt, of course to drink the health of
our distinguished visitors.
Now, having said that, I am going to sit down. Dr.
Evatt is having a very, very bad weekend; this will be the
second time this weekend that he has had to agree with me but
if I may anticipate what he is going to say, I think he will
agree with me now, as thcr in the most warm-hearted and wholehearted
fashion. I hn' 6Itc1rA1 



CANCELLATION OF OVERSEAS VISIT BY SENATOR
THE HON. W. H. SPOONER, M. M.
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER.
A visit overseas this month by the Minister for
National Development, Senator Spooner, had been cancelled, the
Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said today.
Mr. Menzies was commenting on a news item cabled from
Bangkok that Senator Spooner might visit Thailand later this
month. Mr. Menzies said: " Several South East Asian countries
have extended invitations to the Australian Government for a
senior Australian Minister to visit them.
" Arrangements were well advanced for Senator Spooner
to visit these countrios when, unfortunately, he had to undergo
a minor operation. " Although he has now been able to resume duties here,
his medical advisors have told him that it would be unwise for
him to accept the strain of an overseas tour.
" Accordingly, he has had to cuncol the arrangements.
" Senator Spooner and the Government much regret the
cancellation and the loss of this opportunity to extend Australia's
friendship with these countries."
CANBERRA, 6th November, 1959. 


P. M. No. 4295The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today&nbsp;that the United Kingdom has offered for immediate competition&nbsp;by Australian students post-graduate scholarships to institutions&nbsp;of higher learning in the United Kingdom.
Scholarships are offered under the Commonwealth&nbsp;Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, under which governments of&nbsp;Commonwealth countries will provide scholarships and fellowships&nbsp;tenable in their own countries by men and women fromother parts of the Commonwealth.
This plan was one adopted by the Conference at&nbsp;Oxford in July of this year, which considered means of extending&nbsp;co-operation in education within the Commonwealth.Mr. Menzies expressed his satisfaction that there&nbsp;was tangible evidence of the success of the Conference aftersuch a short time, and pointed out that Australia would shortly&nbsp;be offering similar awards to enable students from otherCommonwealth countries to further their studies in Australia.&nbsp;
He went on to say that the overall plan would not only expand&nbsp;appreciably the opportunities available for Australian studentsto undertake post-graduate study or research overseas but thatAustralian universities would welcome the opportunity of havingoverseas students working in their own graduate schools.
As selection for these scholarships will be considered&nbsp;before the end of 1959, persons interested should make enquiries&nbsp;immediately from the Registrar of any Australian university or&nbsp;university college, or from the Commonwealth Office of Education,&nbsp;
Successful applicants will commence their studies in the&nbsp;United Kingdom in October, 1960, The scholarships will cover&nbsp;return fares to the United Kingdom and the payment of fees and&nbsp;living and other allowances.Canberra,6th November, 1959.



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
CONCERNING THE APPOINTMENT OF THE NEi GOVERNOR-GENERAL.
THURSDAY. 12th NOVIm'BER. 1959.
As Honourable Members know, our present Governor-
General, Field Marshal Sir William Slim, will be returning to
England towards the end of January next after what we all feel
to be a very distinguished term of office in our country. Before
he leaves we will have an opportunity of saying to him some of
those things that are in our hearts and minds and I will therefore
not anticipate them tonight.
The immediate purpose of my intervention is to say that
after communications with Her Majesty the Queen, orally when I
was in London and subsequently in writing, Her Majesty has been
graciously pleased on my advice as Australian Prime Minister to
name as the new Governor-General of Australia, the Right Honourable
William Shepherd Morrison, the retiring Speaker of the House of
Commons. MLr. Morrison has served as Speaker for nine years with
capacity and dignity and, as is well known, to the great satisfaction
of all political parties. He therefore has had a rich experience
in a great office which has called for marked ability and impartiality.
He was born and educated in Scotland. He served in the
First World War in the Royal Field Artillery. In the course of
his service, he was awarded the Mviilitary Cross; he was wounded
and he wns three times mentioned in despatches. He practised at
the English Bar from 1923. He became one of His Majesty's Counsel
in 1934. He entered the House of Commons where, between 1935 and
19) 5 he had considerable ministerial experience. He visited
Australia some years back as a member of the United Kingdom
Delegation to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association which met
in New Zealand and subsequently had meetings in Canberra.
All who know him will agree with me that he is a man of
remarkable character and talent, of singular devotion to public duty,
and of a personality which will be widely appreciated in Australia.
I am, therefore, privileged to be able to inform the House that Her
Majesty is this evening announcing his appointment. I should add
without, I hope, impertinence, that Her Majesty is herself most happy
about the appointment, which has given her great personal satisfaction.
I should add that Her IMajesty has been pleased to raise
Mr. Morrison to the peerage under the name and style of VISCOUNT
DUNROSSIL. Canberra, 12th November, 1959. 



A, PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES ON FRIDAY, 13TH
NOVEMBER, 1959 at 11 A. M.
QUESTE ON: Can you tell us Sir, when* you expect the new Governor-
General to reach Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, early in February. He would be here well
ahead of the beginning of the 1960 Session so that he
will be able to open it.
QUESTION: Any date fixed for this, Sir? The opening.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no. But I mean normally one assumes that it
will be some time in February, but it may be late in
February.
QUESTION: He's coming by ship, I suppose, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, he is due to arrive here about the 1st or 2nd
or 3rd of February.
QUESTION: Is it the usual customary five-year term?
PRIME MINISTERi No special arrangement.
QUESTIONX You expect it to be about 5 years do you, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. As you know, it is an appointment at will.
But that is the sort of normal practice.
QUESTION-. Sir, there has been a certain amount of criticism
of the appointment, mainly by Mr. Calwell and..
PRIME MINISTER: Has it been in your paper. How important that
would be!
QUESTION: Well, I was just wondering whether you would comment
on that, Sir, on the criticism that the Governor-
General is not an Australia, Sir,
PRIME MINISTER: My views on that are perfectly well-known. Australians
are not excluded, but they are not to have,
say, the exclusive right to be considered. My idea is
to get the best man.
QUESTION: Was there any thought given to the possibility of
getting someone from one of the other Dominions, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Well, when you say " was there any thought" I
ran the whole world over in my own mind first, but I
didn't bring into consideration any individual from
another Dominion.
QUESTION: Could you tell us, Sir, whether this was your
nomination to the Queen or her suggestion?
PRIME MINISTER: My nomination to the Queen. I think I ought to
tell you the way we go about this thing. I don't
take up the attitude that I nominate ' Jones' and that's
the finish. What Itve done twice now is to have quite
a long discussion with the Queen about the kind of
person we want, and getting her views on people, and
offering a few comments on any names that she might
' throw into the ring'. And then in this case I said:
" Well you're going off to Canada and there's not all
that hurry; I will correspond with you when you get
back from Canada". Then I wrote to Her Majesty and
suggested two or three names that might be considered 
by her but I put them in my own order for preference,
but indicated, of course, that if she had any strong
feelings about any one of them that, naturally, would
influence my mind. My No. 1 was W. S. Morrison and she
emphatically approved of it. I think I should add
having regard to some talented pieces of lying that I
have read in one newspaper that from first to last,
neither directly or indirectly, have I made any proposal
that a member of the Royal Family should be appointed
to be Governor-General, nor has any such proposal been
made to me. I hope that is sufficiently specific. If
people will invent stories, I wish they would invent
something more consistent with my attitude to these
matters.
QUESTE ON:
PRIME MINISTER
QUESTION: How long have you known the Viscount, Sir?
Twentyfour years.
Did you first meet him in the legal or the political
world?
PRIME MINISTER: In the political world. In 1935 I think he had
just become Financial Secretary to the Treasury and I
went down and stayed with him a few days at his house.
He lived in what might be described as an old remnant
of some early monastery or something of that kind one
of those little old houses that you strike in the
Cotswolds with a slippery elm stairway up which I had
to go; you know, a rope on the side, and a bathroom in
the attic. But at that time, of course, his boys were
very young. But he and I have been very great friends
ever since. That, of course, I hope won't be held
against him.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEF
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTK
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEF
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEF
COMMENT: PRIME MINISTEF
QUESTION: He is a Scot of course?
Yes. He was born in the Hebrides in the western
islands. Do you happen to know if he is a Presbyterian, Sir?
1: Oh, I'd lay odds that he is a Presbyterian, but I
wouldn't know. He's got all the marks.
Sir, would you know if Lady Dunrossil's father was
a Doctor of Divinity?
Yes, he was a Presbyterian Minister. Like Lady
Slim's father. In fact Lady Slim and Allison Morrison
know each other.
There has been some criticism in London, Sir, that
he retired from the Speakership because of ill-health,
I think that that amounted to a slight deafness
and oddly enough he felt that even a slight deafness
wasn't very good in a Speaker, who ought to hear both
sides. It is sometimes very useful not to hear, Sir.
I think you will find that he is in very nimble
orm. The snapshot I've seen makes hi~ m look rather like
a Munroe Ferguson portrait. Would that be true, Sir?
f 
PRIME MINISTER: Don't think so. There's a superb photograph in
this morning's Sydney Morning Herald. That is absolutely
" Shakes" Morrison to the life. You know that
big full-on one. He is a tall slightly built man.
QUESTION: Where does the " Shakes" come from, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, his name is William Shepherd Morrison and a
lot of people when I first knew him were firmly of the
opinion that his second name was Shakespeare. I think
a lot of people got that misapprehension. Probably in
his student days he might have got it because he took
a keen interest in poetry and he read a lot of Shakespeare
and is fond of Shakespeare. He wrote one or two
very good poems himself, I don't mind saying. But I
think he was called " Shakes" only afte-1 he came round
to live among the Sassenachs. I think he was always
called when he was at the University.
QUESTION: Did he have an opportunity of seeing much of Australia
the last time he was out here; to know what the
country would be like?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don't know. They weren't here for more than
a few days. He didn't have much opportunity. But he
bas represented a rural electorate in the North Cotswolds
and he was Minister for Agriculture for some time
in the United Kingdom Government.
QUESTON: Sir, I think you said much earlier that Australians
were not excluded. Is t hat correct?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right.
QUESTION: You've no objection to Australians
PRIME MINISTER: No, I haven't but it is very difficult to get a
man from your own country in reality, unless you can
get somebody who is not, politically, a contentious person.
And most people who are best known in Australia
have been through some political or controversial mill.
You might very well have somebody who wasn't handicapped
in that way, but who was a man of great eminence.
I wouldn't exclude him. I think it is always useful
for the man appointed to be known to the Queen because
he is the Queen's personal representative. But I've
advocated for many years the idea, for example, of
having some Australian made Governor-General of Canada
or South Africa or vice versa. I think these crossbearings
are valuable. But there again, of course,
it is not easy.
QUESTION: Does that suggest, Sir, that the list you presented
to the Queen could have included an Australian
name?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it didn't. I did not find myself able to
select a suitable name in Australia. You understand
this was my No. 1 nomination. This notion that I've
been toting the business around, of course, is most
offensive because this is No. 1 nomination and warmly
and promptly accepted at that point of time by the
Queen. Up to that time we had, in effect, merely
talked about the type of person or the qualifications,
which is a good thing to do.
QUESTION: He announced himself in London last nig7ht, Sir,
that it wasn't until the 27th October that he was approached. 
PRIME MINISTER: That's quite right. I didn't sound him or anybody
until I had the Queen's concurrence in my nomination.
Then the next step is that I say: " I now ask permission
to approach that man to find out whether he is agreeable".
You don~ t go around saying: " if you were
offered it -vuld you take it?" you know, That's no
good.
QUESTION: His retirement from the Speakership was not in any
way related to the appointment?
PRIME MINISTER: No, As a matter of fact it was when I knew some
little time back that he was giving up the Speakership
that I brought him into the area of thought myself.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, as I understand it then the machinery
is that the Prime Minister approaches the nominee, not
anyone from the Queen's..
PRIME MINISTER: In this case, having got the Queen's approval, I
then got Sir Eric Harrison to see Mr. Morrison with a
specific message from me. He then considered the matter
for a day or two, then Sir Eric Harrison told me
that the answer was " Yes", then I communicated with the
Queen saying that the nominee was agreeable and I
therefore now formally nominated him and would be glad
to know on what date the Queen would make the announcement
what date and time so that it could be referred
to concurrently at this end. Then, I finally got back
word that Her Majesty would announce it at 12 o'clock
noon yesterday.
QUESTION: The other possible nominees, Sir, would not even
know that they were considered?
PRIME MINISTER: No, never.
QUESTION: One small point, Sir. The paper you referred to
as not quite accurate. Could you tell us whether that
was a Melbourne paper?
PRIME MINISTER: It was a Sydney paper Sydney afternoon paper,
You would have no doubt about that would you which
one I mean?
QUESTION: Sir? W~ hat's the fate of the Divorce Bill going to be,
PRIME MINISTER: It's a non-party measure. Somebody was asking
when I was in there last night whether that stood
right. It does, Most of the argument seems to centre
about this Separation clause.
QUESTION: Are you going to speak on it, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so.
QUESTION: Have you made up your mind on it, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I'll support the Bill.
QUESTION: You stated, Sir, that the new Governor-General
would open Parliament. That means there will be a prorogation
of the Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right.
QUESTION: Sir re the Governor-General. Have you heard any
word as Lo whether he will be bringing any personal
staff out at all or will he 
PRIME MINISTE]
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE]
QUJEST'ION: PRIME MINISTEi
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
qJESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
QUESTION: Those matters are being discussed with him now.
What progress has been made with your review of
Parliamentary allowances and amenities, Sir?
; Ahat review is that?
I believe you said you were informing yourself
about it.
i: I said I was informing myself about it yes. But
somebody appears to have got into his head that I have
established a committee or something, but I haven't.
There has always been an Amenities Committee.
Have you informed yourself, Sir, to the extent
that you are going to crack any heads?
I: haven't yet informed myself I regret to tell you.
I have been too busy on other matters.
Which Ministers have the authority to direct the
activities of the Security Service without reference
to you, Sir?
1: The Attorney-General's Department has it for administration
purposes. I am responsible for policy and
the Head of the Security Service communicates directly
wfith me. Would Sir Garfield's direction to approach
Professor Stout be an exercise of his administrative
authority or a policy matter?
PRIME MINISTER: 1. ell, he didn't direct Spry; he found out that
Stout wranted to know and so apparently Sir Garfield
conveyed that to Spry, no doubt with an indication that
he thought it might be useful if Spry saw him and helped
him. I don't ro-ard that as a normal practice. As I
said in the Parliament, the normal practice on these
matters is that the Security Srvic oepor'. s to me, or from
time to time if I say I want the Attorney-General to
see this, to the Attorney-General or from time to time
to the Department of Scternal Affairs because these
things havo a bearing, but the Security Service exists
to inform us putting it in that way and does not in
fact normally convey information to other people, It
collects information. But I don't foel at all disturbed
about the fact that he saw Stout because as a matter of
fact it became quite clear that everything that he informed
Stout about, had already been published in the
Press. There was no secret cloak and dagger stuff
about it.
QUESTION: The end in effect of this project though, Sir,
seems to have been to dissuade some non-communist
people from attending this meeting and perhaps leaving
the Communists to win the Congress by default. Do you
think that was a desired end result?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you are now saying the " end re sultll of
what? The end result of statements made by Mr. Casey
and Sir Garfield Barwick and myself, not by the Security
Service, but by us, may have had the effect of dissuading
a lot of people to attend. I hopoit did. I consider
it most desirable. I don't like to see decent citizens
having their legs pulled. So there you are. I
must be careful because I saw in one report that they
ASre going to pass a vote of thanks commending me, and I 
hope none of you will publish anything that will prevent
that from coming about.
QUESTION: QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
QUESTION: i It might be just to test the feeling of the meetng.
On the Security Service, Sir, you told Mr. Whtitlam
in the House, 10 days or so ago, that you expected to
reach some conclusions on the telephone matter before
the end of the year. Has that been developed yet, Sir?
well, no. W4e've been so heavily engaged in Cabinet
on other matters. I've had some discussions with the
Attorney-General but I haven't got it to the point of
discussing it with the Cabinet yet.
When do you expect the Defence Statement to be
ready Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. We've had two or three Cabinet
Meetings on it. We're having another one next
Wednesday. I am hopeful that all this will enable a
Statement to be made in the following week, but as I
said earlier to you chaps, I want this thing to be
cleared up before I leave.
QUESTION: Has any decision been made, yet, Sir, on National
Service Trainihg?
PRIME MINISTER: No. No decisions have been made yet. We have
arrived at a series of tentative views, but further paper,
or papers, are being prepared which we are going
to examine when we next moet on this matter next week
and we will then, I hope, be in a position to arrive
at a final conclusion.
QUESTION: You mean, Sir, that you are hopeful of being in a
position to make a statement to Parliament the following
week.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, yes. I don't know whether I will make the
statement or whether the Minister for Defence will. I
haven't worked that one out but I'm hoping a statement
will be makeable if that's the right word by the
following week.
QUESTION: Sir, there soems to be a su:; gestion from the United
Nations that there has beon a change in the Australian
Policy towards South Africa's racial laws. Formerly,
when the matter was brought up, we voted on it
against the resolution. This year we are abstaining.
PRIME MINISTER: Well the reason for that was explained yesterday
in the House at Question Time by the Acting Ministur.
WJe have consistently opposed the United Nations intervention
on the ground that this is a matter of domestic
jurisdi ction.
QUESTION: Has that been a policy hitherto or
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no. That's boen our policy for ten years,
that it is a matter of domestic jurisdiction just as we
would resist United Nations intervention in some discussion
that we were having with Papua, or with people in
it. I say that's domestic jurisdiction. We've never
felt called upon to sit in judgment on actual policies
pursued by the South African Government because we've
said that matter doesn't arise with us, 1TT say the
matter is a matter of domestic jurisdiction under the 
7.
Charter and therefore it ought not to be dealt with.
This year our people felt that this point of view of
the Australian Government, though it is completely
logical and prudent from our point of view, was becoming
a little misunderstood and was being interpreted in
some countries as an approval by Australia of the actual
policies being pursued by the Government of
South Africa, and in order that that should not any
longer be an inference from our voting against it, it
was decided that Australia would abstain, having explained
first, once morc, its belief that this is a
matter of domestic jurisdiction and not cognizable by
the United NL. tions. That is the whole of the story.
QUESTION: A cable from London yesterday, Mr. Menzies, stated
that Dame Pattie would launch the liner " Canberra" on
March 1st and I was wondering whether this had any
bearings on your plans for that time next year?
PRIME MINISTER! No. I'll be here on March 1st. She is going over
by herself, quite privately.
QUESTION: Could you tell us, Sir, what Sir Gilos Chippindall t
salary will be as the new Chairman of T. A. A?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I suppose the same as the last one.
Better ask Shane Paltridge. I don't know. W4hat does
the Chairman get?
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEF
QUESTION:. PRIME MINISTEI I think he probably got œ C2,000.
' doll, whatever it is.
That doesn't compromise his Public Service Pension
I presume, Sir?
You don't suppose I've beon thinking about that do
you? lle only made the appointment yesterday afternoon.
O0 MWri. t h Hutgheh DCaosmhp, liments of
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER-~ THE RT. HON. RG.
MENZIES AT THE OPENING OF FELRAL COUNCIL OF
LIBERAL PARTY CONF". ENCE AT THE ALBERT HALL,
CANBI2LRA 3 16TH NOVEMBER, 3 1959
Sir, Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is, cC course, not the first time that I have had
the pleasure of opening the Annual Meeting of the Council. In
fact as I walked in this morning I was reminded of a few facts
that I had almost forgotten. But it is always a great pleasure
to come here because this is always a most important meeting.
Naturally as we approach the end of ten years we look
back and we look around us. I was called on the other day by a
very well-known American Journalist who had been on his travels
around the world and hie said something to me which other people
have said also, and therefore it's worth recording. He said:
" You know there are very many interesting countries in the
world, but Australia, today, is a most exciting country". Now
lots of people have said that to me; not because they wanted to
please me because most of them had nothing to gain from my
opinion. But they are right: this is a most exciting country,
It isn't exciting because we are exciting nobody a&amp; er accused
us of that it isn't exciting because we have revolutions or
counter-revolutions, or change our Government every few months.
All that kind of excitement is absent from Australia. It is
exciting because no country of even comparable size in the
world or population inthe world is doing so much, is so busy
building its future, so busy creating the great nation that it
will some day be. This is what strikes the intelligent onlooker:
" Ten million people", he says to himself " that's not many;
what goes on here?" and when he looks around and finds out what
goes on here his first impression is that it's an amazing thing
that ten million people should be achieving it. And of course,
particularly, because he is so frequently told before he comes
to Australia that we are easy-going, ' that we are not very fond
of work, that we are devoted to sport and that, really, we are
not very seriously-minded people. That's what he is told before
he comes here and wvhen he comes here he finds an almost turbulent
process of developiient going on and he finds Australia attracting
the attention of the rest ofthe world and attracting the
resources of the rest of the world as nobody ten years ago
would have imagined to be possible.
Now, that I think is all completely true and the paradox
of it is that this dynamic process that is going on in Australia
should be to some material extent the consequence of
steady, stable and sober Government policies. That may sound
paradoxical, but of course, itis a profoundly true thing. A lot
of racketting, and excitement and speculation and speculative
ideas in the top bracket of Government and you'll find a good
deal of dullness further down, and a good deal of anxiety, a
loss of confidence; but if you can create all those things a
feeling of confidence, a feeling that there is stability, that
there is soundness, 7 that steady and intelligent courses are being
pursued if you can find that in Government, whether it's
Federal or State, then you have the pro-condition for this
enormous development. There are many things that are set out in thiat very
good little pamphlet " The First Ten Years" which I hope that
quite a number of people will have read before long, but which
many people have not yet read. perhaps thore is one aspect
of this matter that ought to be mentioned: I just want tCo say
a few words about, in fact about four aspects of the last ton
years. And the first is on the financial side. Ton years ago 
when we came back into office we had been told quite blankly by
our predecessors, that it was quite impossible to get hold crf
dollars; that dollars could neither be begged, borrowed or
stolen; that in points of fact we must accommodate ourselves to
the idea that the world of trade was being divided into two
parts and that we must live on hard commons in relation to dollars.
Tlithin six months of our roturnir spite of that gloomy
advice, we had secured in ' Jashington from the tlorld Bank
100 million dollars for vitally needed developmental machinery
in Australia six months after we came into office. And since
then the process has gone on. Ten years ago the amount of investment
inthis country on private account from overseas was
very small, relatively small at any rate. But the last three
years, or four years, whenever we have a look at the Budget, we
have found ourselves saying this: " iVell, there was an inflow
of capital last year of œ_ 90m, per, private investment, or œ lO00m.
It would be unreasonable to suppose that so high a figure could
be maintained; we'd better be a little cautious on this, and
perhaps discount it a bit for next year". But it goes on growing;
it goes on growing in an almost fantastic way. Some of
its effects, of course, need watching; others are splendid.
But those of you who cast your despairing eye on the
Stock Exchan.; e reports occasionally will not have failed to
notice the terrific flurry on the market, the immense buying demand,
very largely brought about by an inflow of money seeking
investment in Australia. And they are not seeking investment,
whether it is in factories or in scrip, they are not seeking investment
in Australia just for the purpose of making a qtdck
profit and going away with it: the great beauty of the overwhelming
bulk o f this investment in Australia is that it has
gone into g&amp; reat enterprises, I giving a massive employment to Australia,
using the subsidiary industries to the fullest possible
extent, and, to a very large extent, ploughing their profits
back into furthe-r Australian development. I tell you that all
this change in the financial complexion of Australia means quite
clearly that in the lifetime of most of us inthis room, we will
see substantial experts of manufactured goods to an extent that
vie hadn't dre3amed of a few years ago. The whole face of this
country is being changed. Now, we would, of course be fools if
we claimed that we did it, because we didn't. Perhaps the wisest
way to put it is this: that we had enough brains not to prevent
it from being done; we had eneugh intelligence to create the
political climate in which it could be done, and I may say that
all of these people, from wherever they come, with their money,
with their skill, with their mate rial, to invest in the development
of Australia, will say that the first thing they like about
Australia is that it has stability of Govurnment and appears to
have got rid of Socialist ideas, Ten years ago, as you know,
the State Governments were, overwhelmingly, in the terms of
numbers, Labour. Today we look around and vie find that that
position is completely reversed. People overseas don't fail to
notice this thing; people overseas have not failed to notice
that after 9 years of continuous office we were given a record
majority. They read into this, and very proporly, a determination
on the part of the people of Australia to maintain sensible
policies, encouraging private e) nterprise, and not discoura
gin g it, with all the stability that they require and all
the confidence in the future for which they had hoped. Now,
Sir, these recommendations and facts are, I think, tremendously
important; they are much more important than any catch-penny
policy that our opponents may be able to put forward.
In the second place in the overall economy of Australia
we see the position: we've had our shifts and changes of fortune,
but we have not had shifts and changes of policy; we've
had some ups and downs but, by and large, over the last ten
years the economic growth of Australia has been immense. Nobody 
looking around it could deny it. It is always interesting to me
to encounter, for example the Commonwealth Parliamentary Associa
-tion representatives uho were here the other day; people from
countries and being politicians, most experiencod in the art
of criticism; not disposed to say that something is very good
without some thought. And I think that every one of the representatives
who came hero from 50 or 60 different Parliaments and
who looked around Australia on a splendid journey which was
made and on which they saw many things, not one of them failed
to be impressed by the remarkable growth of the country, and
the opening up of an even more remarkable future. When I say
something about " a remarkable future" I think that it is worth
recalling that very largely because of the vast increase in expenditure
on research my oi. m Government has increased the
amount going to C. S. I. RoO. quite spectacularly over this period
of time. The increasing interest in research on the part of
private enterprise, the encouragement to research by some of the
great primary industries who have levied themselves for this
ppurpose and the work of people like the Bureau of Mineral Resources,
the Commonwe_-alth body which has done almost fabulous
work, as a result of allthese things, and a dozen others, our
old conception of Australia is disappearing. You know, when I
was a young man some wise man sitting in a University study somewhere,
came to the conclusion and proved it by irrefutable
logic that the population of Australia could never be more than
millions because there was no hope for the dead heart of
Australia, no hope of bringing into cultivation land which did
not have adequate rainfall and so on, and even more recently,
as I've told you before, just before the lar this last War
we were told by most reputable experts that the optimum population
that would be reached in Australia was 7 million and we
wouldn't reach that until 1975. That was the climate of mind.
Does anybody believe such nonsense today? When we see soil
being brought under fruitful cultivation which was regarded as
hopeless once; when we find mineral resources being opened
that nobody ever dreamed of, with a broad hint in all the circumstances
that we are almost just at the beginning of mineral
development, does anybody believe these gloomy prophecies when
he sees the work done by the use of trace elements and the like
to bring into proper and rich pastoral production land on
which stock would once fade away. This all appears to the
imagination; this is something of which we must be proud, as
Australians, and which should give us the greatest feeling of
assurance that we will maintain the interests of other people.
I hope we will; that we won't push them back, because I believe
that Australia is roughly at the same period in her history with
a population of 10 million as the United States of America was
in its time, and every prominent American, every highly responsible
American entrepreneur in whatever field, and I know that
some of my State colleagues can confirm this, everyone of them
who has a look at Australia is bound to say before he finishes:
" You know this isjust like the period in American history when
our expansion was beginning and the whole world seemed open to
us" Now the third thing, looking back, is our industrial
position. We have, by and large, over this period of 10 years
had substantially full employment. Je have som times had overfull
employment; we've sometimes had a little spatter of unemployment
but we've never had anything that in any way resembles
the pro-war circumstances in the industrial field. And one
would have expected that with plenty of jobs to be got we might
have expected a good deal of industrial trouble because it is
easier to go on strike to put it bluntly if there are other
jobs around the corner, than it is to go on strike when jobs are
short. And so the cynics, particularly the cynics on the other
side said: " Ah! you see; This Government is -oing to encoun-
4.
ter trouble. The only people who can handle, who can understand,
who can be understood by the Trades Unionists, is the Labour
Party". What nonsense it's turned out to be. I venture to
say that the relations between Government and Trade Union movements
have never been better than in the last ten years. That,
indeed, is why so many Trade Unionists vote for us: our relations
have never been better. And as for the relations between
the great body of Trade Unionists and the community, so far as
that is concerned mark the fact that the loss of work by industrial
trouble is fantastically small. Year by year, year by
year, we've gone on recording fresh records in the small number
of days lost. In point of fact, our present and recent experience
has been such that less time and work have been lost by
industrial trouble than would be occasioned by the granting of
a half-day's holiday in Australia. Of course lots of people
from overseas, years ago, used to say: " Well, Australia, it's
got very tough trade unions; it's always having strikes. We
read about them in the cables strikes and industrial disputes
of all kinds. They even have a special provision in their
Constitution about Industrial disputes. What a land of disputation
it must be." They have only to come here; they have only
to become interested in this country, to get hold of the facts
and they discover that the very reverse is true and in that
field I venture to say that we may claim some credit for the
state of affairs which I have referred to.
And then, finally, looking outside our own country, at
International affairs. You know, this notion one hears, sometimes
in one's own party, or in one's own party organization,
that we have been pretty lucky, that we are rather, on the whole.
inert, and that we suffer from that blessed word " complacency"
in large doses, I get so tired of hearing that kind of thing because
people who say it must have had their eyes closed to
what has been going on, not years but continuously going on
at the present time.
I've said something about some aspects of it but look
at the International picture. Where were we ten years ago before
this inert Government came into power in the Commonwealth?
Where were we internationally? oe had succeeded in quarrelling
with the United States of America; we had been making such
loud noises of self-assertion that people occasionally wondered
what side we were on, on the great issues of the world, and
today, after a continuous processI venture to say that our
status, not only in the British Commonwealth, but in the whlole
world was never as high; that we have achieved a reputation
for responsibility and good sense and co-operation. Certainly
our standing with the United States on the one side and Great
Britain on the other was never more intimate. I have the great
privilege as the Prime Minister to be in frequent communication
of a personal kind with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
and in less frequent communication of a personal kind with the
President of the United States of America. Je can communicato
with each other as friends. Je are of unquestioned standing
in the free world and in respect of our own problems in the
South east of Asia, in the south-west Pacific, which are problems
which, under Communist pressure, might become more and
more acute, without us being able to restrain them, in relation
to. this area, we have taken an active and successful part in
promoting two great International Agreements one the ANZUS
Agreement with the United States of America and New Zealand
and ourselves, a negotiation in which we played a most loading
part and the South-East Asian Treaty Organization in which,
again, the United States is involved, and, of course, Great
Britin and ourselves and Now Zealand and two or three of the
Souti East Asian countries.
That Agreement itself was a notable achievement in
diplomacy and just to show that all this isn't past history and
that we have given up the ghost and have no more ideas to pro-
4 b -duce I hope you have all noticed that in these discussions in
Washington in relation to Antarctica, the chief promotion of
ideas and of an Agreement betwken the Nations has come from
Australia through my colleague Mr. Casey. And in the result
we are going to see an International sot of affairs in Antarctica
which will achieve much good results two things in particular;
one, I wont say the demilitarization of Antarctica because
it hasn't been militarised, but an Agreement that it
shall not be used for military purposes. That would have seemed
silly, wouldn't it, once, until they began to develop rockets
and guided missiles and sputniks and the like; very important
today. And in the second place, the combination of the resources
of nations for the exploitation of scientific knowledge
or, indeed, of scientific matter of any kind in the Antarctic
area and that again is of tremendous importance to us.
Even meteorologically, it would be a wonderful thing if we
could have access to all the scientific meteorological knowledge
gathered by other nations to have a foot-hold in the Antarctic
so that we might pool the results, it would improve our own
poor knowledge of our weather in Australia out of all recognition.
So, Sir, things go on, but as we are getting towards
the end of our tenth year I thought that it might be an opportunity
for saying something to all our friends here today
those iho are the labourers in the field in the Liberal cause
something of the pride that I know you feel and that I know I
feel in what has been going on and something of the complete
confidence that eo have that so long as we maintain the steady
course, the strong-minded ideas that we have had in the past,
then nothing can prevent Austrqlia from flourishing and becoming
great. Sir, I declare the Conference open. 



P. M. No. 4+ 6/ 195~ 9
VISIT TO INDONESIA AND MALAYA
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) today gave the
names of members of the party which will accompany him and
Dame Pattie Menzies to Indonesia and Malaya in December.
Mr. Menzies said that a Member of Parliament, Dr. A
J. Forbes, the Member for Barker, will travel with the party.
Officials included in the party will be Miss Hazel
Craig ( Private Secretary), Mr. M. C. Timbs and Mr. J. H. Scholtens
both of the Prime Minister's Department, and Mr. P. R. Heydon
of the Department of External Affairs.
Mr. Menzies said that Sir John Crawford will also be
a member of the party. However, he will not be travelling in
his capacity as Head of the Departrment of Trade, but will make
the trip in connection with his future appointment as Director
of the School of Pacific Studies at the Australian National
University. Mr. Menzies said that a party of press and television
representatives will also travel in the chartered Qantas
Super-Constellation, which will depart from Brisbane shortly
after midnight on the morning of December 1st for Djakarta.
The visit to Indonesia will be from 1st December to 7th December,
and the visit to Malaya from 7th to 12th December. On the
return journey from Malaya, the Prime Minister will pay a
visit to Cocos Island. Ho will return to Canborra on 141th
December. With the eo1plimonts of Mr. Hugh Dash,
Prime Minister's Press Socretary.
Canberra, 21+ th November, 1959. 



P. M. No. 47/ 1959
PUBLIC SERVICE APPOINTMENTS
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER.
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) announced today
that the Government had made appointments to three senior
positions in the Commonwealth Public Service which will become
vacant shortly. Mr. J. E. Collings has been appointed a Commissioner of
the Public Service Board to succeed Mr. G. G. Sutcliffe, C. B. E.,
who retires early next year.
Mr. Collings, aged 44, is at present an Assistant
Commissioner on the Public Service Board's staff. His experience
includes a period as Private Secretary to the Leader of
the Opposition in the Senate and Minister for the Interior,
service in the Trade and Customs Dcpartment, and in the Department
of External Affairs. He was first appointed to the Public
Service Board's staff in 1947 and received his present appointmont
as Assistant Commissioner in 1953. He holds the qualifications
of Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Commerce.
Dr. Wostorman, has boon appointed to
succeed Sir John Crawford, as Secretary, Department of
Trade, when Sir John relinquishes his present appointment to
take an appointment with the Australian National University.
Dr. Westorman joined the Trade Commissioner Service in 1946 and
served as Assistant Trade Commissioner, New York, until his
appointment to the Public Service in 1950. Ho received promotion
to First Assistant Secretary Department of Commerce and
Agriculture, in 1954, and Deputy Secretary, Department of
Trade, in 1956. He is now Chairman of the Tariff Board.
The Government has appointed Mr. G. A. Rattigan to
succeed Mr. F. A. Moore as Comptroller-General of Customs
when Mr. Moore ro ires in July, 1960.
Mr. Rattigan, at present First Assistant Secretary of
the Department of Trade, was Assistant Comptroller-General of
Customs when the Department of Trade was formed in 1955. He is
41+ 8 years of age and was first appointed to the Public Service
in 1925. He transferred to the Customs Department in 1934 and
was on war service during 1942/ 1944.
In announcing these appointments the Prime Minister
paid his own tribute and that of the Government to the distinguished
public service given by Sir John Crawford, Mr. Moore
and Mr. Sutcliffo over a long period. Each of them had played
a significant part in the post-war development of the Public
Service and had contributed to the high standing in which the
Public Service is hold throughout Australia and overseas.
Canberra, 26th November, 1959. I 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES AT THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE CUNNINGHAM
LABORATORIES RISBANE,-MONDAY., 30TH NOVEMBER, 1291.
Dr. White and Ladies and Gentlemen, I think I ought to
follow my normal practice by naming them the Cunningham Laboratories
and declaring them open before I get taken up with my own
remarks and forget to do what I came here to do.
I never think of the C. SQI. R. O. without thinking of
two things quite detached, one from the other, though they may
be. First of all I think of money, because under Dr. White's
very distinguished predecessor, Sir Ian Clunies-Ross, one of the
great men in the history of this country and, I regret to say, no
less under him, every time I see somebody from the C. S. I. R. O.
around, money crops up. W1ell, the subject of money crops up,
and sometimes the money crops up too! Every time my colleague,
Mr. Casey, comes in to see me with a particularly thoughtful air
I don't fall into the error of thinking that he's worrying very
much, that day, about Laos or Cambodia or one of these other
trouble centres in the world; it is bound to end up by him saying
to me: " You know, we're getting a very poor deal in C. S. I.
And so millions are produced from time to time and we go
through all the motions of pretending to be annoyed, but in
reality I don't mind telling you we're very proud of the work of
C. S. I. R. O. ( Applause)
I don't know of any institution, if I may call it by
that horrible name, which has done continuously such magnificent
work, so much of it, perhaps, little recognised. It isn't only
a Government enterprise this; it has, particularly in recent
years, been able to attract from the great primary industries a
considerable amount of support, as these great industries have
more and more realised that research in their industry is the
whole condition of future success, and both Dr. White and I have
an ambition in common, and that is, that as years go by more and
more will the great secondary industries of Australia realise
the tremendous importance of this work, and themselves come to
contribute more and more to its achievement.
When Dr. W~ hite was speaking about Cunningham, the
lawyer gone wrong the Botanist gone right, I thought to myself:
' Well, there are two things, to people of my generation, that
stick out very clearly in the memory'. The first is that when
I was a student, Botany was regarded as a rather feminine
attainment ( laughter). People who studied Botany were supposed
to be those useful people who could walk around a suburban
garden with you and dazzle you with science. Just as I was
thinking to myself -my wife's good at this, I'm not -now: ' Is
that a carnation or -what's the other thing I like -a
geranium?' the hostess, or hier friend who was a student of Botany,
would be attributing in a somewhat ill-pronounced Latin the most
remarkable names to all these vegetables that one happened to be
looking at. Botany I think I'm right Dr. W4hite in saying
that 30 or 40 years ago this was regarded as a rather amiable
sort of occupation, and in that period of time it has come to be
one of the dominating things in the development of Australia.
The second thing that one always recalls is that, 4o
years ago, I'm going back I'll make it 50 years ago back to
my own time, when I was a boy it was well understood that
Australia had a fertile coastal belt and that inside that there
was country that ranged from " Marginal" that horrible word
to " Desert", the great dead heart of Australia, and there were
vast tracts of land now completely fertile and productive
which were regarded as unworthy of the attention of sensible
human beings. There were vast areas of Queensland covered with
prickly pear and not available for productive employment in the
production and growth of stock. 
e a 2.
And then the scientists got to work and the great
leader among the scientists has been, Sir, your wonderful Organisation.
And they got to work and they said: " You know this
can't be right" and thae result is, that today, by a variety of
means running from the work of the metallurgists to the work of
the entomologists and the botanists, there are millions of acres
of land in Australia, fertile, productive, which were at that
time regarded as, more or less, hopeless and useless. The last
development, and we are associating ourselves with it today, has
been to devote proper study to the improvement of pastures, the
introduction of new g-rasses the discovery of leg-umes in the
sub-tropical areas of Australia, because everybody who thinks
about these problems except in terms of current œ Cs Ss and pence
knows perfectly well, that much production in sub-tropical areas
has been grievously handicapped in the past by an undue dependence
on native grasses, by our relative failure so far, to
discover the right kind of grasses, and above all, the right
kind of legumnes if we are going to improve our production of
cattle; not only of dairy herds, but of cattle in the vast and
growing meat industry of Australia. And I like to look forward
6n these matters. I like to feel, and I'm sure you do, Sir,
that on top of all this work on the sub-tropical areas of Aus-*
tralia will come concentrated work on the tropical areas of
Australia. How much remains to be done in the north of Queensland,
for example. If we could only encourage our scientific
people in their patient work, because it is patient work, to
discover these remarkable instruments for growth and development,
I said then, Sir, tit's patient work'. I'm afraid,
speaking on behalf of rmy own craft, the politicians, we are
sometimes tempted to bel~ ieve that if we find a few million pounds
today we will have thirty million pounds worth of results in 12
months time. And it doesn't just happen in that way. It may be
that in these very Labs, there will be work done under simulated
conditions which will last, by trial and error and careful expe: 1&gt;.-
rnent, for 10 or 15 yeas, and nobody may be able to say that any
one of those years, to the political people ulho produce so much
of the funds: " Yes we have a result, 9 and this is going to be
worth so-and-so". Science just doesn't operate in that way. As
citizens of this country it is our duty to find just as much as
we can for the scientists to enable them to do their work, take
every possible pains to see that-Je have earnest and skilful
people engag': ed in the -work and then leave it to them, because
the best re sults they will obtain will not be as a result of some
happy fluke, as so many people choose to think, but the best
results will come as a result of patient examination, patient
testing, patient elimination of things that have proved not to
be useful. Ofcourse, there will be happy flukes. 11ho am I to
deny the existence in the world of happy flukes? I'm one myself
But all scientific work doesn't involve the happy fluke. It
involves enormous scholarship, and skill, and patien and support.
I believe, you know, that out of the work that will be
done here weO may very wroll hope some dqr to find the production
let us take one case the production of cattle in these subtropical
areas, multipled four or five times. And think of what
that can mean to a State like Queensland, so rich in resources,
so many of her resources so difficult to tap. And after all,
what's -ood for Queensland is good for Australia, and what's
good for Australia is good for the living standards of men and
women all over the world.
So, Sir, I'm most honoured and delighted to be here tht,
aftornoon. I can see, sitting, around here today, people who have
been closely associated with this remarkable work. I wish it
well: it's a great honour to be asked even to speak for a few
minutes on such an occasion, and feeling that way, I express my
gratitude. I offer you and your colleagues the gratitude of the
fgcooo ur ndgtoorwtynt, e na nandid t a novnIec eid le mcaloa rrpee, l aqntuhoeet. Lhaabvoinrga ~ orcyo notrpaerny, taon d pIas wt ilelx, p eIri etnhcien, k, 



PRESS CONFERENCE BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, AT MEDAN MERDEKA BARAT
DJAKARTA, SUNDAY, _ 6th DECEMBER, 1959
Ladies and Gentlemen I want to introduce to you the Rt.
Hon. R. G. Menzies, Prime Minister of Australia. Thank you.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I suppose, ladies and genlmn yo
would like to ask me questions. Do that. I may be
able to answer one or two of them, but in the meantime
I hope you will let me say that though it has
been a very strenuous journey you people have the
habit of starting the day frightfully early and it
has been very hot still it has been a journey full
of interest. Wie have seen something of your counitry;
we have seen something of the industry and
cheerfulness of your people. I have at any rate
learned something of your problems, administratively
and economically, and of course I have had the inestimable
advantage of talks with your leading men,
culminating this morning in a long talk w'ith your
famous President. I think perhaps you all realise
that I did not come here with a bag full of proposals
to ne ,, otiate about trade or transport, or aything
for that matter. I came really as a means of improving
our contact with Indonesia and of learning
at first hand something of your problems and of your
point of view, and I think that I can say quite
accurately that I am going away tomorrow very much
better informed on many matters than I was when I
came here. Now, if there is some particular question, perhaps
somebody would put it.
QUESTION: Sir, after your talks with Indonesian leaders,
is Australia going to change her decision with
regard to V-1est Irian?
PRIME MINISTER: I had a discussion this morning with your
leader in which we, as I think he himself said, had
a full and frank exchange of views. I explained the
Australian attitude in substantially the terms in
which I explained it in Parliament in Canberra after
the visit of Dr. Subandrio. Your President explained,
with elaboration, the reasons for his point of view
and your point of view. What he said was supplemented
by the Chief Minister and by Dr. Subandrio.
I think the one thing that was quite common ground,
and it is very important, was that the problem was
one that should be solved by peaceful discussion and
not by resort to force, and that statement made by
the President following on one made by Dr. Subandrio
will, I think, do much to improve the atmosphere in
which this problem may be discussed in the future.
I shall merely report back to my own Government any
added material that I have, and the impressions that
I have as a result of this journey. What will be
the result of that, I don't know.
QUESTION: Sir you have said that this should be settled
peacefully. Did you, in your talks with Indonesian
leaders, Lzdvance any proposals from the Australian
point of view for a settlement by peaceful mcans?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I have not. I have not. This is a matter
which exists as between the Netherlands and Indonesia.
QUESTION: QUESIPOriNm: eM rM. i nister your discussion with 
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION:
O PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINIST&amp; I":
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: President Sukarno this morning, is there still any
doubt of thelndonesian policies towards West Irian?
' Is there any doubt about the policy?' In other
words, do I think that there has been any change in
the approach of the Indonesian Government towards
that problem? from the Australian side, because the
President said this morning that the Government of
Indonesia has made clear to your Excellency the view
of the Indonesian Government as issued earlier, that
this Wjest Irian question will be settled by peaceful
means. Yes. Is there any doubt now with your Government
about this policy?
I'm sorry, I don't understand.
Before this all this misunderstanding between
Australia and Ind~ onesia about the policy, about the
Indonesian policy for settling the question of !,, est
Irian after this discussion is there still any
doubt from your side?
Any doubt about the problem being settled
peacefully, you moan.
Yes. No, I accept that: I think it will be settled
peacefully. But when and how I do not know.
Mr. Prime Minister, our President has said and
always says that Indonesia is still in evolution and
the West Irian question is a colonial problem, arnd
that is why it is always possible that in the future
Indonesia might use armed forces to release Irian
Barat. Therefore, will Australia remain passive if
Indonesia uses armed forces to release Jest Irian?
You know that is rather like the old question:
' If you had a brother would he like cheese'. ( Laughter).
Iam much too old, though, in this business to
be answering hypothetical questions. ( Laughter)
Mr. Prime Minister arises then out of your
statement just now that in discussions on the West
Irian problem is going better?
Not that I know of. I am the prime Minister of
Australia, not the Prime Minister of the Netherlands.
You fall into Lin error if you think that this is an
argument between Indonesia and Australia. We make
no claim to that portion of New Guinea. Never have.
Je have a bit of our oxwm which occupies us pretty
busily and costs a great deal of money and effort and
skill to develop.
Mr. Prime Minister will you kindly tell us,
after your visit, will the Australian nation give
more understanding to Indonesia's claim for ilest
Irian? Sorry, I did not hear him. 
QUES TION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTERi:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUES T; ON:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEli. ( repeated by Mr. Heydon)
Well1, as I said just now, I have learned a
little myself and when I go back I will convey my
impressions of what I have learned to my colleagues
in the Australian Government.
Will you be successful in this?
I beg your pardon. I hope I will be successful
in making them understand me, but if you want to know
what the result of that will be, or if you want to
build up some expectation that it will be exciting,
I don't know.
Is your Govew.. nment, Sir, still committed to
handing over W~ est Irian as a trust territory to the
United Nations?
Is my Government what?
. still committed to changing i1est Irian into
a United Nations trust territory. There was a report
sme months ago in the Indonesian press that the
Australian Government wants to turn the 4Jest Irian
territory as a United Nations trust territory.
I am sorry, I did not see that report.
It came from Canberra.
Oh, but that does not necessarily mean it was
true. ( Laughter) My Government has not put forward
such a proposal.
Mr. Prime Minister, would you please say whether
Australia would be interested in using her good
offices in suttling this issue peacefully.
Look, I think I've said all I can say on this
matter and I am not going to engage in a series of
speculations about it. This is a problem of considerable
importance and some delicacy, and I don't
propose to add to what I have just said about it.
Mr. Prime Minister, Sir, in discussing international
problems, was anything said about the attitudes
of Indonesia and Australia to the summit conference
between East and West?
Oh, no, no. I had no discussions about a summit
conference, no. My own views on that matter, I think
are probably pretty well known. I had no discussion.
Was there any discussion about the action of
Communist China during the past year in your talks
with the President this morning?
No. To return to the question of We-Ist Irian again.
You said that it was a mattor between the Dutch and
Indonesia. Dr. Subandrie yesterday said that the
passive attitude of Australia would constitute a step
forward. By saying that this is a matter to be discussed
between the Netherlands and Indonesia, are you
saying that Australia will remain passive?
I have said all I propose to say on that subject. 
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESt ION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEi:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTIONs PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Prime Minister there has been a rpport that
the possibility of President Sukarno visiting Australia
has been discussed at Merdeka Palace.
I think that is a matter really which we ought
to leave to the President himself. I have certainly
made it quite clear that should he find it possible
to visit Australia, he would be warmly welcomed and
the visit could do nothing but good; but of course
he is a very busy man with enormous responsibilities
and it is very difficult in those circumstances for
anybody to say off-hand and quickly if and when,
but you may take it that the invitation is open.
May I ask your impressions of President Sukarno?
That's rather a urly4 one as we say. As a
matter of fact I have never met your President before
and, if it is of any interest, and I can say it without
impertinence, I have been very greatly impressed
by him. I think he is a man of remarkable personality
and he has a superb place in the history of your
country, and therefore I felt it was a great honour
to meet him and I got nothing but benefit from my
discussions with him.
Mr. Prime Minister, after having discussed
friendlily with our Goveinmcnt and explained your
attitude to the press, I do not want to argue with
you but to learn your views. Now permit me to ask
you this question. What are the real reasons that
Australia still recognises the Dutch sovereignty of
dest Irian the real reasons?
You didn't hear what I said before, did you?
( laughter) It has been announced in the local press that
you and the authorities of Indonesia would be discussing
the problem of security. Is it true, or is
it false, and what kind of security, what country
and from what?
It has been said we would be discs sing the
problem of security?
Yes, that was the report.
Well, we had no discussions about the problem
of socurity. I have some views on it myself. The
one kind of security that is needed in the free
world is security .6ainst Communist aggression.
Do you mean Communism as an ideology or some
particular country?
Communism as a spe. cific modurn form of treason,
eating into every country, trying to . dermine its
capacity, trying to spread its power as a result.
, Jo have very strong views on this matter. I imagine
a number of people here have too.
Did you discuss any question of economic aid,
flestern economic aid
Our discussions on the economic field were fairly
general. dfe had no specific ideas. I think I can say
that woe, on both sides, we felt that there would be 
QUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: enormous advantages in what is called " technical
aid" in the receipt and training of students, in the
providing, wherever we can, of experts, as we have
indeed done in the past, in order to help in economic
development. That is, I think, one of the most
fruitful aspects of economic co-operation that has
been devised and I would like to see it extended.
But I had no specific discussions as to how and
where. There is just one question left. Mr. Prime
Minister, can you tell us what your talk with
General Nasution was yesterday because I heard that
you had discussed abroad talk yesterday with
General Nasution, the Chief of our Army.
I had a very interesting talk with the General.
He was giving me an account of the various limited
campaigns that are , oing on in various parts of
Indonesia and we discussed that kind of thing.
But what else? Did you offer anything for
training, for army training, in Australia?
No, I made no offer. I made some enquiries,
got some answers and said that I would discuss
those matters when I returned home. But there was
no offer on either side.
Mr. Prime Minister, after you have talked with
our leaders you would mind telling us your views
on Indonesia's position as towards the question of
peace Asia also the security of Australia.
I think that Australia has a very profound interest
in the prosperity and peaceful living of Indonesia.
It is entirely putting it from a quite
selfish point of view. It is entirely in our interests
that that country should develop a first-class
administrative system and great economic stability
because, of course, I believe . mong other things,
that if Indonesia can establish herselif in that way,
and I am sure she can, with work nd thought, then
of course the whole attitude of the people will be
in the direction of peace. They won't be themselves
tempted by doctrines which are of a more
aggressive kind. They will in fact grow as a large
and powerful and peaceful neighbour, a close neighbour
of Australia on our north. From our point of
view, everything that will make Indonesia peaceful
and prosperous is a good thing.
Last question please.
Mr. Prime Minister, may we heacr your formula
for success during your trip to Indonesia?
I don't know that I have a formula. ( Laughter)
I just said " Good day" to people in a genial fashion,
and they said " Good day" to me. ( Laughter) It is
not a bad formula after all.
F 



I STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTEI_, THE RT.
HON. R. G. MENZIES, X. P. RECORDED
FOR THE CELEBR TION PARTY TO MARK
FIRST TEN YEARS OF FEDLEPAL GOVERNMENT
HELD IN SYDNEY, THURSDAY, 10TH DECEMBER,
1959
I am very proud that you should have drunk my health
( in my absence from Australia) and given me so much credit, undeserved
though it may be, for the events of the last 10 years.
On the other hand, I am very sorry that I should not be with
you on so happy an occasion. My wife, who has done so much, has
the same emotions. As you know, our relationships with South-East Asia are
of tremendous importance to us. It would be a misfortune if we
uere always to consider them in military terms. I therefore
accepted invitations to go to Indonesia and to Malaya for a brief
visit of goodwill and of understanding. It is of the greatest
importance that in our dealings vrith our Asian neighbours we
should emphasise our points of unity and not dwell too heavily
upon our possible points of difference. Thus, it is that one
of the main things to say to the Indonesians is that, apart from
our difference of opinion about dest New Guinea, we both have all
the reasons in the world for getting to understand each other and
establishing positive friendship.
In the case of Malaya, re already have considerable
historical and current reasons for being friends. Australian
capital and skill were many years ago invested in Malaya, particularly
in tin and in rubber. Through the former Governor-
General of Australia, Sir ; Jilliam McKell, we played an active and
constructive part in the devising of the Malayan constition after
the achievement of Malayan self-government.
The Prime Ministei, Tunka Abdul Rahman, recently visited
Australia and was, I am sure, delighted at his reception and
at the instinctive friendliness of our people.
As part of the British Commonwealth reserve of forces,
we have been and are represented, in all arms, with the willing
co-operation of the Malayan people.
To return to Indonesia, it is, of course, w½ ell-known
that we recognise Dutch sovereignty in West New Guinea and that
on this matter we have, so to speak, agreed to disagree with the
Indonesian administration.
As we are in no sense anxious to piomote hostility we
have, in the first places strongly supported the reference ol the
Indonesian territorial claim to the Permanent Court of International
Justice. The Government of Indonesia has, for its own
reasons, not thought this to be a suitable tribunal. We have
made it clear that, as we recognise Dutch sovereignty, so equally,
do we recognise the right of the Dutch to co4duct negotiations
with Indonesia so long as those negotiations are not conducted
under either threat or duress. On this matter you will recall,
as I do, that the Indonesian Foreign Minister, Dr. Subandrio, on
his recent visit to Australia entered upon a joint declaration to
the effect that Indonesia did not intend to solve those differences
of opinion by force of arms. This, you will agree, is a
civilised attitude and, as your government, 9 we , rill do our best
to preserve it.
It seems to me that the truth is that the great problEms
before the new nation of Indonesia are those of civil administration
and economic develop ent. Ue will do all in our power to
help to solve these poblems. 
2.
Indeed, it may be said about both-of these neighbouring
countries Indonesia and Malaya that Australia has a
genuine interest in seeing them develop as free, well-administered
and self-governing communities, with rising standards of
living and that pride in democracy which is the best assurance
of resistance to Communism.
Looking back over these 10 years, we feel proud of the
economic and social development of our own country. ' e have
experienced unpopularity and popularity, but at all times we
have tried to maintain a steady course; a c0ourse which in the
result has, I believe, as you do contributed powerfully to the
g-reatest period of national deveiopment within living memory.
But we have not confined ourselves to domesiic and economic affairs.
* We have set about the task of build1ing up these friendships
and associations abroad which mean so much to our national
security and our national future.
It may occasionally be forgotten that the Colombo Plan
originated with Australian initiative; that we played an active
and I think, a determining part in the creation of the ANZUS
Pact with the United States and New Zealand;, and that we were one
of the founders of the South-East Asian Treaty which has done so
much to stabilise those freedom-loving countries in South and
South-East Asia who are determined not to paiss within Communist
control. In short, we have had a positive, constructive and
fruitful foreign policy. Our association with Great Britain and
the other nations of the British Commonwealth has never been
stronger or more genuine. Our association with the United States
of America has never been so happy or so helpful. Thus it is
that I think we may say at the end of a decadie of government that
both at home and abroad we have served our country with integrity
and with success. It is a good thing that ~ Ve should be able to
say this to ourselves at this time.
That I should say it to you is not an expression of
personal self-satisfaction, because nobody kriows half so well as
I do how much the progress of events has depbnded upon the intense
loyalty and co-operation which has beep received from
Ministei-s, Parliamentary Members and the manyr thousands of Party
Members in the field of organisation whose names are perhaps not
well known but without whose sacrificial work we could never hope
to achieve success.
Ten years seems a long time lookiing forward. it
seems an astonishingly short time looking back. But I see no
reason to doubt that so long as we provide s~ rvice to the Australian
people, a sound character rhich inspires that service,
and a patriotism which prefers the interests of the nation to the
interests of the individual, we should be able to look forw. ard to
another decade of which wve may be as proud a$ we are of the
years just ended. 



EMBARGO: Not for broadcast publication or cabling before
1/ 30 a. m. WEDNESDkY, 16th Deoember, 1959. P. M. No. 48/ 1959
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTEI. S! CONFEIENCE
In commenting on the announcement by Mr. MacMillan
that there is to be a meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers
in London beginning on the 3rd May, 1960, the Prime Minister,
Mr. Menzies, said that he welcomed this opportunity for an
exchange of views among the leaders of the British Commonwealth.
CABERRA, December, 1959. 



P. M. No. 49/ 1959
DENIAL ON TROOPS FOR NORTH BORNEO
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. MenZies, this afternoon
categorically denied a report published earlier today
that he " is expected to announce earlS next year that
Australian troops will be sent to North Borneo."
Mr. Menzies said that no such proposal had been
put forward and the story was a figment of the imagination
of its author.
CANBERRA, 16th December, 1959. 



FOR PRESS , MNo5019
UNIVERSITY-DELELOPMNT~ ING4NBERR,
Statement by the Prime M'in-ster, The Rt.' Hon. ROG. Menzies.
Cabinet has devoted much time to ! resolving the
question of the future of the Canberra University College.
Should it be given full and independent University status or
should it be organically associated with the Australian National
University? We have decided in favour of association.
Mindful of the importance of self-government in
University institutions, we have not attempted to work out any
details. lie are inviting both institutions to co-operate in
preparing a plan which will serve as a basis for association in
one university, with one over-all governing-body, one series of
degrees and, as far as is practicable, a comnmon administration.
As this decision is one of great tmoment for those
concerned, I think it ' proper to set out as succinctly as
possible some of the major considerations which have led us to
our conclusion. 4Ie have had close and prolonged ministerial
discussion. I have personally had consultations with representatives
of the A. N. U. and C. U. C. Their views favoured separate
development, and have, of course, been care'fully weighed. When
I was in London earlier this year, I discussed the problem with
Sir Keith Murray, whose committee on Australian Universities had
left this matter open, though with some broad indication of its
approach. More recently, I invited the ne ly-appointed
Australian Universities Commission, under the Chairmanship of
Sir Leslie Martin., to give its opinion.
In the result, the views which Cabinet had tentatively
formed are supported by those of Sir Keith Murray and of the
Universities Commission.
In its celebrated report the Murray Committee said
that " It clearly is a matter for very seriot'is consideration
whether there should be in so small a centr e of population two
quite independent universities". Later tH~ e Committee said:
" It should be possible, in our view, to devise a form
of constitution giving to the College all the independence in
operation which both the National UniversitY and the College
desire and yet making it possible for students at the College to
receive degrees of the National University and for common services
to be organized and maintained without unnecessary duplication.
Such a constitution for a university would be a new
thing in Australia; but there are patterns-of various types in
universities overseas which might viell be studied and we think
it should not pass the wit of man to devise constitutional
arrangements which might suit the situation in Canberra in a
manner which would be acceptable to all concerned".
In conversation with me in London, Sir Keith
developed very strongly his belief that two universities could
not be justified. The principal reasons for this opinion
reasons which have commended themselves to the Cabinet are,
first, that it would be difficult to justify the creation of two
universities in Canberra with a population of around 40O, 000 at a
time when efforts to create second universities in Sydney and
Melbourne are, in the case of Sydney, by no means completed and,
in the case of Melbourne, largely at the ' paper stage'. Where,
as in Australia at the present time, there is a marked and nation
-wide pressure for more universities, care must be taken to
devote the available resources to the best advantage from an
Australia-wide point of view. Second, if the C. U. C. is to 
C 2.
become a separate university and is not to be a second-rate
university, it cannot stop at first degrees it must cater for
post-graduate studies. Above all it must provide facilities for
research, and such facilities'are increasipigly costly. The
consequence of this is that a separate and properly developed
Canberra University would, to an extent, duiplicate the Australian
National University at the post-graduate stage or would
need, at -that stage, to become organically associated with the
A. N. U. At a later stage, I consulted thp newly-formed
Australian Universities Commission, a body especially created to
co-ordinate the work of the universities and to examine their
financial requirements. On October 21, 1 received a report
from Sir Leslie Martin, the matorial portion of which is as
follows 11 The Commission has considered this problem, with a
knowledge of the facts and views recently put before Cabinet,
and has unanimously concluded that some form of association
is both desirable and practicable. Further, Commissioners
believe that if the concept of association is accepted it
can be more easily achieved now than later.
It should be possible for a form of association to be
worked out by a committee consisting of representatives of
the Australian National University and the Canberra University
College during the next twelve mpnths. Presumably
such a committee would have before it full details of
distinguished and successful forms of association between
research institutes and universities elsewhere, e~ g.,
Chicago, Columbia, Harvard and Princeton.
Before reaching its decision to recommend in favour
of association, the Commission gave some thought to the
means by which this could be achieved. It seems to the
Commission essential that there should be one institution,
to be called the Australian National Univelsity, and that
it should have one Council, with a Vice-Chancellor as its
chief executive officer.
The Commission went on to indicate diagramatically
certain suggested forms of organisation which I have conveyed to
the two bodies concerned.
We are au~ are of a view current in the A. N. U. that that
body should, to achieve its true position : in Australian University
life, be related and have duties to all Australian universities
and not just to one. Our reply is that the fact of
amalgamation in Canberra would not mean that the highly
specialised researchers of the A. N. U. would not be available to
State Universities or that there could not be effective exchange
of research workers betwieen all. Ile are quite aware of the fact
that there are some highly specialised investigations conducted
at the A. N. U. which could not be sensibly interrupted by the
routine teaching of undergraduates. But as we all know,
teaching and exposition have riat value in clarifying the mind
and in actually testing conclusions already tentatively arrived
at. It may turn out to be extremely useful for courses of
lectures to advanced honours' students, for example, to be
delivered by some of the -reat and world-famous expc rts in the
Australian National University as it is today constituted. Lie
feel also that if the University is to achieve its greatest
results, not only in the granting of degrees but in the stimulation
of the mind, there will be enormous advantage for students
with a bent towards research to have the great advantage of
contact with men of 7reat eminence in their own field. 
3.
In short, we have made our decision for association
because we believe that together and as one institution the
National University and the College will offer to Australia in
the next generation more than they can hopp to offer separately.
It is not our intention that this decision should interfere
with the turk being carried on by either body or prejudice the
proper exercise of responsibility by those wlao deal with
graduates or under., raduates. ' e are quite confident that the
two bodies together will work out a plan which will preserve the
interests of workers in both and provide ani organisation which
will enable them to co-operate fully for the banefit of both.
The working out of the necessary arrangements will take
some time. It cannot be done in a hurry. Our decision means
that the new association will operate by the beginning of 1961.
As the current arrangements with the University of
Melbourne, which has nurtured the welfare of the Canberra
University College for a quarter of a century, were due to
terminate at the end of 1959, I requested the Council of the
University of Melbourne to extend its affiliation for one year,
that is, until the end of 1960. That Council has most
generously decided to extend its legislation relating to
Canberra University College until the end of 1960. I am indeed
most grateful for this decision, which will enable the scheme
of association to be formed without undue pressure, though it
must be brought to finality in good time.
CANBERRA, 17th December, 1959. 



NOTE: Would you please run a Melbourne dateline on this story
as the Prime Minister is in Melbourne. It is not being
released anywhere else. P. M. No. l/ 19' 59
COSTS OF TEACHING HOSPITALS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that he had appointed
a committee to inquire into the costs incurred by teaching
hospitals which are directly attributable to the instruction of
medical students, and to submit for the consideration of the
Australian Universities Commission recommendations on the magnitude
and urgency of Commonwealth assistance for these hospitals
which would be appropriate to those special costs.
Sir Leslie Martin Chairman of the Australian Universities Commission
will be Chairman of this Committee. Its other members
will be:-
Dr'. V. L. Collins, Medical Director, Royal Children's Hospital,
elourne, and Professor-elect of Child Health, University of
Melbourne; Professor D. P. Derham. Professor of Jurisprudence,
University of Melbourne, memberf of the Board of Management, Royal
Melbourne Hospital, and member, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Melbourne;
Mr J. Griffith, O. BOE., Administrator, Royal Perth Hospital;
Mr. L. B1. Hamilton, First Assistant Secretary, Socia-l Serviced'
Division of the Commonwealth Treasury;
Professor J. Hayden, Professor of Medicine, University
of Melbourne, and President of the Royal Australasian College of
Physicians;
Mr. P. Kenny, Honorary Surgeon, St. Vincent's Hospita, Sydney,
and Councillor, Royal Australasian College of Surgeons;
Mr. A. H. Lendon, Honorary Surgeon, Royal Adelaide Hospital, and
Councillor, Royal Australasian Council of Surgeons;
Dr. J. Lindell, Chairman, Hospitals and Charities Commission of
Victoria, and previously Medical Superintendent of the Royal
Melbourne Hospital;
Dr. G. A. Penington, Dean of the Royal Melbourne Hospital Clinical
School; Sir Helbert Schlink, Chairman of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
Sydney, and President of the Australian Hospitals' Association;
Professor S. Sunderland, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University
of Melbourne; and
Prof'essor N. G. Sutton, Dean of the Faculty of Medicine, University
of Queensland. It will be seen that this membership is drawn from all
States with teaching hospitals, and includes men experienced in
hospital administration, others who have a close acquaintance
with the inter-relation betwoen universities and hospitals in
the field of clinical teaching, and others with particular knowledge
of the leg.,. al and financial implications of the subject of
the inquiry. 
2,
The Prime Minister said that earlier in the year he
had been asked by the Health Ministers of the States to set up
such a committee, and that he had a.' reed to do so but had delayed
taking action until the Australian Universities Commission
was established and its views know-n. Indeed, the Committee has
been established in accordance with the terms of the Australian
Universities Commission Act, . ijhich provides for the ; c. ppointment
of Committees to advise the Commission on specific problems. At
present, Mr. Menzies commented, the Commoniealth does not contribute
to the costs incurred by the teaching hospitals as a
direct result of the training given in them to medical students,
although, through the Australian Universities Commission, it
does assist the States to meet the cost of other aspects of
medical teaching. The Prime Minister stated that he appreciated that this
matter is one of some urgency. Nevertheless, because the
Commission is at present fully occupied in assessing the needs of
Australian universities in the period 1961-63, it will not be
practicable for the committee on the tead-ing hospitals to begin
its investigations until the early montlas of next year.
MELB3OURNE, 18th December, 1959. 



P. M. No. 1/ 1960.
SUGGESTED PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced this
morning that he had received a telegram from the Premier of
New South Vales, Mr. Heffron, asking him to arrange a special
Premiers' Conference to discuss the effect of margins on State
finances. Mr. Menzies has acknowledged the telegram and will
be in touch again with Mr. Heffron after he has discussed the
matter with his Cabinet colleagues.
CANBERRA, 6th January, 1960. 



P. M. No, 3Z1960
AUSTRALIA DAY M1ESSAGES
The following messages were received by the Commonwealth
on the occasion of Australia Day 1960. The messages to the
Australian people were directed hrough the Governor-General,
Sir William Slim and the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies.
From the President of the United States:
" I am happy to extend to your Excellency and to the people
of Australia on Australia Day, felicitations and sincere
good wishes from the people of the United States as well
as from myself."
From the Prime Minister of India:
" On the happy occasion of the anniversory of Australia Day,
the Government and the people of India join mc in sending
to you, Mr. Prime Minister, and to the Government and the
people of Australia, our most cordial greetings together
with our best wishes for the welfare and prosperity of
the people of your country."
From the President of France:
" On the occasion of Australia Day I address to your
Excellency with my warm felicita~ ions my sincere wishes
for the happy future of the Australian people."
From the First Minister of the Republic of Indonesia:
" On the auspicious occasion of the National Day of Australia
I have much pleasure in extending to your Excellency also
on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Indonesia
most sincere congratulations and best wishes."
From the Rt. Hon. Viscount Dunrossil:
" Very best wishes and grootings to you on Australia Day.
Looking forward to our meeting 2nd February."
From His Excellency the High Cormissioner for Canada:
" On Australia Day, 1960, it is my privilege and pleasure
to convey to you, and to the Governmuent and people of the
Commonwealth of Australia, warmest greetings and best
wishes from the Government aind people of Canada.
All Canadians would wish to extend their congratulations
and sincere wishes for continued peace and prosperity on
your National Anniversary."
From the Wost German Governmient:
" On the occasion of Australia's National Day, I offer my
sincere wishes for the , ood fortune and prosperity of our
friends, the Australian people, and equally for the personal
health and happiness of your Excellency."
From His Majesty. King of Cambodia:
" On the occasion of the National Day of Australia I am
happy to address your Excellency in the name of the Khmer
Nation and in my oxin name the wvmest wishes that I
entertain for the full success of your high mission, for
your personal welfare and for the prosperity of the
Australian people." 
2.
From the Vice-President and Prime Minister of the Republic of
China
" On tho auspicious occasion of Australia Day I take groat
pleasure in extending to you my sincerest felicitations
and best wishes for the continuing prosperity of your
country and your porsonal well-being."
From the Prime Minister of Ceylon:
" On the happy occasion of the anniversary of Australia Day,
the Goernment and people of Ceylon join mae in sending
you and through you to the Government and people of
Ausiralia, our sincere felicitations and good wishes for
the coming year.
From His Excellency the Governor of Malta:
" On anniversary of Australia Day I send warmest greetings
on behalf of the Governme. int and people of Malta and Gozo
to you and to all Australians.
We rejoice that this celebration, in which so many
Australians from Malta participate, coincides with the
departure from Malta of the 25, OO0th migrant under the
Australia-Malta Passage Assistance Agreement, and I wish
to take this opportunity to express our pro fouhd gratitude
for your help to Malta." 1
From the President of the Union of Burma:
" On this anniversary of Australia Day, I am happy to
extend to your Excellency and to the Government and
people of Australia, on behalf of the Government and people
of the Union of Burma and on ray own behalf, warmi congratulations
and sincere good wishes for the progress and
continued prosperity of Australia."
From the President of Pakistan:
" On behalf of the Governent and the people of Pakistan and
on my own behalf, I offer to your Excellency, the Government
and the friendly people of Australia, heartiest
greetings and sincere best wishes on the happy occasion of
the National Day of Australia. We wish your Excellency
health and happiness and the people of Alistralia continued
peace and progress."
From the President of the Republic of Viet Nam,
" On the occasion of the National Day of Australia I am
happy to extend to your Excellency and through you to the
Australian people, rmy most sincere congratulations together
with my warmest wishes for your Excellency's personal
happiness and for the prosperity of Australia." 
3.
To Dr. Nehru Mr. Menzies reaiprocated with this message:
" On the occasion of India's Republic Day may I extend to
you and your people the sincere good wishes of the
Government and people of Australia.
I recall with very great pleasure my brief visit last
July to your great country, which, in the years since it
achieved independence, has won the respect and admiration
of all countries for its achievements both at home and
abroad. I wish you every success in the ventures which you are
planning and I fervently hope that the friendly ties which
exist between our two countries will, in the years to come,
be still further strengthened." 1
Sir William Slim replied to the President of the Republic of
I Viet Nam: " I much appreciate your Australia Day message and, on
behalf of the people of Australia, I send your Excellency
I am leaving Australia today and one of the happiest
memories of my term of office will be your visit to this
couhtry. My wife joins rae in sending ovary good wish for your
personal well being."
Mr. Menzies has replied to all the messages. To Dr. Djuanda
First Minister of the Republic of Indonesia he said:
" I am delighted to receive your message stop It confirms the
happy feeling I have about our political and personal relations."
1
CANBERRA, 26th January, 1960. 



P. M. No. 2/ 1960
ANTI-SEMITISM IN AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G.
Menzies
I have hitherto made no statement about some recent
manifestations of anti-Semitism in Australia, evidenced by the
painting up of slogans on walls and other malicious or foolish
activities. I have myself had experience of painted slogans directed
against me, but have not treated them seriously. But as
many of our Jewish fellow citizens are genuinely distressed at
these recent events, I think that I should now say that there
is absolutely no room in Australia for anti-Semitism, no
justification for it, and that I believe that there is no real
substance in it.
There is a long history in Australia of distinguished
service to our country by Jewish citizens. The Jews in
Australia are good Australians. Any attempt to create an anti-
Jewish feeling in Australia is doomed to failure. It may be,
of course, that these sporadic actions are those of irresponsible
people on the " lunatic fringe" who hope, by their childish
antics, to secure some form of anonymous notoriety. It may be,
on the other hand, that those who seek to divide our country
are using this as one means of doing so, So far we have no
clear evidence that there is an organised campaign of such a
sinister kind, but we are of course watching the position very
closely. As we found when we attempted to deal legislatively
with Comnmunist activities, the powers of the Commonwealth
Parliament are limited. But I say without any hesitation, first,
that we roundly condemn any attempt to stir up false issues and,
second, that we invite the people of Australia to treat these
outbursts with contempt. I am sure that every Member of the
Federal Parliament of whatever Party shares our feelings on
this matter.
CANBERRA, 26th January, 1960. 



FOR PRI'SS Statement by the Prime Minister
CO&gt;,. 0-O. EALTH SERUM L:' BORATORIES
On Tuesday lI'st Dr. Cameron, the Federal Health Minister,
stated that
1. Certain overseas drug manufacturers were making " feelcrs"'
for taking over the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories.
2. No specific offers had been made.
3. The Commonwealth had not put the laboratories up for sale.
2. The Government had not yet considered the proposals.
These statements were, of course, correct. The names of
the firms making the enquiries were not disclosed. It would be
contrary to proper and normal practice to do so. I should add
that before answering any enquiries on such a matter, Cabinet's
views would need to be obtained. The reason for this is that
an important question of public policy is involved; under such
circumstances it is our practice to secure the views of Cabinet.
One Meclbourne morning newspaper, on Fednesday last, said
that the matter had already been discussed in Cabinet, and
actually claimed to quote my own views. Both statements were
untrue. As it happens, the item has been listed in the normal
way, on a submission prepared by Dr. Cameron last week, for the
next Cabinet meeting, when it will be dealt with.
I should add that the only consideration to be taken into
account will be the best health interests of the Australian
people.
CANBERRA. 1st February, 1960. 



P. M. No. 4/ 1960
COMMlON, TALTH SERUM LABORATORIES
Statement by the Prime Minister3 the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.
The Cabinet today gave consideration to certain
approaches which have been made to the Commonwealth concerning
taking over the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories. This is
the first time that the matter has been before Cabinet. The
nature of the approaches was outlined to Cabinet by the
Minister for Health, Dr. Cameron.
Cabinet decided that the Commonwealth Serum
Laboratories should be retained under Government control, and
that the proposals put forward should, accordingly, be not
entertained. CANBERRA, 3rd February, 1960. 



P. M. No. 5/ 1960
LOAN COUNCIL
The Prime Minister today sent the following
telegram to the Premier of New South Iales, Mr. Heffron:
" I acknowledge your telegram of 3rd February Stop
I understand that at least four premiers have asked for a
meeting of the Loan Council and therefore under the
financial agreement one will be convened by my colleague
the Chairman Stop But as to the matter of a Premiers Conference
the views of the Commonwealth Government were clearly set down
in my letter of 25th January and these views still stand".
CANBERRA,
4th February, 1960. 



CABINET ARRANGEMENTS
The following Cabinet arrangements have been made:
The PRIME MINISTER becomes MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL AFFAIRS;
DR. CAMERON will be the MINISTER-IN-CHARGE OF and
MR. ADERMANN will become a Member of the CABINET.
CANBERRA,
4th February, 1960. P. M. No6/ 1960 



P. M. No. 7/ 1960
COMMON~ iALTH SCHO LIRSHI P AND FELLO ISHI P PLAN
SCHOLA. RSHIPS BY CANADA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr R. G. Menzies.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today
that Canada has offered post-graduate scholarships for
immediate competition by Australian students. The scholarships
will cover return fares to Canada and the payment of
living and other allowances.
This is the second offer made to Australia under
the. Comfmonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan, under
which governments of Commonwealth countries will provide
opportunities for post-graduate study in their own countries
by men and women from other parts of the Commonwealth. This
plan was adopted by the Commonwealth Education Conference at
Oxford last year.
Mr. Menzies said that there had been strong
competition from Australian graduates for the awards offered
by the United Kingdom and he anticipated a similar response
to the Canadian offer.
He went on to say that Australia will very shortly
offer similar scholarships to other Commonwealth countries.
These will have the effect of * ringing graduates from those
countries to study in Australian universities, thus contributing
further to what he regarded as a most valuable
exchange of high-quality graduate students.
Persons interested should make enquiries
immediately from the Registrar of any Australian university
or university college, or from the Commonwealth Office of
Education. Successful applicants will commence their studies
in Canada in October, 1960,
CANBn-LUIRA
February, 1960. 



SPEECH 31-THE PRIMiE MINISTEi, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES AT OPENIAIG OF JEJISH JA1i MEMiORIAL HALL,
' VERLY ON SUNDAY 2T FIRIUAlRY 1960
iMr, President, Your Excellency, distinguished visitors and
Ladies and Gentlemen:
I think that this is a very happy occasion for a very
material reason and I also have t. ro quite irrelevant reasons for
being here this afternoon.
The first irrelevant reason though perha: s it isn't
irrelevant is that I have observed with great interest that
your President's name is Felix I was going to say his
Christian name but I suppose that wouldn't be right. ( Leughter),
But his name is Felix which. if I remember my Latin correctly,
means " happy" happy ( Applause). And I should tink he
ought to be. The second irrelevant reason that I have in my mind
is that the last time I had the honour of making a speech to a
Jewish congregation in Melbourne I was a little troubled about
having to wear my hat all the time. I look bad enough without
a hat on, but when I have a hat on I look terribla ( Laughter)
end I made a little bargain with the Rabbi who is a imost
courteous and obliging man and he said: "' ell, if you start of.
rith it on, you may then remove it and put it on again before
you finish" and that's what I did. And this aftenocn Felix
Happy here said to me just before ie cam ru " It's all right
from now on it's hats off". Therefore I'm so speiaking cool,
calm nd col. ected.
Noj, S: Lr, I'm not going to detain you but just want
to say two o-three things about you and about thi r" irkablc
and interesting occrsion
T'ere are three things that have alxays struck me
about your ccmmunity I hope you won't mind a rank outsidei
like myself, who is an unblushing Presbyteri2. n you ! know what
I mean making a few obse-. vtions about a cnommunity, so many
members of hich aie very close personal friends of mine, Dut
three zhines have alv: ays struck me . nd I think thay' r worth
mentioning. he I'i: cst is your adherence to your faith, You've
been persecuted for it in the course of the centurie. sj you've
been a:; tacked for it you've almost been or. dered to aibandon iLt
from time to time and you haove adhered to it t* arough thick and
thin until it has been hammered into true steel. Now th&amp; t's a
wionderful thing, a wonderful thing your deep. loyal and abiding
religious faith. I admire that enormously. Everybody does.
It produces in any corimunity n element of sanity and balance
and reliability which no comnriunity can afford to be without,
I don't want you to think that people who are not of your par.-
ticular religious faith necessaril/, or frequently, or at alLj
object to you on that ground. Of course we don't. On th.
contr.. ry. Any man, any woman, who has the flame burning qnd .: ho
keeps it alight is a great mnz. n and a great woman and the
community is proud of him and proud of her.
That's the first thing that I've always liked and
admired about the Jewish comnrunity. It's an enduring quality,
And the second thing that I've always admi: ed is that
Ireally think that you have a remarkable sense of family. I
have met a few pe-ple in Australia not too many, I hope, but
some who are a bit anxious to pass off the responsibilit-y for
their fam'lies to somebody else. live never met a Je-w yho felt
like that, I've never known a Jewish fAmily in which the w-Jlfare
of every membe. of the family wasn't the constant task of
the lot, Now thati's a marvellous thing because the family a
L 
good family, a iealth family, % proud famfily, a. famiJly generous
in itself this is of the very essence Df cormunity life,
There can be no , reat nations without great -famAly f1eeling and
I adraire your community im-,, enseJ-y because all thnrough ray life
I have observed this extraordinary, devoted sense of family
pride and fawily resp. onsibility I hope that will s:; lwvays
continue Your community is not a sep.ñ rate -body in a great
nation. It's not a sort of colony. You have no intention that
it should be. But your fuith -tnd your inheritead instincts are a
g. reat contribution tL-otL -ha coni-, iunity in ; hich-you live.
And the third -thing that's always excited my admi,-* ration
i've said something d ut faith, faily117-i he third
is friendliness. I rant to say a word to you -, bout f2iJendliness,
if I may.
I knowi that recently there hc-. ve been stra~ n-e people
puttin, up strange slogans, you'LI* lLoxr met ays
know a little bit about this kind of thin, because " Outl with
* pig-iron Bob" or something ( LauLghter) ( Applause) h-as been on
W every railway crossin, and every brIc walado cu en
a low-down politician I've nev-, er ob. jeck-ed 1-oc it lbacai-use P've
felt that this was unpaid pub. f -city ( ugtr. But I think
that ' qe just want to have in ou2 minds thtthe-e  9. always
be a fe-w people fho intend mi-ischief, who desirec to de-f". le the
community, those rae_ 1d on't believe in tnt orly s: ystem-of
g-overnment that . re believe in, th. at there T1.11 1waMys be a few
people -rho -I-ant to mnake ruide noi1ses or mtupD of'fensi-ve slo. Tanc
And if one coul. d g7rab one of them th-at ijouW. be the day never
been able 3et one mys-elf ( Lauiar( er). They have ino in
this country, They don't :' upresent any opinion in this country
but as usual they've trace d ( Xouad them,; elves ~~ htmgtbe
called " Ithe lunatic fring?". no -, cu i1ow . rKt I mean2' 7hc; are
the silly well to use cood ~. ae~ oAustr-i! iln eco3ression
the " 1ratbags" Arho say: " This is 1etty , gooc.; Uhs' 1d e n
they will 5o . a-rua. nd chaikcin--uP cir painting vp slogans,
I don t rant to discuss that problem iith-yr. e: cept
to say this: that 99 87o of tne peoiule o2 Australia rc-ard thlese
manifestations wi-th contemp,-t. These th-ngs don' c -u prosent a
great movement in this count. ry. Nobody need e ver ' ear in your
community that, in the case cf some of ynvu 7 out oX'
great tribulation , nd poarseution into a country in whichi you
might still be porse cut~ ed, Forget about it ( A'np2 auso). You Iye
comte into the freest country in thie rol.( A'il e That
tGhe 5reat charm about Australia; that's why my friend landa
and I can be up here instead of biting ( each other's ! hea. ds off)
( Laughter) and find our. solves on common gro-unrd, yo~ u kvoi, on
common ground admiring this spec'" acu7-ar Cnd devoted piece of
w-. ork, 3ut it's a fr2ee count.' y, It will rema. In e.
You know I came down haore to do thi s J~ ob and I came
do~ in yesterday and as I drcove in fro,-! the . Uirpor; the (-arstopped
opposite a Hotel thc: 1.-0 twas a tr il lgh aainst
us and it vias in one of those SUL--burb tha-Dt vote J'forLn
and don't vote for Ikenzies you 1kno,; Tn-at 1 inean? ( Ap. plause,
laiughter) arid in the charmfng e l fre-sco halbit that people have
in Sydney there were three fel-loes sitt-ing-. n thae Joorstep Of
the 3ar with their feet in " he strLu&amp;; Lhir-a d~ oin-. tnd there
was arnother one a rather ill-condit-ioned of fellow%,, he
didn't look entirely sober and the-firs. t thrac fellerfs waved.
thleir beer mugs at me ( Ano. said. " Goec' on yor, 13ob" ( Laughter).
fell I thought that was:. thaer nicc. And tlno next feloiw,
sitting all hunched up by hm-e. f, 9 he Just locked at rio and
said: " 1Huh, yei-big mug", ( Laugh.)-Or) Ncw r1-ir, 14A~ e thLat;
I approve of that ve--y wairrmly., see llrl voary Prou: d to be
the Prime Minister of a free countryIibl. toc be dismissed by
the froe citizens one3 of the-(-se days, ' proud to be se-oving them 
3.
and with no complaints of what their decision might be because
we are free people. ( Applause)
Everyone of you who was born in Australia -' nows that;
you don't need to be told by me. And those who have come into
Australia, parti cularly since the aar, out of the horrors of
Europe, in particuar, I know that you've breathed more freely
since you came here and that you feel that you're in a free
land where you have your own opportunity and where, by your
great talents and irammense industry, you can make great places
for yourself. And that being so, while I would wrillingly stamp
my foot on one of the deplorable creatures who do these deplorable
things, don't get that out of proportion. That doesn't
represent anybody of intelligent, decent Australian opinion and
it never will.( Applause)
And so, Sir, I come back to There I bean. Im very
proud to have been invited to come here. I think this is a
marvellous development. Only people with vision and courage
could have imagined this centre, with all its costliness, with
all the hard work thathad to go into it. Only people with
* vision and faith and imagination could have done it. And I
want to say to you; " God speed". I think this is a great
occasion, a great occasion in the history of your own religious
community, a great occasion in the history of Sydney. I can
well understand the M.' yor's pride of this in Javerley and I,
speaking on behalf of Australia, if I might, am proud to think
that such a work could have come jbout through faith, a feeling
for the family and a friendliness which is, I assure you,
reciprocated all round this country.
And so, Sir, I say " Thankyou" for having invited me.
I offer to the rhole of this immense audience or congregation,
my warmest good wishes. I think it's a marvellous occasion.
I'm proud to have been associated with it. ( Applause) 



P. M. No. 8/ 1960
NEW MINISTER
Statement by the Prime Ministe: Mr. Menzies
Senator Paltridge has resigned from the post of
Minister for Shipping and Transport and Mr. Opperman has
been appointed in his place.
I have for some time been conscious of the fact
that Senator Paltridge has been grossly overburdened by
having to attend to both Civil Aviation and Shipping and
Transport. His successful work in relation to shipping has
been quite outstanding and we are all indebted to him for
it. But the problems of civil aviation are becoming more
and more complex, involving as they do most difficult
questions in relation to internal air services and facilities,
and constant negotiations in relation to international airlines.
The change now announced will enable Senator
Paltridge to concentrate his notable abilities upon these
matters. Mr. H. G. Pearce, will become Government vlhip,
in succession to Ar. Opperman.
CANBEiiRA, February, 1960. 



P. M. No. 9/ 1960
CELEBR.. TION OF ROYAL B3IRTH
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister asked today that Churches and
other authorities ring their bells when the Royal birth is
announced. He asked them to make this a most memorable
occasion. The Prime Minister said that the Commonwealth would
fly flags from Commonwealth buildings immediately the news
was received and that flags would continue to fly on the two
days following the announcement.
Gun salutes of 21 g uns will be fired from all
Saluting Stations throughout Australia and the Royal
Australian Air Force will fly in formation over the capital
cities to coincide with the twenty-one gun salutes. The
Royal Australian Navy will dress ships.
The Prime Minister said he understood that the
State Governments would similarly be flying flags from State
buildings and he asked every private citizen and organisation
with a flag to fly it on this great occasion.
CANBERRA, 9th February, 1960. 



FOR PPRSS St.' tement by the Prime -Minister
RGIiI\ T rNiNCL: i;. SS
The recent decisions of the Conciliation Commission
regarding margins and the application in a number of cases of the
marginal percentage increase even to high salaries made it
necessary for the Public Service Board to make increases right
along the line in the Second, Third and Fourth Divisions of the
Commonwealth Civil Service, the top adjustment being P775 a year.
These increases are being in effect challeneged by the Public
Service Associations on the ground that they do not represent a
285) adjustment. These changes have, however, made it necessary
to review the salaries of Permanent Heads and certain Statutory
Officers since, without substantial adjustment, many of them would be
receiving less than ' Second Division officers employed under them.
The salaries of these officers are ithin the authority
of the Cabinet which ha. s now decided to approve an increase of
œ 900 a year in the salaries of Permanent Heads. The salaries of
the principal officers of Statutory Corporations and those others
which are determined by the Government will now, be reviewed in the
light of this decision. The date of adjustment will be the 3rd
December, 1959, which is the gener.. l date applying to other sections
of the Commonwealth Public Service.
Cabinet also decided that the Secretary of the Department
of External Affairs should be placed in the higher of the two
categories which ap-ly to Heads of Depr. tnments.
I think I should emphasise the fact that these changes
in salary, together with those previously announced, have been
made unavoidable because of the new doctrine which appears to have
been adopted that the salary even of a highly paid executive should
be divided into the basic wage plus a margin and that that margin
should v. ry just as does the margin of a skilled tradesman, such
as a fitter and turner. e know. of no other country in the
world in which such a strange and indeed dangerous conception applies.
Should it become accepted as a settled doctrine there may well be
damaging consequences in Australia.
CANB EPRRA.
llth February, 1960. 1 



7
NOT FOR PUBLICATION until 6 p. m. Sunday, l4th February, 1960.
P. M. No. lo/ 1960.
CORAL SEA CELEBRATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, C. Ho
announced today that Admiral H. G. Hopwood,
Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Fleet, had accepted an invitation
to visit Australia to take part in the Coral Sea Celebrations
early in May this year. Admiral Hopwood will be accompanied
by his wife. During their stay they will be the joint guests of
the Commonwealth Government and the Australian American
Association. The proposed itinerary will be as follows:-
Monday, 2nd May
Thursday, 5th May
Friday, 6th May
Monday 9th May ( about 3 p. m.)
Tuesday, 10th May ( 3 p. m.)
Saturday 14th May
Monday 16th May
' Jednesday 18th May
Thursday, 19th May Arrive Sydney
Sydney to Newcastle
Newcastle to Brisbane
Brisbane to Canberra
Canberra to Melbourne.
Melbourne to Adelaide
Adelaide to Perth
Perth to Sydney
Depart Australia.
CANBERRA, 12th February, 1960. 



LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Chairman of the Australian Loan Council
The Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P. Federal Treasurer
The Loan Council adjourned its meeting this afternoon
for the purpose of a discussion between the Prime
Minister and the Premiers. n/ hen the Loan Council resumed,
I informed it that the Prime Minister had agreed to place the
views of the Premiers before his Cabinet at its meeting next
week. I told the Council I would then advise members of
the outcome of this further Cabinet consideration.
CAN BEi RA,
12th February, 1960. 



ECONOMIC SURVEY
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
Strict Embargo; not for broadcasting, Cabling or publication
before midnight on Sunday, 21st February, 1960.
Last week Cabinet made a general survey of the Australian economy.
This is something we do at fairly frequent intervals. The previous occasion
was just before Christmas. We always have before us a great deal of
information on employment, production, consumption and investment expenditure,
costs and prices, external trade and payments, monetary conditions
and so on. After studying all these factors, we consider what, if anything,
the Government should do to influence the situation in one way or another.
We find a good deal in our current position that is favourable
and encouraging. The employment situation is particularly strong.
Industrial production continues to rise. Although there has been drought
in South Australia and some other areas, rural output will, as a whole, be
quite high. We are having a good export year. It looks as though the
total value of exports will be well above œ E900 million. More imports are
coming in and helping to increase the supply of goods and materials.
But there are other tendencies which are perturbing. The most
serious of these is the rise in costs and prices. In some degree this has
been going on for a considerable time, but in recent months it has become
faster and it is now decidedly too fast. Our aim we believe the aim of
everyone and not only of the Government must be to slow it down and
bring it to a halt. We say that unequivocally, because we reject the
view that a rise in prices and costs is harmless so long as it keeps within
" treasonable" limits. We believe that, on all counts, we are better off
with a stable level of prices and costs.
The rise in prices which has occurred has been due principally to
causes within our own economy. For a long time past, import prices have
been virtually stable. Export prices, it is true, have risen during recent
months and this has probably helped to raise the local price of some
articles. But in the main it has been a process of adding, one on top of
the other, a great many particular increases in wages, profit margins,
charges and the like, some large, some small, but all contributing to a
general upward movement that has grown faster as it has gone on.
Some people describe recent developments as costs inflation in
contrast to so-called demand inflation.
But demand has had its influence as well as costs. Up till a
few months ago it was possible to say that overall supply and demand were
more or less balanced. Both were increasing but apparently at about the
same pace. More rece ntly, however, it has become evident that, although
supplies pre still increasing, demand has started to race ahead.
Various factors have contributed to this the rise in export income,
public authority spending, private capital expenditures, capital inflow
and so on. The combined effect of all these is now capped by the wages
and margins decisions. The Basic Wage increase is estimated to add
million to total wages and salaries; the margins decision a further
amount not far short of œ 2100 million. These increases both add to wage
costs in practically all industries and trades. They also add to
demand for goods and services of most kinds.
Along with this rising trend in costs and prices and in demand,
there has also been a growth in the liquidity of banking and monetary
conditions. It is of course a product of some of the factors which have
caused incomes and expenditure to rise, and its effect is to assist and 
2.
encourage those tendencies.
Therefore, it has become quite evident to us that some counteracting
measures should be set in train.
FIRST: As I have said, it is vital to build up resistance to
the rise of costs and prices. This cannot be brought suddenly to a
stop; but there must be increasing pressure against it. Especially must
we avoid further large additions to the elements which enter into costs,
and it is with that idea in view that the Commonwealth has decided to
intervene in the current Basic Wage Case before the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. As we have often made clear, it
is not our policy to oppose wage increases as such; but our strong present
belief is that, having had two major wage increases within a period of a
few months, the economy needs time to absorb them and to restore the equilibrium
between supply and demand which has been disturbed. That is
essentially the point of view we will be putting to the Arbitration
Commission. We are doing this not in any spirit of opposition to the
claims of wage earners, but because we believe it to be in the best interests
of the economy as a whole and of all people in the community, including
wage-earners. SECOND: We had before us up-to-date figures on the budgetary
position, and we went very thoroughly into them. We also gave some thought
to prospects for next financial year and discussed broadly what should be
the aim of policy in the light of conditions we see developing. The next
I eBxuadcgte t piicst uofr e coofu rwshea ts omree vemnounetsh s oro ffe xpanedn diittu riess dimfayf icbue lto r too f hatvhee alniyk elvye rycontext
of economic conditions. Just the same, it is very important to
think of these matters well in advance because they are necessarily affected
to a considerable extent by what happens during the intervening months.
In the current year we have budgeted for a deficit. But in the circumstances
I have described, we propose, for the new financial year, to do all
in our power to avoid any deficit finance.
THIRD: Monetary conditions, as I have said, have been
exceptionally liquid and have tended to become more so as the year has gone
on. The Reserve Bank of Australia, which has a special responsibility in
these matters, has been taking action by way of calls to Special Account,
and, since the change-over in arrangements, by increasing the reserve
deposit ratio to ensure at least that the liquidity of the banking system
will not be increased during the year. The Government is very much in
accord with and will support the policy of restraining the growth of
excessive liquidity.
FOURTH: Along with our review of the internal econoliy we have
this week examined our external trade and payments position. It is one
of considerable strength. Whilst imports have risen, exports have risen
still further. We have had some success in borrowing abroad, and there
has evidently been a quite large inflow of private capital. As a result
we now hold considerable reserves of gold and foreign exchange and we
have, in addition, our quota in the International Monetary Fund which was
increased last year to 300 million dollars. This may be regarded as in.
the nature of a second line reserve.
Over the past couple of years we have relaxed import restrictions
by successive steps and this, I am certain, has been all for the
good of the economy. We have now decided to move to a position in
which, as nearly as possible, imports will be unrestricted except by the
Customs Tariff. It will be necessary for a time to retain some licensing
arrangements on certain commodities to meet the special problems arising
out of existing commitments, but that will be all the restriction that
remains. 
73. My colleague, the Minister for Trade, Mr. McEwen, will shortly
announce details of what is to be done. May I recall that when, in 1952,
the Government first imposed restrictions on imports, it gave an undertaking
to remove them whenever our external position should permit. We
have been through some fairly difficult times since then but we have
always kept that undertaking steadily in view and we find it very
gratifying now to have been ableto come so close to fulfilling it
completely. We see these several policy decisions as a broad programme
intended to provide strong and increasing resistance to those forces now
operating in our economy which are tending to throw it out of balance.
We feel the situation requires firm and steady pressure of this kind rather
than abrupt action. Much that is going on in industry and trade and
construction is undoubtedly sound and beneficial. We do not want to check
or impede this. What we do want, however, is a restraint on certain
developments, such as the price and cost movement, which have been tending
to get out of hand and which could, unless counteracted, undermine our
stability.
CANBERRA, 21st February, 1960. 



ST&amp; Lñ. i ' iJEiGO Norito to be published or broadcast before 9 pm.
Monday, 29th February, 1960.
MANAGEMENT IN A DEVELOPING COUNTRY
Prime Minister's Address to Melbourne, 29th
Fe bruary_, I960_
One whose management of certain national affairs is
under daily criticism and is found most inadequate by 49% of the
electors may well claim some boldness in addressing you. But I
have several good excuses, One is that you invited me, at your
own risk. Another is that the business of politics is management
You may perhaps believe that we in politics interfere in your
management too much; but if we had no sense of management you
would properly condemn us. But my third excuse, the best of the
lot, is that we are living in an era in which management has
major responsibilities, and in which national success or failure
may well depend upon it, Any contribution which any of us can
make is therefore desirable.
I am encouraged by remembering that when I was a law
student at Melbourne, under that great and good man Professor
Harrison Moore, one of my friends in the back row ( a place
eminently designed for meditation) held his hand up and offered
an opinion disguised as a question, Harrison Mocre replied
blandly, " Your suggestion is wrong, Mr. X, but I beg of you not
to be disheartened, All suggestions, from however humble a
source, are to be encouraged!"
This is the 12th International Congress of Scientific
Management. It is organised by the Australian Institute. It
has attracted the attention of eminent men from many countries,
It has already focussed, and will continue to focus, the attention
of thoughtful people upon what is a vital problem,
The very phrase " scientific management" deserves
analysis. For we are all too much disposed to divide up the
activities of life into separate compartments, WJe sometimes think
of philosophers as those who engage in thought without experience;
of politicians as those who have words without substance; of
scientists as those who live strange lives among test tubes and
the piercing of the mysteries of natural elements and forces; of
business men as practical people who have experience w. thout
thought. All of this is, of course, nonsense. We cannot sensibly
subdivide the wcrld in this cynical way. For a. man without
a philosophy of his own is only part of. a man; a politidan
without substance in his mind is no more than a demagogue; a
scientist who fails to see the impact of his work upon humanity
is, quite possibly a menace; and a business man who has no
comprehensive and orderly, and therefore scientific, thoughts in
his mind will contribute little to the development of production
and commerce. My assignment is to speak to you of " Management in a
developing country". The very title is a recognition of the
basic fact that, like every other element in life, the problems
of management change with the years and with the circumstances,
Jhen I was first Prime Minister, over 20 years ago, the business
of government had only a fraction of the complexity which ipossesses
tody Wars, depjressions, booms, the increasing demands
made upon governments, a social revolution, have made their mark.
In the course of one normal working week quite recently, to quote
an actual example, I found myself trying to understand and do
something about Budgetary policy, central banking action and
monetary control., the protection and encouragement of industry.
social services, the wage structure and its machinery, mineral 
development, foreign policy and relations with neighbouring
countries, the financial relations between Commonwealth and
States, the problems of inflation, and policies relating to
civil airlines. A developing country is a complex country. To
understand what is going on requires that we should have learned
to manage our own minds. This indeed, is the basic truth in all
management. When I undertook this task, it occurred to me that to
understand something about current and future develope nt it
would be useful to look back 50 years, to see something of the
changes that have occurred in Australia in that time. A study
of those fascinating volumes, the Year Books, has enabled me to
take a few key examples.
I find that 1910 was a year of economic simplicity for
governments, though not, of course, for many thousands of private
people. Taxes were low. There was no Commonwealth Income Tax:
the first world war produced that. The total Commonwealth
Revenues were about œ 20m. Today they are œ 1400m. Our population
was much less than half of what it is now. ife had 300,000 employed
in factaies; today we have well over a million. Our
overseas trade was made up of œ 60m. of imports and œ 74m. of exports.
The exchanges were normal. Nobody had heard of exchange
control or dollar shortages, or a two-currency world. The great
problem of overseas funds had not arisen. Today our overseas
trade has grown to œ 900m. of imports and over œ 900m. of exports.
Exchanges are controlled, we have been passing through a period
of the licensing of imports to protect our balances. ', ie are
living in an era of Trade Treaties, the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, the European Common Market, and a score of
other arrangements of an international kind which have studded
what used to be the fairly plain road of trade with a myriad of
signposts and prohibitions.
There has been a social revolution. In 1910 there were
65,000 old age pensioners; today there are ovei 500,000. There
was no Invalid Pension; no Child Endowment; no Hosc" ' al Benefits;
no Repatriation Benefits; no Medical Health tcneme; no
Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme; no Unemployment Insurance, We
paid œ 1,500,000 for Old Age Pensions. Today our Social Services
Bill alone is over œ 300m. Our Defence Bill in. 1910 was œ 3m.
Today, with no actual war on, it is œ 190m.
I have selected these few examples because the Social
Revolution has involved enormous increases in company and individual
Taxation, new indirect taxes, and a host of governmental
rules and reulations, all of which directly affect business and
therefore management. For in a complex world, with growing burdens,
the pressure on management is greater, and the need for
managerial skill more imperative.
Side by side with these things, there has been a vast
development in the power and significance of the Trades Unions.
In 1910 there were rather less than 360 000 morn' -s of Unions.
Today there must be very nearly 2,000,000. But the matter does
not end there. To meet the particular nature of the Commonwealth's
industrial powers, there has been a great development
of inter-state, i. e. nationally organised unions. Their weight,
both politically and industrially, is susbstantial. The percentage
of unionists to the total of wage and salary earners has
risen to a preponderating degree.
It follows from all this that business managerent has
been learning to accommodate itself to the pressure of organisations;
to recognise their value; to study their relationship
to problems of management; to secure better human relations and
man-management. But such problems cannot be solved by governments 
alone. They call for good management and good work all round.
We in Australia pride ourselves on our independence and a degree
of irreverence about established persons or institutions. This
is very good, for other ise pomposity could well become the endemic
disease of politics, But this spirited attitude does
not prevent us from taking most of our problems to " the government",
as if that magnificent abstraction was all-powerful
( which, fortunately, it is not) and all-wise, which will be admitted
by nobody here tonight except myself. The sobe, truth is
that community problems cannot be solved except by community
effort. At a time like this, when we are not dealing with a
crisis, but are called upon to take sensible steps to prevent
one from arising, no good. citizen can hope to escape from his
own responsibilities. Employees have well-understood ambitions
for better pay and conditions, and security of employment, and a
full opportunity for their children. But they must, and I am
sure many thousands of them do, ealise that if wage increases
outstrip increased productivity the effect will be that demand
will exceed supply, prices will iise, and the value of rmoney will
fall. e-nployees, therefore, have a vested interest in increased
efficiency . nd production. It is by these means that real and
effective wages will rise and family interests be served.
On his side, the employer who simply passes on wage
increases into higheo prices is contribting to the in-flationary
spiral; rendering inevitable the next wage increas and cost
increase, and price increase. Vast numbers of orc_.: a.. y citizens
will suffer in the process, the export industries : i. ll be
penalised, and the national finances will be discrganised, The
task of the employer, who is for this prpose the manager, is
therefore to meet each upward movement of labour cost first, by
absorbing it as far as porsible, not regarding the currenit rate
of profit as sacrosanct, , nd second ( or should it be first) so
improving the efficiency of his operations as to reduce. or at
least stabilise, his unit costs of production. The crowing
availability of power, the rapid de'v . lopiuent of *. rliat we now call
automation, the rising levels of education and skiill? , hould pay
their o: ih dividends to ordinary mz; n nd women. If, chirefore,
there is on the face of it a conflict between th2 iprf-its of investment
and the upward pressure on wages, that conflicc be
seen as a challenge to increased efficiency on both: sides, I
short, the present period of our national cde'.. o. leent c ; n rroduce
a damaging inflation if we are to pass the labours of contributing
ingenuity to others and adopt as our mottc " E'ach for
himself, and the devil take -he hindmost". But if ore se the
problem and are prepared to understand nd deal with it, we ccan
make the decade of the 60' s in Austr:. lia even more dynamic and
productive than the last 10 years,
Because I believe that, I assert that the most important
Australians today are the mana; j ars. It is upon Their s" il I
imagination, and enterprise that the national futur' wil den
Against this background, political managers and business managers
confront what is, properly speaking, a common task.
It nmay perhaps induce a proper feeling of biothx ho. d
if I say to you that we both suffer from common . orms of teml tation.
You are tempted, and I hope you will net deny it, to regard
politicians as verbose ' fllows who don't i. nderstand business
and ought to keep their meddling fingers out of it. That sturdy
attitude of mind persists until it becomes necessary to ask a
government for a tariff, or bounty, or a trade promotion
organisation, or an immigration programmo,
Joe in politics are tempted to regard buriness men as
politically ill-informed, and as failing to see th fo. rst of
national economic policy for the trues of individual profit or 
loss. But there is another form of temptation which is more
important. You are tempted to take short views; so are we. The
raising of prices, in a non-exporting and protected industry
seems in the short run to be calculated to protect this year s
trading account. In the long run, such a policy may involve the
busin ss in decline and loss.
Similarly, in politics, we are tempted to take the
popular measure of the moment " the electors will be pleased!"
forgetting that great economic policies seldom bear fruit in a
month or two, and may be bitterly unpopular before they achieve
a recognised success. In the long run, the short view may involve
the nation in decline and loss.
In both fields, therofore, clear intelligent imaginative,
and brave management is of the essence. Above . ll, if
people like you and me are to work together intelligently and
successfully for the nation, we must get, not only wisdom but
understanding. I will take one contentious mattor the licensing
of imports. A restriction of imports by means other than
customs tariffs is, under modern treaty and practice, permissible
only to protect our overseas balances. We could find ourselves
greatly embarrassed under GATT, and other international monetary
arrangements, if we failed to realiso this.
Time after time, my colleagues and I have wa: ned industry
that import licensing is not a measure designed to protect
Australian industry, but one designed to protect our overseas
funds. Yet in a real sense, this has boon a counsel of
perfection. If certain imports are, over a period of years,
excluded or limited in quantity, not by tariff but by licensing,
many people will begin or extend import-rcp. acing industries in
those fields, hoping that what is, by declaration, temporary will
turn out to be in practice, permanent. Yet, when the economic
foundation of import licensing begins to disappear, and licensing
with it, it will be hard for many to understand that the days of
competition have returned; that tariffs, though important, are
not the whole answer, and that management will have to carry the
main burden. In my philosophy, that is no bad thing. I believe in
free enterprise. That does not mean protected and monopoly enterprise,
sheltered from competitbn; but competitive free enterprise,
adequately protected by tariff against a cheap labour or
unfair competition, but not given an exclusive access to the
local market, irrespective of structure or efficiency.
Let n. e turn t: o another , eneral observation. The
current cant of C A P I T A L and L A B 0 U R is a great and
misleading oversimplification. It conjures up a picture of fat
capitalists and hungry workers, ungaged in a war to the knife.
This picture is out of dato. Like so many conceptions which are
thought to be radical and progressive, it is unreal and reactionary.
The jrowing task is that of M A N A GE M E N T, which
has to see that capital is put to the best use, and that labour
is most productively applied. 2o do the latte:, management must
regard the welfare of the employee and his human problems as of
growing importance. Human leadership is the greatest element in
productive management. There was a time wThen the capitalist was
the employoe: direct. Psychologies arose which, as I have indicated,
have persisted and are r', yed up. But in great modern
enterprises, the " capitalists" are many and unseen. A little of
their money m_-y form part of the great pool which supplies the
enterprise. But the employers in substance are the managers
employees themselves, who marry the money to the machine to the
man. 
So true is this that I have no '. seitation in saying
that the development of Australia in the future will depend
more upon compotent management, ' ohether of farms or factories
or mines or . overnments or Trade Unions, than upon any other
factor. Pressure groups will not ensure or even aid progress,
for they seek power without responsibility. People rith money
and nothing more will not unsure it, for they are passive. A
badly managed factory worker will not ensure it, for he will fail
to identify himself and his work with the end in view. The vital
people are the managers, the loaders who plan for that end and
see how to attain it.
I now turn to some of the problems of true national
development. What are the principal characteristics of rapid development
in Australia? If we answer that question we will have a
better idea of the nature of the tasks of management and of the
difficulties which it will confront.
The greatest characteristics, as I see them, are these,
Wl ' i have a quickly increasing population, nearly half
of the increase being the direct result of governmental immigration
policies. This increase, while it stimulates optimism in
business circles, provides additional stores of productive manpower,
and adds to our national security, also creates its problems.
There is a greater capital demand for factories and
schools nd houses and servies, which in the short run is inflationary.
In many large factories which I have visited, the copresence
of hundreds of workers of different nationalities and
languages has presented problems of organization and management,
the handling of which excites my admiration.
But, taking all these things into accou-t, I think that
the outstanding effect of a fast growing populat-. jn is its psycho
-logical ofect upon enterprise. The retailer plans and buys for
an increasing number of customers. He is perhaps, less willing
to be " taken over", or more willing to " take over". Retail trade
is optimistic and increasing. Man-aacturing expands. The building
industry is active. The great basic industries are hard
pressed to cope with demand.
This atmosphere of optimism is admirable, and indeed
essential to growth. It is, indeed one of the act problems of
political judgment to preserve and encourage optimism while doing
what can be done to avoid excesses which may lead some day
to pessimism and unhappy results. For inflation is a common
dange: r; a flat rate tax upon the money of the poor as well as
of the rich; the enemy of thrift; the basic injustice , ainst
which we must all fight.
A severe and unchecked inflation would be. nationally
disastrous. I think it necessary to say something plain, but
not extravagant, on this point.
If costs rise ( as they are now rising) and prices rise
in consequence we have what we call a " cost-inflation". But if
the cost rises are primarily related to wage increases, the increase
in purchasing power soon produces a " domand-inflation".
-Jo need not, therfore, distinguish unduly betwe. en the two aspects
of what is one common problem.
Can costs go on rising, without national injury? Already,
one or two of the smallr, but not insignificantexport
industries are in trouble. Even the jreatest, like . iool and
wheat, must h.: ve occasional . pprehensions. 
But there is another aspect of inflation which cannot
be ignored. As our population grows, so will our demand for
goods and services. That, as our economic history proves, will
be not m.-ely a demand capable of being satisfied by local production.
It will include a large demand for imports. In other
words, as Australia develops she -will become increasingly a
great international trade drawing upon the skills . nd products
of other lands. To pay for such things she will need increasing
exports. If she is to achieve the necessary volume and, in terms
of price, not be unduly vulnerable to changes in the price of
wool, she must add to the diversity of her exports. She must be
able to manufacture for export, and compete in the markets, particularly
of the politically " new wrorld".
There may be some who despair of such a result, though
I think that they will concede that without such a result there
will be a sharp limit to true Australian development.
So there is our problem. In a rapidly developing
country there will inevitably be inflationary pressures, Population
will be increasing; capital demands will be not only
largo but urgent; there will be an atmosphere of gr'owth and
prosperity; standards of living will rise; luxuries will become
necessaries; wages will rise; greater profits w ill be
sought and frequently achieved; there will be international investment;
public works programmes will grow.
Yet, if we yield to the inflationary pressures, and
say that their results do no great harm, we will check fixedinterest
investment; we will be forced to carry more : nd more
capital works on revenue; we will do grave injustice to those
who live on fixed incomes; we will upset Gove-nment Budgets and
move towards chronic deficit finance, thus dding inflation to
inflation; and, except to the extent that c. eavily protected industries
can live on the local market, price o-j: rselves out of the
world. Und.. such circumstances, what action can I; take, not
only as government but as people, to secure and confirm the enormous
advantages of expansion . nd growth while at the same time
maintaining that stability and security which always seems to
to be the pro-condition of the attraction of men, money, and
skill? The appropriate policies need not be sensational;
there is no occasion for extravagance in our thinking, ' Ie can
learn a great deal from our own experience and that of much
greater countries, most or all of which have encountered the
problems. Indeed, I should, to avoid sensational sm, make it
clear that our current problem in Australia is nuch loss acute
than that which follwed the Korean Jar,
I would now like to state quite briefly the nature of
some appropriate policies as we see them,
Our objective must be to check rises in costs, by all
means in our power, and to counteract :. owing monetary demand,
negatively by banking and monetary controls, positively by increasing
the supply of goods and services. The supply will be
increased by active and growing manufucturing industries, and by
imports on a scale that our exports will permit us to pay for.
We must preserve stability of mp uunnpemlopylomynmt ent is
nationally wasteful; so is over-. full employment, which inflation
is apt to create in the first instance. So far as possible we
should encourage savings so that there is adequate investment
out of true savings, in loans for developmental publi works and
in capital for private enterprise. . Je must attract investment,
not speculation, from overseas, But above all, anc this is where
John Citizen comes in, whether employer or employee or self-employed,
we must increase our productivity pe.. head. And, if we 
desire the stimulus which would follow a reduction of, or a less
steep increase in, government expenditur, we can moderate our
demands upon GoveL. nments. Don't overlook that last observation.
In Australia we are apt to want the -bst of everything " at once,
if not sooner". Getting our costs down does not mean cutting wages.
It means getting better value for waes by increasing production,
improving processes . nd skills, and attaining a realisation all
round that wages and salaries are worth only what they will buy.
We estimate that the two decisions made last year, in the Basic
Jageo nd Margins cases, iill add something of the order of œ 165m.
to the annual wages bill. Does anybody suppose that employees
in Australia will be œ 165m. better off? If rises in costs and
pricus continue at their recent rate, and tend to grow, employees
may in the long run be no better off at all. : hat we need, for
everybody's sake, is a period of quiet on the wages front, so
that these increases may be digested, and so that industry generally
can, by improved efficiency, ave:.. t their impact upon
prices. It would be fatal to accept the folio circulairo of the
wage-prices spiral as inevitable.
On the side of _ ove: Lnment, the-e are two tasks to perform,
each of which has a bearing upon the other.
The first is to slow down the massive upward movement
of , overnment expenditure, which in the case of the Commonwualth,
has been rising of late at the rate of something like œ 100m. a
year. The second is to do all in our power to avoid further
deficit finance. How to do these things will be our greatest Budget
task later this year. And let nobody think that it will be easy.
It is difficult because management is the most important and the
most difficult element of all.
Thus it is that the problem of inflation presents perhaps
the greatest challenge to management. Take national management
first. The Industrial Tribunals, which exercise a great,
and in its nature uncontrolled and uncontrollable power over the
national economy, have been known to express a view that if
the-o is any inflationary consequence of any decision, " the govoznment"
has power to deal with them. This is, I fear, not
correct. Indeed, it is one of the facts of life that the two
most significant economic instruments, the Arbitration Commission
and the Tariff Board, are, in the first case absolutely and in
the second case for all practical prposes, independent bodies.
I think it a very sood thing that this should be the case. The
nation has good reason to appreciate the work that they have
done. But clearly the Commonwealth's anti-inflationary powers
are severely restricted in consequence. True, if we think that
there is a demand inflation, we can increase taxes, which I know
would give all of you great satisfaction! Interest rates, so
far as they fall within the Banking power or the authority of
the Loan Council, can be vuried. The Reserve Bank may call
Trading Bank funds to Roeserve Deposits. Subject to the state of
the overseas funds more imports may be admitted. Educational
campaigns can be carried on. The costs of government may be
reduced; this is quite a fashionable remedy, though, in the
case of the Commonwealth, the costs of administration amnount to
no mo.. e than of the total Budget.
Hire-purchase seems to be substantially beyond our
control. But the fact is that one of the great obstacles to
counter-inflationary action is that there are many people who 
think a bit of inflction is a very good thing; that a cost and
prices rise of 3 or 5 per cent per annum makes for greator purchasing
power buoyancy of business, and of course, if I may so
so impertinently, a decline in the burden of overdrafts and of
fixed indebtedness. Such a view pays little heed to the position
of those on fixed incomes; and no heed whatover to the continuing
and growing need to finance, by public borrowings at fixed
rates of interest, great programme of public works, the completion
of which is absolutely vital, through transport and water
and power and housing and schools and universities, to the expansion
of industry , nd commerce and the maintenance of employmont.
Before I conclude, I would like to say a little more
about import licensing, the impending winding-up of which has
recently been announced, with, naturally, a mixed reception.
A restriction of imports by licensing, if it reduces
the actual quantity of goods available for local purchase, is inflationary
up to the time at which local production roplaces the
deficiency, if it ever does. But in an inflationary period, as
we have seen in the past, boom conditions tend to develop, and
with them over-full employment, bidding up for labour a rapid
turnover of labour, and a loss of efficiency which still further
adds to rising costs. One way of counteracting this is not to
restrict imports, but to purmit them, so that demand does not
overwhelm supply.
But no remedy is simple, particularly in Australia,
where the balance of our international trde can change quite
quickly and drastically. Thus, the year 1953/ 54 was a thriving
year, with employment and production rising and a tolerably good
export income œ 812m. Early in the following year, 1954/ 55,
however, the familiar signs of inflation (-ppoared. Labour shortages
became rath_ r acute, prices began to rise fairly rapidly and,
with local productive capacity fully taxed, the rising demand for
goods spilt over into demand for imports.
Unfortunately, it happened that our exports fell alay
in that ye. r, and our overseas reserves began to decline rapidly.
They had boon œ 571m. at the beginning of the year. By the end of
the year they had fallen to œ 428m. and wore obviously destined to
go a good deal lower. Therefore, instead of being able to meet
the additional demand for imports we actually had to restrict imports
as in fact re did in April 1955 and again in October195.
I mention this piece of history because it illustrates
how constant and complicated the problems of management can be.
Our recent decision in respect of import licensing, made against
the background of buyant overseas reserves, will impose fresh
tasks of management and increased tariff-making activity. This is
not because lice. nsing was a protective measure; we always made it
clear that it was not; but because in the nature of things the
exclusion of imports by non-tariff means tended to give a feeling
of security to a variety of import-replacing industries in Australia.
Some of these industries will now set about justifying a
tariff protection. All of them will meet the challenge of competition,
which is the great challenge to managoonent.
I wish your conference well. Mine has been a small and
inadequate contribution. But the subject is so vast and significant
that all thought about it is to the good.
29th February, 1960. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. R. G. MENZIES
AT ME TING OF ST; TE EXECUTIVE OF LIBEAL PARTY
OF VICTORIA ON JEDNESDAY 2ND MARCH 1960.
Fellow Members of Parliament and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I want to make a small correction before I say anything
else. The President referred to me as being " sun-tanned"; I'm
not: I'm hard-boiled. I thought when I was in Indonesia recently
and Malaya that it was impossible for anybody to be hotter
than I was but I've felt hotter still in the last couple of
days in Melbourne. ( Laughter)
Now I'm not going to be here very long because I'm in the
middle of a lot of work in my Office and we have a Cabinet this
afte-noon, but I do want to say one or two things to you.
First of all, of course, I reply to your welcome with the
very greatest of pleasure. It's one of the sorrows of my life
that being in Canberra, necessarily, for the great bulk of the
time, and going to other States from time to time, I find myself
very seldom in my o. wn town and among my onm people, and you've
no idea what a pleasure I get out of coming here and seeing old
friends and feeling that I'm in my own place. If that could
happen more frequently, perhaps, Mr. President even the low
Sgrowls might disappear. ( Laughter)
I think, perhaps, I ought to say a word or two to you first
of 1ll about matters outside Australia. I was very struck on
this recent journey to Malaya and to Indonesia, by one very
significant fact. In Indonesia, Independence was secured as a
result of armed conflict and there were, and are, great racial
hatreds. It's a ve,' y astonishing thing to be in Indonesia and
to realise how almost completely the Dutch influence has been
expelled, not always to the advantage of Indonesia; though
it's their own country and they'll govern it in their own way.
But one sees there all the survivls of acute racial cleavage and,
as I say, to a degree, hatred, -hereas up in Malaya Independenr
was achieved as a result of peaceful arrangement between the
British and the Malayans. The whole atmosphere is different:
Europeans are going around about their affairs; large and
famous business houses in Kuala Lumpur and Penang are conducting
their operations. You go up through the country and if you see
some big engineering piece of work it's ' a guinea to a gooseberry'
that the Chief Engineer is called " Cmpbell" ( Laughter).
I didn't find any of this atmosphere of fear of the outside
influence or detestation of the Europeans. And the result is
that in Malaya the Government, under a most enlightening and
sensible man in their Prime Minister, the Tunku Abdul Rahman,
is going forward; they know that it's their responsibility to
conduct their country and, if I may say so, they seem to be
doing it with great efficiency and with high civilization.
Now I think there is something to be learned from all this.
The British history and tradition of converting Colonies into
independent States is, of course, well known and it deserves to
be better recognised all round the world. It's a most honourable
history. It is, in effect, a unique history. But there
are still some people who prefer to be late rather than early
with the creation of self-government. I think I used to belong
to the school of thought myself which felt that you must be
very, very, very cautious about reaching the right time. Today,
I'm not so sure. Today I'm more and more satisfied that the
important thing is that people should be able to rule themselves
and that if you help them to reach that stage, if you don't hold
them back, if you give them every conceivable kind of help and
training and encouragement, then when they do achieve their
independence, they will do it on the basis of friendship. And
we need that because we're not a very big country. le need it.
That, to my mind was the 5reat genius of Harold Macmillan's 
visit to Africa a magnificent journey. It ali: ays sounds quite
simple these journeys always do, until you take them yourself
but they're not as easy as all that. And his, of course, was far
more difficult than mine because he is the Prime Minister of one
of the great powers of the world and, indeed, and I think in the
long run, the most influential country in the world. ( Applause)
And he goes down on a journey, starting with Ghana and
ending with South Africa, going through half a dozen different
countries each of them with utterly different problems from its
neighbour, each of them in a different stage of development;
some of them with forceful and even hostile leaders and some of
them with friendly leaders and, of course, ultimately, in South
Africa, the classic example of a country in which the racial
problem has attracted the interest of the whole world, though
not necessarily the intelligent interest of the whole world, because
it is a tremendously complex matter. And he's gone down
there; he's made speeches; he's met people; he's discussed
their problems with them and I will undertake to say he has, in
this one journey, profoundly influenced the future history of the
whole of the African Continent.
Cynical onlookers who think politicians like myself are all
words, and take jaunts what does it matter what they think
about me but I say this about Mr. Macmillan: I think this
journey of his has made such a profound impact on the future
history of Africa that it will be regarded as an " epoch-making"
visit. And the outstanding thing about it is that wherever he's
gone he's made it clear when he's talked to Africans, to the
indigenous inhabitants of these countries: " vJe are not your
jailers; we are your friends; we look forward to the time when
you are going to rule yourselves and we're not going to be too
petty about how you come to rule yourself. le want you to know
and we want you to fed that you are to come to your Independence
with feelings of friendship."
It seems simple doesn't it? I bet a lot of the things he
had to say weren't very popular with some Europeans in Africa
because whether we like it or not there are always conflicts
between the young turbulent native element, getting education and
getting a feeling of freedom and a great ambition for their own
country, and the older European inhabitatns who feel that things
haven't gone too badly and they might, with advantage; be left
alone. And Macmillan's visit has gone like a breath of fresh air
on all these matters. He has spoken in South Africa with great
frankness but on my advices, without leaving one ounce of rancour
behind him. This is a marvellous combination of firmness and
tact and good sense and imagination for the future. And it's
important that he should have done it in Africa because though we
talk about one hot spot in the world after another and they
seem to change every year very few people doubt that the
developments in the African Continent in the next ten years are
going to occupy an increasingly important place in the thoughts
of all of us. And of course, will have increasing significance
for us. Don't forget that from our point of view it's a very
grave matter that hundreds of millions of people in China should
have cone under communism; it would be a double tragedy if the
Communists, who have their eyes on Africa, should succeed in
establishing themselves by capitalising the interests, the enthusiasm,
the emotions of the native inhabitants and pointing out
that their white colonial powers are being unfair to them and
failing to see their point of view. This was a mater stroke by
Harold Macmillan.
Now I might, perhaps, turn from there to our position at
home. I'm not going to make an orthodox, political speech I'll
probably have to make one or two before I'm very much older.
I'll be out on a stump in Latrobe where I've already been preceded
by my friend, Mr. Calwell, who has my warmest good wishes
for this election to Leadership. ( Laughter) 
But the thing I want to talk to you about very briefly has
nothing to do with . hat he is talng about. It has to do with
what the President said this morning in an indirect way.
Half of our problems as an organisation irise from the fact
that we live under a Federal Constitution. I'm a great believer
in a Federal Constitution nobody need suppose that I have any
ambition to see all power concentrated at Canberra. But it's
true that a lot of our problems crise from the fact that we do
have a division of power. So does the Federal Government that
has limited power over this and that, the State Government that
has limited power ovo-that and this and there will ways be,
in a sense, conflicts which don't need to be conflicts of
hostility but there will always be questions of jurisdiction;
there will always be in the feeling of a State Parliament or a
State Government a sense that it is too dependent upon the
Commonwealth in the financial field; there will always be a
feeling in Canberra that while we have the macjor responsibility
in financial matters, we don't have and you will agree the
major authority to deal with them.
All these things produce differences of opinion and arguments
and they will always go on as arguments. But the thing
that we have to remember is that we are all one people. I feel
strange in some places in Australia Melbourne's not one of them
I hasten to say to discover that I'm an outsider. I've nothing
to do with that State, I'm something to do with Canberra.
And I always have to tap them on the shoulder and say: " I'd like
to remind you that every man in this place is a constituent of
mine because I happen to be Pri-e Minister and I am elected by
exactly the same people only more". And that's to be remembered.
It's the underlying element of unity which must be preserved
and if you have that a sense of common destiny and of
common responsibility then whatever discussions we may have
about the details, one arising from some conflict of power,
another, perhaps ,. rising from a conflict of. ideas, they don't
matter. They're very healthy. I agree with the President. I
like to have this low grumble, this low mur.. er. It's a very
good thing; it shows that we're not dead. But I do beg of you
to remember that over and above all that we are one people and
just under that, but remarkably important, we are one Party. U', e
were once, inl943, fourteen parties. ' Je became one, and let's
never forget it. ' Je have presented to the people and to ourselves
a spectacle of inity which the other side of politics
envies in secret because it has been torn . sunder for years.
All I say to you is: " Don't let us ignore what we see in
front of us. Let's always come back to the fact that we are one
party". You take the Commonwealth body. Je have a Federal
Secretariat. And it's a very intelligent and very useful affair
to have. But we don't forgot at Canberra that the whole of the
field organisation in Australia is attended to by the State
Divisions. : ithout that we would be helpless, ic could go to
the newspapers; we could make speeches; we could go over the
air but wo wrould have no organisation on the ground; none of
this thing which is so vital to political success.
While the State Divisions on the other hand remember that in
the Federal Secretariat we have evolved a very considerable and
useful thinking and policy scheme which, in relation to Federal
matters, does work that can't be duplicated elsewhere, in relation
to Federal problems. And, therefore, here again is the
very proof of our unity. lemay appear to be different, but re
are the same thing operating through various instruments,
Now, I say that to you bucc. use that means that I'm saying
that in our Party organisation work we should lways remember the
Federal structure of the Constitution under which we all live.
Therefore proposals to alter that Federal structure are the 
concern of all of us, People occasionally think that a Constitutional
amendment will resolve itself into an argument between
one Parliament and another. That's not true. Constitutional
amendments concern the whole people; they're not lawyers'
tricks or lawyers' problems; they are the problems of ordinary
men and wonon the lawyers may have to put them into form
but ordinary men and iomen are affected by these matters.
ile have just had a joint Parliamentary Committee on the
Constitution at Canberra. It has made a massive report, a
tremendous report, which I suppose very few people have had an
opportunity of reading as yet. And about 40 or 50 amiendments
to the Constitution were suggested. v-oll, I'm bound to say
without being too discouraging, but I think that's a pretty
optomistic approach to the problem. I've had a bit of experience
trying to make one or two amendmonts to the Constitution
( laughter) but I've never tried 57.
As a matter of fact some of you will remember that in one
year I think it was 1937 we had two amendments to the Constitution.
One had to do with marketing orderly marketing
notwithstanding Section 92. It came out of the Dried Fruits
Case and was designed to help, among others, the dried fruit
growers in the Murray Valley. And when it came to the polls I
couldn't fail to notice that it was most heavily defeated in
those areas. You never know. I hadn't a friend left. All my
friends in Kooyong who weren't very interested in orderly marketing
or dried fruits, or whatover it might be, used to look at me
in the street with considerable distrust and I just scraped-home
at the next election. It's a fact. I know a bit about Constitutional
referendums.
But at the same time we put up another proposal, lot me
remind you, to give the Commonwealth Parlia! iont_ powo.: over
Civil Aviation. Now you'd think, wouldn't you, that a problem
of that kind was obviously a matter for Commonwealth treatment
since you can get into an aircraft in Melbourne and be in Brisbane
in a couple of hours. So what? Enthusiastically you think:
We're in the habit of saying we vote If we don't
understand it we vote " No" which, no doubt, is a very safe thing
to do ( Laughter). And therefore I just want to tell you that
nobody need anticipate that we're coming out tomorrow with a Bill
to make 57 amendments in the Constitution. On the contrary.
tWe're going to examine this great and massive document with loving
care. I use theword " loving" in a metaphorical sense. It
may be that some amendments will emerge as being worth consideration.
I know myself of one or two problems that could, with advantage,
be straightened out, particularly the relations between
the two Houses on which I think that it's an unsatisfactory state
of the law at the present time.
But so that nobody will become involved in heated argument
prematurely, let me say that we have not yet discussed in Cabinet
this report. A lot of preliminary work is being done on it by
my colleague, the Attorney-General, and I've been doing some
reading on it myself, 3ut nobody need fear that there is going
to be a sudden announc. iuent that this particular mass of amendments
will be introduced to Parliament. We must discuss this
with our own colleagues in the Party, we must commune between
Members of the House of Representatives ,. nd ienators; we must
exercise our own judgment as to what is practical, as to what
people are likely to approve of. Therefore I'm not in the happy
position of the Labour Party in Latrobe rhich I notice has already
begun to say, not that , what we're doing about infl... tion is
wrong though they iill, of course, in due course say it's
rong but that what they would do about problems like the
problem of inflation. What would they do? They would alter
the Constitution in accordance with the terms of the recommendation
of this Committee. I think that's rather nice. You might
win a by-election with proposals of that kind, but you wouldn't
win a referendum. ( Laughter) 
And so, Ladies and Gentlemen, I just take the opportunity
of reminding you of these things. Jo don't al:. ays think about
thom but I am satisfied that the 10 years in which I've been
able to be the head of the Commonwealth Government, 10 years of
very great advance all over Australia, would not, on the political
front have been possible if it hadn't been that I had a
united band of people behind me and united people working as you
work in the field. It is unity which has been our great strength
and if we preserve that, spiritedly, frankly, never afraid to
argue with each other though preferably in private but not
afraid of differences, but always remembering that it's the great
underlying unity that carrios this movement foriard and that
carries Australia forward. And Ithink that somebody else I
hope will be standing here in 10 years' time as a Liberal Prime
Minister looking back on nother 10 years of successful service
to the country.
0 



SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES BY
THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. RoG. MENZIES
ON NO-CONFIDENCE MOTION TOTH MARCH. ~ 3960
MR. MENZIES: I am indebted to the House for 0. lowing me to speak
for a period of 30 minutes. It really is not long enough.
MR. CURTIN: It is too long,
MR. MENZIES: No, it is not. I felt that a period of 30 minutes
was not long enough for the Lead3r of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell)
and I myself would have liked a little more time. I want to
say first, Mr. Speaker, that the Goverrnment, oddly enough, will
vote against what is in effect the no confidence motion. That,
ofcourse, will surprise honourable members opposite!
Secondly I wish to say something, quite briefly and I
suppose not comprehensively about the points that were taken by
the new Leader of the Opposition in attack on the Government.
I should like to chide him a little gently, if I may, about one
or two statements he made in the course of his speech. He said,
for example, that there was not one. wo. d in any Governmrent
statement about the impact of inflation on ordinary people wage
earners or those on fixed incomes. Having said that, the honourable
gentleman went on to pay me an ill deserved compliment of a
theoretical kind about the speech I delivered to the Institute
of Management conference in Helbourne to which, as I did not
realise, he had listened, Irarnjng from it but not, I regret to
say, acquiring wisdom from it. If he hod . li'ened to that
speech as closcly as I should have hoped he wrould, he would have
known that we have made a feature of this matter bec-use in that
very statement of mine in the Mielbourne Twcn Hall I said, if I
may quote my om -rords I knc it is n ill bus ness
' But the fact is that one of the great obstacles to counter
inflationary action is that there are . iany pr-ople who think
a bit of inflation is a very good thing. Such a view pays
little heed to the position of those on fi' Ad incomes and no
heed whatever to the continuing and growing need to finance
by public borrowings at fir. d r: ates of interest a great programme
of public works the completion of which is absolutely
vital to transporc and wat.: r. and power and housing and
schools and universities, to the ex-pansion of inCustry and
commerce, ana the maintenance of employment.
Theh, Sir, the honourable gentleman, when making his maiden
speech as Leader of the Opposition which we all appreci. ated,
said-de believe that the country is prosperous'
Indeed it is, It is prosperous for the overwhelming
majority of the people of Australia. If one had time one could
demonstrate that by showing how the ordinary standard of living
has risen. But I was glad to near the honourabl. e member admit
that the country was prcoerous a rather unpleasant admission
for an Opposition Leader to have to make. But he made it like a
man. Ho: wever, it was a notable reversal of form for one who has
been busy prophesying disaster and mass unemployment for the
last ten years and urging people not to save, Even he must know
that saving is one of the prime means of defeating inflation.
He has been saying, " Do not save your money; spend it, There
is disaster coming and there will be mass unemployment."
One of the iany things I like about distinguished
friend is that he is devoted to prophecy but over a period of
ten years his prophecies have never turned out to be right, So
this time he got away from prophecy and unertoolk to analyse the
present state of affairs in which there is a distinct upward rise
of costs and prices He said that this was a profit not
prophet inflation. In order to osta bish that there was a 
profit inflation he quoted another authority as saying that the
total profits of Australian companies other than mining companies
last year was œ 130,900,000. Because of that œ 130,000,000 in
the total national income of Australia he said that all these
things were explained.
The honourable member spoke about wages, too. Has he
realised that under the last two decisions of the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission I do not discuss them
the annual addition to the wages bill has been œ 165,000,000.
That is an addition over and above what has existed before. Even
that annual addition exceeds the total company profit by
œ 35,000,000. That may give a lot of intelligent and toughtful
people something to think about, My honourable friend seems to
think that that portion of company profit which he regards as
being excessive I do not know whether it is 10 per cent.,
per cent., or 30 percent has brought about the present inflation
while all the other obvious factors in the situation have
not affected it at all. That is a very remarkable state of
affairs. I shall accept the honourable member's view purely for
the sake of argument even though, between ourselves, I think it
is nonsense. Let us suppose for the sake of argument that there
is a profit inflation and that profits are being made by companies
every one of which employs thousands of good Australian
people. 4Jhat does the honourable gentleman propose to do about
it? Our supposition lends itself to a supplementary question,
and it is this: Does the honourable member regard inflation as
a theoretical or future problem or an immediate problem? As I
suppose he would agree that it is an immediate problem, I ask:
What does the honourable member irho, thank heaven, has made this
the issue propose to do about it? First of all indeed, I
thought at one stage it was last of all he proposes an amendment
of the Constitution and then to decide how to use any new
powers that the people may vote for. Sir, I have had a long
experience of attempts to amend the Constitution. I would not
dream of speaking of them in that confident way, particularly if
I were saying to the people, " You give me charge and I will
settle inflation. I will change the Constitution.
Mr. Bryaht: Put value back into the œ 1.
MR. MENZIES: Dear me! If you would put a bit more value into
the that you get the would be worth more. That is all
I have to say to you.
Mr. Bryant: That is a pretty bright remark.
MR. MENZIES: It is. Brighter than any remark I have ever heard
you make in this House. But I am not to be led off by these
matters. The time ticks on.
The Loader of the Opposition is going to amend the
Constitution. Really! The honourable member has enough experience
of politics to know that you do not just say today: " We
will amend the Constitution", and get it amended tomorrow. I
can remember sweating my way around this country many years ago
23 years ago asking the people of Australia to vote to give
power over civil aviation to the Commonwealth of Australia. They
voted, Therefore, if the honourable gentleman is saying
to people who are properly pressed by the weight of inflation,
" You leave it to me. I will alter the Constitution", they may
have a somewhat sceptical mind about it. But that is his first
step: . Ie rill amend the Constitution! As a solution for n
immediate problem of inflation I have never heard anything more
futile. In the second place, the honourable gentleman does not
say on behalf of his party that he would not intervene before 
the Arbitration Commission, because it has been made clear for
years by his predecessor :. nd himself that it would. To do what?
To support further immediate wage. increases so as to increase
the volume of demand and, if I may add it, turnover, and, if I
may add it, profit. That is the one short run remedy that he
presents. The long run one quite theoretical at this stage is
to amend the Constitution. That takes an a;. ful lot of doing.
I am not saying that it might not be done in due course, but it
takes an eaful lot of doing and involves a lot of time. In the
meantime, the short run proposal is to increase the volume of
money in circulation in order to ristrain inflation!
Mr. Courtenay: You should get Sir Frank Richardson.
iMRl. M ENZIES: Did you refuse your increase? Stand up and be
counted! Did you refuse your increase? Of course not! There
is nothing I despise more than a fellow who wants to cash in on
a popular clamour, but takes the money ' ile the money is going.
So re need not pay any attention to you.
The third proposal of the Opposition is to increase
government expenditure both in respect of private citizens and
of State governments. Ie are not paying the State governments
enough! Last year when a new arrangement had been made with
the State governments and a bill was brought in to give effect
to it, every member of the Opposition voted for it. But there
is a by-election coming and so they say now, " Oh, this is
wiicked. The State governments are not getting enough." So, as
a counter to inflation, the Opposition proposes that more money
should be provided for the State governments and for private
citizens! Of course, all that means, once again, is that Opposition
members and I should like to have heard their views on
this matter either accept deficit finance in the middle of
inflation, when clearly there could be nothing more damaging, or
thuy propose, . ithout saying so, to raise taxes in order to
avoid a d-ficit. It would be very interusting to know whether
the Leader of the Opposition was proposing the outlines of a
counter-inflationary budget in which he rould substantially increase
expenditure and jack up revenue by further taxes on the
citizen. oell, -he has not told us. But the alternative to all
this greatly increased expendituro as a counter-inflationary
measure, mark you! the alternative to increasing taxes to raise
the wind is to leon heavily on central bank credit; to make what
the Opposition would call a more vigorous use of central bank
credit, thereby increasing the supply of money, but not, of
course, the supply of goods and services.
Sir, for a Labour Opposition much enriched by the
presence of a new Loader, and a nie deputy . ader whom I complimont
on his appointment to be seriously making an issue of inflation,
and at the , ame time producing a body of ideas which
would only pour ptrol on the fire of inflation, is one of the
most pathetic things in political history.
So far, I h.: ve stated what I believe to be the Opposition's
counter-inflationary policy if it is to be called onein
positive terms. But there are negative terms which we all
ought to remember. The first of them is that there is to be no
borrowing of capital from overseas. I hope that will not be dernd.
Mr. Pollard: It was never said.
Mji. MENZIES: No, Reggie I am sorry, Mr. Speaker I should
refer to the honourable member for Lalor.
MR. Pollard: It was not said by the Leader of the Opposition. 
4.
MR. MENZIES: I am very interested to hear you say that because
I made a few notes on what the honourable member for Melbourne
the Leader of the Opposition whom you loyally serve today, said
in 1955 in this very House. He said
As a party-
I suppose that means, " As a party"
we do not believe in overseas borrowing. oJe have a very
strong objection to borrowing at all from overseas.
Mr. Pollard: Hear, hoar!
MiiR. MENZIES: My old friend, the honourable member for Lalor,
can make the best that he can of that. That is the view unless
it has been changed in the last fortnight. Labour would not
borrow from overseas! That might be a little awkward because this
country is chronically short of capital in its present amazing
state of d: velopment, lo cannot, at present, generate all the
capital we require for public w. rorks, for the needs of private
enterprise, and for the employment of all our people.
So, the first thing that the Opposition says unless
the policy is now to be cancelled is " WJe do not believe in
overseas borrowing. / e are entirely opposed to it." All right!
That means that that avenue is closed. Do honourable members
opposite believe that we can get sufficient capital for development,
capital for employment, capital to reduce the excessive
demands inside Australia which so easily produce inflation, unless
we enrich ourselves by an inflow of capital from other
countries? What is their view on that? So far as I ha: ve been
able to understand the Leader of the Opposition said nothing
about it, but I heard his predecessor speak about it a great
deal the Opposition is severely critical of foreign investment
in Australia. Foreign investors are bad people. They squeeze
out Australians. They have regard only to their own interest.
They make profits. Is this the policy of the Labour Party? If
so, it is a policy that ought to be expressed quite plainly in
Dandenong, in Goolong, and in Broadmeadows, to refer only to my
own State. Suppose Labour did succeed in deterring foreign investment,
would it have made a contribution to defeating inflation
or would it have poured petrol on the fire of inflation?
These things are worth remembering. I wonder whether honourable
gentlemen opposite, when they find themselves addressing people
who, by the thousands, are employed in Australia as a result of
developmental industrial capital, will say to them, " You ought
not to be employed by these peoples; you ought to be out of a
job. It is much better that you should be out of a job than that
we should allow money from overseas to come into Australia."
Time marches on, and I pass to the next point I want to
make. My honourable friend, talking about the increased costs
produced by recent events, has said that the Government is not
asking business interests to absorb some of these costs, but if
big business is so prosperous, it should be able to debit some of
the wage increases against its profits. I was sorry when I heard
the honourable member say that, because he had done me the groat
honour of going to the Melbourne Town Hall to hear me make a long
and considered statement on these very matters. I merely recall
to his mind what I said. I shall quote it to honourable members:
' The employer who simply passes on wago increases into higher
prices is contributing to the inflationary spiral, rendering
inevitable the next wage increase, and cost increase, and
r ice increase. Vast numbers of ordinary citizens will suffer
in the process, the export industries will be penalised, 
U and the national finances will be disorganized, The task of
the employer, rho is for this purpose the manager, is thorofore
to meet each upward movement of labour costs first, by
absorbing it as far as possible, not regarding the current
rate of profit as sacrosanct, rnd second ( or should it be
first) so improving the efficiency of his operations as to
reduce, or at least stabilise, his unit cost of production.;
I quote those words in order to demonstrate that this has been
by no means overlooked.
As I an now left with ei. ght and a half minutes Ithink
I should perhaps say something about our own policy in case it
becomes overlooked. I will pass over all the proposals that have
been made by Labour leaders or by a Labour leader ovie the last
seven or eight years. In overy political campaign and in every
policy speech we have heard of more millions, more hundreds of
millions and more promises, all adding to purchasing power, and
not one of them having any relation to production. I pass over
that. As counter-inflationary measures they were, of course,
quite pathetic. But, Sir, we the Government have done something
that the Opposition has not done. , Jo have had a gcod deal of
experionce about this matteo. In 1951 in the Budaet of that year,
when the wool boom following on the Korean war had led to the
most tremendous inflationary pressure, we introduced a Budget
which was violently assailed by the Opposition. This Budget was
designed to draw down the total purchasing power so that the demand
in the country would not outstrip the supply. Honourable
members opposite had a wonderful time. They took us to pieces and
they had great supporters. The gallup poll showed us right down
at carpet level. But in--th 1954 ulection we won, and we won in
1954 because the action we had tak-en against inflation had produced
results. We may have won because the honourable sentleman
who is incerjccting was one of the candidates. Of cours., we won
in 1954 because the people saw that stability was being achiuved
by this Government. The people are not such fools as members of
the Opposition appear to them.
I shall tho:: efore rehearse quite briefly what action we
are taking. We have had to deal with booms by budgeting for a
surplus and have been hated in the process. JWe have had to deal
with minor recessions by budgeting for a deficit and whatever we
have done on these matters has been rong, but in the net result
as the Leader of the Opposition himself admits, this country is
in a state of prosperity that it has never boen in before. Our
inflationary measures I mention them very briefly devoting about
seconds to each are these: Je are going to avoid deficit
finance because deficit finance adds to the supply of money ahead
of the supply of goods or services. Deficit finance is proper in
a period of recession. Budgeting for a surplus, as in 1951, is a
propr counter-inflation action. Doesthe honourable Leader of the
Opposition agree with not budgeting for a deficit? He has not
said so. He does not believe it. Being an honest man he could
not honestly say so because the promises that will pour out from
the Opposition in the next few woees would make balanced budget
impossible. Therefore au are for avoiding deficit finance. The
Opposition is for h-ving it.
In the second plac. we support a central bank policy of
restraining the growth of excessive liquidity at a time of inflation.
The Leader of the Opposition said on behalf of his party
though I should doubt that he slid it on be'ialf of himself that
that is not right. His motto is more and more and more liquidity
and more nd more central bank credit. That is crazy and I say
that on behalf of the ordinary people of this country who suffer
from inflation. In the third place we have said plainly that we are
going to do what we can to resist, not paying increases as such, 
6.
but to resist increases in the pay cheque of the country which
are not matched by increased productivity. This is the whole
basis of truth in this matter. If you pay more than there is
production then you hAv.:, of cours2, inflation and rising prices.
If you pay less than you have production, then you have a period
of depression and recession. The honourable gentleman says,
" Forget about productivity." Indeed, he did not say a word about
it not a word. Nor did his great predecessor over nine or ten
years say a word about productivity. He said, " Support the increases
whatever the result may be."
Finally we say le us move as quickly as possible towards
the removal of import licensing and thus towards in increase
in the total supply of goods. . Jhatever nonsense may be
talked about profit inflation, the truth is that by and large,
over a period a month, a year or five years-inflation reprosunts
an over-supply of money as compared with the supply of
goods and services. Ther. fore, Sir, wre have stepped towards the
removal of import licensing. Before I finish, having said that
the Labour Party is opposed to this, let me remind those of the
other side who have some memory that when, in 1952 we introduced
the modern edition of import licensing quiLe soverely
S owe were assailed from the Opposition for doing so. Dr. Evatt,
who was then Leader of the Opposition and who is now happ. ly
placed in another jurisdiction, said, " 1ec look forward to the
time when this system can be removed and when there will be substituted
for it a proper system of tariff duties so that the
trade of the country may run free". 3ut, today, the Opposition
is scratching about for a new look. However, it is ve:. y hard to
de -elop a new look in three or four days. So it has now discovered
that the removal of import licensing is a wicked thing,
although it thought, only a few years ago, that the imposition
of this kind of licensing was a piece of villainy.
I sum up, Sir, by saying that the Australian Labour
Party, having decided, as it has done, o make inflation the
issue, has absolutely no remedies to off. r, except, first, an
attempt, some day, somewhere, in respect of some matter, to induce
the people to alter the Australian Constitution, and,
secondly, further taxes I think they were vaguely hinted at
on che profits of companies.
Mr. Speaker: Ordoi T'he Rt. Hon. gent?:.**:: ans time has expired.
SiMR. MENZIES: Thank you, Sir. That was exactly where I wanted
to end. 



P. M. No. 11/ 1960
OFFICIAL SECRETTARY Af AUSTLALIA HOUSE
Statemont b_ the Prime Minister the ~ It. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today that
Mr. J. HR. Cumming, had been appointed Official Secretary
at Australia House, London.
Mr. Cum: iming, an Assistant Secretary of the Prime
Minister's Department, wiill leave for London with his family
on 2nd April. Mr. Cumming was Director-General of the highly
successful visit to Australia last year of Her Roya Highness
Princess Alexandra of Kent. He was A. C. T. Director of the
visits by Her Majesty the Queen in 1954 and by The Queen Mother
in 1958. He oas Joint Director of the Australian visit by the
Duke of Edinburgh in 1956.
Mr. Cumming is Secretary of the Commonwealth
Literary Fund, and the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board.
C--NBERRA,
13th March, 1960, 



SPEECH BY i .11OJME MINISTLL 29 i1E R O HON. UG
MENZIE," ! N THi[' HIOUSE -OF REPr-ZLENT JTIV. ES ON THURSDAY
24+ TH MAI: CH4 .19
Mr. Spoak., er,, Acoreseuatation of this bill marks an
historic occasion folr thne national carcital, and, therefore, for
the nation. The Canberra University College was established by
ordinance in Decemb: Dr, 1 929, Trie Australian National Univer?-
sity was established. under? tho Australian National University
Act 194+ 6-4+ 7, in whicha proviSion was made in two sections, not
directly for the incor.. por-, at-o. of the Canbe--ra University
College, but giving poc+.. ver undeio university statute -to incorporate
the Canberrla -Un-iesity Coll-ee. Therefor. eatog te
Canberra University llege was not chosen to be the body from
which the National Univoarsity would spring the possibility was
obviously cent err -la t4 -0at tjftite tha: t when thr Ai.' stralian
National University came i; nto f_ 17l or~ fration, and wihen the
college beca-ie sufficielltlj advanocd in its own development,
the tw6 bodies might bccome associated -in on!:.
The Australian Nution.-J. Ur.-*-ersity le,+ is lat ion was in
the charge of tho Iiin . ctor for Pcist--ir Recc: st-! u-ction, Mr.
Dedrnan. and 1 tace tlis 0-p;-OC, 1 uni-cy to say to the House that his
name will always be h. rro-. aby associatod withi tha-t achievement.
He said upon tho int. 1oduiction of the b-ill-that the Government
had had the hel. o Lxdv.' Lce of' thaconcell of th,! college. He
referred to the fact that then col1-o-ha6 a._. iays l~ ooked forward
to the cre, t!-rn cli' -iuie 4ancL that r mdhold. very steadfastly
to its fideas foilrmany y'r. Refer-inag to his own bill
to create thie I* ust-al-. in Nat. orno -LLi-. c-. csit-f ho said
It will-be long row bof---cr! t61qv s-e h ideas translated
it oi.
Well, perhia-s it h2-, a lPl L~~ rthai 1+ ight have been
expected, bu., t + ia thie beenr o'uite remarkable
growth in bot.. 1. Lj~ f* Le--, 1 at~ m the notion of
eventual as so cia-, ti. on 7h sf peoiple on what
I will call. bc-h ~ r; yea-s the i~ ational
University, or 4its c u: tln ; h _ ccYcaotl lo ge, rr its
repesetatve., eVQO~ hO. orros-] tion to as: socdati on -' eeling
that it r4_:.: git 10or% 2, rt b r'-f th~ oge t 1-1-But a
decision had t3 bo nta&amp;( . X During
the whole of Amt'elh DL'nh~ eLnvr
sity of Melbor) i. nc oon ' o h ranting of deg-
rees and fo. VY _-PJ c~ er 2, 1t te wo of the colleg-e
in the relevant fac-. 1L'. ies., Tho Cncfi the UniverLsity of
Melbourne some litetrQagro hat it did not feel
that it was Practical tocf'Jiate ~ oc~ infor very much
longer. Lii point oZ. t! he o-1 y+-nl terminal dateoh
associavtion was thae e. of 7.9' 9.
I rnsffer. nuu_ bo-r .(. 3u1fl wiLth reporesentatives
of botha t'hz)ñ anKo th ocl-loe becaus.. ' his is a
matter whicha has deorn v i1 ere_+ ro ed ::; ocae-rn d, any event my
department eaibrac. s ti. E. ac ii t: e. _ f o~ taian Na ional
Unvriy. P irrv-lv i-h. Cc_-vouiy'-ent was aLbcycn to cone to
a decision I ind. icatee. t L-t i1t vou'ld 1edsrb1 i'te nvr
sity of M/ elbourne ccr*. 1c ' -' a-no n xtnsL of one year, thereby
giving us a nc-v: a: L. b erL -F request
was con; ide ed ! Dr vce Cornc-i.. of the_-University.) of Melbourne
and thie corc c. acOJ to it.' hat ino-ans that the new
organisation in Cabr: utbe r-C-. y Jo operati-: by the end of
this calendar so th. Iat'. tli,_ nu-r acadom-ic ye a2r ' Jj61. will be
conducted with a ttm ce~ A n ti-I tGE rums o-f the proposed act.
SsIi. j Zl op) i e* lml.: ef the Government and of all
those corncerned, that chior-e is e~ i rofound arLPreciation of
the wo-rk that has bcoe--oacc, r. e-d by the University of Melbourne.
The Canberra eLec annide strth e., AuStralian National 
University will always be profoundly indebted to it. I acknowledge
that debt writh great pleasure.
Jhen the ultimate decision was taken that there should
be association and not a development of the college into a
separate entity, thereby providing two universities in Canberra,
I asked the representatives of the college and of the university
to get together and to work out the broad outline and, as far as
possible, the details of an association which, in their view,
would work satisfactorily. I am very happy to say that from the
time when they were asked to do that, every attitude of hostility
to the change seemed to me to disappear. They sat down together;
they worked together? they rose to the highest standards
of their occupation, and in the result they rwere able to produce
to me the terms of their agreement, and two or three points of
disagreement, some reeks before the date that I had asked them
to observe. Before I go on to describe the scheme, I think that I
should say that we thought it desirable to reinforce our minds
by reference to the chairman of the famous Murray committee, by
reference to the committee's report, and by reference to the
newly constituted Universities Commission under the chairmanship
of Sir Leslie Martin. From those sources we obtained marked
confirmation of the idea that there should be an association and
that there should not be a continued separation of the university
and the college.
Perhaps I should indicate quite briefly the princiF.'
reasons for our conclusion that the two bodies ought to be associated;
The first is that if the Canberra University College
were to become a university of itself, as, say, " he C:.-berra
Unive-sity, it would become and remain a second-rate university
unless it were able to do all those things which a university of
standing normally expects to do. In other words, it would not
be able to confine itself to first degrees or even to the degree
of maste It would have to look forward to research work, post
-graduate work, and the further it proceeded into thatfield,
which is a legitimate university field, the more would its work
tend to overlap some of the work being done in the present
Australian National University. Daplication of that kind is not
to be readily contemplated in a comparatively smell city.
In the second pl. ace, we thought it would be very difficult
to justify the existence of two separate universities in
Canberra, considering its population, at a time when the pressure
for second and third universities in gren. t centres of population
is mounting eve: y day. There is a tremendous amount of
university development going on in Australia now, and I can assure
honorable members that the pressure for it is beyond all
belief. It might interest honorable members if I told them that
the investigations of the Universities Commission so far have
shot. wn that even the estimate made by the nurray Committee of the
future undergraduate population in Australia an estimate which
the committee thought was liberal, and which I am bound to say I
too thought was liberal has been quite falsified already. The
numbers eming forward are greater than anybody three years ago
imagined would be the case.,
In point of fact it is a great thing from the point of
view of Australia to be able to say that by the end of another
eight or nine years, on the present estimate of increased population
and increased demand for university training, there will
be in Australia~ if we can meet the demand, more undergraduates
per 1,000 of population than in the United States, Canada, Great
Britain or New Zealand. I am sure that honorable members will
agree that that is all to che good. It eoans, howeJor, that there
is a tremendous demand in the big centres, and in other centres
perhaps less big but still very important, In those circumstances
the existence of two separate universities in Canberra would
be very hard to defend, 
In the third place, Sir, \. JCel tha) t the) ro would be a
great advantage in associ., ting a body, in uihichi mos' of the students
are undergaduates with a body in which all the students,
readers and professors are gradu,, tes of a liigh-order, This w~ ill
give to the undeñ' gradu,. tes the benefit of an association, even
if only occasionally, iritht eminent specialists in their branches
of knowledge,, or study. To take a simple example, how many times
have we heard a great physicist say prou " I worked under'
Rutherford"? I am pe5-ffectly certain that this association will
hgarvaed uaat es plbeondyd idu ndcefrf ec-tth eb ebrt-ohad_-w -aycso. v er Tohfe ict hper esoenon cef inosft iatun tiuonnd erw ill
have a stimulatdn, effect on thosejs who arc -_ ngagi-_ ng in research,
and the impact on the undergraduate of men of distinction and
of gfreat intellect is bound. to be strong and memocraL_ oe
Those were reasons whiich cormnded thei1asolvos to US,~
but I thoughit it desirable to go hack to Sir Keith 1ñ 4u) rraY hienseif
and to the Universities Co17-rnis s _ oi Let mne ro-r-ind thc Hlouse of
what the Murray Committee said in its famous rcpo,:. I shnal
quote thi-E one passage-
It should be possible, in our view, to devise a term
constitution gi'v ing to thae College al. l theo . nk:) ndcrece, ioperation
which bothi the Nab'-ional Univorsity andl the Cc-,-
logro desire, and yet ma'iekin-it possiblu for studeo2-Lts ait the
College to receive degrees of thu Nation~ al Uni versity anr.
for common services to bo org; ani zed and riisrn ninod xjithor 7
unneccssary dupJA n,, iticn,.
That was not a definito sta'emcntl but, so to F3-orK, .4t gave a
broad hint of the way in which thc mind of the comm. nJceeo Iwac
running. When 1 saw, Sir Ke\' ith. Muralray in Engjlr ad las'--
put to him the problem that T had been lookiLg at, in. ic e
how my mind was running asnd I invited him to Cohallun ' o u'hat I~
had in mind, if he thL~ proer So Lrfo hlegn t
he said that he felt tina:;, t-he case for inrgate o" uneso
bodies was complute, 1 jhciu re feried hematter to ti,-a Ai'. st-m
lian Universities Comm ission to -get it11s inde) pende3nt1 nO ex-oort
opinion. Phe co: iTxoOnr ' t o to mesetting, c1-1-( ' wnios
view. It said
The Commission htas consineC~ red th-is iprobien,_ i Ti t; K
ledge of the facts ~; dV40-, S recently put bfr aie
and has unan4rnouF~ jy concludca that some of' a,. soc -ation
is both desirablo and ar-) acticable. IT nc s
believe that if the concept of alSsociation is accep. ted it
can be more oaE: iU . y achie) vod now.% then litto-,, . Bfr
reaching its decision to recoi-ioond in favour1 of associati. 1on,
the Commission gave some th-ough-t to-I the rnean3 bywhh : L
could be achieved. It seems to the Cornmissior: n~; e~ a
that there should be one ' n~ ttboteo ho
Australian National tjn-iesJity, and thiat it should culve one
Council, with a Vice Chccallor as its chie*. f wciv
officer.
Then, Sir, we made our decision,. Jo put theio -attor to the-1 ' eT
bodies and, as I have said, theoy respondedC with " mra
promptitude and with extreme cdw~~ Theiy worked ou a plar, o. 3
associoition, and we, hoeae1te -c he ad o poi,, nt' of
difference, Le whiich -7 shiall. 2ofoi, T. hinch '. as of : o'e n-atoriality,
cand there we-ire otie qitie miner, p o ns of dic nebut
on the whole the-i two bJodies agedon a srev'
It i-, ey be te ioh toc be lut. top.-L: ea~ ry, 1-t may he
thought, for cxamnpe thiat t-he . oe. 1nc-Ll is a l ttl-e tuo largeo.
It may well be that tllat IF so, but 1. asi: 1-onorable( m-mbers, i. r
consideri -ng' the balanoirng of vsicue,, 7 interests inthe a~ xaivistr. a.
tive structure, to boa-.. in rf-i-nd thet It has not. eSy to get
the Canberra University Cc3. eo to-fi., wr eut7, 1si. on ofa jo.
arato existence as a separate unive. rs-Jty, orl, for-. that ,_ attoer,
to cet the Australian National UniLversity to a c c pt a pDo -i tiJon 
in which its degrees could be g-, ive-n first degrees or as
Mastar's degroes its degrees being g7iven at -oresent only in the
higher reaches opscholairship and science.,
Under these circumstances, I did not iuldisposed
nor would the House, I aim sure to hagg-le about some details on
which the two bodies had agreced, meirely because 1 -thought that,
to use a modern phrase, thkey could have been more(-stream-lined,
On the whole, I think it is g-ood scheme. I am suire that it
will work. It will work all the bettelr Lt trio begi. nning if
there is an atmosphere of -, oodwill,
The) re was one point of difference t-o vA-icla 1 said I
would refer. It relates to the awrarding ofL thedere of doctor
in thei Austrcxd. ian National University the Ctc,.' e e of Doctor of
Philosophy or Doctor of Science. The pre-s ent _ raULtie'Lna._ University
attaches supreme importance, to thei pr-inciple that the
standards on which those degrees are awalrded should be of thie
highest, and that those standards should be maintained so that
world recognition and prcstig. Ye will attach to the dere. That
of course, is completely roight, The i,, etiena1 Univer-sity believed,
theorefore, that thrr oiugh-u -to be controcl from-i its
side of the university eve:: the stauldards for doctoral degrees.
The Canberra University CoTI-ege rep Cosuntativ7cs, on the, other
han, flt-hat ' hat might s gestthat doctorates in faculties
not at present emjbraced by t-iu HeJUt-LonslD Univo-rsity ivould be beyond
their power, and that this vould in-hibi', t the recr-uitl-eint of
men of the first quality to their toaching ste*,. answer
tima ae-ndIam happy to say that i ccpp, a ble to
both sides is that.-, under the statate, cn years the derre
of doctor shall be based on ste@ nJ,-: ds by thie
modern replacement of * the pre sent Au1s t: alia F~' att onal University,
that is, the Institute of Advanced S'-udics. Land ~ h; after ten
years the Thole matter si. ll be det," t xrith no doubt by-, university
statute by the council, Thcby ti..' at tirc wl hv
soettled down e~ nd riill 1ound its fea. t, tiha--t tiimn the members
of the council will have , chiovod a comml-, on Lt-ndrstanding of
1. rhat is best for the : nsuitutior. as a I hi. a p ' py t o s ay
that that ten-year pcaod ifs acceptab"_ le to both o te nterasts,
if i may so describe -thorm.
I should Just like to say . haG tiee ' lhtchLiLs
icnisgs otcoi ,, tthioins, unit iviesr snitoyt Ltion d beg ouinngd erfsulo-oct. h letih ai-tf iru Swte :* r~ eol atos -ecgree
wiill be, in some tray, inhibited fi-c~ _ 3a~ J 1a-. 4g nh
deg) rees. It may very . rell. be that in the 1, orderg'-raduoteU-body -T
will describe it moire prucisely in a momeint there wil be facultios
which are not in the present Austr,* 1 ln Nut-' onal University
and that in those faculties provision nil fo-re,-
se3arch and furthejr teaching and, of cou.. cse, fol.-hig her de-rocs.
I do not want it to be thought for one ric. nent th. at th1-is new, body
is to be divided into the shee,,-and the -oats the sheep being
those ; Jh-o browse on the highe r pastureLs of researc -and the goats
being, thosd who, as some us have had the oX'v) Crience: of do-ing,
struggle through _ 1nd takel c. first degreeC-. That wl. not be the
position at all.
Mr. U. 4hitlan Like the inner and outer Cbn&gt;
MR. MENZIES: Yes, ike the inner arnd ctrCat.*._, l2 õ L exce-, it
there are no goats in either of those, 7atue adviu. c iGhe
honorable member not to tem'ptL on thsquos~ f. c-&gt;.
One other matter that X-. as nut. upat jThe tine ( lhon we
uwere lookin:, at vieee. diff-, r~ nces th-re i 123 ' TZ tii
question whothejr some of the morinbers to be a_ cintedo-_ to thec
council by the Govern--Gonxr-al n CoiUociI sh-oulcd be ajorointod
after consultation with'. ce.-tain sr. ccifi~ o&amp;: e :, sucL , as the
Academy of Science, the Humanities. o Counci. l and. on.
Mr. ; Jhitlam Includingz thae Social. ScJience., ~ ecrc Council. 
MR. MENZIES Yes, all of them are in the same promises that
building with which we are now familiar. I indicated that I
did not think very highly of those provisions which find their
way occasionally into statutes under which, when a nomination is
to be made to a body of this kind by the Governor-General in
Council, he is placed by statute under some rustriction or some
obligation to other bodies. For myself, I am bound to say that
so long as I have anything to do with this matter it will be a
great pleasure to consult such bodies because they can contribute
a great deal in this field. I have no doubt that that would
become the regular practice, but I did not think it was desirable
to put it as an inhibiting element in statute. I have had
representations from one or two other bodies claiming that they
ought to be allowed to nominate or to be consulted, and to them
I made the same answer.
I shall summarize pretty briefly, what the scheme is.
The government of the university is to be vested in a council of
38 persons. As I said before, this-is larger than we first expected.
It had been hoped to make it about 30. But still on
examination, if honorable members look at the constitution of
the council in the bill, they will see that there has been a
genuine attempt to give a balanced administrative authority.
I may say also that, although this is not in the act
itself, as honorable memburs know there is already provision
for a convocation with certain functions. Although it is not
necessary for us to legislete in this measure about that matter
I did venture to say to them that I hoped that the new council
would consider the possibility of adding to the convocation, as
members of it, members of the Federal Parliament who happened to
be university graduates. I think there is a bit of merit in
th it. It would give more honorable members than could hope to
have it at present, fairly close contact with what goes on.
Jhether that suggestion will be agreeable or not I do not know,
but it is not a statutory provision and it does not arise in
this bill. Apart from these matters, Sir, what has been done, in
this broad, is to take the present research sections and constitute
them that zone inside the university as an Institute of
Advanced Studies and the rest of it as a School of General
Studies. This is merely to distinguish between what has gone on
in one and what has gone on in the other.
By having these two separate bodies each with its own
professorial boards but under the council and the general administration
of the vice-chancellor and with contact at all levels
to produce co-operation, it is felt by both of the parties to
this matter, and certainly by the Government and myself, that we
will develop a harmonious institution without, in any way,
threatening what is vital in this matter the high standard of
those research degrees which it has been the main object, or one
of the main objects, of the Australian National University, to
produce. That is really its second object, the first being, of
course, to conduct research and to add to the general store of
knowledge. As for the bill itself, it is not unduly long and it
is, in 1l rge measure, almost entirely I -would hope entiroly
self-explanatory. But what I have said will perhaps assist
honorable members when they read the bill. When they do I am
sure that they will cgree very warmly that this is not to be
regarded merely as a marriage of convenience or a marriage under
threat. It is to be regarded as fulfilling what was the ultimate
-ibition regarding this university to make it a. n all-embracing
university, one that will Cive the highest possible advantages
in instruction and in reading to those who come as
undergraduates and at the simo time make an honorable name in
the world of learning and so bring great credit to this country. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON TIHURSDAY
24th MARCH, 1960
Mr. Speaker, I had the great advantage this afternoon
of listining to the speech of the Attorney-Goneoal ( Sir Garfield
Barwick) in reply to the attack made on the Government in relation
to the subject of wool pies. I am bound to say that his
speech though brief, was so devastating that nothing remains to
be said on that matter. He exposed the Opposition's move as a
piece of arrant political humbug. So, my colleague having
successfully destroyed this attack, there is no reason why I
should trample on the graves of the attackers.
But, Sir, the motion put forward by my friend the
honorable member for Lalor ( Mr. Pollard) -ont beyond wool pies.
It extended into the area of restrictive practices. About that
also my colleague had something to say. Restrictive practices
are, I imagino, attacked in the case of wool because it is said
that they tend to rduce prices. In every other respect that I
can think of, however, they are attacked because it is said that
they increase prices and therefore increase profits, and therefore
produce what the distinguished Loader of the Opposition
( ir. Calwell) was good enough to describe, a few times at
least, as a " profit inflation".
Mr. Calwoll That is right.
MR. iENZIES: That is right! I am very ' lad that ho is here,
because I regard his words with great interest. Several times
he has made it clear that this is a profit inflation. Therefore,
I imagine that my distinguished friend will agree that
this is just one phase of the attack, which the Opposition is
going through the motions of making, on the subject of alleged
excess profits and how to deal with them. Pies, coupled with
the honorable name of General Motors-Holden's Limited, represent
the two ends of the scalu-. Now Sir
Mr. Pollard ihat about Sir WJilliam MacGregor?
MR. MENZIES: I have never heard of Sir ! William MacGrueor.
Mr. Whitlam You have heard of Sir * illiam Angliss, though.
MR. MENZIES Yes, I have, and how green with envy you have been
ever since. I hate to use the word " green" beacuse it may wake
up troubles on the Opposition side and that, if I may so to
tho Deputy Leade of the Opposition ( Mr. Whitlam), is the last
thing I would ~ want to do. Now, Sir, the Attorney-General has
already said something about the difficulties that are involved
in an attack on the problems of improper harmful price agreements.
I do not desire to add anything to what he said on that
matter, but there are those, of course, who after a period of 59
years of this Parliament's existence, profess to find that the
problem is quite simple. No Government from this side of politics
or from the other has ever found it simple; but I am happy
to say that, reinforced as we are in this Government by the
services, as Attorney-General, of the most distinguished constitutional
lawyer at the Australian Bar, we are, in all earnestness,
concentrating our minds on what can be done either in the
general or in the particular.
The general treatment of this matter is not, of course,
very easy because, as everybody knows, and as the Joint Committee
on Constitutional Review recognized, the powers of the Common-
, r~ alth are sketchy; but the powers of the States within their
own domain are clear, and the committee d,;, ioted a good deal of
thought to producing its own solution of this matter. Now, I am
not at all disposed to brush all th-' t to one side, I think that
the report on that matter is of great interest. I have read it
two or three times. It is of great interest, but it does not
solve the problem because, first of all, you have to determine 
whether you are going to seek to deal with these matters by
clear Commonwealth law ofcontrol or whether you are going to
seek to deal with them by co-operation between the Common. wealth
acting within its powers the States acting within theirs.
And obviously this is not a matter about which at this stage we
can do very much.
The Opposition professes to say and I understand its
attitude of mind "! ell here is the recommendation. All you
have to do is put it forward. The people will approve of it
and then the . whrole constituional structure will be changed." I
do not want to be unduly melancholy about this matter; but I
should like to remind 11 honorable membe:. s of the House that
for a long time it was thought that the answer to this kind of
problem was to give the Commonwealth Parliament power to legislate
with respect to monopolies a nice, round, mouth-filling
phrase. But that phrase is understood by the Opposition in a
quite different sense from that in ., which we would understand it.
The Opposition is entirely in favour of monopolies so long as
they are government monopolies. We, on the contrary, have always
been disturbed about any monopolistic tendencies in the
ordinary, and what ought to be competitive, business world.
I hope I will not be told that if I only had the right
attitude of mind the Constitution could be altered tomorrow. I
remind the honorable gentlemen opposite as they have reminded
us ond others that the Constitutional Review Committee's report
points out that five times in the history of the Commonwealth
attempts have been made to secure power over monopolies
for the P. rliament of the Commonwealth, and five times the proposals
have been rejected. I quite agree that on the last occasion,
in 1944, the proposal found itself one of fourteen points
which the then Attorney-General was optimistic enough to think
would be adopted in toto and which the people were pessimistic
enough to reject in toto.
But, Sir, the constitutional problem is not a very
easy one, and among the things that we 0ll h. ave to consider is
whether we will travel faster: and fare better by having co-operative
action rith the State gov-rnments and the State parlaiments
than by trusting all to the chances of a constitutional amendment
one of 22 comparatively major constitutional amendments
to which the attention of the Parliament is directed by the
report that has been referred to so frequently in this debate.
There are, ofcourse, some heads of power belonging to
the Commonwealth under which, subject to the wind and weather of
section 92 and those other prohibitive sections of the Constitution,
we :: ight be able to do something. I can assure the House
that we have been concentrating our minds on this very matter.
Jhen it was said in the Governor-General's Speech that we wore
closely investigating these matters, that is exactly what we
meant. Jhat is more, we mean to achieve as much result as we
can within the limits of our poweo in refieonce to this matter at
the earliest possible moment.
The whole House need have no exaggerated fears on
those matters. 3ut, Sir, as I said when I stood up and I notice
that the inexorable hand of the clock goes round and I
have used up half of my time this is one facet of the campaign
which the new Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell) has
launched w: ith customary spirit and gaiety profitoering
profit inflation. Therefore, I would like to say just a few
words about this alleged case; because there is no better answer
to a rhetorical case than a few simple, well-vouched facts. The
honorable gantleman said in the general, and his colleaguo, the
member for Lalor ( Mr. Pollard), said :-oday in the particular in
another connexion, that all these things are part of a profit
inflation. In other words, these things represent that the
present state of affairs in Austr,. lia, the inflation that is
going on the inflation which they used to describe a few years 
ago as a bogy is due to extravagant profit making, whether it
is made by rings or whether it is made in the ordinary course
of business. Therefore, I would like to say, if I can be heard
over the unkindly interruptions of my distinguished and very old
friend, the honorable member for Lalor, that this talk about
profit inflation is the greatest rubbish in the world. And, of
course, if that falls to the ground all this becomes a mere
skirmish directed to the non-wool-growing constituencds of Australia,
which I gathered was the case this afternoon.
Now Sir, a few facts. The last concluddd financial
year is 1958-9, and I hope I will not be contradicted on that.
The national income in 1958-59 was œ 5 000,000,000. It was
œ 5,021,000,000; but call it œ 5,000,060,000. lagos and salaries
in Australia represented, out of that œ 3,046,000,000. In other
words, something well over 60 per cent, of the national income.
Remember that; wages and salaries represented œ 3,046,000,000.
Company income, meaning by that the gross profit before taxation
was œ 630,000,000, and bank profits œ 28,000,000. So that the
total profits ofcompanies of all sorts, public and private and
banks was œ 658,000,000. Out of that income, tax on companies
and the banks amounted to œ 220,000,000, and that left
œ 438,000,000, net dividends and profits sent abroad and I
emphasize that because the greatest friend that they have over
there is General Motors-Holden's Limited, and they generalize
from General Motors-Holden's Limited which, if I remember
correctly, they had the great honour of establishing in this
country -were œ 43,000,000i See how the figures are coming down.
Dividends paid to Australian residents were œ 160,000,000.
So out of that œ 658,000,000, taxation accounted for
œ 220,000,000, and dividends, both sent overseas and left in
Australia, amounted to œ 203,000,000, perceptibly less than the
tax on these companies. Then, as we go down the line, that
leaves us with undistribated profits of œ 235,000,000. Je
started with œ 658,000,000. Those undistributed profits of
œ 235,000,000, going into the reserves of companies have provided
for their devulopment. They have been ploughed back into
the business. And when one of these enterprises, which we can
abuse much too lightly in this country, ploughs back so high a
percentage of its profits into its business, it means a new
factory and extnnsions : nd more employment, more stability of
employment and more security. I wonder how my distinguished
friends opposite would like to go and tell the employees of one
of these companies that they do not believe the company should
have any capacity for financing its future development and future
employment
Mr. Haylon Why don't you go back to your muttons?
MR. MENZIES: If I did go back to my muttons, I would go directly
to the honorable member. Of this remaining total of œ 235,000,00
residents accounted for œ 201,000,000. In other words, residents
had the equity in this undistributed profit to the extent of
œ 201,000,000; and these sinister monsters which are getting
command of Australia had œ 43,000,000 œ 201,000,000 here and
œ 43,000,000 ove: seas.
Now, Sir, I will just put that in summary. Of the
total company profits and this is all behind this motion, the
object of the exercise this is the case that the Australian
Labour Party under new and garnished leadership thinks it has
of the total company profits earned in Australia, ' on-third comes
to the Government as income tax for expenditure on the general
social and other services of the country, 35 per cent. soes back
into enterprises for development, for capital investment, future
employment and for expansion of our industrial capacity, and
near enough to 31 per cent. is paid out in terms of dividends.
Now, Sir, those, I think, are very interesting figures, and I
refer to them because I believe that the Opposition has put this 
4.
sorry little motion for'/ ard today as part and parcel of its
general campaign on profits.
The only other thing I iant to say is this and I
have three minutes in which to say it: Je have occasionally been
told from the other side of the House tihat if we did our duty
we w ould impose an excess profits tax. And even the honorable
member for East Sydney ( Mr. ia-rd), who dies hard, as we all know
in the last fortnight, keeps referring to this. May I remind
him and may I remind the House that there have been quite a few
attempts made to devise an equitable and just system of excess
profits tax on companies wrhich rould not grievously handicap
the new company established by some enterprising Australian
starting from scratch. The late John Curtin had to abandon it.
The late Mr. Chifloy had to abandon it and, indeed, he was very
frank about the matter because in 1947, in this voey place, he
said In ordinary peace-time circumstances this tax operates
inequitably.
This is the excess profits tax
It penalizes new industries by preventing the building up
of reserves -nd consequently favours old established industries
which have had the opportunity of building resorves
in the past.
* Sir, I quote that, and I would like to have said more
about it; but I quote it for the purpose of showing that if the
Labour Party in this place wants to put itself forward as the
party ihich will protect the old established business and as the
enemy of new enterprises, which must attract a lot of profit in
order to develop a now industry, it ought to say so.
Mr. Pollard It is not a matter of profit inflation but of
price manipulation.
MR. MENZIES I do not need to tell the honorable member any-
Sthing about rool pies. The Attorney-General left him, this
afternoon, without even the crust of a pie to bite on. 



PR. 38
Department of External Affairs,
554/ 1/ 1 Canberra, A .0. T.
31 st March, 1 960
HOUSE OF RERESENTATIVES DEBATE ON SOUTH AFRICA
Speech by the Prime Minister and Minister
for External Affairs.
Speaking in the House of Representatives today on the
resolution on South Africa moved by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Calwell,
the Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs, Mr.* Menzies, said:-
The honourable member sentenced himself to half an hour's hard
labour and has now performed the sentence. He began and ended by, I suppose
he would say, twitting me for being so ignorant of the alleged fact that this
matter was before the United Nations a week ago and implied that I am as out
of date as I can be. It is a great pity for the honourable member to become
too eloqu. ent about a matter of that kind unless he gets his facts right. The
fact is that the Security Council sat for the first time to deal with this
matter, or to determine whether it would deal with it, at 5.30 o'clock this
morning, Australian time, and the first business which had to be discussed by
it would be, of course, whether this item should be inscribed and then discussed
in substance. We have, of course, no opportunity to know since 5.30 this
morning, Australian time, what the result has been as to whether it was
inscribed but we do know that that was the first appearance at the United
Nations stage of this matter and so it is a pity that a great deal of this
rhetoric turns out to have been wasted.
As to South Africa's attitude, I would have thought that every
schoolboy knew that South Africa' s attitude is one of complete objection to
this matter being dealt with by United Nations. Somebody says they are
agreeable, but that is a great effort of imagination. The fact is that they
have opposed this matter coming before the United Nations. I have no doubt
they have once more stated the view which their Prime Minister stated only
yesterday in the Parliament at Cape Town, that it is a domestic matter and
that they do not recognise the jurisdiction of the United Nations ick relation
to it. And incidentally, sinrne the honourable gentleman now says that it
is not the shootings so much but the policy of apartheid that we want to deal
with I may tell him that yesterday, in the Parliament at Cape Town, the Prime
Minister stated the position of the Government in relation to jurisdiction,
which is the great question that I was addressing myself to. He stated that
the views of the Government and those views were specifically concurred in by
Sir de Villiers Graaf, the Leader of the Opposition; so there is a bi-partisan
position on this question of jurisdiction in the South African Parliament.
In these circumstances, where you have the party of the present administration
and the party which was the party of Sm-its at one mind in South Africa on this
question of jurisdiction they are by no means of one mind. probably on the
question of internal policy when you find that position, I simply say that
this Parliament as a parliament ant. this Government as a government would be
accepting a grievious responsibility if it sought to invade these policies
of a domestic kind in another country of the British Commonwealth. That after
all, is the essence of what I have said from beginning to end. But, Sir, I
will not take up too muich time on these little imaginary exercises that the
honourable member engaged in. I must want to say this; the motion is much
more violent than the speech. The speech was almost tender at times. The
motion, which has already had great publicity was deliberately designed to
stir up all sorts of feelings of hatred in this community. 
-2
The esence of the motion is, of course, its purely political
quality. That is shown by the fact that at no time during the massacres
in Hungary or the widespread killings in Cyprus or the grcat loss of life
occasioned during the Mau Mau attacks in Kenya-whore 13,000 lives were lost
did the Opposition ever submit any resolution or even ask for one. This
time, they think that they see an opportunity of embarrassing the Government
by fanning hatred where there is already too much, and by encouraging
differences in the Commonwealth at a time when mutual urderstandinA was
never more important. That is a broad statement but it is completely
demonstrated by clauses 3, 5 and 6 of the resolution about which I
propose to say something.
Biause 3 says that the opinions expressed by me quite plainly
and temperately I thought in this House will be construed as Australian
condonation of the South African Prime Minister' s statements and attitudes.
That is a most remarkable proposition. Even as a piece of English it has
fantasy in it. I do not kniow what these statements and this attitude are
that have been referred to. I have heard a variety of statements by the
Prime Minister of South Africa. I have heard or read of other things
attributed to him. What these things are that are reforred to in the motion
is not made clear, but o~ ne thing is perfectly clear, and that is that the
South African Prime Minister has done what I venture to say an Australian
Prime Minister would do under similar circumstances. He has promptly ordered
a judicial investigation of those incidents and has appointed two Supreme
Court judges of the highest repute to conduct this investigation.
The Leader of the Opposition says. " We know all that we need to
be told; we know how many people -ocre killed or wounded". But what do
we knov. about the circumstances? Wfhat do we know that enables us, at a
comfortable distance, to sit in judgment on the events in this particular
town on this particular day or night? How can we propose to say, ' We know
everything; we understand the facts porfectly. We sit in judgment. We
condemn!" That is exactly what the judicial investigation will be for.
What I said in this House, was not that the Australian Government
was condoning the events in South Africa. I said the very opposite that
wec were following a policy of non-intervention in what is, though tragic
and terrible, a domestic problem for the Union of South Africa. It is, to me,
a novel and very twisted use of viords to say that non-intervention implies
condonation. The words, of course, are almost exactly opposite in their
significance. ' hen, as a government, we decide not to intervene, that
mea~ ns that we arc not expressing a judgment on domestic policies. Wec may,
as individuals, with tho very limitcd information available to us, think
those policies. disputaole, but as a government, we arc not taking upon
ourselves the grievous responsibility of the sitting in judgment on policies
and on events of which we in Australia, happily, have no experiene, ocing,
as they are, matters of political dispute in South Africa itself.
I now rcfer to the policies or some of their manifestations.
I emphasise that what I tried to indicate on Tuesday and looking at the
Hansard" record I think I did say this was that we are -all entitled to
our own personal feelings which, in the case of most of the people of
j~ ustralia, are feelings of horror and apprehension. But one of the
inhibitions that is laid upon the man who is the head of the Government
of Australia is that his personal feelings are a luxury in wvhich he cannot
publicly indulge when the real problem is what political attitude the
Government should take and express. This is a great responsibility. it
iñ oquircs calm judgment and a sense ef responsibility to the future as well
as to the present. That is why we agree with the statement which wias
made by the Prime Minister of Canada a few days ago in his own Parliament.
He said that the oonclusion of his Government -was that at this time no
beneficial purpose would be served by diplomatic protests nor by even more
extreme measures to intervene. 0 *-13 
-3
Turning t3 clause 14 of the motion, I express myself with
restraint when I say that this clause is proof of an absolutely scruffy
political manouvre and, in itself, is a monstrous perversion of the
truth. You havc only to read the clause to sce that that is so. T he
clause states that I drew a parallel between South Africa' s treatment
of the natives in South Africa and Australia' s treatmunt of the indigenous
inhabitants of Australia end its torritorics. Every memiber on this side
of the House knows that that is en utter invention. At no stage did I
say anything of the kind.
I know that there are people some of them in Australia
who constantly foment the idea that this nation has-ill-treated its
abcrigines. I deny this. It is a charge, not only against the Commonwealth
Government, bu.. against the various State Governments. Tho facts
reject it. Nor did I, in my statemont, talk about our treatment of
aborigines in terms of v.. hat goes on in some other countries. What I said
lot me remind everybody of it was that if the domostic jurisdiction
principle is abendcned in the he. at of the moment, so to speak, we may live
to see the dlay when other nations, whether in the United Nations or
otherwise, will icek to discuss our aboriginal policies end claim as a
precedent whatever action occurs in relation to South Africa. That is
what I said. We h~ pe and believe that we will never have incidents of
the kind now under discussion, but all these things are matters of degree;
and a point of principle, once surrendered, is not easily recaptured.
So far' as our territories are concerned we believe, in this
Parliament and I think that most objective onlookers agree that our
policies end administration have been enlightened and progressive. We
have clean hands in respect of our territories. But it is not difficult
to imagine that, with the passage of time, some people who have no interest
in orderly progression towards rising living standards zr. nd sclf-government
will proceed to stir up trouble in those territories, and, having stirred
it up, invite the intervention of other countries, treating the domestic
jurisa3iction principle as having been abandoned.
The clause is, therefore, grossly dishonest in its statement
and deliberately damaging in its implication. I merely add that the
reference to the carriage of passports by indigenous peoples, passports
governing their movements inside their country, shows the length to which
the Opposition will go in order to secure what it believes to be a point.
First, the fact is that in the Soviet Union such passports are required,
but the Opposition in this Parliament has never, to my knowledge, ever
commented upon that or proposed a resolution about it.
Mr. Galvin. Do you approve of it?
Of course I do not approve of it but I do not interfere in
the domestic affairs of the Soviet Union if that is the way in which they
went to run their country, well and good. There are a few people
who ti ink that it is a very good way, but I am not one of them. Not one
word has ever been said by a member of the Opposition protesting against
th; a carriage of domestic passports in the Soviet Union. They cannot
squirm off this hook. And yet they have the strictest rules applying
over a great area of the Soviet Union, and these rules have, if anything,
beep more and mcre intensified during the last four years. It is interesting
to note that the penaltios for infringement of the passport rules in
the 5oviet Union range from six months " corrective" labour to two years
deprivation of freedom.
/ Now I come to clause 5 of the motion. Clause 5 emphasises
that my " gratuitous end maladroit" references to the policies of Australia
i~ n regard to its native peoples may be construod in Asia and Africa in a
qtanncr most damaging to this country. .* 14 
-4
Now, Sir, that is just about as unpatriotic and damaging a
clause to put in a motion as I have ever reaa in my life. ' What were
these references by me to thc policies of Australia in regard to its
native peoples? Thc Leader of the Opposition will be hard put to it to
find them in mry answcrs in this House. My references
to our own problem I have already said something about this wore made
in the setting which I have just elaborated. These policies arc, I repeat,
honourable and good, and I have yet to learn that they are the subject
of criticism either in Africa or in Asia. The Opposition here, while
piously expressing its fear that my references to these policies may be
construed in Asia and Africa in a manner most damaging to this country,
is plainly expressing its hopes that they will be. How could they
possibly be construed in any other country in a damaging sense unless
other countries are persuaded by people in this House that they are
damaging? Sir, our policies in relation to native peoples, either
inside Australia or in the territories, are aand let me emphasise
this our business and our responsibility and they have been pursued,
as even the Opposition would scarcely care to deny, in a clea-, r and
honourable fashion. May I, having regard to the eagerness of some
people to become engaged in South African politics, repeat what I have
said about our policies? Our policies are our business and our
responsibility, and we are not transferring them to other people. My
answer, Sir, on Thursday was and I quote it
If wie are tco free in asserting that what happens in South
Africa is a matter of international jurisdiction, we may
well step out of the light into the dark-iess en this matter.
We may well find that, the door having been opened in that way,
somebody will be willing to assert at some time or other, in
some circumstances, that we, in relation either to our own
internal population or to the population of our territories,
are also sub. bect to internationalI condemnation and international
jurisdiction.
This is what the honourable gentleman professes to fear, but his near-deputy
leader, at once interjected, when I hL-d made that remark, and said ' And so
we should Mr. Reynolds. If we do wrong.
0 h! if we do wrong. Mark the words that I used and I think
I was quite audible. I said that somebody might be willing to assert that
we are " 1also subjuct to international condemnation and international
jurisdiction". And inediately I said those words a prominent member of
the Labour Party said " And so we should be". Of all the pieces of
humbug that I have met w... ith in a long experience of politics, this is the
supreme example. One of the most pro) minent members of the Opposition has
said publicly in this House that we ought to be condemned for our administration
cf our policies in regard tz) native pecples, that we ought t,%
be dragged before an international jurisdiction. This very same Opposition
brushes that to one side and says, " How terrible that the Prime Minister
should even hint that there is a subject of this kind and so should
attract the hostile attention of other countries".
Now, Sir, wie come to clause 6 of the motion. Clause 6 is the
one that refers to the United Nations and the forthcoming Common-! ealth Prime
Ministers' Conference. Australia is not a member of the Security Council.
Therefore, the d% 2cision as to whether the South African question should be
there debated and made the subjeot of sor.-e decision or direction, is not
ours. I have stated in public, on behalf of this Government, our view on
that matter; but it is not our decision. The Security Council, as I say,
sat early this morning our time, and is presumably discussing the matter
at this moment. I have also, Sir, stated as dispassionately as possible
the principle to which we have adhered for y--. ars in relation to the internal
affairs of other countries. This is not a matter that has suddenly cropped up.
0 
This is a problem which has come up time after time, almost year after
year, and we have consistently taken the view that wie are not going to
intervene in the internal affairs of other countries; and so far aslI
kniow, Sir, our actions on all those occasions have never been seriously
challenged in this Parliament.
I think that I might have been able to regard this policy
of non-interference as the accepted national policy of Australia, for I
had never heard it challenged until the Opposition saw, in these moving,
dreadful, dramatic events in South Africa the opportunity for cashing-in
on a natural emotional reaction in the minds of most of us. But, Sir,
the clause goes on to propose that the events in South Africa not the
policy of apartheid Which the honeurable gentleman has talked about tiis
morning, but the circumstances of these incidents should be taken to
the meeting of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers. Really, can anybody
suppose anything more fantastic? In the first place, the motion indicates
no understanding of what a Commorr~ ealth Prime M1inisters' Conference is and
how it works. Mr. Duthie. N obody else has such an understanding either.
Nm, and you will be deprived of that experience forever. But,
Sir, Connnoncalth Prime Ministers' Conferences do not have matters listed for
discussion. They do not have an agenda. They do not have votes taken.
They do not have majorities. They consist of, say, nine people sitting
trngether, each of them the head of the Government cf his own country,
discussing matters of common interest, informing each other' s minds, learning
from each other's experience, getting to know something more about the problems
of other men. These are not meetings where votes are taken. Indeed, I
should like to~ tell honourable members that even the communique which
emerges at the end of a Commonwealth Primel Ministers' Conference and it
is always a harmless enough document, as you know. cannot contain anything
to the inclusion of which even only one Prim Minister objects.
Now, it is a system that has continued and which I and other
people too, think is one if the most important elements in the present
Commonwealth structure these regular meetings between the heads of
gcvernments of the Commonwealth. Yet, the Lcader of the Opposition, who at
Isayonse time had ambitions to attend a Prime Ministers' conference, seriously
that this matter ought to be listed. The Opposition sa~ s:-" Put it down
on the agenda. Bring along the Prime Minister of South Africa. Let him
be put into the dock and let us all try to cross-examine him". How long
does anybody suppose the Commonwealth would last if that was the way we
went on? How long do they suppose the structure itself would endure if
every time the head of a Commonwealth Go-ornmunt, or a parliament in the
Commonwealth, or somebody in a Commonwalth Government or Parliament,
disagreed with something going on inside another Commonwealth countr and
said " I wiant that listed for the next Prime Ministers' Conference"?
As a matter of fact, I would remind honourable members that
in the past there have been tremendous problems in the Indian sub-continenttremendous
pr-* blems of refugees and vast loss of life after partition
grievous problems. One problem left unsolved, the problem of Kashmir,
a problem w-hich has bedlevilled the relations between India and Pakistan
for years. I proposed at one stage, in London, that wie might have some
talks about it among Prime Ministers, just informally. But it was not
listed. It could not have been listed because at least two or three heads
of governments objected to this matter being made one for formal discussion
by a Prime Ministers' C~ onference. The reason they did so was they they
put on one side whatever might be their ovm views on this particular problem.
They realised that Yihen a meeting of the British Commonwealth Prime Ministers
sets itself up as an adjudicator on disputes inside the Coummonwealth then,
as I say, the end of the whole structure is in sight.
It has been said I clo not know with what authority that
the Prime Minister of South Africa would himself have liked an opportunity
of explaining his policies to his brother-Prime Ministers in suitable
e ./ 6 
-6
circumstances. I have heard that said, I cannot vouch for it but
it is primarily a matter for him. Personally I would welcome hearing
something on the matter because I appear to bc in a hopeless minority
as I look at the Opposition on this matter. I confess that I do not
kiowv all about South Africa's domestic policies. I do not know all the
implications of what has been called a-partheid and I would like to be
better informed. Now my time has expired and I shall sum up by saying that
this resolution is crude, it is misleading, it is dangerous. it will, 9
I hope and believe, be utterly rejected in this House and by all thoughtful
people with a sense of responsibility. But if, in all the circumstances
which confront us and in view of the honest indignation and shook in the
minds of our people, some resolution is required so that misleading commennts
may not be made on the outright rejection of the one now before us, I say
" tvery well, let us have a resolution". It wVill need to be of an entirely
different kind. I shall move the following amendment That all the wordls
after " that" be 6mitted arnd the i'ollowing wards inserted:-
" This House profoundly regrets the loss of human lives
occasioned in recent incidents in South Africa, is distressed that such
events should have occurred in a member ccuntry of the Commohwealth of
Nations, expresses its sympathy with those who have suffered, profoundly
hopes that order may be re-established as soon as possible and earnestly
hopes that the adjustment of all disputes and differences will be achieved
by orderly and lawf'ul pr~ cesses for the cormnon * oenefi t of the people of
South Africa", 



PI~~ h NISI'L I'S OV--ZAS VISIT
Thei Prime inister ( Mr. Ivenzies) wzil leavje Sydney
oy C I r o n S unday 7 th A pril i 160, for London to attfd the
Mee tlngx of Comon.,-ealth Pr** n'mo Miniaters which be~ ins on, 3rd
1cy. H e : i i b e a c c cm ) a n ied byv Mis s L. : H Cr,, a Ig ( Priva te
3ecr-etary)., an-d Mr 2JuTn ting ( Porm-, anont Ie a c of ePire
In London t!-e Prill-, Minister -Jill joined by theic
1i-ijnicor Lfo--Territories ( Mr. Tasluc.). Senior offi 2j, 9s moo
17_ i 1 0 join) the Prime inistoir in Lo. ndon arc. Sir Arthur
Tango ( Scretary, Department of xteornal fer) nr
HFok Sert c Depart nt of Defence.}
S ir E r ic T i s' Ai) strc;; ian High Ccm~ rx si53L 1; O r lte
Unitoe3 iinadeo, and O'; Lr -All1en 3rmrn, Dcmuty High-Cor. 1riipsioner,
* raills rieicr ofI e the aener d clc i ti-. on it th11ec P rimeo
Y j-n is t: 3r s M, -co-tiJ. n g.
Sir2 JOin-11 CrcoD(. oesy r~ o-tient of ' 2radc),
-nd Pnd2a] 1 Dpty Secre, t ary5 Depart--iont of -t-hc
Tireasury) % ill also in Lonclonfoi' trade an~ d ñ' in~ nce i-otings
befoteh Prin in-~; te sc arr ival anC uill be available t~ o
hunir fol-theCom:~ Dnve3.. xn 1r -Lenj-Lns t,) rs I ie cin E;
The 11rii-Iic linister wrill re-tur-. n to 4ut: lLvia the
UniteUd btat-e-s LindCan,--da. I n Jashington, ho i. will attenid Mmn
is terf or Extorna-1 ;',-ffirs a mee,, t-n of the Co-Lnci-l o'f the
% South-EaA; A!. ia irayOrg-anizK : tion b~ nning on 31st Ply
The rm iinistterY is e, c. u ted -to rejtu.-n to Austlral: l.
a bDut " C1-middle of June.
CaniibD r , a
7 c6 0. 


Douell's PortraitGraduated and Capital inms TaxTaxationnew shiip for Tasrman ran: Joomera Rocket RangeChambers of Commerce GuaranteeSchemehir. Hasluck and London visitExternal Affairs PiortfolioLondon ConferenceSo~ uth frica at lengthK~ onopolies etc.Proposed Daom on M~ urray
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THERT. HON. R. G. MENZIES ON SATUiDAY 9TH APRIL, 1960AT 11 A. M.PRIME MINISTEQUESTION: PRIME MINISTEQUESTION: R: Well what can I tell you?There's a message published in New York this morningSir, saying that Time Magazine propose to send Dobell'sportrait of you on a tour of Australia and then to offerit to you. It's at present on display in the QantasOffice in New York. Our people are wondering whetheryou've heard from them and whether you will accept it.R: I've heard nothing about it. I read it in the Agethis morning. I've no comment to make on it.Mr. Calwell last night, Sir, proposed capital . rtax and graduated tax on Company profits, mainly for tihundoing I think of General Motors Holdens, as a deflationarymeasure, or anti-inflationary measure for the nextbudget. Are you likely to consider either?PRIME MINISTER: I don't know ihat we'll consider for the next Bud?. oIt's a little premat'ire. But you've heard this storyabout a graduated company tax many times. I seem to rememberit was tried by Mr. Curtin and later on by Mr.Chifley, and abandoned. Of course, this is all part andparcel of Mr. Calvell's obsession with the idea that thicis a profit inflation. That argument has been answeredpretty completely in the House.', UESTION: Sir, can we take it from : ihat you've said thatthere will be no reLgaoe T company tax and no . oPRIME MINISTER: You can't take me as saying anything whatever aborthe next Budget. I don't know anything about it yet.That answer doesn't have any implications eithe-, ( Lter)QUESTION: Mr. Calwell also mentioned that you'll have to increasetaxation to reach a non-deficit Budget. Is thatfair assessment?PRIME MINISTER. What does Mr. Calwell know about it?QUESTION: ( Interjection)Oh, now come on, I'm not arguing about the Budget. Th-;is April and not even April the 1st.There are some fleeting rumours around that someaction may be taken jointly by the Governments of Austr,.lia and New Zealand to provide a new ship to maintainAustralasian Shipping Service on the Tasman. Minitells me that he hasn't heard officially of it but sugted that if anything had cropped up you may have been c..cussing it with Mr. Nash.PRIME MINISTEi;: Joderful. This, I think, involves a question fo--some replacement for the Honowai doesn't it? al1iel l,can tell you about it is that Mr. Nash, when I as spciing to him on the telephone in Sydney a couple of days rtold me that among othe: things he would like to discuss,, ith me in London was this question of the shipping link.And I've said I'd be glad to do that and I've now askedthe Shipping Department to give me . ihatever backgroundinformation they have on it so that I'll be qualified totalk about it. But that's all I can say about it, that'sall I know about it.QUESTION: During the week, Mr. Menzies, there were reports
published from London, first appearing in tl. e London DailyExpress, that Britain was considering abandoning the . JoomeraRocket Range and jiving away the Blue Streak and othermissile experiments there.PRIME MINISTER: I hope I'll be relieved from the responsibility ofcommenting on Mr. Chapman Pincher's rumours and speculativestories because one becomes accustomed to them.QUESTION: Sir, the Chambers of Commerce in their final sessionyesterday, agreed to try and sponsor a guarantee schemefor Commonwealth countries to guarantee investment 3i sksin some of the lesser developed areas and they proposethat this should be partPRI1iE MINISTER: Don't tell me; I haven't read it. I'm certainlynot going to comment on it, whatever it is. They didn'tdeliver the paper at ray house this morning before I left.Sir Garfield Barwick will be acting Minister forEternal Affairs while I'm away. I notice that there hasbeen some speculation about " Why Mr. Hasluck?". Well theanswer, of course, might by " Why not?" Mr. Hasluck I'mtaking with me for very good reasons. He's been deeplyimmersed in his territorial problems for years now withoutany intermission and I think that this will be very helpfulto him to get a sort of distant perspective on thesethings'; to come with me to have discussions with theColonial Administration in London; to go over to TheHague and have talks with the Dutch; to have discussic'-in New York with members of the Trusteeship Council -ioTrusteeship Organisation; putting our point of viewexplaining our policies that are being pursued, I thin..it's very valuable. It has no significance beyond that,QUES'ION: Might he be useful to you on the question of rac'.-problems, integration, if those matters are discussed?PRIME MINISTER: If those matters are discussed, yes. Oh, he'll beextremely useful to me because he's very experienced andintelligent.QUESTION: -y s te-t the Trusteeship Councilformally, Sir?PRIME MINISTER. Oh, I couldn't tell you that. I don't even knowwhether it could be meeting. Their Headquarters are inNew York and that's all I had in mind.QUESTION: Does your statement, Mr. Menzies, suggest that yo"-will retain the External Affairs portfolio indcfini-PRIME MINISTER: I think the last time I was asked about that I s.-that that would depend entirely on how I found I wasing out with it.QUESTION: Have you found out yet Sir?PRIME MINISTER. Well, I'm so far not very embarrassed by it. NoI've got Senator Gorton doing a lot of work.QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE Is he doing any policy stuff, Sir, or is that a?.I; ' ell, not major policy stuff, i mean questionswell they're not really policy stuff I suppose butquestions of approval under the Colombo Plan, they involve,I suppose elements of policy well he deals withthose. There's a good deal of routine, or semi-routineadministration ihich takes up time. The things he attendsto are broadly those things which are not top policy or
matters which involve some major decision. In which casehe refers them to me and, if necessary, discusses them withme. So far it's working all right but nobody can piercethe mists of the future.QUEJTION: Will Mr. Hasluck present to the Dutch Goverrmient inhis discussions any specific plans for the future of NewGuinea?PRIME MINISTER: Oh, now look, he's not going to Holland to presentplans. Really why always force the cards in this way. Hehappens to be the Minister for Territories, Austr; lian-New Guinea, Papua. The Dutch happen to be the proprietorsof Jest New Guinea so of course he'll call on the Dutch.Je hatve administrative contacts with them therefore he'llbe very interested to talk to their people. Their mancame out here and talked with us,QUESTION: His visit will be the equivalent, in fact, of thevisitPRIME MINISTER: That's right; but we didn't discuss plans withtheir Minister , rho came out hero, nor will Hasluck haveany proposals to put before them. There's always an assumptionyou know, about these internationsl thjngs ti:.;you go along with a plan and if it's got four paragraph_in it, it's a four-point plan. That's a good head. lineyou see. But you never go with a plan. You g o h-c'talk about things. You go to let the wind blow the ccversationaround the room. You just take it as it goe:Something may emerge from it. You dont go in with astatement of claim.QUESTION: Can you give us any thoughts on the general Londo.-,Conference, Sir?PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I think it's going to be very inter. sing becauseit's just, as you know, just before the Suit andI've no doubt Mr. MacmiJlan will look for lr. d to discussingwith the other Prime Ministers the problems that ri..arise at the Summit; one of the major things of which,no doubt, will be the disarmament problem, which has runinto some difficulties in Geneva and which I think, rays-Nwill probably need some direction from the Sur7mmit if it*:to be brought to finality, But I anticipate that he'll b,very frank about what he has in his own mind in discuss'-that problem with us. I suppose it will be too irmuchi toexpect that he'll get eight or nine views all of whichcoincide. But he'll get some considerable bcnefit, nodoubt, in having ideas thrown around at the table,' ThatIrather think is going to be the major object of the e: rcise. ' To may also have some talks about the future ofCyprus as to which there is still some uncertain,-Ly, T.will be a proposal from Ghana that, on becoming a Repub"' i-Ghana should remain in the Commonwealth, But we've noagenda. ie never do, Ihat happens, in fact rt a Pri-coMinisters' Conference is that, for example, a ForeignSecretary, whoever he may be, will, at a certain stage,give a conspectus of the foreign situation and c" urrent*problems, and then we discuss them exchanging ideas,getting further information where necessary. At anotchosessionthe Chancellor of the Exchequer will come alongand he'll open , n economic session and discuss his ownbudgetary policy, the position of the Sterling area andwhat goes on in relation to conzertibility. Another, tiethe President of the Board of Trade may be invited to cc-eand discuss the European common market,QUESTION: Do you think there'll be any serious discussion onthat? The Chambers of Commerce are very concerned aboutthe developments,
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know how serious a discussion there'll be.But that there ,/ ill be some discussion is quite certainbecause we're interested and Canada is interested. ' Jhetherthose discussions will occur in the full meeting ofPrime Ministers, or whether they will be talked out by twoor three of us with the Board of Trade, for example, Idon't know at this stage. iie don't have an Agenda paper.QUESTTIONDo you think it's on the broader racial questionrather than South Africa-that there will be a possibilityof that being discussed.PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't know. I've ndt heard it proposed. Therule that has been applied in the past and by nobody morezealously than one or two of the Asian members of theCommonwealth is that we don't discuss matters at issue betweentwo members of the Commonwealth. In other words weare not a board of adjudication. And that means forexample this problem: these arguments that go on aboutSouth Africa. They will almost certainly not be discussedin the Conference but that there will be discussions inprivate in an informal way, I've no doubt. I, for example,would hope to have a talk wlith Dr. Verwoord before the Co;--foernce begins. I'd like to add to my own knowledge of,not only the events, but the policies that lie behind therThat's quite inevitable and I'm looking for-ward to that,It will be very interesting. I gather that my colleaguethe Tunku Abdul Rahnan is going to raise this matter, biu'not, I think, in what I'll call full session of the Conference.Because that's ainst ourpractico, and, indeed,it's very undesirable because if you got to that pointyou can have somebody wanting to move a resolution or somethingof that kind.QUESTION: PRIME MINISTIQUESTION: PRIME MINISTEQUESTION: PRIME MINISTEQUESTION: PRIME MINISTEQUESTION: Is that rule always observed Mr. Menzies?R: Always, in my experience. And again in gy expericnaand I am the oldest inhabitant, no motions are ever tabledand no votes are ever taken, though some of the suggestionsI've read are a little bit revolutionary. No votes.As a matter of fact when re produce t'iat superb collectionofclichos known as the communique, at the end of the Conference,it is a collection of cliches only because everything in it has to be agreed to by everybody at the table)Is it a fact, Sir, that each Session is put asideand re-arran ed at the next Session?R~ i'Jell if you said that, you'd have some prime facieevidence to support it. That's the position. You've beendiscussing some matter, it's very interesting, it's worth-.ihile referring to it and one Prime Min ster says Iobject to any reference being made to that subject" andthat's out. ThataLy t'k sa bit. " biants mag-lHave you had any recent news of developments onSouth Africa Sir, Llart from what you said?R: I know that what I've said about this matter notbeing a matter of debate in the full Prime Ministers' Conference,coincides with Mr. Macmillan's view and I've nodoubt that on examination it will be the generally acceptedview. I know for example that Mr. Nehru will agreethat this kind of problem is not a matter for full session,Can you tell us, Sir, what the Commonwealth is givingPrincess Margaret as a Jodding Gift?R: No I can't.Reverting to that again, Sir, has our High Commissicn-
er in South Africa given a second report on this or in anyway dealt with the circum-ntances of Sharpeville?PRIME MINISTE: Oh he's written one or tio quite lengthy letters on,this matter but I don't think there's anything very freshin them. That's all I'll say about that.QUESTION: Do you think these discussions in London will easethe situatioh at all, Mr. Monzics?PRIME MINISTER: JWll, I don't know. I, for one, always hope so. Atany rate any talks which, again I repeat, will be privateand informal, must do good because they must produce explanationsof policy, for example, which will be vcluable.You see there are two aspects in C matter of this kind,One is these terrible incidents which shock everybody. Yonmay assume that these are the direct consequence of apolicy or you may think that they are not, but that theyare sort of inadvertent by-products of some policy. Well,we'll know more about that when we read the results ofthe judicial investigations that are in hand in SouthAfrica. Idon't know whether my colleagues in London whodesire to talk about this matte want to " out theincidents, or want to talk about the policy. I!' m myseYvastly interested to understand the policy while alwayremembering that it's South Africa's policy, not min'e.is their business, not mine.QUESTION: Sir, if the South African Prime iiniste:. tokosviewpoint it might not be discussed at all?PRIME MINISTER: I've no reason to suppose that he won't discuss it,with me, for exampleo I think he will. I'm sure thatwill be willing to discuss it with people, bu' net in theConference Room with the threat that some people havehinted at, of emotion. I wouldn't expect that he woulV.that. But I've not the slightest doubt that mattwill be freely discussed.QUESTION: Is there any fear that the colour question :-ay di-.vide the members at the Commonwealth Cofo---e.PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I won't say anything about that, : T've gotalong pretty well so far. No reason . rwhy we shouldn't.There are just two crmments thatl'd like to makewhich are worth having in mind, I think. Those who tal. 7about expelling South Africa from the Commonwealth, ifsuch a procedure is available, I think overlook the factthat there may be a great number of people in South Af: iincluding a considerable number of Africans, who want t?be in the British Commonwealth, who don't want to be tL:' o.out ofthe British Commonwealth.QUESTION: You mean the Dutch people?PRIME MINISTER No. I mean Africans the coloured people.; theBantu. They call them Africans. ell, how does anybodyhere know? There might be millions of them who would notw. ant to be out of the Commonwealth, who feel that in amembership of the Comnonwealth they have sorn ' ectionfor their future, You don't know. I don't know. Undethose circumstances to say to South Africa: " You're outhe Commonwealth" may be to punish the wrong people, Nowthat's point No. 1.Point No 2. I'm glad to see that this nonsenseabout a trade boycott is beginning to fade out ofthepicture because never was anything sillier suggested.What's the object of a boycott? I suppose it is to punis.'the Government, the present Government of South Africa. o:
6.to affect its policies. Suppose if Australia imposed aboycott. It's worth remembering that perhaps the largestsingle item of import we have from South Africa is fishand thu great bulk of the people engaged in that industryin South Africa are coloured people. So in order to showour sympathy with them we put them out of a job. A boycotalways was a blunt instrument, but if you apply it to thetrade bet roon South Africa and Australia its stupidity andinjustice become perfectly clear. Anyhow, I don't thinkanybody in Australia seriously suggests it.QUESTION: On a more local subject Sir, have you any hint of akind of programme in mind on monopolies and other legislativePRIME MINISTER: No. I haven't. The Attorney is at work on thatmatter. As you know it's a complex . thing. ', ell he'sbound to hold it until I get back because this is going tcrequire a great deal of examination. I would hope in theBudget Session.QJESTION: WJould a referendum be involved in this?PRIME MINISTER: A Referendum?QGETION: Mm. Like more Commonwealth power to deal withPRIME MINISTEIR: Oh, I Look we haven't yet czc, . c ony decisionabout this famous report on the amcndment of the Constit'c.tion.QUESTION: It would be an interesting paper if you took thewhole lot of them wouldn't it, Sir?PRIME MINISTER: Yes.QUELTi-ON: Do you have any particular monopolies or restrictivepractices in mindPRIME MINISTER: Now, look, I'm saying no more about it.QUESTION: Sir, Sir Thomas Playford has suggested that itwould be a fair thing if the Commonwealth and the StateSouth Australia pay half each of the cost of his ooc.dam on the Murray. Have you any reaction to that?PRIME MINISTER. No comment.PRESS AN: It's quite surprising that he wants to pay half,isn't it? ( Laughter)fith the compliments of:Mr. Hugh Dash,Press Secretary to the Prime Minister.



3liC . JAGE DECISION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Mr. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said today-
" This should help touards stability this year, Stability
is worth a great deal to all wage-earners and all who
live on fixed incomes".
CANBE'LR A
12th April, 1960. NoL. 13/ 16 



P. M. No. j-IQ
ACTING MINISTERS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. Menzies announced today that Sir Garfield
Barwick will act as Minister for External Affairs during his
absence abroad. Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton will continue
to act as assisting Minister in the External Affairs portfolio.
Mr. F. Osborne will act as Minister for Territories during the
absence of Mr. P. M. C. Hasluck.
CANBEIRA, l4th April, 1960. 



P. M. No. 14/ 60
BLUE STREAK
Statement by the Pyime Minister the Rt. IHonn JiL., jMenzies
The United Kingdom Government have issued a
statement concerning the long range missile Blue StreWd
The statement was discussed with the Australian Government.
The Australian Government concurred in it. Text of the
statement is attached.
CANBERRA 14th April, 1960. 
0
0
0
I 0 0 
3LUE S3TREAK
The Government have been considering the future of the
project for developing the long range ballistic missile Blue
Streak and have been in touch with the Australian Government
about it in view of their interest in the Joint Project and the
operation of the Joomera range.
The technique of controlling ballistic missiles has
rapidly advanced. The vulnerability of missiles launched from
static sites and the practicability of launching missiles of
considerable range from'mobile platforms has now been established.
In the light of our military advice to this effect and of the
importance of reinforcing the effectiveness of the deterrent we
have concluded and the Australian Government have fully accepted
that we ought not to continue to develop as a military % Jeapon a
missile that can be launched only from a fixed site.
Today our strate-ic nuclear force is an effective and
significant contribution to the deterrent power of the free
world. The Government do not intend to give up this independent
contribution and therefore some other vehicle will in due course
be needed in place of Blue Streak to carry British manufactured
nuclear warheads. The need for this is not immediately urgent
since the effectiveness of the V--bomber force as the vehicle for
these warheads will remain unimpaired for several years to come,
nor is it possible at the moment to say with certainty which of
several possibilities or combinations of them would be technically
themost suitable. On present information there appears much
to be said for prolonging the effectiveness of the V-bombers by
buying supplies of the airborne ballistic missile Skybolt which
is being developed in the United States. H. Mv. Government understands
that the United States Govermient will be favourably disposed
to the purchase by the United Kingdom at the appropriate
time of supplies of this vehicle.
The Government will now consider with the firms and
other interests concerned as a. mat-ter of urgency whether the Blue
Streak programme could be adapted for the development of a
launcher for space satellites. A further statement will be made
to tGhe House as soon as possible.
This decision ofcourse does not mean that the ., rork at
ioomera will be ended. On the contrary there are many other
projects for which the range is needed. 11e thcer, fore expect
that for some years to come at least there will be a substantial
programme of work for that range. 



South Africa
Common Market and Free Trade Area
! oomera
Commonwealth defence
South Africa
3lue S3treak
David iheppard
8outh Africa
Apartheid
Riussian Submarines to Indonesia
i,' ew Guinea
Visit to Continent Paris
K,, orean situation
Red China
VJisit to Queen
South *-frica
Summit 
-F ThRhE MIISTERWS PRFS AND COMM'TENCE
LOJUX) I; N QAtI.-h -Z12 l v q
T IIITERVT2M,
I. T. V. ~ e~ tion: Do you feel that there is any influence the Cotmnorwalth
Prime hiistero can bxing to bear on the situation ini South Africa?
. Answer: Well.$ I don' t know but I think the tal. ks the Co~ aunwoalth
Prime hinisters will have with each o4; her and the represent'Uativ: e of' the
Prime Ministor of. South Africa car-not fall to do som-e good because they
will increase our knowleodge. They may have an efei-on both sides.
I don't maan by that that I think there ought t o be talks in the fuill
Confurence. % q never have g-one in for that kind of thing in the past
and frankly I hope we won't in fut-ureo because the iiicment you get to thait
you got to the point whero you bave resolutions and votes, and we have
n,-vor had tho~ tu,
Ruest-Jon Do you feel that thure ave any steps * that the Commaonwealth
countriens can take which might have s-orwe tfect on this th-reateoning trade
vwr in Europe between the Cunmon Mar'ket a: id tLae Pree Txdde Area?
Answer: This problem of tha Seiren. and the Oix is muoth too comnplicated
to l. end itself to the half minule flashy genor: alisation and
I'm not goi;. rg to make cne.
41Ll right, we'll 5skip that one,
Qz3qsti Australia has a big G-ak9 in th1e Woomera Rocket Range. What
effect will the abandonment of the Blue Str oak have?
kn-wer: Wel, wre have every reason to believe that there wrill be
a considerable amourit of work for it t o do and for a con-23zvable time to
come, lf in fact it turns c~ ut thai; the appara~ tus could be used for
purposes of space research thare might be no redaoing off ect on operations
of -Woomera at all. It mightA be some increasing resu. 3, But you don't
want to exag,; e'oate our trouble in this matter if there ie tro'uble.
Our contribution to Womera h-i be( en E-u% at:_ ntli but Cveat s
contribution has been a bigao: one, you know, and any losses in-volved in
the change of direction the losses will primarily ihil on thiLs country.
aU Lcstro: Are you happy about Cornmonwea2th defenca as long as we don't
have a long range missile of ou-own?
Answer:* Well. you are now asking me a question again which coulIdn't
possibly be answered in under half an hour, Have we half an hour?
You had better just write me down as being not unhappy.
auestion: Coul. d I put it in another way do you think the Commonwealth
oughat to have a long range missile?
Answer: Now you are asking me a question -that relates almost entirely
to the Govewnment of this Country and I thin~ k I've heard in qr trave. o~
that there is gcxdng to be a debate. I am not in it.
Thank you very much indeed, 
2.
B. B. C.
Questicn: Mvr. 1ienzies, you are on record as saying that you
belleve the South Afr-Ican situation is a doulestic one and not one for
discussion by the ' Urnited Nations, but ' how do you feel about its be-Ing
discusoecl at the forx6hclomling Prime k-Ami. ster' s Conferonnc:?
I would hope that it was not discussged. as a set itmi in
a fornial session of the Conrferernce, because if that were to occur there
woul~ d inevitably be somn divisions of opinion and thoe wculd become
mault. 9ro of notorietLy, port-aps w~ tt. ars reso'ui, n~ ~ hv
never had votes in the Prime Miniates' Cofrne W area a wvoilder'
fuJ. body. We have no rules, no votes, plent-ty of discussion, cut of
it all there emorges a comm~ on accepted view about 8cme -; hing or thore
doesn'~ t. and if thore. is no co~ on accepted view on a particaular probl. em
t hen nothing is said pulicly what~ ever. But at the samae time lEin suve
that other Prime Ministers like 4yrse. f are look-ing forviard to
writh the reprenontative of South lfrica in.. d to becovia bettbar nord
as to what goes on, It is ver easy to talk about thoix policy, vc. , y
easy to be rather ill-informed about it. I have novux pvofessed to
und ; tand oth-D~ paople Is policies frightfully well. I have all the
viox-la' trouble in understanding my ow n. .1 want to learn, I want to
understand, and if in a private vray I disagree writh someothing then I am
able to say it in a private wray.
_ Zi: es4-ion: Don't you feel that open discu~ ssion of tho situation at
the Conference might give soire encourag~ montb to the Inoe modera-te elements
amongst the South African Governmnt supporters?
Answer: Nothingr could persuade me this ought to be listed for
discussion in forffl s,. ssion of this Primne I, 1i. iirtersj' Conference. I can
see nothing but harm coruing from it.
Q-uesion: Do you thlink if it wore listod for aiscuasion it could
result in Suth Africa leaving the Coivannv-althi?
Anower: That 1.9 of course a purely specdLative matter but there
are some things whl-ich if they are allowed to haippon in the formal
proceedings of the Prime hinisters' Conforenoe rroy -Iexmphasiso mty
have a damaging effect on the whole s-; ruct ture.
.&amp; eiio: One of the leading Nationa. 42' papers in South Aftri. a
envisages a situation wiherevby Sou~ h Afica could become wh1at thoy call tho
Polecat &amp; t the waKia. Wouild wie necessarily i-nt a PdLeoat ixi the Coimamonwealth
house? Idon't think that is a questVion that I ought to be askedL
to answer' because of course that assumes something about pdLecats, doesn't
it? I1 have no c ament.
_ Qae s t Icn: To change the subject, sir, how do you feel about the
abandonment of the rocket Blue Streak?
An Well., the a-: ime 11inister was good enough to send out to
us the First Sea Lord so that ive might be put in possession of all
technical and military considerations whiich had led them to their conclusions,
We found nothing which we could object to in those conclusions,
and that being so those conclusions ought to be put into effect.
Thank you very muoh, 8sir. 
3.
THE PRESS
,. estii, o n: Prime Minister, could you tell us what you think of
David Sheppard's decision not to play against the South Africans?
Answer: I regret it.
Qlestion: Can you re-state for us Australia's attitude to the
South African situation?
Answer: The attitude of the Australian Government was stated by
me on two occasions in the House of Representatives, and what I said
amounts to this, We regard the problem of the racial policies existing
in South Africa as matters of domestic jurisdiction. We regard them as
not being within the jurisdiction of the United Nations by reason of the
Domestic Jurisdiction Clause. We think also, apart altogether from the
Charter of the United Nations, that it is a very sound rule of foreii
policy not to seek to interfere in the domestic political problems of
another country, That has been our attitude and that remains our
attitude. As I have said, that doesn't at all exclude the possibility
of private or semi-private discussions between the Prime Minister of
South Africa or his representative and myself and hr. Nash and Mr. Macmillan
and whoever else wants to have discussions. I want to have them,
I am very anxious to know more than I know now. I seem to be in a bit
of a minority. Most people seem to think they knov all about what goes
on in South Africa. Not a dark shadow of doubt in their minds at all.
But I don't belong to that happy band. I would like to have an oppartunity
of discussing their policies but, as you know, not as a matter
of formality. People ought to remember that there have been previous
occasions when suggestions were made that a particular topic that involved
a Cormonwealth country or countries ought -o be listed. Kashmir was
one but it wasn't listed. That was a problem which was producing
tension between two great members of the Commonwealth. It was never
listc:. l It was discussed privately. And if a matter of that kind,
with all its possibilities and involving as it did flatly different
views on the part of two identified nations, if that were not to be listed,
how does it come about that we list for discussion a matter which affects
South Africans in South Africa but whiuh after all we think is their
business. Question: I was just going to ask you, Ir, henzies, if you can say
that you personally dislike Apartheid?
Answer: I have made it clear in Parliament, and I am sorry that
I have to make it clear here, when I speak publicly I speak as Prime
Minister and on behalf of the C-overnment and therefore I don't permit
myself the luxury of private views.
Question: There was a statement made today, hr, Menzies, that Russia
has supplied submarines to Indonesia with trained crews. Have you
had any confirmation that this is true, and have you had any concern
over it?
Answar: I have had no canfirmation of that at all.
But it is
Oh well, if you had a brother, would he like cheese? That is too
hypothetical far me.
f 
Question: ir. Menzies, a question on New Guinea. The Dutch are
now talking in terms of offering self-determination to New Guinea in
something like ten years. Does this speeding up of New Guinea's
political development surprise you?
Answer: I have no official confirmation of the proposition you
have just referred to. I know that there has been an idea floating
around. We think it is impossible to state a timetable on these
matters. We think that the test ill be i. n the long run what stage
of development have the people reached. That is the thing that determin
the question of self-determination on their part. I don't think
one ought to assume that the Dutch have really vitten down a specific
timetable. I have read about it in the Press but that doesn't pr-ove
much. It was announced in the House...
Well, I wasn't there, I didn't hear it. Anyhow Mir. Hasluck is coming
ovur here and no doubt he will have smne talks with them.
Question: Have you any plans for going to The Hague on this visit?
Answer: No,
Question: What visits will you be making on the Continent, ir. enzios?
Answer: I doubt whether I will make any. It looks as if Paris
might be a bit crowded after we finish our Conference here. No, I have
no plans for going to the Continent. I have just come from Geneva.
Cuestion: Miay I take it from that, Mx. henzies, that you will not be
going to Paris as certain suggestions have been made that you would go to
Paris? Answer: Really' Well I didn't know about them. I haven't noticed
any of the big shots making them.
Question: ir. Menzies, hr. } acmillan has said that the winds of change
are blowing through South Africa. How do you see the future in South
Africa? Answer: I make no comment on that. I wvill be much better informed
on that matter when I have had an opportunity of talks with the representative
of South Africa at this Conference.
Question: hr. Menzies, what do you feel about the Korean situation?
inswer: I suppose it might be permitted for me to say that I am
not surprised full stop. Whore's mny adviser on External Affairs? I think
that's permissible, don't you, hiick?
Question: iKr. 1henzies, what is your policy with regard to recognising
Red China?
Answer: We don't recognise Red China.
Do you intend to in the near future?
® 1 Question: 
Answr: I know of no prospect of that policy being changed. It is
elementary, of course. I can say that now but somebody else may have
different views in future. But we hve nothing before us to suggest
any change in the present policy,
Qu9stion: Sir, is a visit to the Queen before the Wedding on the 6th
listed in your programme?
Answer: I don't know. I know that I am down to have an audience with
her some day. I think it is quite early in the Conference, isn't it?
But whether it is before or after the Wedding does that nmtter very much?
Is that very important? What point are you going to make of it? It
will have all the time and novelty to me whoAn you make it.
Question: Returning to Africa, sir do you see the South . fx-ican
situation causing a Commonwealth split? With the coloured nations being
separated from the white?
Answer: Look, I am not going to say any more on that subject because
un t!. hing that anybcdy sayson that at this time is not very helpful to the
Conmmnwealth. Lets get together, and let us have this great oppcrtunity
for meeting each other, directly and personally.
Question: Have you anything to say, sir, on the prospects of a Summit
success?
Answer: No, nothing to say on that.
Question: Mr. Nash was quoted in Moscow ycsterday as saying that he was
sure that 1Mr, KCrschev wanted peaceful co-existence and disarmament.
Ansvwer: Well, if he turns out to be right, this Conference has a wonderful
opportuiity of being productive.
Question: Are you able to discuss any subjects which you yourself will
raise at the Prime Ministers' Conference?
Answe: No, I am not very talkative about these things before they
happen. Well, we are trying hard.
I know.
Quest ion" How long are you here for?
Answe: Three or four weeks, I think. I have to go and do a lecture
at Cambridge.
Question: On what?
Answer: On the changing Commonwealth.
Question: Will you fit in some cricket then?
Answer: No. I would like to see them once but I don't know whether
T will be able. 



HOBART FLOOD RELIEF
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister. Mr. McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, today sent the
following message to the Tasmanian Premier, the Hon. E. E. Reece:
" On behalf Commonwealth Government I wish to express our
sincere regret at serious damage occasioned by floods in
Tasmania and deep sympathy for all who have suffered so greviously.
Mr. Townley has impressed the Government with the seriousness
of the disaster and raised the question of Commonwealth
assistance and I also have your telegram of today's date.
Consistent with the approach in other major disasters the
Commonwealth will contribute pound for pound with State finance
for relief personal hardship and distress on usual conditions.
Also in line with assistance xiven in other major disasters
Commonwealth is willing to make a contribution on a pound for
pound basis towards restorations necessary as a result of damage
to public roads, bridges, etc., and our officials would wish to
consult as soon as convenient with your officials on needs under
these headings uith view to an eaiy advance by Commonwealth."
The Minister for Defence, Mr. Townley, said in
Canberra tonight that he was encouraged by the sympathetic
attention-xiven by the Commonwealth to Tasmania's problems. He
was also pleased at the prompt reaction. He said: " The
Tasmanian Premier, Mr. Reece, has been informed by the Acting
Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, of the details of the Commonwealth
assistance". Briefly the Commonwealth will share equally all
amounts expended by the State Government for immediate relief of
personal distress and hards-hip. Seca-) Jly the Commonwealth on the
same basis will share the cost of restoring bridges, roads etc.
This is in line with practices adopted by the Commonwealth
in all major disasters and will undoubtedly ease the
burden on the State especially as planning can now proceed
~ uithout delay.
CAN'BERRA, 26thi April 1960. 



OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Australian News and Information Bureau, Australia House,
Strand, London, W. C. 2 Telephone: TEMple Bar 2435
AUSTIALIAN PRIME MINISTER REVIWS
TH C1IM1 , VEALTH ' S ECON0 11Y
The Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. R. G. Menzies,
and the President of the British Board of Trade, Mr. R. Maudling,
addressed members of the Australian Association of British manufacturers
and their guestsat a dinner at the Mayfair Hotel on
s qs? 4 hd to celebrate the association's
S pDurmetsh idaendn. ivTheers aprrye, s ident ofA the association, Mr. Jocelyn Morton,
In the course of his speech Mr. Menzies reviewed the
Australian economy. The main text of his speech follows:
Now, Sir, an occasion like this is not an occasion, as
I long since learned, for heavy political observations. But it
may be perhaps an opportunity for expounding quite mildly, quite
lightly, a few aspects from my point of view of the Australian
economy. I think there are three or four matters that I would
just l-ike to mention to you,
The first of them is that in 1950 17inston Churchill sent
me a cable about import licensing. Not that Winston was a great
expert on import licensing. Let that be conceded at once. But
because there was a certain amount of uproar here about tne steep
impositions of import licensing to which we resorted at that time
and particularly two years later. I remember it very well.
I was put up on a platform over past Westminster somewhere. I had
a delegation from Manchester modest fellows those! They didn't
merely make it clear to me that what Manchester thinks today London
thinks tomorrow. They gave Ye a pretty broad hint that what
Manchester thinks at any time the Australians would never think of
in a century' But anyhow it was all quiie enjoyable and I went away
feeling that there was how shall I put it slight objection to
import licensing' Well, in effect we took it off the other day and Iexpected
to get votes of thanks even frcm Manchester. o. votes of thanks from
Manchester dear me' what it was a crime to impose it was a
double crime to remove. But all I want to remind you about is
this. Tariffs yes. The Tariff Board yes. It's our great
instrument and I am delighted to have heard your reference to it.
It's our great instrument of providing the terms and conditions
on which goods wi: lpass into Australia.
But import licensing what you might call the blunt
instrument of import licensing this is something which can be
justified only for balance of payments and balance of funds' reasons. 
And when, as it's happened with us, through the inscrutable
wisdom pa5rtly of Providence and partly of' my own Government;
when it turns out that our balances of payment are good and our
overseas funds are good, it is, quite seriously, necessary, if'
we are to maintain our position as honest international traders,
that we should reduce and ultimately eliminate the arbitrary
impact of import licensing and leave these matters to the tariff'
and to the Tariff' Board.
Now of' course my friend the chairman very naturally has
said that he feels anxiety, and some of you do too, about what
may now happen. If we are to put up a tariff in A:* ustralia high
enough to keep out low cost commodities and of course you
realise Japan is by no means the lowest of the low cost countries;
if we are to do that then we may lave to put up a tariff so high
that it will. impose grievous disabilities on the exporters from
this country.
B~ Now all I want to say to you, Sir, is that that is
Wa problem well known to the Tariff Board; to which the A ustralian
Tariff' Board has been directing and is directing a great deal of'
attention. And in its consideration of that matter it has, as
Susual, been tremendously helped by the representative of your own
WAssociation in Australia,
It isn't an easy one tc get some flexibility into a tariff
structure which will enable you to deal properly with one and
equally properly with an entirely different one. But I do know
for myself that the Board is itself very exercised about this
matter and all I need say to you is that you need have no fear that
it will do its very-best to avert the kind of consequence that you
had in mind., Now the second thing that I want to say a word about.,. 0
Vis this. I have been a long time on the political scene much
too long I think. But I have been here almost a ridiculous number
of times and we've had all sorts of arguments. I. can go back
years to a time when you could genuinely find people in this
country who thought that Australians ought to hew wood and draw
water and grow wool and leave the manufacturing to people who
understood it. That's onl. y 25 years ago.
But a great change has come on the world. The truth is,
and this is the lively thing about our association, this is the
1i211 thing about the Commonwealth or at any rate about Great
Britain and Australia that we know that it is through co-operation,
not throu ' gh hostility; through dynia-mic ideas, not through a set
of static ideas, that we are both going to develop to our fullest
possible extent.
And for that reason one of the things that I want just
to mention to you is the extent of capital investment in Australia.
Recently, when, for some purpose or other, I was looking up the
records, I found that in the last 50 years the population of
Australia had doubled. That's really an enormous increase.
Since the War ended, the last War ended, our population
has been increased by more than two million people which in
a country of our population-size is an enormous development. 
We've had the most enormous immigration policy and
programme, W'e have been going through a period of development
so fantastic in the last ten years that I don?' t think anybody
would have dreamed about it 20 or .30 years ago.
And of course you can't have a great programme of
development, you can't have new works of irrigation, of powier,
of bydro-electric works; all the great foundational things that
have to be done mna country the size of the United States and
with one-fifteenth or sixteenth of its population, without making
tremendous calls on capital and therefore without involving yourself
in enormous inflationary pressures. A nd one of the great
answers to inflationary pressures has been to attract into
Australia capital investment, genuine capital investment from
other countries which will supplement the very remarkable amount
of saved and invested capital that goes to work in my own country.
S Again may I trouble YOU to give you a figure or two?
Figuzres that ought to be given Take June 1947 to June 1959
that is 12 years, all post-war years. The private investment of
capital from overseas directly or indirect~ ly I'm saying nothing
about public investment, nothing about public loans either in
Londun, or New York or in Switzerland or from the W orld Bank, but
private investment has been -0819 million. Z: 280 million of that
represents undistributed income left and therefore reinvested in
Australia, and r: 5.79 million represents othor inflow of capital.
Anyhow, .!: 819 million.
Now I turn to the domicile of the investors from overseas.
Uiited Kingdom: Cœ 520 million. out of r' 819 million Z? 520
million.' United States and Canada.: .(" 214 million, and other
sources ( E~ urope and so on): .7285 million.
You know, I think it's a r-. emarkable thing. It's one
of the greatest gestures of co-ope ration and underostanding and
* inteligence in my political lifetime that this country, with all
its problems, with its own tremendous battles on its own balance
Isotef rplainymgen ts, with its owin struggles to advance to a state where
and dollar reserves, trading and financial balances,
vould move towards a period of conversion that in this very
time people in this country, not Government, people like youshould
have invested in Australia. 252D mi-llion out of a total of
œ 819 million passing into Australia,
Now, of course, Sir, I know theire are tho3e who, no doubt,
for their own good reasons, feel a little reluctant about a flow
of capital into their country because they say that ' W-vell, that
means that money will go out. That means that w--e're in the hands
of other people. That means that dividends will be paid out,
and this will become an intolerable burden on our trading position."
And 8.0 if you are troubled by that at all I'm not I would.
comfort you by telling you that at the present tiimie taking our
present financial position in Australia, of all companies' income
after tax and tax takes, of course, about a third of it of
all companies' incomes after tax, œ 160 million goes as dividends
to resident-shareholders and œ 043 million as dividends and profits
remitted overseas.
Now that, I think is a fascinating figure M% left in
Australia, paid in Australia as dividends, and on top of that, if
you take the undistributed profits, which again represent roughly
a third of the profits earned, then of the undistributed profits
œ 201 million accrue to resident shareholders and Pœ 34 million to
non-re sidents. 
~ 4.
So you see the point I'm making: that there's been
this tremendous pouring-in of investable capital into Australia,
particularly from here and so far from putting Australia in
pawn.. so far from laying burdens on the Australian economy, the
whole of these transactions have resulted in immeasurable benefits
to my owni country.
And, I hope, considerable satisfaction to those who have
put their money in.
Now I won' t weary you with any more figures. I mentioned
those simply because I think there is some misunderstanding....
But I woDuld like to say something to you about this
celebrated legal expression as it was once " seven and sixpence".
You knt-w, of course, most of you were much too young to remember
the time when a solicitor was expected to charge 7s. 6d. for an
interview. And as I was never a solicitor myself I didn't ever
know it. But we've all become accustomed, haven't we, Mr. Maudltoin
gc, o ntcoe atl atlhkei ngd iraebcoutitn nt heo f sethvee n satrnodk et, h e thseix . s ix Oarn di fth ew e sewavnetne, d
I think perhaps it is desirable that I should just say
something to you about our attitude on this natter because it can be
easily misunderstood, I say " our" attitude, I speak for
* Australia, at least so far as I know I haven' t been beaten since
I left home, though one never knows. But anyhow, our attitude,
and I have no doubt it is the attitude of other Commonwealth
countries, We did not object to the creation of the Common Market,
we did not object to the creation of the Six. We felt that it
was unfortunate that a movement calculated to strengthen the
economy of six European powers should even ap~ m ar to be something
in rivalry to the economic strength of Great Britain or of the
other Wiestern European powers,
But every movement in the world which is calculated to
Sstrengthen an economy of a group of nations is a good movement,
Wand we had no complaint about it because may I remind you we
are, though you think us tiresome occasionally, and even more
frequently irrelevant, we are a very considerable trading nation,
I spoke a little while ago about what the position was
years ago, The exports and imports of Australia at that time
averaged about S70 million each way, And today they're within
a touch of 1?, 000 million each way. We do have the great honour
and the great responsibility of being one of the first ten trading
nations, international trading nations, in the world.
Always remember that,. because that will keep a few things
in proportion when you find us mTaking deals with various people
who are prospectively good customers, Wie are a very very considerable
trading nation, And as a trading nation we felt at once
that the agreement between the ' Issina powers had something in it--
that if this could strengthen the economy of Europe: good.
And then, of course, right on top of that, like yourselves,
it presented itself to our minds that if this were the beginning
and the end, then Europe would be divided economically and a Continent
which is divided economically can before long find itself
divided politically. And there could be no greater disservice / to the 
to the free world than to have the whole of the Western European
powers divided into two sections because that would of course
begin tby all thiose pleasantries that economists, Ministers of
Trade and so on engage in, and could easily end up by producing
hostilities, dislikes and finally perhaps tear apart the whole
structure or Western defence a structure which has not become
irrelevant just because there is going to be a meeting at Paris.
And theref( hre when the proposals for the Seven were
avalved. what is called by some people the " Little Free Trade
Area!; when these proposals came forward you mustn' t assume~ that
we were objecting to them. on the cotntrary, we saw in this the
gathering together of a group of people vho vculd be in a powerful
position to construct a bridge between the " Seven" 1 and the " Six".
In a powerful position to have all the thirteen nations associated
in a way which would help their common economy, strengthen their
position, and make them as a result a more considerable trading
Svfiaecwto, r in the world, a selling factor perhaps from their point of
but a buying factor from our point of view.
And we still think that. Nobody need suppose for one
moment that there is some doctrine in the Commonwealth which opposes
this kind of thing, We think that this is a good idea and we
think, really, that it is an urgent idea, just say two things
Wabout it, They're both qualifications but they don't materially
alter what I have been saying,
In the first place we think that as a Commonwealth
country, with all o'dr old associations with this country and with
all t ose mutual benefits that we have extended to each other we
ought to be at the party. We and other people like us ought to
be in the closest consultation when the bridge is being built.
Now that's fair enough, isn't it? Because we In ve our interests,
though we're well aware, as I have said to you, of our common duty
to do everything that can be done to strengthen this structure,
And in the second place, yes, some of you who met some
Iofm my opowerrful enego tiators like Sir John Crawford and so on much
difficult fellows than I an the President of the Board of
Trade he's familiar with my colleaguie, John McEwen, who is now
enjoying the novel experience of fighting my battles at Canberra
and leaving mri, to make the extraordinary statements on the trade
front overseas ( all that's right) of course we'll argue about
this and that. Of course we'll be interested in our exports to
FRurope. Of course we will want to argue sensibly, as I believe,
about preferences which we enjoy, just as you want to argue
sensibly about preferences that you enjoy in Australia,
And the whole point that I want to make is that it would
be a cardinal blunder for anybody to think that those who have
some interest, and they're not here, but those who have some
interest to keep the Seven and the Six separate, to keep the
European economy divided; it would be a very great mistake to
assume.. that they are the people to whom we in the homely Australian
phruse wre " barracking". Because they' re not. We want to see
the highest possible measure of unity. 1-Tieaon't want Vo see it.
at the sacrifice of matters that are important to you and that are
important to -as.
But for the life of us we can' t urderstand, nor indeed
ivould the President deny it for one moment, ' Pe can't understand
/ any reason 
any reason why Commonwealth countries like my own, increasingly
si. gnificant in the world, should not be at the party, at all
relevant times, able tn say what we think, able to be told what
goes on. We still have a little to learn about the price of
effective brotherhood, and the great price of effective brotherhood
is that we should have no secrets one from the other; that
we should always sit down together and commaune with each other
at the right time; that whatever disagreements we have should
be in private. and whatever agreements we have should be placed
in the shop windows.
Now I know that in saying that I am speaking merely the
mind of my distinguished col-e ague, the President of the Board
of Trade. But I thought I would make a reference to this matter,
because I know how some of you may have felt that we are developing
in a turbulent, aggressive fashion. Itm flattercd when someone
tells me that I'm aggressive, Opponents at Canberra assure me
week in week out that I'm a weak-kneed apologist. And so I don't
mind who tells me that I'm being aggressive. I'm not really
aggressive because I begin all my thinking on these problems and
end all my thinking with whatever little differences and occasional
irritations may have intervened I keep coming back to it and
saying that iWell, you' re half Scots and half Cornish and you're
British to the boot-heels and we will sink or swim together.
ooooooooooooooooooooOoooooooooo 



F~ R PRESS RELEASE AT 6, P. M. SUNDAY MAY 1st
" EMPLOY THE IDHANDICAPPED" WEEK MIi Y 1-MY 8.
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
( The Prime Minister, Mr. bienzies, who is in London to
attend the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference, sent the
following message to the Nationa. l President of the Australian
Junior Chambers of Commerce, Mr. Leslie M. Perrott, Jnr.).
A job of work is much more than a source of income it
is also a source of personal satisfaction and individual dignity,
For this, among other reasons, I commend the Australian
Junior Chambers of Commerce for their drive to " Employ the Handicapped."
In Australia about 300,000 people are now receiving
Repatriation or Social Service benefits for disabilities, and of
these more than 100,000 suffer permanent disabilities.
However, it does not follow that all of these people are
incapable of undertaking a job of work indeed, the facts quite
clearly show otherwise.
Last year the Commonwealth Employment Service found jobs in
commerce and indsutry for 8,700 physically handicapped people while,
since 1948, the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service has trained for
employment more than 12,0 0 allegedly " hopeless invalids."
There are two factors to consider when discussing employmentof
the physically handicapped:
First, from a colding commercial point of view, payment of
benefits to this large body of people represents a substantial
charge on the public purse; while the loss of their productive
capacity represents a heavy drain on the nation's resources.
Second, and perhaps more important, is the factor I have
already mentioned: the sense of individual dignity which doing a
job gives to the doer the personal satisfaction of helping one's
self, rather tha-n having to rely on an impersonal repatriation or
social service benefit. The pursuit of happiness lies along a
self-made road, seldom along a road made by others, no matter how
good their intentions.
Employment of the physically handicapped is not a simple matter
of Governmental legislation. It depends on the moral judgment of
the community and the policies of organisations which might
employ these people.
However, the organlsation which employs or which, as a result
of this drive decides to employ, physically handicapped people has
no cause to think it is performing a mere act of charity: the
record shows quite clearly that the physically handicapped worker,
placed in a suitable job, is a productive, efficient, safetyconscious,
and loyal employee.
During " Employ the Handicapped" Week I hope the r
Ch:. mbers f Commerce will reach :. ll sections : f the community
with . n im. ginative pr-gramme of public informa. tion and education.
In doin so, in this first national venture of its kind, the
Junior Chambers will be filling a national need.
My Government commends their efforts, and the existence of
the Commonwealth Employment Service and the Commonwealth
Rehabilitation Service will ensure that their work will be
followed up.
C&amp; N BERRA
May 1. 1960 P. M. 



FOR PRESS: CORAL SEA WEEK
Admiral Herbert G. Hopwood, Commander in Chief,
Pacific Fleet U. S. N. guest of the Commonwealth Government and
the Australian/ American Association will visit Canberra during
the Coral Sea Ideek Celebrations and will arrive at Royal
Australian Air Force Base Canberra at 4.3 P. m. on Monday 9th
May. He will be met at the Base by Senator JG. Gorton, Minister:
for the Navy, representing the Commonwealth Government, His
Excellency Mr. Jilliam. J. Sebald American Amabassador to
Australia, Vice-Admiral Burrell, Chief of the Naval Staff and
W'ing Commander Smythe Acting Officer Commanding Royal
Australian Air Force Base, Canberra.
Accompanying Admiral Hopwood on his visit will1 be
Mrs Hopwood and members of his personal staff.
On his arrival at Canberra the Admiral will inspect a
Guard of Honour after irhich he will attend a rece ption given in
his honour by the American Ambassador at His Excellency's
residence. Later the Admiral and Mrs. Hopwood will attend a
dinner given by the Minister for the Navy, Senator Gor g'on, and
Mrs. Gorton. On the second day of the visit the Admiral will lay a
wreath at the Australian -far Memorial at 10.4+ 5 a~ m. and attend
luncheon tendered in his honour by the Acting Prime Minister th
Rt. Hon. John McEwen and Commonwealth Ministers of State,
After attending Question time in the early afternoon
in the House of Representatives the Admiral will leave Canberra
from Royal Australian Air Force Base at 3.15 P. m. for Melbourne
to continue his tour of Australia.
CANBLERRA,
4th May, 1960 


The&nbsp;Government&nbsp;has&nbsp;reached a&nbsp;number of&nbsp;conclusions&nbsp;upon the&nbsp;future&nbsp;of&nbsp;the&nbsp;National&nbsp;Library, about which I should like to inform the House.
As honorable members will know, the National Library has grown directly from the Library of the Commonwealth Parliament. The Parliamentary Library Committee, under the leadership of the President of the Senate and the Spaker, has been the main source of advice in the Parliamentary and National libraries, and I should like to acknowlege the value of its work over the years. The advice of the present committee and of its&nbsp;chairman, Sir Alister&nbsp;McMullin, has been most helpful to the Government in considering the future of the National Library.
It has been clear for some time that the National Library has outgrown the scope of the Parliamentary Library and has become a research and reference institution with nation-wide responsibilities. It is generally recognized that a different form of control has become desirable.
In 1956, therefore, the Government set up a committee with&nbsp;Sir George&nbsp;Paton, the ViceChancellor of the University of Melbourne, as chairman to study the matter. The committee included three members of the Parliament, representing all parties and both Houses. The report of the committee was tabled in Parliament and we are all greatly indebted to the committee for its work.
Last year the Government set up an interdepartmental committee to advise on the detailed measures which were necessary to make effective the main recommendations of the Paton Committee. This committee worked last year in the closest association with the Presiding Officers and the Parliamentary Library Committee. The Government's conclusions can be summarized as follows: -
1.&nbsp;&nbsp; There should be a Parliamentary Library and a National Library of Australia, each to be a separate institution.
2.&nbsp;&nbsp; The Parliamentary Library should be controlled, as it is now, by the Presiding Officers of Parliament with the advice of a joint committee of members of both Houses.
3.&nbsp;&nbsp; The National Library would be controlled by a small council. The council would be given substantial responsibility for the control and development of the National Library, with ministerial responsibility limited, so far as possible, to such matters as the review of annual expenditure and the appointment of members of the council.
4.&nbsp;&nbsp; The present division of the library concerned with the records and archives of the Commonwealth Government should become a separate agency of the Government, within an appropriate department, under the direct control of a Minister.


The Government intends that there should be the closest co-operation between the Parliamentary Library and the National Library in order to avoid overlapping wherever possible and to ensure economies in administration. This co-operation, will, of course, be especially close in the early stages because we do not have, as yet, a building to house the National Library adequately. The Government has agreed that design and planning work for a new National Library building should begin. Naturally, the timing of construction will have to be considered in relation to requirements for other public works.
The Parliamentary Library will have its own stock of books, periodicals, newspapers and so on for the use of members of Parliament. It will have access to the resources of the National Library by arrangement between the Parliamentary Library Committee and the Council of the National Library - an arrangement which will strengthen the reference and reading services available to Parliament itself.
The Government has given special attention to the future of government archives, and has reached the conclusion that government archives should be under government control as they are essentially a collection of the Government's own confidential papers, records and files, many of which for a number of reasons should not be made public at least until a certain period of time has elapsed. This is the normal practice in countries overseas.
The Government proposes to take early action to give effect to the conclusions it has reached. The first step will be to appoint the National Library Council and its chairman on an interim basis.
I should perhaps emphasize that we are not in essence establishing new institutions, but rather are introducing new methods of control and divisions of responsibilities which are more suitable for the present needs and which are similar to those operating in many countries in the British Commonwealth and elsewhere. I am confident that the Government's legislation, which, it is hoped, will be brought down in the next session of Parliament, will command a large measure of support, both in this Parliament and the Australian community.
Statement by&nbsp;John McEwen&nbsp;(Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade)
See also&nbsp;https://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22hansard80%2Fhansardr80%2F1960-05-05%2F0088%22&nbsp;&nbsp;
&nbsp;



FOR PRESS: P. M. Sunday 8th May. P. M. N6. 16/ 1960
APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF NAi2IONAL LIBRARY COUNCIL
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister Hon. J. MoEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. MoEwen, announced today
that the Government had appointed Dr. A. Grenfell Price, C. M. G.,
of Adelaide, as Chairman of the National Library Council.
In the House last Thursday, Mr. McEwen outlined the
Government's decisions on the National Library. These decisions
included the division of the National Library into two parts
the Parliamentary Library and the National Library. The National
Library would be administered by a Council, appointed on an interim
basis pending passage of the necessary legislation through
Parliament, probably later this year.
Mr. McEwen said: " We are fortunate in being tLe to secure
the services of such an eminent man for this responsible
position. " Dr. Grenfell Price, vrho was a Member of the Commonwealth
Parliament from 1941 to 1943, has had wide experience in the
literary and library fields.
" He is a well known geographer, historian and educationalist,
and was Master of St. Mark's College, University of
Adelaide, from 1924 to 1956.
" In 1936 he was appointed to report on libraries in
South Australia maintained or assisted by the State, and he also
was a member of the Committee under Sir George Paton whichi produced
the report on the National Library on which the Government's
recent decisions were based.
" Dr. Grenfell Price is at present Chairman of the Advisory
Board of the Commonwealth Liteñ' ary Fund, a positionwhich he
has held since 1953. He recently resigned as Secretary of The
Humanities Research Council, a position he had held since its
inception. " He will, I am sure, bring to the responsible position
of Chairman of the National Library Council much aergy and knowledge
and the Government is gratified that he has been able to
accept the appointment."
Dr. Grenfell Price's appointment is for three years.
CANBERRA, 8th May,* 1960. 
4p 00* O 



OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Australian News and Information Bureau, Australia House,
Strand, London, W. C. 2 Telephone: TEMple Bar 2435
AUSTRALIA CLUB SPEECH.
Describing the Summit meting next week as " one of the great
climwctic events in the world", the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr.
Robert Gordon Menzies, surveyed the Commonwealth in relation to the
current international scene. Mr. Menzies was addressing members of
the Australia Club at a dinner given in his honour at the Savoy Hotel
on Monday, May 9./ qOIn the course of his speech, he said:-
UI would like to begin by saying that, as the Prime Minister of
Australia, I ' dip my lid' to Harold Macmillan, who, after all, began
this pioneering and exploratory work. There were people who, when
e went to Moscow, said " Oh no, no, no, you mustn't do that kind of
hing there is no precedent for that. To hell I'm sorry
to hell with those people. _ s a matter of fact, Harold Macdllan made
the adventure he opened up the door; he said " Well, I shall go", and
s he said the other day to two or three of us it has now become
ather fashionable not fissionable, I don't want to open up any
troubles in the Labour Party bat fashionable for people to go around.
I think that that is a wonderful thing. Not because I amn silly
enough to believe that in one blow at the Summit all the great problems
of the worldcan be resolved, but because I hope I am sensible enough
to believe that when human beins can meet each other and sit dovm and
talk and go to some trouble to understand each other, there you have
the beginning of wisdom. Therefore, I am all for the Sum. mit, and when
I say I am all for the Sunnit I won't be there I mean I am all
for the Summit meeting. Not because I believe that at the Summit
neeting there will be 15 problems all neatly dis osed of b, the rules
of Laclid is Euclid still presentable? I don t know but because
IS ubnemliit evmee etthinagt , ito nei s mtahtet erf irnsott syteet p dettheartm cinoeudn tsis. deAtenrdm iinfe, d , a t thtehnis I
t hink the whole world will say " Well, at least this is the beginning
f the new age of common sense."
Who am I to say that the problem of Germany will be resolved, or
the problem of Berlin; but nuclear tests why not? just on the
edge of agreement. And suppose that were resolved, suppose you had
one matter, two matters resolved; this would blow round the world like
fresh air. People would say " Well, at any rate the great men of
the great countries are hoping for settlement."
But the second thing that I want to say to you is this: We are
and in this respect I want to say to the people of Great Britain what
I would say to the people of Australia, because we are very much of a
kind we are a little bit disposed to think that the burning question
of the moment is the determining question of the future. But it isn't.
To be rid of nuclear tests, to have some temporary agreement about
Berlin, to lay a foundation for discussions about the future of Germany
these are very important things. But I happen to belong to the school
of thought that says, or believes I am saying it now that
armaments, the pressure of armaments, the whole terror of a world
standing to arms; these things are not causes, they are results. Anmd
they are results of tension, hostility, bitterness, and therefore, we
must go below the surface of the arnmraent arguments and say " What
is it that keeps the world standin--. at rnms?" And when we put that
question, we ought to think about the answer. 
2-
What are the cuases of the world's us go.
back 15 years to the end of the war and say to ourselves " What has
happened to bedevil the world, which was going to be a world of peace
and co-existence and prosperity in which we would all devote our
talents and resources to the greatest thing in life, which is to make
ordinary men and women happier and more peaceful and give their
children a more lovely futg~ I?"
What has happeo bcause the things that have happened are
the causes of offence in the world today. We needn't too much
concentrate on the results. Let us go back to the causes. And
here we have the causes the Soviet Union spreading round Middle
Europe. Look at Poland and East Germany and Czechoslovakia and
Roumania. Gentlemen, we are too easily persuaded to forget about
these things. These countries were among the great homesof freedom
in the world; marvellous countries with great men, great democracies,
great hopes for the future; the homes of scholarship and tradition
and freedom. And they have now become let's face it colonies,
colonies of the one great colonial power left in the world.
I don't iysolf believe that you can pacify the world if, at the
Svery moment at which the British colonies look around the world;
I have been sitting with them at No. 10 if at the very moment when
the British colonies have been marching to freedom and independence and
self-government and membership of the Commonwealth, we shut our eyes to
the fact that there are more ancient democracies, more ancient
* politically speaking, more ancient countries lying athwart Europe who
are the colonies of the new imperialism. These are tremendous things
they are terrible things. I think that we all ought to know before
we persuade ourselves that everything is for the best in the best of
all possible worlds, that there is no longer a propaganda instrument
which is designed to reduce to slavery our people in Australia people
all around the world.
This is not to mean that we deny other people their rights, but
it is to mean this that we would be perfect fools if we believed
that by settling one point here or there we would remove the causes of
these grievous discontents of the world. In short, we must never
lose our courege. We must stand for those things that relate to
human beings in which we believe and for which we will live and die.
This is of the vastest importance, but we must at the same time be
Sprepared to make a beginning.
All I have been saying to you is that I think that the Summit
meeting is to be looked at as the promising beginning, but not as a
definite end. You may all perhaps, be disposed to agree with that.
There are certain things in the world; there are great symptoms,
great results, there are deep-lying causes, but before you can begin
to discuss the causes, before you can begin to get down to discuss
with these great nations in the world those basic matters which
produce the differences, it is essential to remove those more
superficial matters which prevent you, so popular are they, from
getting at the causes.
Now that is one thing that I really want to say to you. We
are a little bedevilled in the world by popular campaigns, by
newspaper campaigns, by looking at the " hot news" circumstance of
the moment so that we don't talk about political philosophies in
South Africa, we talk about Sharpeville. This is more attractive;
this is more newsworthy. We don't talk about the great causes of
difference between the Soviet world or the Chinese world and our own
free world, but we talk about nuclear tests, nuclear weapons.
Now all these things are vastly important, but I do beg of all
of you not to suppose that by dealing with one of these the
resultant factors you have got at the root cause of the trouble.
There will be no peace in the world, no peace whatever in the world,
until we have all got to understand that no country is to be
overthrown by propaganda, by subversion; that every country has the
right to run its own life in its own way. 
-3-
Whether it is our way or not doesn't matter so much some of us
think so occasionally, but it doesn't. Every country must run its
life in its own way. It must get up in the morning and go to bed
at night feeling that it isn't being pressed and harmmered by the
propaganda of some other nation or some other body of Government.
This is tremendously important. The one thing that so many people
don't understand is that if a man wants to loaf he ought to be
allowed to loaf. That if a,. an wants to think in a funny, silly
way, he ought to be ^ iwed'-o think in a funny, silly way. It is
only when we become ovirtuous that we want to tell people how they
ought to think, how they ought to live, what they ought to do, that
we become involved in this deplorable mischief which bedevils the
world. Now here we are all tonight we are all British people and
thank God we understand something about liberty and we have never
supposed that liberty is a freedom to do what somebody else tells you.
Do let us understand that liberty is liberty.......... these things
are vastly important, and when our distinguished representative goes
to the Summit don't let us be like people standing around saying we
asked for a miracle. There are no miracles to be got nowadays.
As a matter of fact, Kruschev is the best public relations man in
the world. He changes his tactics every day and conceals the fact
that his strategy remains identical with what went before.
But so many people can be deceived by this kind of thing.
Don't let us be deceived this is the Australia Club, but we are all
British, we are all of the same strains of blood not devoted to
reasoning out very closely what have in our minds, but with a
deep instinct down in our guts as to viwh: t is right. Don't let us be
led away from it. Don't let us be beguiled by transient events.
Let us always come back to the basic truth that there are certain
great things about the world that we have understood that we have
practised as nobody else in the history of man has practised.
I have been sitting at No. 10 with people who couldn't have been
there unless we had these beliefs and practices. wvieh ent alk about
that let us think about it without apology and say " We are not being
Sled off by false gods". We know what are the basic things that make
for the peace and content of mankind and not for the first timo in our
history we will stand to them and battle for them." 



EMBARGO: 7 P. m. Sunday, 15th May PM o 716
PRICE OF SUGAR
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. J-McEwen
The Acting Prime Msinister, Mr. McEwen, announced
today that the Commonwealth Government had closely studied the
case submitted by the Premier of Queensland, Mr. Nicklin, on
behalf of his Government and the su-, ar industry for an increase
in the domestic price of sugar.
Mr. McEwen said that the Commonwealth Goveriient had
agreed that--. the Sugar Agreement should be amended to increase the
wholesale price of refined sugar by an amount equivalent
to an increase in the retail price of ld. lb.;
this would make the new retail price lld. lb. in'
capital cities;
having in mind the probl ems of the canning fruit
industry and the link of almost 30 years between it
and the sugar industry, the domestic sugar rebates
should be increased from 0 to : C5. 0. 0. per
ton
the Sugar Agreement-' should be amended to empower the
Export Sugar Committee to vary option rates for export
sugar rebate in accordance with the alteration in the
wholesale sugar price and in the domestic rebate
rate.
Mvr. McEwen said that these three amendments would
operate during the remaining period of the Sugar Agreement
1956/ 61. The price increases would operate from Monday, 16th
May, and the introduction of the changed rates of rebates would
operate from 1st June.
Mr. Nicklin had concurred in these proposals.
Mr. McEwen added that as thie present Sugar Agreement
would expire in August, 1961, and as renewal of the agreement
would require a prior examination of the industry, the Government
had decided that in due course a committee of inquiry would
be appointed similar to the 1952 Sugar Industry Committee to
investigate the circumstances of the sugar and fruit industries
and their relationship with a view to preparation of a report
before the end of the period of the present agreement.
CANBEJRRA, May, 1960. No, 17/ 196o 



EMBARGO: Simultaneous release in London. Not for publication
or broadcast before 1.15 a. m. Tuesday May 17th.
THE FIRST SMUTJ1S 14EMORIAL LECTURE
by The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, C. H. Prime Minister
of Australia at the * Jniversity of tambridge Monday 16th May,
1960
THE CHANGING COMM4ONWJEAL TH
Jan Christian Smuts was one of the most remarkable
men in modern history. He wras a scholar in the finest sense;
a soldier of remarkable distinction, a South African statesman
who made an imperishable contribution to the history and institutions
of his own land; a Commonwealth States~ nan whose
towering abilities made him a commanding figure, the trusted
confidant and adviser of the gy: iant of the age, dinston Churchill;
a world leader " the veriy wind of .7hose name" if I may
borrow that great phrase spoken by J. M. Barrie about the
Scots " has swept to the ultimate seas",
feel it a -reat and unmerited honoix that you should
have chosen me to deliver the first " Smuts Memorial Lecliire" l
in this ancient university of which, in the course of his incredibly
versatile career, he became Chancellor.
Oddly enough, though I have had a " walking-on" part
in some of the iorld dramas of the past quarter of a century,
I never met him except through reading and report. But such is
the force of personality that I always felt that for me he was
a living presence. In spite of past events, or perhaps because of them,
he became a great champion and expositor of the lBritisha Commonwealth,
and had at all times clear views about the changes
wrought in it in and since 1926. It is for this reason that I
have chosen to say something to you, in honour of his memory,
W on " The Changing Commonwealth".
ing of " Dr. Y ouJ ekwyillll arnedm emHvbre. r HyLdleo" y; d Oshobwo rnReo'bse rts tLooruyi so f Sttehvee nwsroint
I' wrote it in a few days, had it sharply criticised by his wife,
was enraged by the criticism, and then accepted it, and then
tossed the manuscript into the fire, and then in another few
days re-wrote the whole thing in its present immortal form.
It is a great story. But wh-should I begin by reminding you
of it? Certainly, not that i can write like Robert Louis
Stevenson, nor, indeed, that the story has any parallel with
mine except in one respect. I began to write this lecture on
a quiet weekend in Canberra. I thought tih-at I knew something
about J. C. Smuts in a broad way; that in theory and practice
I was not unfamiliar with modern Commonwealth constitutional
development; and that the political Smuts fitted into that
development in a way uhich was intelligible to me. And so I
wrote on, increasingly more interested in my own ideas than in
those of Smuts until, finding it necessary to consider the basis
of Commonwealth changes, I laid my writin3-pad aside, and began
to re-read Smuts. I even essayed " Holism and Evolution",
whipped on by Peter Drucker's " The Landmarks of Tomorrow", in
which he describes Jan Christian Smuts as " that astounding
South African, the closest to the " whole man" this century has
produced". The more I read, the more I marvelled at the genius
of the man whom this lecture commemorates. 111ho was I to speak
to his name and memory? How superficial were my own views: how
shallow my own intellectual experiences. vdhy not toss my draft
into the fire and, unlike Stevenson, write no more? 
And yet, the more I thought about it, the more I
realised that the researches of Smuts, leading him away from
the static properties of matter and the disciplines which static
considerations impose, to the dynamic post-evolutionary concepts
of the grouth from " whole" to " whole", provided a key to
the problem o f Commonwealth evolution, in the solving of which,
as a practical man of affairs, he had much to do. The Commonwealth,
as I shall endeavour to show, is the best proof of
Smuts' central thesis, that " the whole is greater than the sum
of its parts". Further, if there is, as events have s'novn, nothing
static about our gre at associ,: tion, we must be prepared for
changes in the living organism. it must contain within itself
not only the past, but the present and the future. There must
be room for the ascertainment of basic principles, but there
must be no room for dogma. ; UJmeu st not be merely the historians
of the Commonwealth, but the creators of its future form.
if, in the course of my remarks, I refer to past events, it
will not be to engage in the vain task of wishing them undone,
for the clock does not turn back, but to try to see where we
have gone, and whore we are going.
When the Balfour formula was evolved in 1926, many
thought that the new Commonwealth had acquired definition and
historic form. " Empire" had been taken by some to connote the
subordination of the Dominions; this notion was now swept
away. The Dominions were declared to be " autonomous communities",
" in no way subordinate one to another". There it was,
plainly stated. : de in Australia, characteristically enough,
had not for maryyears thought ourselves subordinate, but still,
there was no harm in the fact being expressed. The formula
then went on to use what I have myself on an earlier occasion
described as " three expressions of great cohesive significance.
They were-" within the British Empire"
" united by a common alleg7iance to the Crown"
" the British Commonwealth of Nations".
Here, we said, was " unity in diversity", a unity possessing a
slightly theological flavour, it was true, but neverthc~ iss expressed
in a new formula ihich wrould, once and for all, convert
the mystically unexpressed into lucid form, ustablishing
equality but preserving structureo; opening up a new era for
self-government and development.
F'our years later, the Prime Ministers at their 1930
conference, evolved what became the Statute of ' Iestminster 1931,
clearing up a few technical matters of power,, but reciting in
its preamble that " as the Crown is the symbol of the free association
of the members of the British Commonwealth of Nations,
and as they are united by a common allegiance to the Crown...,"
So theri it was, complete and tidy; and to a monarchist,
all compact of a superb blending of heartening emotion and
enduring structure. Unlike that peculiar product of the
British inductive genius, the non-existent British Constitution,
the Commonwealth had a iritten charter for all to see. Only
thirty years ag'o; but in those years the great definitive
formula has become largely obsolete, true only in a fragmentary
iay, in many respects altured beyond recognition.
I will take the " three expressions" in heir order.
1. The expression " within the British Empire" has ceased
to have acceptance, partly because the notion of a group of
completely self-gov. ning nations existing within " an Empire"
was not in its nature one which could long endure, and partly
because the word Empire itself has fallen from grace, Wo now 
leave the creation of colonial or satellite empires to the
Communist powers, and have been talked into believing that
" imperialism" and " jingoism" vere synonymous.
2. The second expression, " united by a common allegiance
to the Crown", is no lon6er accurate, nor should we pretend
that it is. Great Britain, C-nada, Australia South Africa, New
Zealand, Ceylon and Ghana are at the momen united by a common
allegiance to the Crown. But Ghana and Ceylon are designed
to become Republics, like India and Pakistan. Malaya is no
Republic, but has a monarch of its own, to w. hom it owes
alleoiance, The Government of South Africa has made no secret
of its Republican objective, and evun now the Crown is less
" visible" in South African administration and affairs than it
is in, say, Australia.
All this means that at some future time there may
well be only Great Britain, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand
who could be described as united by the common allegiance, the
femaining Commonwealth countries having a measure of unity
with us and with each other established on a quite different
foundation. This is much more than a change of form. I am
going to say a little more about it, because it seems to me to
be very important that we in the Crown Dominions should not
weaken our own principles by pretending that they are not
matters of substance.
Republican membership of the Commonwealth was accepted
by the Prime Ministers in April 1949 in a Statement which
merits complete quotation.
" The Governments of the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, India, Pakistan
and Ceylon, whose countries are united as Members of the
British Commonwealth of Nations and owe a common allegiance
to the Crown, which is also the symbol of their
free association, have considered the impending constitutional
changes in India.
The Government of India have informed the other
Governments of the Commonwealth of the intention of the
Indian people that under the new constitution rhich is
about to be adopted India shall become a sovereign independent
republic. The Government of India have however
declared and affirmed India's desire to continue her full
membership of the Commonwealth of Nations and her acceptance
of the King-as the symbol of the free association of
its independent membe. nations and as such the Head of
the Commonwealth. The Governments of the other countries of the Commonwealth,
the basis of whose membership of the Commonwealth
is not hereby changed, accept and recognize India's continuing
membership in accordance with the terms of this
declaration. Accordingly, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, South Africa, India, Pakistan and Ceylon,
hereby declare that they remain united as free and equal
members of the Commonwealth of Nations, freely co-operating
in the pursuit of peace, liberty and progress."
Note that at the time of the declaration India had
not actually become a republic; the opening paragraph was
therefore a correct statement of the then position. The 
statement as a whole makes it quite clear, if it needed to be
made so, that India as a Republic, would no longer owe allegiance
to the Crown. But she accepted " the King as the symbol
of her free association... and as such the head of the Commonwealth".
Ever since this historic decision, the Crown ceases
to have any internal significance in a Republican member. The
Queen disappears from Parliament, the Courts of Law, the armed
forces. In Australia, by way of comparison, the Governor-
General is the Queen's representative, I am the Queen's Prime
Minister; my ministers and I are the Queen's servants; our
S are enacted by " the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty,
te eo, and the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth
of Australia". All members of Parliament take oath or
ffirmat on of allegiance. Legal process issues in the name
f the ueen. The judges are the Queen's judges. In short,
our who e structure, legislative, executive, and judicial, is
built ound the presence of the Crown.
J Nobody remained unmoved when the Queen in opening
Perliament at Canberra on February 15, 1954, staoed the matter
quite simply ' The first Section of the Constitution of the Commonwealth
of Australia provides that the legislative power
of the Commonwealth shall be vested in " a Federal Parliament,
which shall consist of the Queen, a Senate, and a
House of Representatives".
It is therefore a joy for me, today, to address you
not as a Queen from far away, but as YOUR Queen and as
part of YOUR Parliament. In a real sense, you are here
as my colleagues, friends, and advisors.
When I add to this consideration the fact that I am
the first ruling Sovereign to visit Australia, it is clear
that the events of today make a piece of history which
fills me with deep pride and the most heartfelt pleasure,
and which I am confident will serve to strengthen in your
own hearts and minds a feeling of comradeship with the
Crown and that sense of duty shared which we must all have
as we confront our common tasks.'
The Prime Ministers in 1949 were clearly not unconscious
of the fact that they were creating two relationships
instead of one; preferring this duality to the contraction of
Commonwealth membership. Note the words
" The Government of the other countries of the
Commonwealth, the basis of whose membership of the Commonwealth
is not hereby changed, accept and recognise India's
continuing membership in accordance with the terms of this
declaration". Was this duality affected by the phrase " Head of the
Commonwualth"? That it was a valuable and significant expression
nobody would deny. It had far-reaching effects. But what
does it mean? It does not mean that the Sovereign is " Queen of
the. Commonwealth", for she cannot be the Queen of a Republic,
* hat it does mean is that the member Republic says, in effect,
to the Crown members " We recognise that the Queen, though she
is not our Queen, occupies a position at the centre of the
Commonwealth which permits us to regard her as a symbol of our
association with other Commonwealth countries, whether republic
or monarchies". This means that the relationship is external,
and not internal.
One interesting thing about this historic decision
is that Smuts was dismayed. As his son says in his biography 
" My father declared that this ' violated every concept of the
Commonwealth...' You are either in the Commonwealth or out of
it. If the Commonwealth concept is tampered with or destroyed,
and it is still proposed to continue the Commonwealth system,
there would have to be a new basis of agreement between the
member States, with a written constitution on the lines of the
League of Nations or the organisation of the United Nations...
'. hat India appears to wish is therefore not compatible with
the Commonwealth, and cannot be achieved in terms of it".
He wont on to warn
" Groat care should be taken not to empty the concept
of the Commonwealth of all substance ahd meaning, and not to
whittle it away until nothing but the word remained with no
real meaning or significance. Far better would it be to drop
it altogether," At the time when the declaration was announced by Mr.
Chifloy at Canberra, my own views as Leader of the Opposition
were not dissimilar. Iprepared what I thought to be a powerful
and pungent speech. Chifloy, who, to use the homely phrase
" didn't come down in the last shower", guessed my intentions,
and, with studied calm, left the item at the bottom of the
Notice Paper. When months had gone by, I naturally felt that
the incident was closed, and tore up my undelivered speech. I
had, not for the first or the last time, learned the discipline
of past and unalterable events.
The great purpose of my present address is not to
sit in vain judgment upon the past, but to ascertain the
present nature of the structural and dynamic elements in
Commonwealth development, What I have to say to you is designed
to be not censorious but explanatory, not gloomily
retrospective but optimistically forward-looking.
3. The third expressions " the British Commonwealth of
Nations" has also fallen into partial disuse. It is still the
natural expression for the Crown Dominions, or at least for
those who by derivation are British. But it clearly is not
acceptable to the newer Commonwealth nations. This fact
clearly emerged in the Declaration of the Prime Ministers in
1949. As we have already soon, that declaration, in its
opening paragraph, in which the Governments concerned were
speaking before the Indian Republic, described the declaring
governments as " members of the British Commonwealth of Nations''
The later operative clauses dealing with the republican status
of India referred to " the Commonwealth of Nations". This was
no accident. It was fully discussed at the Conference. It
recognised, so to speak, the facts of life and of popular
sentiment in the new nations. Faced with those facts, even I
can call my lecture " The Changing Commonwealth" without it
being thought that I am speaking of the Commonwealth of Australia,
rhile the Empire Parliamentary Association has become
the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association almost by default
of opposition. So far, I have boon concerned to point out the nature
and to try to estimate the significance of the structural changes
which have occurred during my own political life-time. I
have done this principally because I want now to direct myself
to two major questions.
1. ' hat is the significance of the Crown in the new
Commonwealth?
2. Apart from the Crown, what are the elements which
mark out the Commonwealth from other alliances or
organisations of Nations? 
I cannot deal however briefly, w ith the significance
of the Crown in relation to the Commonwealth without
first saying something about its significance to those who are
within the allegiance. Are we the Queen's men and women because,
as the fact is, we love and respect her? Or because,
out of long experience, we find in the Monarchy as such a
focal point, unmarred by political controversy, for our national
tradition, consciousness, and ambitions? Or because we are
snobs, and love an hierarchical society? Or perhaps, though
citizens of a monarchy, we are not the Queen's men and women,
and therefore think that the best way to get rid of monarchy
is to vulgarise the Crown, to treat the Royal Family as if
they were stars in a public show, to deny them any private
life and probe into their real or imaginary emotional experiences,
to remove the mystery of monarchy, to destroy the swift
impulse in the loyal heart when the Queen passes by, to make
all commonplace when the national symbol of the Crown should
and must have a moving splendour of its own.
4e British people, not discouraged by Republican
examples, have a deep instinct for the monarchy. This instinct
oddly enough, does not depend upon the personal
character and popularity of the Monarch alone. The Georgian
era provided some evidence that the people of Britain thought
it a better thing to have an indifferent or incompetent King
( or even Regent) than no King at all. Queen Victoria and King
Edward VII had varying popular fortunes, not necessarily for
the same reasons. The great King George V came to the throne amid
murmured and sometimes loudly spoken criticism. He survived
both, and a great war, and grew into the hearts of his people.
When the war was over, a great stirring began, which transformed
the conception of Empire and produced the new Dominion
Status and the Statute of dJstminstor. The King shrewdly saw
the implications. He accommodated himself to the new Democracy
and the new Commonwealth. He saw vividly the technical
limitations on his own official power, but with great penetration
saw that his own personal influence and experience were
not irrelevant. He secured the friendship of Tory and
Socialist alike. He on occasion affected their conduct without
assertion of prerogative. He lived to be a much loved man,
with a much loved wife. He asserted few or no rights, but he
was nevertheless the centre of constitutional government. He
was, in my opinion, the first great Constitutional Monarch.
His relationship to his subjects will now be recalled
by fewer and fewer people, for he died in 1936. But I will
recount two stories, at first hand, which may serve to illustrate
my text. 1935 was the year of his Jubilee. His Prime Ministers
had gathered from around the world. The South African
Prime Minister was the celebrated and co-itroversial Hertzog,
by history and conviction a Republican, not by nature or experience
disposed to love the British. I had various discussions
with Hertzog ( I was present as Attorney-General of
Australia) about the conflict between my own conception of the
Crown as a single indivisible unifying element and his own
quite different ideas. I respected and admired Hertzog very
much; he was a man of great courtesy and of great integrity.
But I wondered what he would do on the great day rhen the
Prime Ministers were to attend at St. James's Palance to present
their loyal addresses to the King and the Queen.
Hortzog was immediately preceded by my o-wn Prime
Minister, J. A. Lyons, a clear King's man, who spoke movingly,
and, as always, with simplicity and charm.
Hertzog came next. He had seen something of the 
King and the Queen. He had fallen under their influence, and
had learned to regard them with affection. To my groat joy he
began by saying:-" It is my pleasure and honour to present to Your
Majesty and" ( with an old-world bow) " to Her Majesty
the Queen, the loyal homage of the whole of the people
of South Africa."
It vas an unforgettable moment. For the time, at
luast, history was being written.
My second story is of a much more homely kind. I
went to have a haircut at a little barber's shop up an alley
off the Strand. The barber was a museum piece, with a friendly
manner and a fine quiff of hair fiLling over one side of his
forehead. Naturally, he did not know me from Adam, and spoke
as he thought. Brandishing the cutting implements of his
trade, he said:-" Did you see the procession to St. Paul's yesterday,
Sir?" I had. " Did you notice what a lovely day it was?"
I did. " You can't tell me God didn't have a hand in that
Sir!"' I agreed. And then I said, may I be forgiveh, " Do
you believe in all this royalty bu inoss?" It was a deliberately
discouraging question, but the answer was
superb. " Jell, you see, it's like this. Jfhen I knock off
work, I go up to a pub in Holborn, and have a couple of
pints with some of my friends. Je argue about a lot of
things, but we're all for the King!"
By the force of his own personality George V did much
to preserve the true significance of the Crown and to make his
many millions of subjects think of the Crown, not as an obstacle
to democracy but as a living element in it. This example was
superbly followed by King Goerve VI and his great Queen, and,
of course, by our Sovereign Lady of today.
Does our great good fortune, to which most of us have
become accustomed during our adult lives, mean that we are for
the Crown because of the personal quality of its wearer, and
that one misfortune could destroy it? I hope not, and I believe
not. Allegiance to the Crown will remain, intangible,
not susceptible of legal definition, the most profound of all
the unifying influences for the Crown dominions.
But, even for those Commonwealth countries which are
not within the allegiance, the Crown has, I believe, more than
a mere symbolism of friendly association. Last week, the
Prime Ministers met in London, Monarchists and Republicans. In
the past, they have always met in London. This is not just because
London is a convenient meeting place. It is, indeed, not
the most convenient place for those who come, as I do, from the
far corners of the earth. But London is at the heart of world
affairs. The tides of thought and of international relations
beat strongly, even if sometimes unsuccessfully, on the shores
of ' Whitehall and Westminster. But, more significantly, London
is where the Queen is. Some place or places other than London
may in future be chosen; but only, I hope, if the Queen is
there. For when a Republican Prime Minister clasps hands with
the Quuen, I warrant that he sees her as no theoretical emblem,
but as something special for him and his country.
I have spoken at some length about the Crown, end have
suggested that while its place among the Crown Dominions remains
unaltered and vital, its broad significance for the Commonwealth
at large has been changed and qualified. WJe have seen what has
happened to the other elements of 1926 and 1930.
Under all these circumstances, what are the operative 
8,
factors which have continued to make the Commonwealth, in spite
of all its structural changes, a spucial association of nations
with a mutual relationship which distinguishes it from other
world groups? MY answer is that the sense of community between the
Crown members and the Republican members if preserved and'fostered,
not only by the great things we have in common, such as
our desire for peace and freedom and resistance to aggression,
( for these ideas we share with many others), but also by our
frequent meetings and personal exchanges at Prime Ministers'
Conferences, at meetings of Trade or Finance Ministers, in
committees of officials, and in the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association. On all such occasions we may meet as debaters or
contestants, but we meet in a special atmosphere which induces
both frankness and friendliness; with a feeling that we have a
special relationship of mutual respect and common interest. I
have I think a longer experience of Prime Ministers' Conferences
than most men. I will therefore speak about them in particular,
though I could with great advantage expand upon the
growing significance of the Parliamentary Association. But I
speak of those meetings of Prime Ministers which I know so well,
because I believe them to be almost the greatest element in the
" workability" and special character of the modern Commonwealth.
When we meet, we have no set agenda. ' Jo move no
resolutions, and we have never cast votes. But we learn a great
deal about the world's problems and : our relations to them. The
intolerance engendered by long-range and imperfect knowledge is
tempered. From time to time, as I iell know from experionco,
we influence each other's thinking, without the discords of public
controversy. ' Io h. ve, after all, some community of history
and ideas. Jo no longer aim at producing a common foreign
policy, nor do we any longer find ourselves able to envisage
the Commonwealth as a " world power". But if we can achieve a
common philosophical approach to world problems, there is life
and virtue in our deliberations,
We do not meet as a tribunal, to sit in judgment upon
each other, or to ventilate and pass upon intra-Commonwealth
issues. Je are not a super-state.
During the recent tragic episodes in South Africa,
there were not wanting suggestions that South Airica.. culd be
expelled presumably by majority vote from the Commonwealth.
Any such suggestion, in my opinion, misconceived the nature of
our association. iJe do not deal with the domestic political
policies of any one of us, for we know that political policies
come or go with governments, and that we are not concerned with
governments and their policies so much as we are with nations
and their peoples. If we ever thought of expelling a member
nation of the Commonwealth it would, I hope, be because we
believed that in the general interests of the Commonwealth that
nation as a nation was not fit to be our associate.
The Prime Ministers' Conference would break up in
disorder and the new Commonwealth would disintegrate if we
affected to discuss and decide what we thought to be the proper
measure of democracy in our various countries; whether particular
groups should or should not have the vote; whether oppositions
should be respected; whether a P-rliament should control
the Executive. On all such matters, " autonomous" or independunt"
nations must have the right to manage their own affairs in
their own way. . Jo are not a court. e are brothers in a special
international family. [ e have done well so far because we have
nurtured our loments of unity with loving care and have sought
to resolve our differences in a friendly and mutually helpful
way. There is, in brief, a quality of intimacy about our 
meetings which relegates the protocol of diplomacy to its proper
place; induc. s personal friendships; and enables us, between
conferences, to communicate with each other without hesitation
or reserve. I know of no other association ihich possesses these
attributes to anything like the same degree. When we meet, we
are much more than a group of individuals; we are conscious of
the fact that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Contrast all this with the United Nations, where large
numbers of delegates to the Assembly meet, of necessity. almost
as strangers; ihere, of necessity, resolutions are tabled,
amendments drafted, votes canvassed, and majority decisions
taken; where the inevitable bargaining tends to weaken mutual
trust. These things must be so in great multi-national meetings,
where there are no old ties of friendship to preserve, and no
great or comprehensive tradition of well-remembered and wellloved
association in peace and in war.
Do you feel that this approach is sentimental? I
admit it. Indeed, what I have just been saying amounts to this;
that it is a cynical error to suppose that when the first Republic
entered the Commonwealth door the old sentiment flew out
of the window. ' 4 still have an attachment to each other which
none of us would deny. That is why we see in our newly independent
nations such eagerness to remain in the Commonwealth.
That is why I can sit in a Prime Ministers' Conference and feel
instantly as :. uch at home as if I were sitting in my own Cabinet.
Last week some of the principles I have recalled were
under great strain.
We were not discussing the tragic incident of Sharpeville,
for post-war history has seen many bitter events arising
from religious or political or racial hostilities in many lands.
But E1Speville had brought up into the public mind the whole
p robiums of apartheid, or separate development of separate races
within the one country. In the result, apartheid, which has
been the accepted policy of South African Governments for many
years and has never previously been brought up at a Prime
Ministers' Conference, flared into the news and into debate.
When the Conference began, there was a sharp challenge.
But, quite quickly, we re-affirmed our practice that the domestic
policies of member nations are not matters for debate or
decision by the Conference. Though private and informal talks
occurred, as they were bound to, the practice was confirmed.
In this way, we have passed again through a constitutional
crisis. The highly emotional atmosphore engendered by
the South African controversy, though it is intelligible, is not
conducive either to clear thought or to objective judgment. But
the point to be made is that the Prime Ministers' Conforence is
not a quasi-judicial body. Nor is it a Committee of the United
Nations. Nor is it under some duty to discipline its own members
into obedience to the Charter of the United Nations,
These ideas are not novel; they are sanctioned by
past practice. I take leave to mention an issue which arose nine
years ago over the India-Pakistan difference regarding Kashmir;
a difference as yet unresolved. The then Prime Minister of
Pakistan, Liquat Ali Khan, wanted Kashmir to be listed for the
then approaching Prime Ministers' Conference. The Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom, Mr. Attlee ( as he then was) acted
upon the unwritten rule that the Conference was not a tribunal
and refused. Mr. Nehru concurred. Mr. Liquat Ali Khan ultimately
came to London when it had been agreed that private and
voluntary conversations could occur, not as part of the Conference
procedures but as incidental to the fact that Prime 
Ministers would be meeting in London and wrould be privately
available to each other. Private talks occurred. They related
to a matter of considerable international importance, but they
formed no part of the official record,
As our numbers incruase, and the close personal contact
which we now enjoy becomes less close and less personal, we
will encounter dangers which we must be careful to avert.
I state my oin faith in this way.
Jo of the Commonwealth are no longer a single integrated
structure, wlith a common foundation and a powerful organic
association. Our strength is that re meet as equals, without
vote or lobby; we speak to each other with freedom and friendli
-ness; we seek to understand each other, but we do not sit in
judgment on each other; we take an interest in each other but
respect the fact that each member has achieved self-government;
hence we seek to co-operate with each other but not to invade
the sovereignty of each other. / Je seok agreement on purpose
and principle, but leave to each the decision on how to achieve
or apply them. For, though so much has changed, the nations of the
Commonwealth remain " autonomous" and " freely associated". We
derive strength from the knowledge that we are not like other
associations, that our rules may be unwritten but our true relations
written into our hearts and consciousness,.
I conclude with two mercifully brief homilies.
The first is this. In the old Commonwealth, and under
the Crown, the great traditional expression of constitutional
monarchy wasParliamentary self-government. So much ras this
" bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh" that we have been
tempted to regard it as an essential part of the Commonwealth
inheritance. Most of us have, in post-prandial speeches, succumbed
to the temptation. But, Is vu look back and around us,
is this true? Our British institutions of democracy hove
grown from the soil, over long centuris. But they cannot be
easily transplanted. Modern history proves this. They oere tried, and
failed, in Russia , nd in Germany. They have had a chequered
history in France. They suffered a long occlusion in Italy.
They have been swept aside, by force majoureo in the hi. storic
countries of Middle Europe. They do not exist in Continental
China. They are now struggling to life in Japan. hat of tbe
new Commonwealth countries? If we survey Commonwealth mankind
from Ghana to Malaya, e will begin to understand that one of
the great implications of independent nationhood is that when
people win to self-government they choose or permit their orwn
forms of government. It is one of the many errors of modern
emotional thinking, or of emotion at any rate, to believe that
when a former colony becomes free of foreign rule, all that
needs to be said is " Now, elect your own Pa. rliamont, have a
Government and an Opposition, make your la rs democratically,
and all will be well"
The truth, as I see it, is that each new Comiionwealth
country, as it achieves complete independence, tends to begin
its adventure by developing a higher degree of executive authority
at the centre, and correspondingly a lower degree of parliamentary
power, than we are accustomed to. Parliaeintary
government is not an artificial creation . ihich can be established
in a new country by a mere act of law. If it tends, . rith us, to
give expression and protection to individual rights, that is
because we have a passion for individual freedom, of which Parliament
has become the expression and the guarantee. The historic
movement has been, in the famous phrase, " from status to 
11.
contract". Our parliamentary system is based upon the free
individual. If we occasionally respect our governments, and
always, or almost always, obey the laws passed by Parliament,
it is because the body of citizens, with equal political rights,
have chosen our ministers and legislators, and can dismiss
them; though this, to one who has survived five successive
elections, is a sobering reflection.
I turn to my second homily.
I have spoken about " unity in diversity', and have
dwelt at some length and with some emphasis upon the increased
diversity which has arisen since 1930. It is not to be thought
from this emphasis that I think diversity a bad thing. It is,
on the contrary, as good constitutionally as it is agriculturally.
The old British Empire had groat diversities of institutions,
creed, tradition, culture, and race, The new Commonwealth
has, as we have seen, added some of its own. Such diversities,
so long as they give rise to different points of view
and promote the frankest exchanges of opinion, and do not give
rise to hatreds, are good. Properly dealt with, they promote
true friendship and co-operation by widening the boundaries of
understanding and tolerance and serving to create a sense of
the interdependence of independent minds and nations! A sound
individualism is not anarchical, but democratic.
As a wise observer said to me recently " If organic
unity in the old sense is gole, a new unity must be sought for.
It cannot be achieved in a hurry, any more than its predecessor
was". In truth, and in the world in which we live, absolute
independence, as some speak of it, is impossible. Je all
value its form, and do our best to achieve its substance, But
without economic aid, technical assistance, foreign capital, and
in most cases military or material alliancues there can be few,
if any nations in the world that could hope to maintain their
indopendonce. If we are to enjoy the co-operation and respect of
each other, we must got to know each other bettor, be more
tolerant of what to us are strange ideas, bury old prejudices,
and seek to achieve that understanding intimacy which recognises
differences but learns how to live with them,
The most remarkable expression of this vital human
truth is our Commonwealth of Nations, changed and changing, but,
so long as we see clearly, destined to endure, 



P. M. No. 18/ 1960
LATE P. J. CLAREY
Statement by Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwon
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEien, said
today he ias most distressed to hear of the decth of Mr.
Percy Clarey. Mr. McEren said Mr. Clarey -ias one of the
great men in the Australian Trade Jnion and political
movements. He had devoted himself with great courage to
overcoming his physical disabilities in looking after the
affairs of his own electorate and in sharing his Party's
political responsibilities generally.
I extend my own personal sympathy and the sympathy
of the Government to his relatives.
CAi\ NBERRA,
17th May, 1960. 



OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Australian News and Information Bureau, Australia House,
Strand, London, W. C. 2 Telephone: TEMple Bar 2435
ADDRESS BY THE RIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA.
THE RIGHT HON. R. G. hENZIES, M. P.,
TO THE PARIEANTARY PRESS GALLERY
AT THE HOUSE OF CO1MMONS
Oi WEMIESDIY, 18TH MAY, 1960.
Addressing a luncheon gathering of the Parliamentary Press Gallery, at
which he was the guest of honour, Mr. Menzies said, in part:-
" I want to say a few words to you about two matters. The first is the
one that is most in our minds today. I can't help thinking, after all this
bogus argument that's been going on about spies, all this humbug, this pious
horrpor at the discovery of the spy over Russian soil, that I seem to remember
hundreds and thousands of them from there over our soil, or on it, or in it!
But when this Summit meeting had at long last been arranged, I venture to say
that all of us, not being too starry-eyed, hoped for some result; not for the
pacification of the world by one single stroke that is not possible, you
can't reconcile the differences of a decade, or perhaps in some respects a
century, by a single master stroke of statesmanship but vie did all hope in
our own simple fashion that when the great leaders met, they vould earn. estly
direct their attention to one or two problems, hoping that by disposing of
even one, there might be a prospect held out to the world that common sense
and true co-existence, tolerant co-existence, might come about.
". And therefore it's been a very grievous blow to us if, as the latest
nevs suggests, this Gonference has ended before it began. That I think is
a shocking thing. It's useless for somebody to tell me that Khrushchev has
scored a great propaganda success. I have a firm belief that most of the
people in the world ordinary, sensible, honest, honourable people, regard
this manoeuvre with contempt. It's a very great mistake to think that this
clever stuff really lodges in the minds of millions of people in the world
who honcstly want peace. This has been a shabby thing.
" How mueh we expected that vhen they met they vwould be able to begin
with say, a discussion about nuclear tests, a -mtter on which so much
progress, not enough but so much, had been made at Geneva. This is the kind
of thing about which one felt that the catalyst could be provided by a meeting
at the Summit; some simple, broad direction which would at any rate have
produced a moratorium in that field and perhaps a moratorium in the field of
the Berlin problem.
" And then the incident of the flying man in the sky occurred. It vas
seized on. I repeat, one would almost have thought that there never had
been a Soviet spy in the history of modern times. We've had a few in
Australia. I daresay you've had hundreds here. And for a man under those
circumstances to prefer a manoeuvrc of propaganda to the pacification of the
world is, I think, a shocking thing. I hope that everybody, every sensible
honest person around the world, will be shocked by it.
" We're accustomed to the move and counter move of political tactics,
but we despise them whun the issue is the issue of the safety of the nation.
We have enough proportion to put aside the manoeuvres under those
circumstances. There is a time for debating points. I've used a few
myself in Wy time, and enjoyable enough they arc when the opportunity
presents itself. But whcn the wholc world is waiting for the first breaking
of the tension that has existed fur the last ten years, a debating point is
a contemptible thing. 
2
" I've been asking myself why this was done. hen I first read about
the alleged shooting down by a rocket of an aircraft flying at a vast height
the remarkable result of the shooting down being that the pilot is held safely
and that the contents appear to have come down very neatly in an ascertainable
form, and in an ascertainable place I thought, ' Well, of course, Khrushchev
will have a bit of fun over this; he will recognise that there were poor
tactics on one side and he will respond by what he regards to be good tactics.'
But little did I believe. that this would be used as a means of defeating
a conference of preventing a conference from ever occurring. I'm still not
without hope, I would not be surprised if I were rung up at dinnertime and
told that, by some accident, they had met again. I don't know I've had no
information but one always hangs on to some hope about this matter. I
thought, ' Well, as a tactical-exercise this is understandable though it's
silly', until I realised that on their own story the plane had travelled,
before it was intercepted, for the better part of a thousand miles over Soviet
territory. That perhaps is the most interesting feature of the whole thing.
That, I would venture to believe, must have created great feeling in Moscow
and great feeling among such people as knew of it, because, you see, if a
plane capable of delivering a nuclear bomb can fly for the better part of a
thousand miles over Soviet territory, then the vulnerability of Soviet
territory becomes demonstrated and the efficacy of the deterrant is thereby
increased. Lnd if we look at it in that way then of course we can begin to
S understand why this was not perhaps just a manoeuvre but the genuine expression
of a passion and perhaps of a fear. Otherwise the whole thing is beyond
comprehension. " Now, going back to the propaganda aspect of this matter, I have most
staunchly supported the idea of a Summit meeting. I pay grcat tribute to
the Prime Minister of this country for having done so much I think more than
anybody else to bring it about; and I hope that we won't fall into the error
of saying ' Well, you wanted it, you made a great point of it Lnd it's
failed,' and then sit back in our corners and become critical. Because it
still remains true that unless these leaders meet at the Summit, and that
right early, the world may pass into a more terrible phase of existence in the
next ten or twenty years than it has known before. And so we must naintain
hope, we must keep our ideas up, we must still be for the Sumiit, we must
still be for personal contacts. And if I'm right in my own guess, the
leader of the Soviet Union will very soon become aware that right around the
world there is a feeling of bitter disappointment and a critical feeling about
the attitude that he's taken. And, if that's so, well, we may meet again
another day. And so long as the heads of the governments of the world will
meet and be prepared to talk as if they were human beings, and not mere
advocates hired by some established interest, then there is hope for the world.
" I would like to make a comparison between these astonishing events
or non-events in Paris, and the meeting of Prime Ministers of the
Cor. mmonwealth. There are still people who think that a Prime &gt; inisters'
Conference in the Cormonwealth is a species of committee of the United Nations;
that it has the shape and character of an international conference. It has
nothing of the kind. We don't meet to judge; we don't meet to have all the
tiresome machinery end motions and amendmcnts and people running up and down
in the lobbies. We don't go in for that kind of thing. We meet. We've
had, this time, some matters to cormune about full of explosive material
end we concluded our meeting with a spirit of complete good temper, with our
knowledge expanded, with, I think a high degree of mutual tolerance; nobody
looking for some spectacular triumph at the expense of someboOy else, but all
of us looking to be able to establish that this Commonwealth of ours is one
in which you're not thinking of tactics, but in which you talk quietly in a
friendly way, you learn more, you're able to disagree at the table, and then
go out and have a drink together afterwards. This is in the highest possible
tradition. And I am delighted to say that the new members of the Conmmonwealth
respond to this traditional idea as rapidly as anybody else at the table.
" What a contrast that is to the other business! Taking a trick!
Trying to humiliate your opponents! I little thought the day would come
when, on the greatest platform in the world, with the greatest powers in the
world, assembled through their ' number one' people, I would find the state
of affairs in which the leader of one govcrnment accepted, what raight be
thought to have been the hurmiliation of saying, ' Well, we won't do this again',
and that he should then find himself led on to apologise ' Unless you 
3
apologise I can't talk to you any longer'.
" Really, I think that in the place of the President, being less wise and
perhaps less guarded in my remarks, I might have offered to exchange apologies
' Yes, I'll apologise for this one, if you'll apologise for all yours'. And
in this atmosphere of mutual apology, they 1night have got to work on the real
thing. " But we must remain optimistic, we must hope; we must not allow
ourselves and this is all important to become divided under the jeers of the
other man who will say, ' f2a, I scored the point; I scored the point; I made
you look silly. Good afternoon to you'. That's the very state of affairs in
which France, the United States, Great Britain, could easily be persuaded to
have a post-mortem and to say, ' Well, you shouldn't have done this, or you
shoul 2n' t have said that'. Divide and conquer is just as modern now as it was
in the days of the Romans.
" If there's one lesson to be got from all this, it is that so far as the
other three great Powers are concerned the United States, and Great Britain
and France they must instantly and persistently keep together, evolve their
ovl ideas, exhibit their ovnm united strength, improve their united strength;
not by way of threat but in order to mlce it clear that the people who believe
in a free life are not easily driven into fragments by a shabby Soviet manoeuvre." 



1825_ RA1 1980
Asked about his reactions to the news from Paris, Mr. Mensies
saids " Well, I suppose I'm like all the rest of us it makes one
feel very anxious but my first reaction to what appears oe the surface
of the problem so far is that it is an unparalleled piece of hmnbug.
I mean, the greatest experts in spying in recent tines asking another
Power to apologise humbly seem to me to be almost unbelievable. In
fact it is so absurd it can't really be the whole root of the matter.
From the time this incident occurred about this aircraft the one thing
that stuck in my mind is that it was near enough to a thousand miles
inside Russian territory, if that's the right word. That alom of
course wouldn't be very comforting to Ehrushcher, because if aircraft
ean travel as far as that at great heights undetected, quite obviously
S the capacity of the Western Powers to deliver the aeclear weapon is
greater than perhaps the Soviet leaders have permitted their people to
believe. That will explain the real anger on his part. If there is
no sueh explanation then it is simulated anger and I would think it is
a pretty poor thing when the people of the world, who have a vested
interest in peace, or a contingent interest let's say, or a great belief
in it, or a wonderful desire for it, should find these negotiations just
set aside for propaganda points. That I think would be unpardonable
and I believe that the uncommitted portions of the world would think so.
Q the whole therefore I think that Khrushchev has done more harm than
good to his own cause".
Asked about future prospects Mr. Menzies went on:
SCh well, that's anybody's guess. Tou're thinking in terms of
a Treaty with East Germany, pressure on Berlin. You see, for all we
know they will meet this afternoon. How do we know? hrushchev's
nothing if he is not spectacular. I think he is the best propaganda
expert in the world. He has made a slip this time, if it is propaganda".
SQuestioned about the possibility of pressures within Russia
itself, Mr. Measies indicated that one knows little about that. It was,
however, quite conceivable that there may have been unobasant reactions
to the journey of a thousand miles over Russian territory. Mr. Mensies
also referred to " some symptoms of the rise of what we might call the
new Bourgeoisie inside the Soviet Union. It is bound to happen when some
people are paid a great deal more than others and live rather better than
others. You caa' abolish these distinctions just by act of Parliament.
I think there are a few symptom of some growth of that kind but how far
it goes, how far it is vocal and how far it can exercise pressure I
wouldn't know". Mr. Menzies further said that Khrushchev is very flexible about
his tactics but they don't affect the direction of the battle or the
objectives of it. 
-2
Asked about the suggestion in the United States that the
plane was delivered to him and not shot do=, Mir. Menzies replied:
* In these fields I an the least expert of people and I
have had no mpert advice. But as a layman like most of usn hero,
I find it a little difficult to believe that if you shot a plane
down at that enormous height by some rocket device there would be
time for the pilot to bale out or that you would collect so neatly
coins, wedding rings which in the event of semething of that kind
must have been sea aduIover many square miles.* Therefore, one is
peormitted to be skeptical and to think that the plane perh~ aps for
other reasons had to ceme down and that the pilot baled out".
Asked about his own hopes from the Summit, Mr. Menzies said:
* I had hopes that some result would come out not on a wide
field but for zaxple there were two things
the suspension of nuclear tests. Thy got so close
to each other at Geneva on this matter that I had
hopes that the four leaders sitting down together or
at anry rate three of them, I am omitting Do Gaulle
ifto, r It htihso upgrhpt oteh, a bt ecleaaudsee rsh em migihgth t bne oat bblee tionv oslevtetdl ein-'
that matter by giving a broad diretion to the Geneva
negotiaters which wouild produce a moratorium right
down the sale; and
not to settle the berlin quetion ( which is still
bedevilled by all sorts of juristic and military
considerations) but that they might have got some
standstill arrangement in relation to Berlin for a
period of time even though it might not be a long
period. If we could have got one of those or both
ot those out of the Summit Meeting it would have
loosened things up and given people a good deal of
hope for the future".
In reply to a question on the future of Woomera, Mr. Menzies
said: " Woomera wo't of course by any means disappear, but whether
it will mintain its full range of activities I would think would depend
upon the study that is being made here now on its possible wse for space
research. I think there is a good deal of feeling that in Whs spae
research business the United Kingdom ought to have a hamd. If the result
is that we are going to have space rfmearok, then the overall eff ect of
the abandonmet of Blue Streak as a weapon would be comprative3y small.
But I think it all has to be understood that their judgement as to whether
Blue Streak should be continued must be parimount. ThqV are the people
who are in the immediate firing line. Thqr are the people who under
the pressat arrangements possess some share of the deterrent and it is
their military advise which must be of paramount importance in determininag
whether you are going to have a vehicle of this kind sent from a fied
place. Sir Charles Lambe came out to Australia and he discussed this
with = and with three or four Ministers direetly e. aorned,, including the
Minist er for Def ence. We were by no means disposed to disagree with the
views that thq were taking*. 
11r. Mensies was asked -" Now that you have had an opportunity
to got a true picttre of the situation in South Africa from Mr. Louw, will
you say what the Australian Government's attitude in to South Africa's
racial policy". He repliods
01 don't know that I will. I man, whenever I say something
like that it is suggested in some quart-ers that we are approving of their racial
po3. icy, That is not the position at all. What we have done in to adopt
what the Conference in London agreed was the correct attitude. We do not
interfere in th. domestic policies or affairs of another memiber of the
Comonwealth. The whole Conference here abreed with that. I don't know
whether we have the complete picture yet because several of us had-, private
talks,. I suppose all of us one way or another with Mr. Lmzw, he has very
strong views, but in the course of these private talks at least five of us
of the group to which I vas attached ( and that includes one Afriopn and
two Asian Prime Ministers) put to Mr. Lauw after a good deal of to * 3d fro
and explanations by him, certain ideas which we thought would softeA the
asperities of this policy and perhaps make it a good deal more workalg. e,
practicable, rasonable, witower word you care to use, and he told 4~ that
he would convey those notions to the Prime Minister. He was in a difficult
position bemause he was representing his Prime, Minister; he just couldn't
speak with much authority as if he was Prime Minister. I must say that all
these suggestions were made in the i~ odeato and good tempered way. I mas
greatly imnpressed by the fact that those three colleagues ( Ekrmih and
I Taaku) didn't s* am to be making hysterical extravagant remarks or proposals
at &amp; 34. On the contrary they recognised the difficulty that presented the
South African sukment, the difficulty which so maxr people don't appear
to realieq because they have a grnat difficulty one that I am very glad
we don't have to deal with in Australia. It is easy to be theoretical
about what you would do if you had a multi-racial society. We don't have
the problema to cope with and under those circumstances I feel that their
recognition of the, fact that there was that problem and that you couldn't
do thing in a hurry was very good.
" I didn't hear an illtmpored remsk made om the matter.
In point of fact the Confere* ce its elf realised what a nuimber of people
outside do not realises that the argument was not all Sbarpevifle.
Sharpevifl was not discussed in the Prime Minister'sa Conference as an.
incident. What vas discussed was the policy, to the extent that it van
not discussed in formal meetings but what we were talking about in private
meeting was the policy of Apartheid and its political, social, JJAUstri
manifotations. -Of course, the incident of Sharpowille broUg~&amp; t4 ito
the picture betause it is not to be forgotten that this polic7 Allsit
start yesterday it is 15 or 20 years olds and ar a matter of fact
Louw claimed, and I think he is right, it was first stated Saduts
himself, though Smuts himself, of course, had ideas of method * W dogepe
and temper whiqh were not necessarily those of his suM eon I I"
it has nibeenbo brougtt up before at the Prim Minister's 6otre. t
but taihtks time, no doubt because of the world wide reaci -,, ito tho
to the Sbarpoville incident and the undoubted fact that in 4 h
countries of the Cm~ nwealth outside South Africa there w, 7t Uf~* m oW52
strong feelings. 
-4-
* I agree with the Tunka, ( what the Tumku. ins upposed to
have said) that the knowledge pined by Leow here of the depth of
feeling, non* the less deep because it has been moderately expressed,
mst have some effect on his mind. It may very well have an effect
on the mind of his Prime Minister". Mr. Menzies continued:
N kid my piece on these matters in May private talks
and I think it would be very unwise of ae to be reproducing publicly
what the private talks that couldn't have been held under other
countries".
AID TO AI Asked about a " Colombo plan for African oountries*
discussed at the Conference, Mr. Uen21ems aidt
" I think there is reference to that in the comwanique,
but what happened in effect was this. It uas raised when we were
having a general discussion on regional economic problem, and the U. K.
mentioned this in relation to the Colombo plan. I said that the
problem of the development of Africa was tremendously important, that
we had in the pest, I thought, under-estimated it. Now there are
people in Africa. The movement towards independence is rapid
and accelerating. The fact is itis going faut. We will have a position
in which politically independent commuities will be in many cases
, economically dependent, which is an unhappy state of affairs and could
easily lead to social disorders and propagunda results of a very unhappy
kind and under thoe circumstances I believe that we have to take
into immediate study the possibilities of decidinig a comprehensive
plan of some kind for Africa, not necessarily along exactly the same
lines as the Colombo plan but one worked out.
" Nobody is agreed in principle to this thing yet but we,
are all attracted to the idea.* When I get back hoe I will have my
people work on these, and in fact one of the official committees already
existing is going to have a look into this, to examine its practicability
and what sort of scheme could be worked out of a practical kindN.
LHC as
30/ 5/ 60 



P. M. No. 19/ 196o
UNI VE SITY SALARIES
Statement by Acting Prime Minister. Mr. J. MoEwen
The Acting-Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, said today that
thle Australian Universities Commission, having regard to movements
in professorial salaries during the past two years, has
proposed that the Commfonwealth Government should accept an increase
in the basic professorial salary on which Commonwealth
assistance is made available under the States Grants ( Universities)
Act. Some States, he said, had sought a lead from the
Commission on the question of University salaries. The Commission
had advised the Commonwealth that it would be appropriate to
assist the States in respect of salary rises up to f-4 000 a year
for basic professorial salaries as from 1st July, 1966. The
Commission has also recommended that the salaries of sub-professorial
staff should be suitably adjusted.
Mr. McEwen said that the Commonwealth accepted these
recommendations. He emphasised that the actual level of salary
increases in each State iras not a matter for the Commission or
the Commonwealth Government to determine. The Commonwealth,
however, is prepared to meet its share of any increase in University
salaries up to the level indicated. Whether the actual
professorial salaries paid in State Universities were higher or
lower was a matter for the State Governments and their Universities.
Mr. McEwen pointed out that there had been general acceptance
of the Murray Committee report ( on which the present
level of assistance is based) which includes the concept that
University salaries throughout Australia should be more or less
in line. The Gommonwealth has assumed heavy financial commitments
under the States Grants ( Universities) Act, arid it also has
its own direct responsibility for the Australian National U~ niversity
and the Canberra University College. Because salaries form
such a large element in University ' costs, the Commonwealth must
necessarily concern itself with movements in University salaries.
During the past eight months the Commission I1Rs visited
all Universities and has considered their needs for the 1961/ 63
triennium. Since approximately 601o of the recurrent expenditure
at Universities is devoted to salaries, the Commission recommended
the appointment of an expert committee to advise it on the
appropriate levels for academic salaries throughout Australian
Universities for the 1961/ 63 triennium and on other relevant
matters. The Acting Prime Minister said that the Government had
accepted this recommendation.
Mr. McEwen said that the committee would be under the
Chairmanship of Sir Leslie Martin, the Chairman of the Australian
Universities Commission, and :* iould comprise the following members:
Dr. 11,0. Coombs, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, Mr.
L. B. Hamilton, First Assistant Secretary, Department of the
Treasury, Canberra, Professor Sir George P ton, Chairman of the
Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee, Mr. G. F. Seaman, Under
Treasurer, South Australia and Mr. L. J. Jeickhardt, Technical
Director Imperial. Chemical industries of Australia and New
Zealand Limited. The Acting Prime Minister added that the
committee would have power to co-opt where special information
was required and that interested bodies would be invited to prepare
submissions for the consideration of the committee.
CAN BERRA,
27th May, 1960., 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINIST...' THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIJLS AT CAANN -AU3TRAL I4IN LUNCHEON, NE.!
Y0iu( 6TH_ JU 196o
Sir, having listened to you, having listened to Tom,
having collected a little of the atmosphere, I want to say what
a pleasure it is for a practising politician to find himself in
such a completely non-political atmosphere.
Governor Dewey made some very pleasant remarks about
me. I just want to say to you that I'm glad thiat he did, because
I feel t:' at he owes those remarks to me. In 1948, ihen I shared
the gift of false prophesy with Roy Howard and all of the
thousands and thousands of people who wrote to his orders, I went
all the way at my own expense from New York to Syracuse to hear
Tom Dewey at a railway station, And having heard him, I went
all the way back to New York quite satisfied t'aat he was going
to win. . Jhich goes to shnw, doesn't it, what extraordinary
results can happen in a country like the United States, so
backward as not to have compulsory voting.
But it really is the most fascinating thing in the
world for a man who comes from a country where politics is conducted,
as you know, with a high courtesy, never a rude remark,
never an ugly thought or a hard word, to come over here in a
presidential election year, And of course I should love to be
able to tell all of you who will be on the ticket when the vote
comes. I've had it right from the horse's mouth, or rather I
should say, right from the mouths of horses. I know of at least
three absolute stone certainties for the Democratic nomination;
and as for the vice-president, wel, permutations and combinations
couldn't go far enough to e ' Vlain how many people are
undoubtedly certain to be chosen,
I am sorry I can't wait long enough to attend one of
these conventions of yours t-sit in the gallery and listen to
the brass band. Because really in 1948, having gone up north to
listen to Tom, having gone out to Indianapolis to listen to Mr.
Truman, having got back to New York and being about to go back
to London to pick up my wife and daughter, I paid $ 2o50 ( did I
ever tell you about this?) to go to Madison Square Garden and
hear Henry Uallace. It cost me about a hundred dollars to hear
Tom Dewey; about two hundred dollars to hear Harry Truman and
$ 2.50 to hear Henry J. allace. And it was a great night a
wonderful night. There were bands, there were people who gave
a very goci imitation of the Andrew Sisteis, crooning int a
microphone. Paul Robeson was in the chair and he sang his opening
speech to the tune of Old Man River that was worth the
$ 2.50 in itself and then Henry came out with the spotlight,
and a lock of hair and he made a policy speech. Ten minutes
consisted of four sentences interspersed with the most tremendous
volume of applause and the rustling of five-dollar bills as they
fell into the collection bags. I went home writh my mouth
watering. I began to work out what I might have been worth ' t
the same sort of tariff.
But I remember that the fourth sentence of this speech
consisted of these words: "' Je stand for light, not darkness."
Now that's a very good cbservation. And as my old lawryer's
instinct asserted itself I thought I would love to get some
further and better particulars of what that might mean. So as we
walked out into the great peace of the starry night, out of
Madison Square Gardens, I spoke to a neighbour who was walking
out, and I said to him with my most courteous manner: " Excuse me
sir, I'm a foreigner here, I wonder if you could help me. Now
when Mr. dallace said that he stood for light, not darkness,
was he adumbrating possibly the nationalization of the gas light
industry?". And my neighbour looked at me with that contempt
that is reserved for foreigners, and he said: " Say, it's easily
seen you are a foreigner." And he left me for dead. 
Now Tom Dewey has said some rather magnificent things
about the position of Australia. I hope they were taken down;
I think I might use them about the end of next year, when, in
the inscrutible wisdom of Providence there will be another
election. But they were very complimentary words. I think that
in substance, leaving out the bits about myself, they were quite
true. I don't know that there has been a decade in the
history of my own country that has seen such astonishing development.
But development, of course, particularly in a young
country, a country with a small population, a country which in
order to build up its population must not only provide firstclass
living conditions for its own people, but must have a
large movement of migration. One of the great problems when you
have that is that you get the pressure on your resources, an
over-demand on capital, a tremendous pressure of demand for all
sorts of social facilities which gives rise almost chronically
to inflationary conditions. Now that has been one of the great
problems in Australia4 how to maintain the rate of development,
how to give expression to this enormous desire to unlock the
resources of the country and at the same time preserve a degree
of stability in the currency which will produce confidence in
the minds of investors, both at home and abroad, and do justice
to those many, many people who live on fixed incomes.
And this has been, economically, one of the very
greatest tasks that a government could confront, and we have
encountered it we have sometimes encountered it successfully,
sometimes we haven't had all the success we might have liked.
Sometimes there have been circumstances outside Australia altogether,
which have given rise to the most enormous pressures,
like those which followed on the outbreak of the Korean War, for
example. But by and large, I do look back with great pride on
the measure of stability that has been achieved. I thought you
might be interested to know of our last experience in this field,
because about a year ago we began to see strong symptoms of
inflation, a cost inflation bearing very heavily on our export
industries in particular, wages high and rising, a degree of
employment which might be called almost over-full employment,
with all that that involved in the turnover of labor, inability
to maintain the ordinary disciplines of employment. Therefore
we decided that we ought to take some steps about it.
We have the great benefit in Australia of compulsory
arbitration. You go in for a different way of settling your
matters. I don't know whether it is any less expensive than
ours, but at any rate ours comes high. And in the course of
the calendar year 195' 9, the Commonwealth Arbitration tribunal had
added to the wages bill, first of all by an increase in what we
call the basic wage, and then by an increase in marginal rates of
pay. It added in one period a total of about œ CA165,0070OO
œ_ A170, OOO, OOO to the annual wages and salaries bill.
Now in a country of 10,000,000 people that11 was a very
very considerable injection of inflationary pressure. And so
this year we decided we would have to do one or two things that
were different. For the first time the Government, which has
always stood neutral in these wages dispute, intervened before
the Commonwealth tribunal and put up a powerful case for making
no further change in the basic wage. In other words we said the
whole economy of the country needs a period of time of a year to
absorb what has already been done, and in the long run you won't
be helping anybody if you add to the inflationary pressure and
see the price level rising and the value of wages being eroded
in consequence. And although this intervention of ours, I can
assure you, wasn't the most popular action of our lives, it
proved to be uncommonly successful, and the Commonwealth tribunal
acted upon it and said " No change". Now that in itself is quite
an historic event in Australia and I think must have a steadying
effect on the economy generally. 
3.
At the same time we have found that for various reasons
it had been necessary in some earlier years to budget for a
deficit in order to prevent certain signs at various periods of
some minor recession from developing, and we had budgeted for a
deficit. This time we said, and I hope we will be able to perform
it popularly, that we would not budget for a deficit in 16o.
-61. That has been loudly applauded by hundreds of thousands of
peoplo who will loudly object to it when the time comes, But
we have nailed our colors to that mast.
And in the third place, as you know, we have had for
years now a pretty severe system of import liceonsing in order
to protect our overseas balance, Import licensing the sole
international justification for which is to protec our balance,
not to be used for some tariff purpose, that is an entirely
different matter. Tariff ought to look after that. But import
licensing, to restrain the overall volume of imports so that we
wouldn't see our overseas balances running down. And the
measures taken in the past have been so successful that this
yecr we have been able to announce the virtual termination of
import licensing. That, of course, not only means that there
will be a considerably greater inward flow of goods, plant, all
of w,. hich will tend to have a counter-inflationary effect, but it
also means that our trading relations with other countries in
the world become wider, more flexible and morc satisfactory all
round; because import licensing was very, very unpopular with
some people and its abolition has proved even more unpopular
with others. But by and large, through these various means, we have
been able, not without difficulty, not without constant scrutiny,
to preserve a degree of stability, which I am happy to say has
proved very effective outside Australia,
J,, e do, in fact, generate a great deal of our own
capital, out of our own earnings and resources, far more than
people sometimes think. There must be very few countries in the
world with a higher savings rate per cent of overall income than
we have in Australia. I know we are regarded as light-Ihearted
gambling sort of community, who think that tomorrow is another
day. That is not quite true. There has been an enormous satisfaction
of demand for capital out of the current earnings of
industry inside Australia. But over and above that, over these
last eight or nine years, the inflow of capital into Australia
has been quite phenomenal. I don't necessarily mean, or merely
mean monc : y borrowed by goverment on government account, from
say the World Bank, or drafts from the International Monetary
Fund, or whatever it may be. Putting those things on one side,
and looking solely at private investment from outside Australia,
in inlustry inside Australia, it has avoiag-d out, over the last
eight or nine years, pretty near to œ_ Alc'Om. a year, Now of
course, when I talk about a hundred million to you gentlemen,
you just regard that as small change. I know that, because as
I stood at the door side by side with this taciturn fellow,
Floyd Blair, I shook hands very warmly with about eight or nine
hundred million dollars. It was a wonderful sensation I kept
looking at my hand and wondering whether any of the dollars had
come off in the process. But to us an inflow of LZAlO~ m. a year
is an enormous accretion to our resources, and but for that I
venture to say we might have had some trouble in maintaining our
immigration programme and we certainly might have had to slow um..
to a certain extent, the industrial development particularly,
that is going on in Australia.
I know there are other parts of the British Commonwealth
that don't share this view, but in the result I am dolighted
to say we have had great sums of money invested in
Australia by American concerns, great industries have been
established, the whole motor car industry in Australia which
was regarded as a pipe dream 20 years ago is deeply associated 
with enterprise from this cohtinent. And when you consider how
much that involves in employment in forward-looking employment,
in a sonse of social security, in the development of ancillary
industries, you will understand how pleased people like myself
are to find that just as we have striven for the right conditions
inside our own country, so people outside, not given to sentimental
judgments only on these matters, have found this a good
environment in which to invest their own skill and their own
capital. Therefore it is a . Zood picture, a good story.
But of course it is not the only problem we have in
the world, because Australia is not only Australia: it is part
of the free world. Its itinerant Prime Ministers fetch up in
London and attend Prime Ministers' Conferences and discuss
matters with great vigour. They turn up in Washington, and
discuss the problems of South-east Asia. We are not unconcerned
with what goes on in the world of course. And therofore I just
want to make one broad observa~ ion to you about the state of
the world: Hundreds of millions of people, let's put it quite
modestly, had high hopes of the Summit, exaggerated hopes if you
like, but even the most hard-headed of us would have expected
that out of a Summit meeting there might come a little crack of
daylight. Not a broad settlement, because at the moment we
discuss symptoms far more than we discuss causes, discuss results
far more than we discuss causes also, but most people, I think,
hoped that som~ ething might come out, some direction about, for
example, nuclear tests, where the East and the West had got
already measurably close to one another, and where one would
have expected that a good draft of commonsense night have overcome
the outstanding difficulties so that some headway might be
made. I-t~ ink that many people hoped that out of a Summit
conference there might come at any rate, some moratorium in
relation to the Berlin question, with all its stickiness and
apparent insolubility. And therefore when the Summit failed
before it be-an I venture to say that all around the world were
hundreds of mcillions of people whose first instinct was of bitter
disappointment, and whose second instinct was one of profound
resentment. Now of course the Soviet Union, the master of propaganda,
insofar as Khrushchev is still the master, which I am
inclined to doubt, but the masters of propaganda will have the
world believe that the Summit failed because the United States of
America had flown an aircraft over Russia and had been investigating
what when on. Now I remember being told m-. any years ago,
when I first went to the Bar, by a very experienced judge,
something like this: " I see you are getting a good deal of work."
I said: " Yes sir, I am, fortunately for me at any rate." And he
said: " Well, I just give you one piece of advice, I'm not pointing
the bone at you because I haven't had the opportunity of
hearing you, but Igive you one piece of advice: It is always
permissible to think that your opponent is a crook. B~ ut it is a
cardinal blunder to think that he is a fool." And t'lat is worth
remiembering. It is worth remembering in this connection because
to tell anybody in the world that the Summit failed because of
this aircraft is to assume that that somebody is a fool, because
no intelligent person would believe it. I don't suppose the
Russians have ever gone in for anything like that them-iselves. Do
they seriously expect anybody to believe them? Of course they
don't. I have a certain crude theory about this matter. It
falls into two parts: In the first place I think that the
measure of unity that has been established between the President
of the United States and the President of France a-nd the Prime
Minister of Great Britain has made a tremendous impanct on the
Soviet mind. It began to be clear to Khrushchev that perhaps he
wasn't comaing out of the Summit meoting with profit and therefore
it might be desirable not to attend it at all. I'll eerme back
to that question of unity because I just want to say a word 
about it. But in the second place, on his own showing, this
celebrated plare came down. Of course if wasn't shot down either
Providence doesn't work that way. You know the pilot comes
down quite safely and all the bits and pieces come down in a neat
package in the one place. VTell it is a little hard to take. But
anyhow, it came down 900 miles inside the frontiers of the
Soviet Union. Now just think of it as an isolated event, if we
must be completely academic. Nine hundred miles is a long way;
nine hundred miles of undetected flight meant that the power of
the deterrent in the hands of the free world was immeasurably
greater than Khrushchev had ever admitted to his own people.
Because if one . could do it, a hundred could do it. If that sort
of distance was feasible, then without international ballistic
missiles, or whatever these new horrors may be, there was a
country completely vulnerable to counter-attack. And I'll be
very surprised if thaat melancholy reflection hasn't had a pretty
big effect on the mind of Khrushchev or even on the mind of that
gentle, soft, rather refined and angelic person Malenovsky.
And so I said I would just come back for one minute to
the question of unity. This is the American-Australian association,
this is the United States, the greatest power in the world,
Australia, one of the smallest powers in the world, Great Britain
France unity is so tremendously important that we ought never
to allow a day to go by without praying for it and working for
it. It is so easy to differ, so easy to disagree. It is in our
nature to disagree. do sometimes overlook the fact that under
our system of government we insist upon disagreeing. It's the
business of politics to have disagreements in your own country
It is the business of Congress or of Parliam.' ent to have every
possible point of view, every possible point of disagreeme-int
ventilated, thrashed out, and we take all this for granted. We
don't think that because we have a government and an opposition
in fierce debates that we are a divided country, because we know
that when it comes to the great things in the world we will be
together to the last drop. Vie know that. But we are accustomed
to our own forms of government. We want to be very careful I
think, not to allow the virtue of our system of self-government
to become a vice in the international field. To allow internal
disagreements to spill over into external disputes, because
these people, fabulously united, with all the instruments of
propaganda at their disposal, able to change their tactics every
day if they want to, still have a sort of monolithic quality
about then.. which enables them to take advantage of all the
differences that exist on the other side while never displaying
any of their own. They will do this; they will fish in troubled
waters; they will take advantage of every possible dispute.
It is a matter of very great urgency for the countries
which are outside the Communist orbit to settle their differences
among themselves, to settle thema with the greatest possible
speed. We were discussing only the other day cases in Southeast
Asia, where there are unresolved arguments between neighbouring
countries, each of whom has the m-, ost vital interest in
not being absorbed by Cormmunist China. And yet you have outstanding
differences, sometimes very griat, sometimes quite
tiddly-winky, but so long as they exist then the whole machinery
of the Soviet Union or of Communist China will be available to
inflame then, to build them up, and thereby hope to bring aboutnot
for the first time in history differences which are almost
crippling if they manifest themselves in the presence of the
same cormmon foe.
And so I say to you gentlemen,, I think we must all do
in our own way and in our o in place everything that we can to
preserve the highest measure of unity on the great mattexs. And
it ought not to be difficult, because we have all the great m~ atters
in common. Ie have in common our trusteeship for individual
freedom, and the great conflict in the world is between an a~ gros
; so fom 5ol slvr indi idual eo nta
we ognae re0 CVweeq naifo ddto an e~ prc ~ ooo 



P. M. No. 20/ _ 960
COMMONiW ALTH SCHOLAI' 3HIP AND F'LLOWSHIP PLAN
Statement by the Actinc Prime Minister, Mr. J. McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, announced
today that the first senior award to be offered by Australia to
an educator from another Commonwealth country under the Commonwealth
Scholarship and Fellowship Plan had been accepted by Dr.
Pø FoR. Venables, Principal of the College of Advanced Technology
of the City of Birmingham.
Mr. McEwen said that Dr. Venables' visit should provide
a stimulus in the field of technical education in Australia. Dr.
Venables was one of the leading figures in technological education
in the United Kingdom and had been closely associated with
recent important overseas developments in tis field.
Dr. Venables was expected to arrive in Australia
towards the end of July to spend six weeks in Australia.
Mr. McEwen added that Australia had offered scholarships
to over twenty Commonwealth countries, mainly for postgraduate
studies at Australian universities.
Fifty aw,_, rds would be made, tenable from the beginning
of the 1961 academic year, but it was expected that a small
number of students would arrive in Australia shortlyto commence
post-graduate study during 1960.
Furthermore, offers of scholarships had now been received
in Australia from the United Kingdom, Canada, New Zealand,
South Africa, Mala a and Hong Kong.
CANBERRA, 7th June, 1960 



EMBARGO: 11 p. m. Wednesday, 15th June, 1960 P. M. No. 21/ 1960
WORK AT KIMBERLEY RJL] SEARCH STATION TO BE
DOUBLED
Statement by the Actingi Prime Minister, Mr. J. McEwen
The Commonwealth Government has agreed to increase its
assistance to the work of the Kimberley Research Station.
An expanded programme of agricultural research is to
be carried out over the next five years at the Station, which is
located in the Ord Valley, North-W4estern Australia.
Annual expenditure on this work will be almost doubled.
The station has been operated jointly by the Commonwealth
and Western Australian Governments since 1946. The agricultural
research is carried out by the Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation and the -lestern Australian
Department of Agriculture. Each Government meets half the costs
involved. The results of the Station's work in irrigated agriculture
are already being applied in several northern Australian
areas. The Stationts annual funds ( exclusive of salaries) for
carrying out its work uill be increased from œ C50,000 to œ C92,000.
The research staff will be increased.
The programme decided upon for the next five-year period
provides for an expansion of work on rice and safflower. These
two crops are giving very encouraging results. Further work will
be done on a number of other crops which appear to have good agronomic
prospects. It will be recalled that the Government of destern Australia
decided to spend in the Ord Valley part of the œ C5 million
grant provided by the Commonwealth for new development works in
the northern part of Western Australia. It is now proceeding
with the construction of a weir on the Ord River to serve an irrigation
area of from 10,000 to 15, GLOO acres.
This decision of the t4ostern Australian Government has
emphasised the necessity for expanding the work of the Station, so
that it can handle technical problems arising from the commercial
venture. . CANB fRA, 15' th June ,1960 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY, 16TH JNE 16o
This is a proud day for mae. To one who has had a
great deal to do with the recent expansion of Universities in
Australia, and who is himself an Australian Graduate, an honour
accorded by this famous foundation means more than can be
readily expressed. To the political leader of the Australian nation it
means even more. For on this day the most powelful country in
the world offers a courtesy, so to speak, to another country,
weak in numbers but strong in will, whose future is bound up
with yours, the body of whose intellectual and spiritual character
is part of a common inheritance.
You have honoured me by asking me to speak. I would
not wish to acknowledge that honour by offering you the common--
places of that escapist piety of sentiment which characterises
most after-dinner oratory. I shall not say that " we are
cousins" because, for the most part, we most certainly are not;
we get on much too well. I shall not say that we have the same
kind of parliamentary democracy, because we have not; we in
Australia live in a constant blur of good-natured bewilderment
at some of the " oddities" of your own constitutional processes.
But of course we do have great things in common; so
great that if we avoid insanity in the English-speaking world,
we shall always be friends and allies, To preserve this friendship,
we are to face up to our tasks, accept our responsibilit~ cs
with some favour or affection, no doubt, but without fear.
Today, fear is our greatest enemy. So far, a century
of the most brilliant scientific achievement, of growi ng political
consciousness, and of material advancement, has been marred
by fear, suspicion, and actual hatred, to a degree without
modern precedent. Many have developed a fear of life and of its problems.
so that the psychiatrists flourish like the green bay tree, Many
of us have learned to fear our own unruly impulses and -the individuality
which is our divine gift, and therefore seek the
protection of conformity. If we seek to " Keep up with the
Joneses", it is mostly because we want to be like the Joneses
and avoid the accusation of being odd, or different, or conspicuous.
' 4e fear to be unpopular. WIh en we do something we
regard as generous or helpful, we are dismayed to find so muCh
ingratitude. On quite a few occasions I have been asked by
prominent Americans why the superb American International generosity
of recent years has so frequently been received with such
covert resentment or open hostility. My reply has always been
that the world power of the British in the 19th century may well
have inspired respect, but certainly did not purchase populariti-y.
Power exacts its own reactions. Friendship cannot be bought,
and great powor, however benevolently exercised, will always
produce puzzling resentmentL-s. " Why should this rich nation have
more than we have?".
doe are frequently invited to fear the poten~ tial eneray-
In destructive technology, we find him so clever, and forget
that in the constructive sciences the contribution of thie free
world is so much greater than his.
ile rejoice in power, but we sometimes fear and misunderstand
the responsibilities it brings. We are tempted to
withdraw into ourselves to enjoy the fruits of our own labours,
and to let the re3st of he world go by.
This brings me to the point I wish to make today,. 
0 0 
0 2.
Tennyson, no so dernode among the young, once wrote a
few lines which have been much misunderstood
" We sa iled wheirever ships could sail,
Je founded many a mighty state;
Pray God our greatness may not fail
For craven fear of being great!"
This was no imperialist tub-thumping. It was brilliantly perceptive.
It saw clearly that greatness imposes responsibilities:
that power which is merely enjoyed is a menace, but that power
with responsibility can be the salvation of the world.
The great free powers are on trnlt today: none more
so than the greatest of them, the United States of America. The
way in which they survive this trial will depend upon how they
rise to the splendid but awful responsibilities of power: how
bravely they guard the inner liberties of man: how utterly they
cast out fear: how clearly their light shines before men: how
far they keep the feeling of adventure, and avoid the defensiveness
of riches. A desire f~ or power seems natural in mankind. Among
politicians it is thought to be endemic. But the great men and
the great nations are those who, having achieved it, do not
weakly recoil from it, afraid of leadership, or rejoice in power
for its own sake and for the precarious comforts it brings.
The twentieth century, which might so woll have been
the golden century of civilisation, has been bedevilled by the
lovers of power without responsibility. 4o do not denounce the
infamous memory of Hitler because he g ained and exercised power.
Much greater men than he gained and exercised power to defeat and
destroy him. Hitler is infamous, as are the other malevolent
dictators of our time, because with all his power he had no
smallest sense of responsibility for the true g7ood of men and
women. He obtained power, and became a monster.
Today, the communist threat is the result of another
and terrible misconception or denial of the duties of power. If
the men who come and g7o as the controllers of the destiny of the
Soviet Union were content to pursue their philosophy in their own
land because they believed that their system, so alien to us,
was the one to give peace and security and social justice and
happiness to their own people, we might well wonder, but we
would stand aside, on the principle of " live and let live", But
when we see them as an aggressive force, aiming at the bending of
hundreds of millions of free people to their own will, we know
that we are again seeing the search for power without rospohsibility.
The answer to power without responsibility is not power
simpliciter, though some people are prepared to rest there. '! Get
toug i" has an appeal, particularly if the slogan-makers can
stigmatise those who would wish to negotiate as " appeasers". In
a world such as we live in, power is essential, but it is not all.
The truth, self-evident though it may be, is that the only answer
to power witiaout responsibility is power with responsibility.
It is not sufficient to say that tL-his is the truth. As
usual, it is necessary to say what it moans.
It is a matter of famous record that in this place
George Marshall announced the groatest and most gonorous aid plan
in history. But greater even than its generosity uas its intelligence.
It was only a great power that could g7ive great aid
to others, But the diving of that aid was an ackno,, wledgment of
the responsibility that goes with power; a rusponsibility based
upon an understanding of international facts and the true foundations
of peace. 
7
0 0 
3.
Here we have g reat scope for the imagination. ' vie know
that, on our side, the greatest of all wars was fought for
freedom, 3ut this did not havc a purely selfish connotation.
It did not mean freedom for those who alrcady enjoyed it; for
Americans and British and Frenchman and Australians. It meant
freedom for all mon, including those hundreds of millions in
countries moving towards independence, for whom self-government
is thne greatest of all adventures. vlhen you in your great way,
and we in our small, tax yourselves and ourselves to help new
nations, we are not just being more or less comfortably generous,
and feeling -ood about it. Wde are rocognising. the one-ness of
humanity, and the profound responsibilities of power and of
possessions. It is not philanthropy, but wisdom, to accept the
task of guiding and helping other nations and people, so that
they may acquire not only the institutions of freedom, but,
much more importantly, those rising standards of living and of
thaought without n rhich free institutions will wither and decay.
True, we may properly admit that we -rish to restrain the expansive
move of communian. To this end, as in the case of SEATO we
enter into military engagements and make military preparations.
But these will fail unless, in those new nations which stand at
risk, economic growth is stimulated, the development of the
individual is pursued, and the communist powers find themselves
increasingly confronted by communities resolved to accept no
slavery of the mind.
In the performance of our responsibilities, there is
no time to be lost. Since 1945~ the hitherto little-known new
world moves rapidly to a series of now nationhoods, Lor.-I at
Africa, until recently a nest of colonies, where a score of new
nations are coming to birth. Are we to be just kind to them,
giving to them that which we feel we can comfortably afford, the
" crumbs from the rich man's table", or will we see in their
(: mergence a great challenge to the wisdom of western civilisation?
Is there not a wise-self-interest to serve, not a narrow selfishness
for self-protection, but a self-interest based upon the
understanding that our own freedom is dependent upon the freedom
of others: that we cannot havc peace and prosperity for ourselves
alone? May I venture to remind you of one of the great economic
phenomena of our time? It is that, nationally speaking, the
gap between the ' haves" and the " have nets" is becoming greater.
I believe that this is not true inside of our boundaries,
where social responsibilities, e-xpressed in terms of schemes of
social welfare and social justice, have led to a narrowing of
the gap between riches and poverty. High and graduated taxatioi
is, within reasonable limits and subject to legitimate grumbling,
accepted. More and more, in our own place, we carry the burden
of being our brother's keeper.
But internationally, this, in spite of great efforts,
is not by any means true, 4oe live in an ago of amazing technological
groi.-th. Aided by the most superb technical skill, the
great industrial countries make progre ss in an almost geometrical
fashion. The luxury of yesterday becomes the mass-produced
commonplace of tomorrow. And so, nationally speaking, and in
the words of the old song, " 1the, rich get richier",. But what of
the new nations, the relatively poor nations, with sketchy or
primitive industries, with little technical skill and with, as
yet, small facilities for increasing it? At best, their rate of
material improvement is arithmetical, not geometric. So far from
catching up they are, in relative terms, falling behind.
This consideration, quite clear as it seems to me,
must give us all furiously to think. In face of it, we cannot
rationally decide to do less; we must do all that we can, even
though it means we do a little less for ourselves, " Charity
begins at home" is a cynical proverb, and, in this w,. orld, a
false one. 
I never come into the United States without feeling
something of the pulse and drama of your strength and growth.
Your resources are so boundless, your productive skill so boundless,
your optimism ( that great driving forcc) so all-pervasive.
Moro than any other country in the world yucould, in an economic
sense, live to and by yourselves. Lnd yet your high destiny
is to use your strength to ive light and leading and encouragement
to the world. The measure of how you fulfil that destiny
will be the measure of your greatness. You have accepted the
greatest responsibilities in htuman history. In this famous
place, the father ( or mother) of so many who have served in
high places and have, in high or humble places, given leadership
in the fields of the mind and the spirit, may I pray that year
by year there will be more and more of your graduates who will
persuade their follow-citizens, not only here but around the
world, that, just as rights are less significant thaan duties, so
is strength admirable only for the responsibilities it accepts
and discharges. The free world and that gre at area of the world which
longs to be free, look oyou with gratitude, but also with hope.
It is an honour to be enrolled in your brotherhood, and a rare
privilege to speak, not so much for myself, as for Australia,
your young but determined friend. 



SSPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. iR. G
MENZIESA HARVAD UNI 16 TH JUNE 16I0
Sir and ladies and gentlemen:
I have had a very, very exciting 22 hours in E: arvar.,
I arrived at 5 o'clock last evering. I came into this famous
yard. I lit a cigar, hoping that there was no local rule
against it, and I occupied any one of the fourteen thouosnd
seats available to me. I had an idea that when there were
other people on the platform, there would be a biggor audience.
But at any rate I sat in a seat and I meditated on . life; and
studied Harvard for the first time, I blush to say. I saw
respectable looking gentlemon, like myself, walking along with
red bands on their hats marked with such symbols as " 1935~:.
( Applause) The mystic puzzled a little, because I noticed,
as a rule, what I took to be a wife who also was " 19351; and
then a quite grown up daughter also branded '" 1935 ( Laughter)
and a somewhat disorderly small child of about 5 years old
( Laughter) also marked " 1935" ( Laughter). A little reflection,
of course, gave me the clue, but it was puzzling for a " tart.
And then I thought I would like to sec the Undergraduate
on the spot. I had made up my mind that all undergraduates
in the United States of America would not only have
the characteristic uhtidiness of undergraduates, but that they
would have nothing to do with any old world customs if they
were here. And so I sat and comfortably thought, "' ell,
there's one thing: this not being Groat Britain, I ,: ill not
see any umbrellas carried". Well my ear was pleasantly
attacked by the choir which was then rehearsing and which I
regret to say started rehearsing and woke me up in the
President's house this morning. ( Laughter) But they had been
rehearsing. And they came out. Do you know that every third
man carried an umbrella? ( Laughter) Oh!' What a disillusionment
this was for me. The only thing that really delighted me was to
discover that no one was so old fashioned as to carry he
umbrella by the handle, by the crook, or whatever you rmay call
it: it was usually seized a little lower down as if for
purposes of self-defence. This delightful reconciliation of
the spirit of the pionjor and the habits of the old world movel
me very greatly. ( Laughter, Applause)
And then of course this morning, when : oung Mr, Davis,
who I should think is destined to be the best known :-an in the
world inside five years, gave his Latin oration do you
remembor? so superbly done that L understood most of it
myself. ( Laughter) Full of a vein of irony which, in my days
as an undergraduate, was reserved e---lusively for classical
Professors. All they had to do tas . o look as if they were
being funny and, so far as we were concerned, they ' woer funny.
( Laughter) Well, Sir, Igive you those somewhat irrelev. nt and
impertinent observations, because really this is a great day for
me. I've had the great pleasure of having a lot to do,
particularly in recent years, with the development of
Universities in Australia and as I am a graduate of ,. n
Australian Univursity nysolf, an honour paid by this most
famous body is one that I appreciate quite beyond tl. puwcr of
words to express. And of course to the political loader, ilrost a chronic
political leader of the Australian nation, it means oven nore,
Because on this day, through you, the most powerful nation in
the world offers a courtesy, so co speak, to one of -he
smallest nations in the world, weak. in numbors, ut strong in
will, a nation whose future is bound up with yours nC. the
body of whose intollectual? and spiritual charactur forr.:. s part
of a great common tradition. 
2.
Sir, you have honoured me by asking no to speak. I
would not want to acknowledge that honour by offering you the
coammonplaces of that rather escapist piety of sentiment which
characterises after-dinner oratory. You know what I mean?
Most of you have suffered from it: I have practised it.
( Laughter) And because I want to avoid that I don't want to
say to you that " wo are cousins" because, quite demonstrably,
we're not: we get on much too well for that. I won't say
that we have the same kind of parliamentary democracy, because
we have not" we in Australia live in a constant blur of goodnatured
bowildormont at some of the " oddities" of your
constitutional processes. And in case you think that that is
a gross impertinence, I want to say that that is a bewildernent
that I have found is shared by most of the Americans I moot.
( Laughter) But, Sir, we do have great things in common; so
great that if we avoid insanity in the English-speaking world,
we shall always be friends and allies. ( Applause) To preserve
this friendship, we are to face up to our tasks, accept our
responsibilities with some favour, and I hope with some
affection, but certainly without fear.
Today, Sir, fear is our greatest eneny. So far, a
century of the nost brilliant scientific achievement, of growing
political consciousness, of material advanconent, has been
marred by fear, suspicion, and actual hatred, to a degree without
modern precedent. Many have developed a fear of life and its probloes,
so that if I may say so with respect the psychiatrists
flourish like the green bay tree. Many of us have learned to
fear our own unruly impulses and the individuality which is our
divine gift, and we therefore seek the protection of conformity.
If we seek to " Keep up with the Joneses", it is mostly because
we want to be like the Joneses and avoid the accusation of being
odd, or different, or conspicuous. We fear to be unpopular.
When we do something we regard as generous or helpful, we are
dismayed to find so much ingratitude. On quite a few occasions
I have been asked by prominent Americans why the superb
American international -enerosity of recent years has so
frequently been received in other countries with either covert
resentment or open hostility. My reply has always been that the
world power of the British in the 19th century may well have
inspired respect, but certainly it did not purchase popularity.
Power exacts its own reactions. Friendship cannot be bought,
and groat power however benevolently exercised will always
produce the most puzzling resentments. " Why should this rich
nation, why should this rich man, have more than I have?".
Sir, we are frequently invited to fear the potential
enemy. In destructive technology, we find him so clever, and we
forget that in the constructive sciences the contribution of the
free world is so infinitely greater than his. ( Applause) We
rejoice in power; but we sometimes fear and misunderstand the
responsibilities it brings. We are tempted to withdraw into
ourselves, to enjoy the fruits of our own labour rnd let the
world go by. And this, Sir, brings no to the point that I
want to r. ake today,
Tennyson is now, I believe, unfashionable among the
younger intellectuals. But he once wrote a few lines that have
been much misunderstood co-ionplace lines, if you like:
" io sailed wherever ship could sail,
We founded many a mighty state;
Pray God our greatness may not fail
For craven fear of being great" 
.4 0 3.
Now, Sir, that wasn't just tub-thumping; that wasn't just an
old-fashioned forn of imperialism. It was brilliantly
perceptivo. It saw quite clearly that greatness imposes
responsibilities: that power which is morely enjoyod is a
nenace, but that power with responsibility can be, and will be,
the salvation of the w: orld.
The great free powers are on trial today: none more
so than the greatest of then, the United States of Am; erica.
The way in which they survive this trial will depend upon how
they rise to the splendid, but awful responsibility of power:
how bravely they guard the inner liberties of nan; how utterly
they cast out fear; how clearly their light shines before men;
how far they keep the feeling of adventure, and avoid the
dofonsivenoss of riches.
Sir, a desire for power soeems natural in mankind.
Among politicians and I an one it is, I believe regarded as
endoeic, the desire for powor. But the great men and the great
nations are those who, having achieved it, do not weakly recoil
from it, afraid of leadership, or rejoice in power for its own
sake and for the precarious comforts that it may bring.
The twentieth century r. ight so well have been the
golden century of civilisation. It has been bedevilled by the
lovers of power without responsibility. ' Jo don't denounce the
inflaous menory of Hitler because he gained and exercised power.
Much greater mnn than he gained and exercised power to defeat
and destroy him. Hitler is infamous, as are the other i: alrv'lent
dictators of our tine, because with all his power he had no
smallest sense of responsibility for the true good of men and
wo. men. He obtained power, and boca. e a monster.
Today, the communist threat is the result of another
and terrible misconception, or denial, of the duties of power.
If the men who cone and go because they do appear to come and
go as the controllers of the Soviet Union were content to
pursue their philosophy in their own land, because they believed
that their systom, so alien to us, was the one to give peace and
security and social justice and happiness to their own people,
we night well wonder, but we would stand aside, on the principle
of " live and let live". " ut when we see them as an aggrossive
force, aiming at the bending of hundreds of millions of free
people to their own will, we know that we are again witnossing
the search for power without responsibility.
What is the answer to power without responsibility?
It isn't power sirplicitor, though people are prepared to
believe that it is. " Get tough" has an appeal, particularly if
the slogan-makers and I suppose there might be some here if
not in my own country, before the year is out can stigmatise
those who wish to ngotiate as " appeasers". In a world such as
we live in, power is essential, but it is not all. The t-uth,
self-evident though it may be, is that the only answer to power
without responsibility is power with responsibility. ( Applause)
Sir, it isn't sufficient to say that this is the truth though
I believe it is. As usual, it is necessary to say what it means.
It is a matter of famous record, referred to by my
distinguished colloeaue M. Spaak just now, that in this placo
that very great nan George Marshall announced the greatest and
most generous aid plan in history. But greater oven than its
generosity was its intelligence. It was only a great power that
could give great aid to others. But the giving of that aid was
an acknowledgment of the responsibility that goes with power;
a responsibility based on an understanding of international facts
and of the true foundations of peace. 
4.
Here we have,. I believe, great scopo for the
inagination. We know that on our side, the groatost of all
wars was fought for froodom. But this did not have a puroly
selfish connotation. It didn't iean froodom for those who
already enjoyed it alone: for aeorica-ns and British and
Frenchaon and Australians and Canadians, and so on. No. It
meant freedon for all mon, including those hundreds of nillions
in countries Loving towards independence, for whom self-governnmont
is the greatest of all adventuros. WJhon you, in your groat
way, and we in our simall -ay, tax ourselves you ' Laxoursolvos;
we tax ourselves to help new nations, we are not being just
noro or less comfortably oenorous, and fooeeling good about it:
we are recognising the one-ness of humanity, and the profound
responsibilities of powor and of possessions. It isn't
philanthropy, but wisdon, to accept the task of guiding and
helping other nations and peoples so that they may acquire, not
only the institutions of frocLdom, but, iuclh mnore importantly,
those rising standards of living and of thought without which
free institutions will wither and 1ocay. True, we oay
properly adnit that we wish to restrain the expansive ., ove of
communisn. To this end, as in the case of the South-East .' sian
Treaty we enter into cilitary onga onemnts and nake nilitary
preparations. But, Sir, these will fail, unless, in those new
nations which stand at risk, oconomic growth is stimulated, the
development of the individual is pursued, and the comi: unist
powers find thornsolvos increasingly 2onfronted by coUnunitis
resolved to accept no slavery of the nind.
In the perforrance of our responsibilities there is no
time to. be lost. Since 1945 the hitherto littlo-known now world
moves rapidly to a series of now n] 7ionhoods. Look at Africa,
until recently a nest of colonies, where a score of now nations
are com. ing to birth. Are we to be just kind to theor, giving to
them that iwhich we fooeel we can comfortably afford, the " crumbs
from the rich nan's table", or will we see in their o; orgenco a
groat challonge to the wisdonm of western civilisation? Isn't
there a wise self-interest to serve, net a narrow selfishness for
self-protection, but a self-interest based on the understanding
that our own frodomn is depondent-upon the froodom of others:
that we can't have peace anL prosperity for ourselves alone,
Sir, i:; ay I venture to remind you of one of the great
econonic phonomona of our time? It is that, nationally speaking,
the gap between the " haves" and the " have nots" is becomiing
greater. I believe that this isn't true inside our own
boundaries, where social responsibilities, expressed in trms of
schenos and social welfare and social justice, have led to a
narrowing of the gap betwooeen riches and poverty. High and
graduated taxation is, within reasonable limits and subject to
logiti te grunblings, that we all understand so well, accopted
More and noro, in our own place, you in your country, I in
mine carry the burden of being " our brother's keepor".
But intornationally this, in spite of groat bfforts,
is not by any means true. Je live in an ag of amazing
technological growth. Aided by the most superb technical skill,
the groat industrial countries nake progress in almost, what I
night describe, as a non-nathematical fellow, gooT: otrical
progression. The luxury of yesterday becomes the i-_ ass-produced
conronplaco of toi: norrow. And so, nationally speaking, and in
the words of the old song, " the rich et richer". You will
remi: obor the second line for yourselves.
But, Sir, what of the new nations, the rcl. tivoly poor
nations, with sketchy or primitive industries, with little
technical skill and with, as yet, slmall facility for increasing
it? At best, their rate of mnatorial i-mprovemoent is arithretic. l 
C not geometric. So far from catching up they are, in relative
terms, falling behind.
Now, Sir, this consideration quite clear as it
soees to me must give us all furiously to think. In face of
it, we can't rationally decide to do loss; we must do all that
we can, even though it means wo do a little less for ourselves.
" Charity begins at hom. e" they say. I've heard it many times in
the course of ny political life. It is a cynical proverb, and
in this world it is a shockingly false one.
I never come into the United States without fooling
something of the pulse and drama of your strength and your
growth. Your resources are so boundless; your productive
skill so boundless; your optimism ( that groat driving force)
so all-pervasive. More than any other country in the world,
you could, in an economic sense, go nearer to living to
yourselves and by yourselves. And yet your high destiny is to
use your strength to give light and leading and encourageoment
to the world. The measure of how you fulfil that destiny will,
if you will permit me with all humility to say it, be the
measure of your greatness. You have accepted the greatest
responsibilities in human history. In this famous placeo, the
father ( or mother) of so many who have served in high places
and have, in high or humble places, given leadership in the
fields of the mind and the spirit, may I pray that year by
year there will be more and more of your graduates who will
persuade their fellow-citizens, not only here but right around
the world, that just as rights are loss significant than duties,
so is strength admirable only for the resoonsibilities it
accepts and discharges. The free world, and that great area
of the world which lon. fs to be free, looks to you with
gratitude, but also with hope,
It is an honour, Sir, to be enrolled in your
brotherhood, and a rare privilege to be allowed to speak to you,
not so much for myself, as for Australia, your young but
determined friend. ( Applause) 



PRESS CONFEREZNCE GIVEN BY TiHE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES AT KINGSFORD SMITH
AIRPORT, SYDNEY ON MONDAY 20TH JUN, 196o, 9 AM
PRIME MINISTER: No doubt you urant to ask me some questions but
perhaps before you do that I might just say something
quite briefly about the principal objects of my visit.
The Prime Ministers' Conference, as you probably
know, Endbd up much more successfully than some of us
had expected. It had all the makings of difficulty.
There had been a number of statements made about the
South African facial policies. Then the Prime Minister
of South Africa couldn't come for reasons that we know
of. He was represented by his deputy, Mr. Louw, who I
thought was in a difficult position for that reason. ! bL
adopted our old rule that we don't engage in official
discussions on internal policies, or, for that matter,
on disputes bet\.; een Commonwealth countries. We had, as
you will remember, refused to discuss in open Conference
the argument about Kashmir and so that rule uas re-affirmed.
But we then did have some r'ivate discussions,
with his approval, with Mr. Louw. And in the end result,
as you know, the communique which I hope will be
the last communique I'll say something about that in
a moment contains something on that problem which was
acceptable all round, and w~ hich I think it u~ ill be admitted
wasn't frightfully controversial. But the essence
of that matte. that discussion, was not what its
result was, but the temper in which it was conducted. I
thought it was the best evidence of the liveliness and
reality of the Commonwealth that such an explosive matter
could have lent itself to discussion of a completely
good-tempered, reasonable kind. That was to me a
wonderful thing. In the private discussions tha I took
part in Dr. Nkrumah the Prime Minister of Ghana, the
President Ayub of Pakistan, the Tunku Abdul Rahman of
Malaya, all of whom have very power: ful views on this
matter and-had expressed. them were, I thought, completely
reasonable. They didn't put their criticisms
in such a form as to render the position of the European
people in South Africa intolerable. On the contrary
they, I thought, recognised very well the problem of a
minority of European people, people of European descent,
who after all had largely made the economy of South
Africa and had been responsible for its development.
They recognised that. They made various suggestions
I won't endeavour to rehearse them here but Mr. Louw
undertook to report them to his Prime Minister, but I,
naturally, on my travels, have not heard anythingC
directly since.
I think on the u; hole a lot of good came out of the
discussions. The ground was cleared a good deal. I
think that these responsible leaders of one African and
two Asian countries were much more roasoned* in their approach
than some of the more extravagant statements that
I heard and read on this matter outside the conference.
I said just then thlat I hoped it would be the last
communique. As the oldest inhabitant of these Prime
Ministers' Conferences I'm famnous for always objecting
to having a communique; not because I object to communicating,
but because in my experience these communiques
are always such platitudinous documents. If
anybody disagrees it doesn't go in and therefore you get
what is universally agreed on, such as that we are all
in favour of peace or that-t-e are all resolutely opposed
to sin, or whatever it may be. And although these
things come to the journalistic ear with all the charm
of novelty, I think they get a little uninteresting and 
I've been saying, " V,{ hy have one, it doesn't matter". I
think I'm getting a few converts on that matter for this
reason and this is a very interesting aspect of the
Commonwealth. Today we have That I'll call the old Crown Commonwealth.
countries Great Britain, Canada, Australia,
New Zealand, South Africa and we have the new ones
India, Pakistan, Ceylon, Ghana and Malaya and at any
tick of the clock, now, Nigeria and, subject to wind
and weather, the ., lost Indies. It is estimated that
there must be three or four more African countries, once
colonial, or now colonial, which are going to, on achiev
-ing their independence, apply for membership of the
Commonwealth. There might be 16 within two or three
years, within five years conceivably 20 Commonwealth
countries if every colony that becomes independent and
self-governing chooses to remain in the Commonwealth or
desires to remain in the Commonwealth. It is a. very
interesting thing that almost without exception they
do. There are great Allelulias, very properly, about
getting Independence, perhaps achieving the status of a
republic, but almost invariably they say, " 3ut we want
to remain in the Commonwealth". And I think myself that
that is largely b; cause it's in Commonwealth Conferences
they can have all this kind of frank exchange of opinion
in an intimate way without all the gallery play that is
involved in motions and amendments c. nd lobbying and
votes.
QUESTION-Sir, did you get that impression with South Africa,
that they wish to remain in the Commonwealth?
PRIME MINISTER: Undoubtedly, yes, undoubtedly. And if we are going
to have more and more new members of the Commonm. ralth,
then I think that we are in grave danger of getting to
a point where somebody will say: " I want to have a
vote", you know, " The numbers are building up;-how can
we determine what anybody thinks uhless we have a vote".
And the day we have a vote we might as well wind up in
my opinion, because we will then be indistinguishable
from a major committee of the United Nations. If we
are going to retain the character of the Commonwealth
then no votes: we meet to meet, to talk, to exchange
our ideas, to be perfectly frank with each other, to be
rude to each other if you like in person so much more
decent than being rude in writing. That makes a special
association and these people understand it. But we are
having an official examination made of what rules, if
any, ought to be applied to future admissions, because,
quite obviously, you may have a present colony with
million people in it achieving independence, you may
have another with half o million people or 300,000 and
the question, " Should everybody just come in automaticaly?"
1, well that's being looked at. But I believe, myself,
that it is go!. ng to be very difficult to discriminate
between countries now within the Empire and in
future to be within the Commonwealth. It's very difficult
to discriminate and to say, " Well, you are in the
1st Eleven and you are in the 2nd". And to my mind, if
we are to preserve the character of it, we ought not to
have these communiques so that people have to argue and
argue and argue as to whether something should be said
in a published document about a particular matter. What
needs to happen is that we should say, ' Itell, we meet
we discuss, we don't issue a communique". We make i
quite plain that we're here to exchange our views and we
can agree or disagree. " de will indicate from time to
time what the subject under discussion was and if any
Prime Minister , ishes to explain to his own country what 
his views are on a particular matter, well, so far as I
know nothing has ever prevented him from doing so in the
past and that will continue. I think that by increasing
the informality of this matter we may get over the problem
of numbers.
Of course, there is another aspect that we considered,
that we will have to think about a good deal in
Australia, and that is the problem of Africa as a whole.
We have got all taken up with South Africa but Africa
as a , hole with over 200 million people is made up of a
series of communities who are literally galloping towards
Independence. This is not just a nice stately
process they are galloping towards independence. Th
United Nations expects to have about 10 or 12 I think,
new African communities asking for membership of the
United Nations inside the next 12 months.
QUESTION: Do you think it likely that anyareas now under non-
British administration may seek admittance to tho Comm nnwealth
when they gain Independence?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I don't at the moment, no. No, I don't. But
one can't tell, but I would think npt. Certainly they
are going to seek admittance to the United Nations and
that gives rise to two matters that we in Australia will
have to do some thinking about.
Thofirst of them is that these communities will for
the most part not be economically independent. This is
one of the current problems of the world: how to reconcile
political independence with unquestioned economic
dependence on other people. People attach such importance
to political independence that they are a bit inclined
to overlook the other aspect of the matter and
therefore most of these countries, most probably all of
these countries, will be in a state of considerable confusion
unless they get economic aid from somewhere. The
Soviet Union will be very happy to extend it on terms.
I discovered in the United States in discussions there,
that there is an increasing awareness in the United
States of this African problem, taking Africa as a
whole. Jhether that involves some new plan on the lines
of the Colombo Plan or some extension of what we call
the Colombo Plan is a matter that we have all agreed to
study. Nobody has committed himself to anything; but
we've all realised that there is every possibility of
the most tremendous duplicated and re-duplicated political
turmoil in the Continent of Africa, unless these
emerging countries can achieve some kind of economic
stability, or at any rate go along some portion of the
road towards it.
QUESTION: Mr. Monzics could you tell us about SEATO; whether you
think SEATO sarcatrain Communism in Asia?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, but before I got to that I was just wondering
whether I had missed some aspect.
PRESSMAN: You started off, Sir, by saying there wore two
points, but you have only mentioned the first
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, the second. I really intended that my first
point should have beon this, that whereas at one time
many of us might have thought that it was better to go
slowly in granting independence so that all the conditions
existed for a wise exercise of self-government, I
think the prevailing school of thcught today is that if
in doubt you should go sooner, not later, I belong to
that school of thought myself now, though I didn't once. 
But I have seen enough in recent years to satisfy me
that even though some Independences may have been premature,
where they have been a little premature, they have
at least been achieved with goodwill. And wihen people
have to wait too long for independence, then they achiee
it with ill-will, and that perhaps is the difference
between the British colonial policy of this century and
that of some other countries.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: Would you apply that view to New Guinea, Sir
I would apply that to any country.
Continuing with Now Guinea, Sir, did you discuss
anything about the New Guinea area with the Dutch?
No, no I didn't go there. Mr. Hasluck went to the
Hague. ' dhon you say " apply that to New Guinca" 5 yes,
but that doesn't mean I belong to this fancy school of
thought that you write a timetable out and say, " In
years' time so and so, and in 20 years' time so and so".
That's just silly. But we are doing a faithful job of
work in New Guinea and Papua. Wo will go on doing it.
We will get to the point where the standard of living of
the indigenous inhabitants has risen, as we think, pretty
well, We may got to a point, or my successors may get
to a point, where they say, " Well, maybe if we allow
them to determine their future now, it is a little
premature". I would sooner take that risk at that time
than leave it too long so that the demand for self-determination
became explosive and produced hostility.
It's the contrast between Indonesia , nd Malaya. You
can't got a better example of the two things,
The SEATO Conference was very interesting. I had
never attended one before. I was impressed by it. I
was rather sceptical when I went there about some aspects
of the matter. I was rather pleased with it. I
thought that the countries reprusented took it seriously;
the speeches that were made both in the General Sessions
and in the confidential sessions were very . ood, very
direct, intelligent, reasonable. I think that there is
no doubt about it that SEATO has had the effect of inducing
for the first timu some sense of com. naunty, of
common danger and of the need for common associ. tion, in
the SEATO countries. But I thought, and I said when I
was there, that one of the great dangors was that we
should regard the South East Asian freaty Organisation
as a place on the map just as we talk _ bout South iast
Asia, as if it were a ogographical expression. Whereas
if it is to meon anything it has to be a community of
N. tions with a sense of community, and they won't develop
a sense of community while they continue to have niggling
little disputes, one with the other, Cambodia and
Thailand h-, ve a dispute about a Temple. '. 1ll~ with
very great respect to the Temple, this dispute doesn't
seem to justify bedovilling the whole of the relations
between the one country and another, both of whom stand
equally at risk. And there are other disputes about a
few islands and this and that and I urged that every
step should be taken to get rid of those li ttle internecine
arguments, because the Communists, the Chinese
Communists principally in this case, would of course do
their best to exaccrbace those problems, create ill-will
and thusinternally to destroy the value of SEATO. That
point was well understood. I am very impressed by the
serious approach that all these representatives took of
the matter. . io had the military planners there, As is
well known nobody has some concrete commitment of a military
kind, but the military planning has been seriously 
attended to! We have just sent over to be the Chief
Military planner, Major General . ilton who, as you know,
is one of the most brilliant of our younger Generals in
Australia.
QUESTION: Sir, you told us before you left Canberra you were
going to form some opinions in your mind in London on
the problem generally of South Africa. Have you any
recent views. Did you change your thoughts about the
South African situation when you , ot to London and had
these talks?
PRIME AINISTER: Change ; rhat position?
QUESTIONT: Joll you were joing to form some opinions about
South Africa.
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. I don't feel anymore disposed than I did then
to make a speech about South Africa's internal policies,
but I have views about them, yes.
QUESTION: You were speaking : bout other countries in which you
said the position generally " might become explosive".
Does that apply too. would you say to South Africa?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, yes. I am very glad I don't have the responsibility
of government in South Africa, because I
think that there are certain ideas that are there current
and practised, the workability of which I gravely
doubt. That is an understatement. I don't think they
will work. But I'm not going to pruach to them. Too
much preaching to the South Africans has been done. It
is the best possible way in which to harden them in,
perhaps, n inflexible application of their policies.
QUESTION: Can you tcll us nything about the situation in
Tokyo?
PRIME MINISTER: ioll it happened when I was in mid-air, so to
speak, but I don't feel very happy about it. oJem ight
as well face up to it. This is, from a public point of
view, however it may be explained, an admission that the
Government of Japan doesn't feel : ble to control unruly
elements at a time when there is a proposed visit from
the President of the United States Japan's most
powerful friend since the rar. Well, that I think, is
a most unhappy event. Once again nobody would envy
Prime Minister Kishi the choice that he had to make. He
might very wellsay, " Well I am not going to put my
distinguished visitor at any risk", but the end result
of it all is that the Communists have scored a notable
propaganda victory and Communist minorities in gon-communist
countries will be encouraged to believe that they
can push Governments around, Woll, that is a pretty
serious weakening of the position. ! We havo, well all of
us have looked to Japan in this sense that Japan was to
be encouraged to stay out of the Communist orbit, that
we in Australia, for example, would increase our trade
with Japan, our economic contacts, because we realised
that a Japan that wasn't economically sound was much
more likely to pass into the control of the Communist
powers. The United States has adopted the same view and
the result has been that a good deal of the specific
concept both of the United States and of our own country
ind others . round these parts, has boon based on,
at any rate, a stable non-Communist orderly Japan, repenting
of the past and learning to live in a civilised
fashion with the world, and in it. And under those
circumstances this gree-t concession to the capacity of
a rol tively few people to do mischief is, I think well
very unhappy, perhaps unavoidable, I don't know. 
markedly different from one or two other bowlers I've
seen, nor were either of the three balls for which he
was called markedly different from any of the others
that he bowled that day. However, who am Ito say?
QUESTION: Did you find any interest in the Australian economy
while you were over there?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, well I was very interested to find both in
Great Britain and in the United States that there is a
very great concentration of interest, economically, on
Australia. The disposition in the United Kingdom is to
move ratler more and more in the direction of Australia
for the purposes of investment on the ground, apart
from the fact that we are a stable community, as we are,
that there are all sorts of enormous possibilities of
future development. And in the United States, particularly
in financial circles in the United States, it is
really quite exciting to discover the attitude that
men who are engaged in dealing with investable funds,
find what their attitude is towards Australia. I have
come back a complete optomist about the attitude of
these great countries overseas to us and to our develop-
® ment and I would confidently expect that unless we do
something pretty silly or are hit by some strange
catastrophe, we will find, year by year, an increasing
interest expressed in practical terms.
QUESTION: On the local political situation, Sir will you be
taking part in the Bendigo and Balaclava by-elections?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't a clue, though I strongly suspect.
QUESTION: I thought you had probably received cables
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no. I've boon too interested in reading all
the side-play about Bendigo.
QUESTION: -Iould you comment on that.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I've . hoard a fuw " rumbles" ( Laughter)
QUESTION: Did your oconomic talks in England and America
embrace questions of monopoly and restrictive practices,
Mr. Prime Minister?
PRIME MINISTER: No, Sir. Not as far as I was concerned, no.
QUESTION: Did you reach any understanding, Sir, about the
future of missile tusts and the Joomera Range?
PRIME MINISTER: Nothing more than you know. They believe there
that the Joomrora programme, in total, won't be very
materially affected. They are still working on the
question as to whether they ought to go in for space
research, in which case ' oomera, of course, would have
further application. But so far we have had no report,
unless it's cone within the last day or two. But they
wore working on that when I was there. I think they are
interested in the problem of space research myself, but
of course it isavery largo financial considoration.
QUESTION: Could you tell us, Sir, if you think the world has moved
in the time you've boon away? Do you think the situation
has improved?
PRIME MINISTER: I think it's moved a little eccentrically. But now
that I'm back, no doubt all that will change.
With the compliments of:
Hugh Dash, Press Secretary to the Primo Minister. 



HUGHIE DASH
Tribute by the Prime Minister. The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Hugh Dash was a most experienced journalist and to
me a most faithful assistant and friend.
His warm and generous pereonality made him a popular
figure not only in Canberra but overseas. I shall miss him
most grievously.
CANBERRA,
27th June, 1960. 



0 PECH BY THE PRIME MINIjTTR TH RTI HON.
R. G. IMNZI3, C. H C. M. P. AT DENDIGO ON TUJDAY, THE
12TH JULY, 9j60
Sir, Senator, candidate nnd ladies and gentlemen:
I always know that there is an election on when I come
here -because they always send me here. Sometimes I see the same
faces; and sometimes I don't. But tonight I am delighted t' 4 find
what, in my experience, must be a record attendance, supporting a
record candidate. ( Applause)
S Some of those who have been listening in tonight will have
h d him for a few minutes at the end of his speech. I nm sorry
that they couldn't have heard him longer, because I think that
anybody who sees him, hears him and, as you do, knows him and his
work and his quality, must agree that Bendigo has . n opportunity
of the first quality in this by-election.
I am of course very sorry, personally, that there is a
by-election, because it is by-election that has been brought about
by the death of political opponent who wv:, almost a lifelong
personal friend of mine Percy Cl-rey: mpn I knew very well in
what I might c-ll my " respectable" d;-ys when I prlctised in the
vicinity of the Arbitration Court, mostly for the Unions ( Laughter).
And f: om that time on I knew Percy Clarey and I admired him very
much. He was a man of character and quality and I know that a. great
number of people in the Bendigo Electorate came to have such a regard
S for him th-t they may have voted for him though that would not
normally represent their political view.
\: ell he has gone, " las. He is a great loss to his Party
and a great loss to his friends. But now you must fill the vacancy.
Your choice is not between somebody new and the memory of somebody
who hhs gone. Your choice is between the candidates whose names
will be on the ballot paper on S turdy. And . I -m bound to sny
that if either of the other c'ndidCtes is within coo-ee of this one,
you must be the richest electorate in the whole of the Commonwealth
of Austr-li I know thnt my geni. l -nd unpredictable frind, Arthur
Calwell, ( L-ughter) spends gre.-t number of his wciking hours working
out rather sharp little observ-tions worth heaidline picturesque-
V 2.
-nd hc loves nothiing botter th-n to desciribe people on the other side
in 2. r-!* t'hor gr otcsque f-iuhion. And therefore I -ra -ccustomefd to
being, told tbh-' t I i-i ltired old-Vell if I oim, thit is
very good reason , or sending m-y friend Snoll in so that ho c:-n diE;
mu in tho ribs occasionally 2 nd wiake me up. And if I am not -and
of course Arthur dosen't really thinik thnat' I am .4then this is 7.
splendid ppportunity of putting in a-longside of me into thisPalmont
a man whose contribution * L'oou r joint iwis dom must be; of great
v'-luo to the Commone.-ilth. This is araire c-, ndida-tc.
I toll you I know -if you won't give me s) wcy on this mit-tor-
I'm n bit of -in expert on c-ndid-, tcs, I have supported_ smo terriblo
candidates in my time. ( L-ughtor, Applaiuse) They w--ore on theo right
O side, but in the wrong vway, if you follow me, And so when I find a
cindid-te who in the homely phrmeu is Ic :&gt; kcr' of a cndidaite I
-Im delightod. And tonight I h', ivu never boen more dcliehted ( ApPlbuso)
Now you h ye boen hea. ring from thu other spoakers tonight
something vory -Qcur-itu indeed ibout some of the things th~ lt h-) vQ
gone on inside Austr-li-, I h-ye, of' aourso, ha&amp; L some sm-ll h-ind
in the things th-t hatve gone on inside Austr-. li7 not tha-. t politicians
do ev.-rything7.. But it is good politicia n who know's , hat to
do anL hen to do it and w-* hen to kccup out andl not butt in, Now
that I think T'erh-. i-, s, ha-s b(-on the summxwr y o-our political1 2nd
government activities. c haven'? t told every ma,-n how he ought to do
his job. lea-ve tha t to the socia list oxports. Ye_ Yxi ve a
sneaking idea th-. t most of you underst-nd your business bottur thn
we 6. o. \ ih-. t h', vo to do is to try to crcente sort of economic
clim: nte, economic xo-' thur, in which you c n get on w. ith your job and
bring about the best results. And th-. t requires though I s-y it
myself -a consider-ble . mount of knowledge -n o-, u. c rienee nd some
wisdom. And iwei ho-c tu'h-t -t the end of 10 yea:, rs or getting on now
tow-rds 11 ye-irs, vo c-, n 7t lu~ ist leek our fellow ci-tizens of
Austrili-in the eye and say tha t ' Iwe 1-v-Nn't let you down". And I
think even our enemies might except in their more profcselo. ua1
moments be disposed -to grco with th-: t. 
Of course it is not the business of an Opposition to see
anything gopd in what a Government does. That is understandable.
And if I were the Leader of the Opposition today, leading this
collection of bits and pieces with my Deputy leader cpntradicting
almost everything I said, every time he opened his mouth with
internecine disputes going on around every corner if I were in
that happy position that my friend Arthur Calwell is in, I would,
I think, enjoy myself.( Laughter) You see I would have no responsibility,
because I wouldn't get into office anyhow. And so I
could be quite free and speak at large.
The other day to give you a si: ple example he ':. ent up
to the Northern Territory and the Northern Territory is, of course,
a very important place and presents an i!. iportant problem. It was
a problem when he was a Einister in the Labour Government. But now
that we are there and he has no liklihood of having his Promissory
Notes taken up. because, he knows that he won't win with his Party
behind him, or around him, or somewhere, ( Laughter) he said that
we ought to be spending on the Northern Territory œ 60m. a year.
A good round sum œ 60m. a year. So I thought I had better find
out what he did about that when he had his last chance which
ended in 1949. Well I have no doubt that he was as eloquent then
as he is now and he's very eloquent and I find that the total
amount of money spent by his Government in the Northern Territory
in their last full year 1948/ 49 was œ 2,750,000. And my
wretched Government neglects the Northern Territory in such a
shocking way that in our last complete year we spent over
( Applause) Well, you know, I daresay th;: t as they looked at it ft
that time they thought œ 2-4m. was a round sum ; ind pretty ? ood I'm
not saying that it wasn't. 7' ut I think that if I had assumed this
post -f perpetual Opposition Leader as he has, I would at least not
be condemning œ 15i. if I happened to remember that I h. d spent onesixth
of that amount. And so I just mention that as throwing a
humourous light on politics which is otherwise, of course I've
warned Mr. Snell a very dull occupation. ( Laughter) If it weren't 
0 4.
for your good-natured co-operation this would be a dull meeting.
Politics is like that. And you want to remiember it.
But I wanted to talk to you in particular tonight, not
about these local matters in the direct sense, but about some of
the things that are going on outside Australia and which I have
had some high responsibilities for discussing at first hand in otr
parts of the world. They are not academic. What is . oing on in
the world today will determine the whole issue of peace and war.
Therefore we have a vital interest in it. And our interest beco * es
more and more important in Australia. " ic have 10 million people.
We have, numerically, the greatest Corn'unist power of the lot
China just up north of us. It is estimated by people who know
about these things that by the end of this century Communist China
will have in round figurz-es a thousand million people far more
than the Soviet Union and by the end of the century no doubt with
considerable industrial expansion, with a considerable growth in
skill and subject to what may happen in the field of disarmament
the most tremendous forces. And between them and us we have Laos,
full of disturbances; Cambodia, living ill-at-ease with Thailand.
We have Thailand, anxious. We have North Vict Nam in the hands of
the Communists and South Viet Nam under a very gallant little
President, holding its own, trying to establish its own way of
living. Malaya come to freedom and Independence under 7] ritish
Administration; Singapore, troubled, uneasy. And Indonesia, with
all its political storms, and problems, and indeed, with still a
civil war on its hands.
These geographical considerations are very grc. t, cnorrmo-s.
And we don't do anything )-ood about them by ignorino. their existence.
We must remember these thihns and it is iLcc. ubc as a Government,
have understood about these thinros that ' e took a leading hand in
establishing the South-East Asian Treaty with the United States,
Great Britain, Prance, Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines, all
gathered together.
In Washington the other day I attended the Annual Meeting
of the Ministers in this Organization. This is something that is
growing, something which, partly because it establishes a sense of
conmmunity. and partly becuuse it attracts the powerful support of 
5
United States, is one of the great items in the future seourity
of Australia. But in the meantime we are not thinking so much in this
world about the Chinese. 1We have occasion to, The people in Formosa
have occasion to. The people in Iaos and Caibodia and Thailand,
they have occasion to. But in the great nations in the world the
discussion, very naturally and inevitably, has been going on about
the relations between the Soviet World and the free world, the 6ossibilities
of a settlement, the pos. ibility of reducing tension and
thereby, of reducing armaments. These are enormmus problems. And
if any Australian thought they had nothing to do with a general
election or a by-election in Australia, he would be making a cardinal
error. And if I, as the leader of the Government of this country,
ignored them, addressing a great audience of this kind, I would be
unfit for my responsibilities.
I was in London when the celebrated event of the Summit
occurred. We had had a Prime Ministers' Conference. We had discussed
with Mr. Macmillan on the kind of thing that might arise at the
Summit, and gave our general views on the iatter. There was a high
degree of unanimity among the Prime Ministers there and they were
Prime Ministers, as you know, from all over the world. Well they
went over to attend the Summit, a Meeting worked for by Harold
Macmillan, wirked for successfully as we all thought and we all
know what happened Khrushchev arrived and he just wiped it all
out with insults and contumely. Very odd, that, when you consider
that a year before he was the man who was saying, " Let us have a
meeting at the Su,! mit". You remember that this was one of their
great pieces of Communist propaganda " We are the people who want
a meeting at the Sunumit; we are the people who want peace". They
have Peace movements and these preposterous Peace parades which
their Fifth Columnists in Australia carry on. " Peace, Peace" they
cry, when there is no peace. ind therefgre one would have supposed
that the Master of the Co1m* unist world would Iave arrived and said:
" Right, let us sit down together; let us strive here. o for peace".
And instead of that he threw it all away. He said " iNo conference".
And why? Because an aeroplane, a United States aeroplane, had 
been found. flying over Russia and therefore, enga: ing in " spying".
And you know how offended a Communist would be to think of anybody
being a spy. ( Laughter).
Why did he seize the opportunity? Because he W. . s indignant
about spying? Nonsense! Nonsense! For every intelligen-tagent
employed by any of the free countries i'll warrant he employs a
hundred. Nobody has the faintest doubt about it. Anyhow I am
always very glad to know what is going on inside the country of a
potential enemy. I think it is of great and vital importance to
the free world thLt we should know where they have their points from
which they can deliver a nuclear and blasting attack on Great Britain
or on the United States itself. What a lot of humbug is talked in
this world, putting this thing in a sort ) f " 0h, itts very unfortunate".
Of course he wasn't troubled about that. W ihat troubled him
* was that he knew it wasn't the first it couldn't have been but it
was the first they had seen and it was the first that they had
persuaded or brought down and it was brought down 1,000 miles * side
the Russian Frontier. That is what troubled him. Because you see
that meant that everything he had been saying to the Russian people
about: " We're not vulnerable to counter-att,' ck; we have much better
nuclear weapons; don't worry about these people: they would have to
send theirs by aircraft and we could shoot them down". Well it is a
bit awkward for that theory when one, the first one, not the first to
go but the first to be caught, was a thousand miles inside the
frontier. Tha. t demonstrated at once that the nuclear deterrent and
we all know that in the hands of the free world it is a deterrent
not a weapon of offence was and is an effective one. That is what
annoyed him. And that is what annoyed those around him. And I have
no doubt it annoyed a great number of his own people.
So, his reaction was to become violent and protesting and
denouncing and, as you know, he has carried on ever since like a
bully, like a crude bully a very, very able man behaving like a
crude bully. This is a tragedy for the world. Disarmament?
What did we expcct tq Zet out of a Su . nit ? reetinrg?
What do you suppose that the fair-mindad people who went there, 
Mlacmil a and De Gau le and Elsenho'er, -rhat do you suppose they
. anted to get from a SuW-nit Meeting? lot just a general chitterchatter
about this or that: one or two things that might have
bro. ght some hope to the uorld, some hope to ordinary men and women
who are the victims of international tension and rill be the mass
victims of . ar, they are the Teople whose i terests matter. And
everyone of the four men should have been there thinking of
hundreds of mil ions of ordinary raen and vomen and determined to
achieve some result, something that would relieve the tensLons: A
temporary arra-gement about Berlin f you like, I thought might be
quite possible. Not a final settlement but something that postponed
the argument, let thin: gs settle a bit. An Agreement about nuclear
tests? . hy they had had a Confererce in Geneva lasting a long time
and the gap w. h . ch began like that got narrower and narro ' er until I
saw no reason whatever why a Meeting at the Summit should not close
t. at gap and dispose of that problem and give to all of us our first
ray of hope about the conduct of the Comunist powers.
All thrown away; all . cejected: " Go away; I will not confer
with you. I do not rant to have a settlement about nuclear tests".
And a few reeks later hen the disarmament conference resudies in
Geneva and the free world is on the very point of tabling concrete
proposals in that great fLe d, the Soviet representative, on ir. struc.
tion, wal: s out and brirgs the conference to an end.
^ P Now, th.. s s not to be overlooked e are not going to
have talks about Berlin; re are not go: g to have talks about nuclear
tests; we are n-t going to have talks about disarmament. We who
wanted to talk nor no longer wa't to talk.' This is one of the
climacteric events in modern history. And the next thing that
happens is that, pursuing the same technique, stirring up something
here or thre, the probicg operations of , rhat has been called the
Cold 4ar, we open our papers one daT and we see that Fidel Castro of
Cuba I . ould not have thought him one of the world's great statesmen,
but impudent and greatly e couraged by what happened in the case of
Colonel Nasser, for example a little matter of which I knor somethi.
g cocks a. snoop at the United States of America, steals
hundreds of milliors of pounds w. orth nf other people's property and 
the next thing that happens s: t is al. right-we, the Soviet
Union, wil1 lo after you: ', re will provide you with oil: we ', rill
get our hard in. vIe Iil1 produce what : e will describe as " economic
aid" and by e couiraging jou to say u-speakable things against the
sreat free nations of the world, re wil' bind you to us
These are pretty ser. ous considerations. ' retti serious*
that is the understatement of all time.
N -v I just turn from that to say one more thing, to go
back a little, about China.
You know some of us have been regarded by some others in
the Commonwealth as attaching undue importance to the Communist threat.
I think that my very good friend, Mr. Nehru, has, though he has not
sa. d it he is much too courteous to do that but I think that more
than once he has thou ht that I had too fixed a mind on the question
of the Soviet Union for example. But do not think he would say
that today about China. I am sure that he would not. He of al-the
great leaders in Asia, has been the one who has sought to interpret
fairly and generously what has gone on inside Communist China. He
has maintairned his full. diplomatic relations with Communist China.
He has had a lot of direct personal contact writh the leaders, Mao
Tse-tung and Chou En-lai and all of them. 1 would have thought
that they iould regard him as a man who had been, so to speak,
an honest broker, in these matters. And what has happened? His
own Chinese frontier has been violated, fol owing on the incidences
of Tibet. Al the disturbances along his frontier: Scores of
thousands of refugees from Tibet drive: into his own country; all the
surging troubles around the North of Nepal and the province of
Ladakh and those other places on the ultimate north, north east of
india. He has been made to understand something, by hard experience,
of the arrogance and aggressive'ess of the Communist, whether he is
in the Soviet Union or in Chion or in o. e of the score of countries
which have been taken into captivity by them.
No-, SLr, why do I occupy your time talking about those
things? i4el, I talk about them, of course, because they are vastly 
important to us. There might have been a time in the history of
Australia when people thought thp. t we could live by ourselves and
to ourselves. Nobody believes that today. Does anybody believe
that, wrapped in o,-r own virtve -nd isolated in our own splendour,
we can just go along untouched by hostile hands? Of course not.
The very thought of it is unreal and ridiculous.
e have our security involved in the security of the
entire free world, in that of the United States and of Cn,-de rnd our
other comrade countries of the Common'wealth: Greet ' ritEin, right
there in the very cockpit of any conflict; the whole of The , est of
Europe. Our security is bound upwith theirs. This is no dr,. for
narrow conceptions, for narro-mindedness, for p', rochrlism. on these
things. This is the day for the broad Lnd secrpin'-conceptjnn of
where we stand in the world. And in crse vov think that perhaps thct
is blowing a little hard on behalf of /' ustralia, let me tell you with
great pride, that our voice, in spite of the limits to our numbers,
our voice is a very respectable and respected voice in the councils
of the free nations of the world. ( Applause)
Now before I conclude I would just like to say something
about how all that has its counterpart inside Australia. I
have never pretended, nor v. oul. d anybody else, that as a political
Sparty, the Australian Co.;: unists a;-ount to very much. They have contributed
a pretty high number of lost deposits to the revenues of the
country. Of course the people of Australia von't pvt then into
parliament. Of course the people of Australia will never consc'o'sly,
in large numbers support a collection of people whose action-s are
treasonable in the highest degree. Of course they on't. e rn
decent, honest, sensible people in Australia.
Therefore t'-ey do 7 little shop \: indo stuf-on r1. nn. ng
a candidate that's only shop c'i:-Caond it is r little ch-nce -Por a
bit of propaganda. ' here they do their wor,-is elsevrhere. nd the
whole history of the industrial ovelient in Australia in recent years
has been the history of an attempt, som: etimes successful and sometimes
unsuccessful, by the Communists to get control of Union offices.
Everybody knows about this. Even my friend Arthur Calwell,
who, I think I think 1 must have been away at the time denied 
that there was a Unity Ticket problem, has been brought to
believe that there might be one. ( Laughter).
But I am not interested in the convolutions in the mind of
these apologists for Unity Tickets. Al' i want to point out to you
is that whatever the technique is that ' s to be employed, the
Communist significance in Australia rests upon their chance of
securing control, or an effective voice, in key trade unions. It
does not require very much imagination to know that if the Communists
achieved the position of leadership in the electric power generat-on
field in the State of Victoria, equal to that which Jim hiealy has
achieved in the ' L. terside Workers' Federation, then a Communist
decLsion could black out this State just as well qs sealing up the
ports of the State. This is what they ; re after. Do not run aiay
with the idea that these are amiable theorists. These people are,
a d always have been, the Fifth Column for Communist aggress. on
proceeding from the great contries. They go there; they do their
refresher courses; they have their ._ nstruct . ons. And the whole idea
is.: Let us insert ourselves into Union office.
Nor we, some little time back, kno ring that the rank and
file Trade Unionist in Australia is a patriot and willi not have
an/ thing to do with Fifth Columns or people of this kind, instituted
a vastly improved secret ballot law rhich enabled smal] l groups the
industrial groups themselves were able to play a great part in it
to get a secret ballot where the ordinary Union ballot looked as if
it had been fLxed or rigged. And as a result of that legislation
designdd to free people from these Communist manoeuvres and give
them an opportunity of chal'e-ging elections that were improperly
conducted, was voted against by every member of the Labour party at
Canberra. But when it went into operation the results of it * ere
astonishingly good. Comnunist offici. l after Communist official
found himself rejected at the polls. And then the Australian Labour
Party, or what is left of it, said: " This will not do", th. s ias
under its previous leadership " This wil' not do. Of course we
hate the Communists but we do not to fall ov. t with them too
much". A.: d so theystarted inside their own ranks, not a pro-Communist 
11.
movement but a viole t movement against the industrial groups.
Because they know that if they could destroy them or their influence,
then some of these eminent Com.: unists would begin to come back as
they have begun to come back into Unton office.
That is the -ihole pnint about Unity tickets: the shabby
statements that have been made, these miserable unconv. incing denials
are all exploded if you lo k at a Unity ticket. B-It that is only a
symptom. The true disease is that the Australian Labour Party is
utterly unaware of the Com; ainist infiltration techniques or, being
aware, is quite indiffere. t as to whether they succeed or not.
Ladies and Gentlemen I could stand up here and talk to you
for a couple of hours about many of the problems of the world and
perhaps, with a bit of luck, I might interest you on them because I
have seen a good deal in relation to them, as you know, in recent
times. But rcally at a time like this, at a period in the world's
history when I think there . re gr. at dangers Cuba is a symptem of
a danger; it is a symptom of hor people like thot can think they can
disregard the ancient homes of freedom, the great poiers of the
world, disregard them, fli in their f. ces, treat them with contempt.
That kind of state of affairs in the world is explosive, A big dog
may taku an awful lot from r. little dog, but not for always. This is
explosive matter. It is a matter in which re must, ourselves, be
prepared to give th-greatest moral and other support to those
nations whose stand in the ;, orld and rhose strength in the world are
vital to our security. And, in the samc way, this is the time :. hen
we must realise, as alwa/ s I think, that if our own Government has
been able to stand firmly, to be recognised around the free world
as being wrorthy of trust and co-operation, then this by-election
presents you with an opportun. ty of saying: " At any rate we have
confidence in this Government. ' Ie rill not weaken it by any vote
of ours".
. Ae 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTI. i, THE RT. HON.
RTO. wGN]. MHEANLZL IEOSN, JEDNEJS4 3_ HJLYA T T_ H96E o BRIGHTON
~ 3TH JLYl6
Sir, Parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen:
In speaking to you tonight I want to say something
about affairs inside Australia. Although one or two sections
of the newspapers don't appear to like it, I would also like to
say something about affairs outside AustrCiia, because not for
the first time in our history they are of vital literally
vital importance to the people of this country. And a Prime
Minister who is not prepared to say something about them, is
not fit for his office.
But, Sir, before I pass on to that I want to say
something about affairs inside Australia. And in particular I
would like to say something very brief supplementing wh-' my
distinguished colleague Senator Gorton and the candidate aave
said to you about the development in this country over the last
ten years. I have yet to encounter anybody and I will warrant
that none of you have encounte-' ed anybody who is prepared to
say that the people of Australia, by and large, in material
terms, are not better off today than we ever were in the history
of Australia. I don't need to quote individual statistics.
The fact is I just put this to all of you that if we could
go-back.-to--thetime-hen--we were-children, go back to our
parents and our grand-parents and ask them to imagine the state
of life in whihc 95 j of us live today, they wouldn't have
believed it possible. Have the people re-elected us because
things have been going bad? Or haie they re-elected us because
they felt, year by year, election period by election period,
that things were going wiell. Now I don't need to repeat all
these statistics. Statistics are frightfully interesting
things. I much prefer to say to the human beings who are here,
and who may be listening: you test it for yourself: l'k back
over your own experience. What is it that a divided Labour
Party with Leader quarrelling with Deputy Leader, with factions
fighting around every corner, what is it that the Labour Party
can give you which you haven't had from your own Government.
That is a fair simple test and all I ask is that sensible
people s :, uld think about it,
Now I have taken some interest, casual interest, in
trying to follow the to and fro of my opponents, particularly my
good friend Arthur Calwell. ( Interjecticn: How can you, you're
never in the country) Now, wait a moment, wait a moment son.
( Interjection: You're never in the country) Oh, is that so?
( Laughter) You know I always know when I am winning because
when I am winning somebody tries to make incoherent noises so
that I won't be heard. I want to tell you I am too long in the
tooth for that. Sir, my good friend Arthur Calwell, the Leader of the
Opposition, he leaps on to a band waggon have you noticed
it? every morning. It's a different band waggon. If he
reads a criticism in a newspaper which is not difficult
then that is his policy for the day. ( Laughter) Or at any
rate until the afte rnoon newspapers appear, when that is the
policy for the evening. ( Laughter) And that is very amusing.
I enjoy Arthur. I've enjoyed him for many years. I hope to
enjoy him for many years to come. ( He enjoys you too!) : 1-
couldntt enjoy anything more. But what is he going to do about
all these things? Have you discovered how he proposes to
improve the present state of Australia. I am not talking about
funny little doctrinaire ideas about socialism and so on 
they are all so stupid that most people in Australia reject
them out of hand and most of the Labour men apologise for them.
I wonder if you know that this Labour Party whihi
moans and groans about Social Services and is prepared to offer
everybody pie in the sky, I wonder if you know that in the last
year in which they held undisputed power in the Federal
Parliament, 1949, they spent in the last full financial year,
1948-49, of what I will call for this purpose, the Calwell
Government, the total payments of Social Services, a topic now
dear to their hearts, was œ 80m. and that in our last completed
year of office it was œ 300m. The œ 80m. boys come along and
promise you everything. Je perform. We have never made a
Social Services promise and don't put your hand up to your
face, it doesn't improve you we have never made promis s
that we have not performed. ( Interjection). Oh, yes. I know
all about that. How many pounds a week do you earn, sir? He
can't answer that, you see. The fact is that he is earning
about four times as many pounds a week now as he could have
earned in 1949. ( Interjection) ' Value back in the pound'
Value in the standard of living in Australia, yes. And nobody
could deny not even my vociferous friend that the standard
of real living in Australia is at an all time high in the
history of the country. Nobody could deny that our provision
for the poor and the aged, the invalids, the pensioners, is at
an all time record in the history of Australia. What I want to
know is what, at this by-election, at which apparently the
Labour Party has given up the ghost and is not appearing at all
except to hand out cards on Polling Day, what are they telling
you that they are going to do for Australia which we can't do
and haven't done and are not doing? Now that is a very sensible
fair question. And that, in reality, is the only question that
you need to worry about, I venture to say, in this election.
But Sir, my friend down here got in early about
inflation and I assume that he is a Labour man. ( Interjection)
Well I am assuming that, sir, your favour, ( Laughter) And
assuming that he is a Labour man I an very interested in the
question, because I noticed that the Leader of the Opposition
has something to say about inflation. It is very interesting
to me you know I am a sort of old hand now in the Federal
Parliament. I have heard all these arguments tit-after time.
I've heard these prophesies. And every tir. c I hoar orn from
my friend, the Leader of the Opposition, I think of the
expression? you remember, ' And if there be prophesies, they
shall fail'? Because oe:. y prophesy he ever made has failed.
I remember, and my friend Rossiter here, on the
platform, will remember it: there was a by-election in Flinders
and we lost it because the Leadeir of the Opposition, and in
particular my distinguished and prophetic friend, Arthur
Calwell, were going around saying, " In three months' time there
will be mass unemployment. In three months' time youwill be
ruined. Spend all your money. It won't be :. rorth saving."
Dear me, it made my flesh creep even to read abcut it.
( Interjections) And as a result of all this :-illy tattle, they
won the Flinders by-election. EBt they didn't hold i; beyond
the next General election because by that time people had
discovered what arrant rubbish it was, ( Interjection) Not a
change of heart, a change of knowledge They had discovered
then, that although it may be the professional techniaue of an
Opposition of this kind to cry Calamity, to prophesy gloom and
disaster, the people who ought to be running the country are
those who meet the facts and who deal with themn; who are
optimists and who look forward to a general recovery of the
country. And how right they were, in 1954. when that General
election occurred, because from that time until this Australia
has made unbroken progress. 
But ohe one thing that my friend goes back to
occasionally is inflation. Now I have many times said and done
things about inflation and some of them very unpopular. But
there was a time, only a few years ago, when my Labour opponents
in Parliament used to describe talk of inflation as a mere
bogey. " Nonsense!" they used to say: " All this talk about
inflation is, I suppose, a capitalist trick to deceive the
worker". I used to hear this kind of thing time after time in
the Federal Parliament. What has the Labour Party offered to
solve inflation. Because, after all, inflation if we may
reduce it to its simplest terms is a state of affairs in
w~ hich there is a greater demand than there is supply and therefore
the cost of the thing you want goes up: whether it is the
supply of money, or the supply of goods or the supply of
services. This problem of inflation is a tremendously difficult
one. Every country in the world has encountered it. Every
country in the world has had to do something about it. We have
been acting along the lines of a policy design to check inflation,
to hold it within, bounds, and, ultimately, to arrest it.
But what does the Labour Party propose about it?
Now I gave myself tho trouble it was a pleasure as
well as a trouble to write down on a piece of paper what I
understood to be the Australian Labour Party's answer to
inflation. I derived this entirely from reading in the Press
what Mr. Calwoll has said and I have been reading, as far as I
can, what his Deputy Leader has had to say and of course I
have heard them in Parliament and I'm not unacquainted with
their views and I see that the first thing that Mr. Calwell
wants to do is to spend œ F60m. a year in the Northern Territory.
Oh, yes œ C60m. a year in the Northern Territory. ( Interjection:
A flea bite) A flea bite you say, Sir. I compliment
you. Because the last year he was in office and had all the
power in the world he spent alVn. And we now spend about œ a4.
or œ l15m. Not too bad, when you consider everything. But he
thought better of it and as he doesn't expect to win an
election or to be made Prime Minister ho can afford to be a
little easy, a little at large -it doesn't matter if the
clothes ar~ e cut a bit too big -and therefore he says: œ C60m. on
the Northern Territory. Well as an answer to inflation I don't
quite follow it. ( Interjection: No you wouldn't) ( Laughter)
No, of course I wouldn't. œ C60m. more money but how many more
goods or services to buy. His Deputy Leader, stung to rivalry...
yes, stun., to rivalry by his Leader, has undertaken
to say that we ought to spend œ lOOm. a year on foreign aid.
( Interjection) Of course you would. You are the kind of fellow
that would make it œ 300m. like a Labour loader as long as
you didn't have to find the money. ( Laughter) ( Interjections)
Then, Sir, the next thing that I see they are going
to do is to restore import restrictions. They must mean that
because they complained violently when we took them off.
Almost as violently as they complained, a few years ago, when
we put them on. You know you can't be right, can you, on these
matters. But he is going to restore import restrictions because
there are too many goods available to be bought according to his
view. He is going to increase Social Services? He would be
hard put to it to beat our record. He is going to increase the
cost of production. ( Interjection) Of course. " Hear, hear"
says his devoted follower. ( Laughter) Increase the cost of
production: that's a fine anti-inflationary measure. And
above all things, Sir, to reach the height of the ridiculous, he
has developed a tremendous hatred of overseas investment in
Australia. pol i cy? This is the Labour Party's what anti-inflationary 
Now just let me say something about the last one:
the hatred of overseas investment in Australia usually associated
with some extraordinarily profitable concern. ( Interjection:
Don't you like people to be inconsistent?) I love it.
( Interjection: I thought you did) It gives me such an
advantage over thorn. ( Applause)
Now, Sir, overseas investment. I just want to say
this: that one of thO notable ovents in our period of office
is that Australia, which was in no sense attractive to overseas
investment when we came into office quite the contrary
because of Bank nationalisation and all those eccentric affairs,
has in these recent years, attracted from overseas and in
spite of theories to the contrary * mostly from Great Britain,
something like œ lO00m. a year of private capital investment. I
am not talking about Government borrowing on Government account
from the ! iorld Bank or wherever it may be, but private capital
investment brought in here by private enterprise, producing
enormous factories, enormous developments and employing scores
of thousands of people. That has happened in the last ten
years and increasingly during the last six years. Is that
unimportant to us? I wonder whether we would have gone as far
as we have or have had as much production as we have had,, or
have had as much employment as we have had, if we hadn't
received this proof of confidence from people outside, not only
in the future of Australia but in the stability and honesty and
reliability of its Government. ( Applause)
I remember one election -not long ago speaking to
a lot of employees in a vast works -not very far from here
and my opponent of that time had only the previous day denounced
overseas capital in A~ ustralia. I tell you I had groat fun
saying to four or five thousand men: " Now of course you know
that these works were established by American capital. Are you
in favour of American capital? Are you hostile to the jobs that
you are now occupying. This silly little Australian outlook
the littlest Australian outlook: we're not to have people
coming in from outside; we're not to have money coming in from
outside. I tell you, ladies and gentlemen, if that doctrine
prevails then Australia's progress will come to an end. Ten
million people in a country of this si. in a Continent of
this size, can't possibly themselves, out of their savings,
produce all the capital that they need for the vast development
that we must have in this country.
And therofore I can only conclude that if we had a
Labour Government they would say to these people: " You stay
away; we don't want you". ( Interjections-Now look, if you
want a little technical advice, the three of you have got most
unmusical voices, you all shout at the same time and you drown
each other. And the result is that all you are is a rather
foolish noise off-stage, You take my tip as an old interjector:
" Get the other fellows to shut-up; then speak very, very clearly
and slowly." Everybody will hear you and so~ un-. oztunatsly,
will I. ( Applause) Now, Sir, having said a few things about that matter
might I just say something about another matter 1. which is
primarily outside Australia, though it has groat concern for us.
If thero is one thing that is pretty obvious in the
world today we discussed it a great deal1 at the Prime
Miites Conference in London it is that there is a stirring
of the movements of self-government in Africa far more acute
( Interjections) well if you like it, listen, ( Applause)
there is a stirring of the movements of self-government in
Africa, the whole of Africa Africa contains over 200 million
people and this stirring is stronger, s-w-fter, than anybody
ever thought of before. And the result is that we have all had 
to think hard about what happens whten countries which have
been colonies or territories want to govern themselves a very
na ',. ral feeling, a feeling that grows stronger as more and more
people in the community are educated and learn to think and
learn to assume or assimilate the ideas of Government. And the
result is that we have seen in the last few years and I've
had great reason to understand about it because I have seen
their leaders repeatedly we have seen the coming to life in
Africa of a new Commonwealth member in the shape of Ghana up
above the Gold Goast, Nigeria up above Lagos, Nigeria which is
a bigger country than Ghana and which will become fully independent
and fully a member of the Commonweal th inside the next
month or two. We have right across Nyasaland and Rhodesia and
Kenya great movements for self-government. And south of some
of those on the western side you have the Congo which has now
been given self-government and, unhappily, at the moment, does't
know what to do about it; and is involved in riots and wars and
feuds of the most formidable kind.
Now, Sir, what to do about these events is a matter
of tremendous concern. Because, ladies and gentlemen, the
position is: it is easier for people to ask for and obtain
political independence than it is for them to achieve economic
independence. This is one of the great pro blerns. C ; on) Of
course you don't agree but every one of the nine Prime Ministers
at Downing Street agreed. And so therefore you must dissent
from them. This is one of the great problems and I regard it
as a great and grave problem. Because if countries become
independent, politically, so that they govern themselves in a
political sense, but they are economically dependent upon other
people, then the Communist powers will se., an easy opportunity
of coming in with help and thereby7 buying themselves into some
measure of internal control. And, Sir, that is why the economic
position of these countries is, in my Qpinion, a tremendous
challenge to the free nations of the world. More and more and
more, all the free nations of the world will have to realise in
relation to these new countries that they are their brothers'
keopers; that they must help; that they must do what they can
to forward the economic development of these newly omerged
self-governing communities. And, Sir, we had a great deal of
discussion about that and a great number of studios are in hand
on that point. Every seriously minded man who is concerned with
world affairs recognises this problem and wishes that something
may be done about it.
But, Sir, there is another aspect of self-government
which I venture to say is very considerably misunderstood.
Indeed, some of the things I have said about it myself have
been grossly misinterpreted.
Last December I had occasion to take a short journey
into Indonesia and a short journey into Malaya. Now here you
have two countries, both of which have achieved self-govurnment
quite recently: Indonesia in 1945; Malaya two or three years
back. But the difference is this: that in the case of
Indonesia the achievement of independent self-government was
preceded by war, by conflict, by bloodshed, by hatred. And the
result is that there are still echos of these things in
Indonesia and Indonesia has yet to settle down into a stable
Govornmon stablo economy, with no internal armed conflicts,
But in the case-of Malaya: Malaya was a British colony
administered originally from the United Kingdom, the one great
colonial power in history which has understood the responsibility
of having colonial territories.
When Great Britain saw that the time was comaing when
Malaya would wish to have self-government, when the Malayans
would wish to govern themselves, did they do it in a spirit of
reluctance or conflict? Not at all. They first of all., 
conjointly with Australia and New Zealand, invested forces in
Malaya in order to get rid of the Communist bandits, in order
to give ti-e Government a chance to work and to survive. And
they then, on a Constitution drafted by the representatives of
half a dozen Commonwealth countries, and presided over by one
Of the Lords of Appeal of Great Britainbg, av e complete selfgovernment
to Malaya, under their very distinguished Prime
Minister, the Thnku Abdul Rahman.
And, Sir, in Malaya what did I find? Hatred? No.
Friendliness? Yes in abundance. The old English and
Scottish firms, Irish firms, carrying on their work ' as of old
inKuala Lumpur and in Penang and so on. Up in the hills on
some bydro-electric work where you would expect the Chief
Engineer to be a Scot, he was one. This I think tras a superb
example of how much better it is that Independence should be
* achieved in friendship and with goodwill, than that it should
be achieved by revolution and blood. ( Int. rjections: Wdhat
about Sharpeville?) My dear sir I know nothing more than you do about
Sharpoville. Now don? t get yourself misled by Sharpeville.
There have been thousands killed in Africa, outside South
Africa, for everyone who was killed in Sharpevillo. I regret
to tell you that a groat deal of the independence that I have
been talking about has been followed, if the circumstances were
not right, by bloodshed; by the deaths of hundreds or thousands
of people. 1. fhat I am saying is that our method, the British
method, is the best. If there is to be Independencu, let us
have it with friendliness. Lot us have it with , oodwill. Let
us, above all things, precede it by training the colonial
peoples in the art of self-government, in the art of administration.
The great secret of India, for example, as a selfgoverning
country today is the old Indian Civil Servant. The
fact is the British trained po* ple, they brought up a great
number of people, thousands of Indian people, and people from
Pakistan as it is now called, and they were trained into the
Civil Service, they were hiighly educated, they have become
great experts I've known quite a few of them. And Sir
without them, no self-government could have been instantly or
very quickly, efficient. That is the whole technique of the
British Colonial System and developing colonies into selfgoverning
nations.-Now Sir, Ijust want to take that proposition and
reduce it to a point ( Interjection) I know; I road somewhere
today from some goat that people don't rant to know about
affairs overseas. Eve-py thoughtful Australian does. ( Applause)
Thoughtful Australians knew that these things are of supreme
importance and as long as I think they are of supreme importance
I shall so describe thema.
I just want to bring out the point of what I hiave
been saying because I am going to relate this to one of our own
territories. I want to bring out the point. And the point is
that provided you do your best to develop the people in the
colony or territory, provided you do your best to give them
education, health services, a knowledge of the instruments of
governme-int and bring them to s point where they can first
participate in goenetand then take it over if they are
so disposed if you are pursuing that policy, as we were in
Papua and Ne w Guinea, then if you get to a point whqre you
think they may be you're not sure that they may be ready
you think they may be that last point which may come in 1
years' time, I don't know, whatever period you care to name
then I say: " It is better to take some small risk of doing it
a little too soon than to delay it to a point where the agitation
for it breaks out into hatred and rebellion". ( Hear, hear)
( Applause) 
Now that is my view and I would have thought tb-ere
was nothing very strange about it. ( Interjections) Nothing
very strange about it. Do I gather you disagree with it?
( What have you done for New Guinea?) Boc -usc if you d~ isagree
with it you arc going to be in great trouble as a Labour man
because Mr. Calwell thinks I am talking about it too soon and
Mrt Whitlai-says it ought to be done now. ( Laughter) Al. I
can do is toll you our view on the matter.
I wouldn't be foolish enough to suggest that this is
a matter that can be achieved in a few short years. Of course
it can't. ( Interjections) As there has been a certain amount
of reference made to what I said about this matter-or rather
to what was alleged that I said I think I might quote you the
verbatim report from the tape of what I said about this when I
came back to Sydney a few weeks ago. ( Interjection: We got it
in the Press) Oh no you didn't; that's why I am, quoting it to
you. I said: '' Whereas at one time many of us might have thought
that it was better to go slowly in granting Independence
so that all of the conditions existed for a wise exercise
of self-government, I think the prevailing school of
thought today is that if in doubt, you should go sooner
not later. -I belong to that school of thought now, though
I didn't once. But I have seen enough in recent years to
satisfy me that even though some Independences may have
been premature, where they have been a little premature
they have at least been achieved with goodwill. And when
people have to wait too long for their Independence then
they achieve itwith ill-will and that, perhaps, is the
difference between British Colonial policy in this century
and that of some other country."
And then somebody said: " Would you apply that to New
Guinea?" and I said this:
" When you say ' apply that to New Guinea', yes. But that
does not mean that I belong to this fancy school of
thought that you write a timetable out and say that in
ten years' time so and so, and in 20 years' time, so-andso.
That is just silly" ( Interjection) Believe me my
boy I've heard it said in other countries, very definitely-
" But we are all doing a faithful job of work in Papua and
New Guinea. Wie will go on doing it,"
And then I went on to say " that we may get to a point
or my successors may get to a point, where they say: " Well
maybe if we allow then to determine their future now, it
is a little premature: I would sooner take that risk at
that time, than leave it too long'"
Now Sir, and laidies and gentlemen, I think if I may
say so that is good commonsense. That is all. Nothing very
rovolulionary about that: it is good cormionsense. But,
ladies and gentlemen, there is now being built up around this,
some sort of idea that we ought to be out of New Guinea and
Papua in a few years a few years. And the result is, if that
view obtains currency, that the development of Now Guinea for
self-government will be greatly postponed. Because what New
Guinea and Papua need for their conomic developmeint for the
development of their population, is a steady inflow of investment
in those lands so that their rural-industries may be
developed, their cattle industry developed: all these various
things which mean a rising standard of living for the New
Guinea people and for the Papuan people.
All these things require confidence and investment
and I do wish I could persuade people who are talking but 
8.
" Out in five years" to understand that if they are believed
they will make it impossible to be out in many many mr years
than that. Weo want to see a steady development as fast as
possible, according to our resources. iind aftor all, we are
spending a groat deal of money in New Guinea, or you are,
through us. d1e want to see all these things go on. But above
all things it , ould be idle to talk about giving self-government
to the native inhabitants of Now Guinea and Papua unless
you had developed their economy in their country so that they
had industries, so that they had employmient, so that they had
a standard of living of a kind that we would recognise based
upon their owrn efforts in their own country.
Now Sir I apologise for having discussed those
miatters because, of course, apparently they have nothing to do
with Balaclava. But they have a great deal to do with the
future of this country: a hostile New Guinea would be deadly
from Australia's point of view. A friendly Now Guinea is
essential to Australia. And the right way to get it is to
pursue in a porfectly normal sensible fashion, the development
of this country and the developm-, ent of its people. Not being
turned aside by chocr-chasers or by violent advocates on one
side or the other, but going straight along the track and
saying: " Our ultimate objective, as Australians, is that we
shall bring these people to a point when they are fit to rule
0 themselves and to determine their own future". When we have
done that we will have discharged a gre2at trust for humanity and
we will have brought great credit and, as I think, great
security in the true sense, upon ourselves. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTEht, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES, C. H. M. P. AT THE
STATE LIBERLAL CONFERNCE, HOBART, 15' TH 3JLY 196o
Mr. President and ladies and gentlemen:
I think I will follow my usual prudent course and
declare the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the State Council
Open. I was told to do it at the finish, but I know if I don't
do it now I may forget to do it later on.
I was very very interested to find that Mr. Pitchford's
mind was running back over a long period now since this Party
began, and as that rather relates to my theme this morning, I
will make a further reference to it myself.
Back in 191+ 3 our predecessor parties had the biggest
defeat, I think, in their political history. In 1944 I had
become once more, Leader of the Party and Leader of the
Opposihion and I determined that there must be a tremendous
effort made to produce something new and vigorous and united.
Many of you may have forgotten that at that time in 1944, one
could find in Australia no less than fourteen different
organisations, all of them professing, more or less, our ownr
point of view fourteen different bodies. Disunity of that
kind was one of the reasons for our defeat. And the unity that
was produced by the work of 1944 and 1945 in welding all these
bodies into one and creating the Liberal Party is one of the
great factors that has kept us in office in the Commonwealth
for the last ten or eleven years. It is worthwhile recalling
that in disunity we found our greatest disaster; and in unity
we found our greatest and most continuous success. The history
of politics is full of that.
I can remember and no doubt many of you can in 1929-
wasn't in the Federal Parliament, that had nothing Lo do with
it the Bruce Government went down to the greatest defeat that
it could have encountered. It was forced into an election
twelve months after the election of 1928, which it had won, and
it was forced into an election by disunity in its own ranks.
And Labour came in at the end of 1929 with a majority that
induced the usual faint-hearted among us to say: " Oh, they'll
be there for ten years". It is wonderful how quickly some
people abandon all hone. They were going to be there for ten
years. And inside 18 months they had fallen to pieces. They
had encountered difficulties of policy and of character in
their own ranks, and in the result they fell to pieces and by
the end of 1931, they were gone. The Lyons' Government came
in and we had from the beginning of 1932 to the beginning, or
the middle, of 1941, an unbroken period of Government by people
of our side of politics.
Do you see how it w; orks out? Every time there is
disuhity, disaster may be looked for. Every time there is
unity victory is three parts achieved.
I had, I think, some illustration of the value of
this kind of thing this year in London. lie had a Prime
Ministers' Conference. The Conference met under very, very
difficult circumstances. There had been an incident at
Sharpeville in South Africa and all round the world there were
denunciations of the South African racial policy not that
that policy was a policy of shooting people but the policy of
apartheid, the policy of separate developmenl of the black and
the white races. And this was under tremendous attack.
Fortunately the matter came up for the first time in any wide
discussion at the Prime Ministers' Conference.
And there we were quite different people: Mr. Macmillan
as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, Mr. Diefen-
baker from Canada, Mr. Nash from New Zealand, Tunku Abdul
Rahnaan from Malaya, President Ayub from Pakistan, a representative
of Ceylon and the Prime Minister of Ghana, Dr. Nkrumah.
Well, we are all different people. And, particularly in the
case of some of our colleagues from Asia and Africa, feelings
were very, very high and they had stated their views and
offered them with considerable force in their own countries.
In the result we sat down together: there is a strange, illusive
unity about the British Commonwealth. If you look at it
as a matter of paper you say " Well what is it?" I have
encountered people who say i doesn? t exist. W~ hat is the
relation between these countries? There are republics; and
there are monarchies, like Australia. ' Uhat does hold these
people together? What is it that induces a country like Ghana
when it gets independent self-government, to apply at once tha?
it may be a member of the Commonwealth? And what induces it,
when it votes to become a republic, to apply at once, as it
did, for approval to remain in the Commonweal th as a republic?
Why is it that this happehs? And the answer is that we meet.
ge are not like any other body on eath. We have no slight
resemblance to the Security Council of the United Nations or
the General Assembly. We are not meeting on the stage of the
theatre; we are not conducting public debates; we are not
taking votes; we don't have people running around the lobbies
trying to persuade somebody else to support this amendment if
I support yours. All this kind of thing which is inseparable
from great assemblies doesn't exist when we enter No.
Downing Street. And down upon us in that room I know because I have
had a long experience of it, longer now than anybody else
down upon us there settles a particular sense of intimacy, a
particular sense of friendly understanding, a particular realisation
that if we can remain a united body for the things that
we believe in, a great good will come to the world. And there
we were, sitting around the table, sitting in various rooms,
talking as occasion offered with the representative of South
Africa, the South African problem: courteously, quietly, no
passions displayed, an earnest desire to get to understand and
to make sensible suggestions. And in the result, after 10 days
of that conference, we were able to issue a communique which
referred to the problem of South Africa referred to the
existence of a multi-racial soc,-4oty in Lho Commonwealth, and
which was the unanimous product of all those present
includinc, South Africa.
You see the point that I am getting at? There are
plenty of debating societies in the world I take a hand in
one at Canberra from time to time, myself,-( Laughter) in a
small way. But the Prime Ministers' Conference is one of the
gre at proofs that people who disagree, perhaps profoundly on
a number of matters, can find a great sense of unity aboU~ the
important things about which, underneath it all, they find
themselves agre. eing.
Now, Sir, we can carry that further on to the world
stage. The world is going through a pretty bad period, a very
worrying period. Khrushchev has two things, perhaps, in his
favour: one is that he knows his own mind and he is the
master of his own time table, just as Hitler was. The other is
that he is acting, so to speak, on internal lines of communication:
he's got this great country behind him, an enormous
aggregation of people behind him, whether willingly or otherwise,
and he can press out, probe out on to the rest of the
wiorld at his own choico. While the free world, being the free
world, will argue, one country with the other, conduct all the
disputes in public, have all the differences magnified in the
headlines though they may be quite trivial. Superficially it
is an example of unity versus a certain amount of disunity. 
0 3.
When the disunity becomes too prevalent, the Cold Var by the
Soviet Union succeeds. When the great nations of the Vdest
really get together and begin to act and think together, then
the Cold War begins to fail. But the Cold Wgar has had a
considerable amount of success of late.
I was in London of course, at the time when the
Summit Conference occurred, or didn't occur as the case may be.
And when Mr. Macmillan came back from Paris I had a long
private discussion vith him about it in order to get some of
the background of it. He was, of course, bitterly disappointed.
No man had done so much as hehad to bring it about. He had
with a bold stroke of moral leadership, as I will always
regard it, IoettMso hmef urged the holding of a
Meeting at the Summit, and had finally persuaded President
Eisenhower and General De Gaulle that it ought to occur. And
so, everything was set for it. Khrushchev had himself
proposed it, do you remember, at least a year before,
Well, what were we all expecting? It know that it is
a very human frailty always to expect too much and I daresay
there might have been some who expected that out of the Summit
we would get an era of peace. 4ell that was never quite, I
think, on the board.
But there wolo two things that I, for on~ e, had hopes
about. One was that they might have agreed to some sort of a
moratorium cabout Berlin. This wretched nagging problem of
Berlin which bordered very close to armed conflict only a fea
years back, until the whole thing was broken by the famous airlift
to Berlin, this nagging problem which goes on and on with
threats on the Eastern side, threats of separate treaties with
East Germany and of closing Berlin out to the i-estern world and
to Western influence. And so most of us had hoped that when
four men of responsible posts got togother they would have
said: " Well there is plenty of time to settle all these
allegedly legal arguments about Berlin; let's have a moratorium
on that",
And in the second place that we might have seen some
answer to the problem of nuclear tests. Because at Geneva they
had been discussing with each other for a long timeu the problem
of suspending nuclear tests on both sides, with an adequate
system of inspection. They had got so close together that I
thought myself that all it needed was a good nudge by the four
people meeting together at the Summit, to close the gap and
bring about at least that measure of relief from tension.
And so it was a tragedy for the world, a tragedy for
ordinary men and women all over the world, people who have a
vested interest in being kept out of the horrors of another war.
It was a tragedy that this one man, on the feeblest excuse in
the world, should have wiped the Summit Meeting out before it
began. Ile must beware of the propagandists, because the
propagandists, the Communist propagandists, would have you
believe that the reason why he did that was the Americans had
had a plane over Russia taking photographs.
Well I'm bound to say two things, ladies and gentlemen:
one is: it may have been very unwise to have a plane at
that time, but at some time or another, I think a very .:, ood idea.
Lot us just reason together a little about this matter, this
famous U2. Did he complain about the U2 because he was shocked
at the idea that somebody was spying on his country? a strange
kind of sheok for a Communist to suffer from., the strangest in
the world. Of course he wasn't. He regarded it in the first
place as rather a nice trick that he had taken. This plane had
come down, or had been brought down, he had the pilot, and I can 
almost imagine him saying, " Ab, I've taken the first trick in
this game; now I'll have them in trouble". But all in a
sense good clean fun, you know. ( Laughter) Until, of course,
he suddenly realised, and so did the famous Marshal Malenovsky,
that this plane was 1 000 miles inside the Russian frontier a
thousand miles. And that as it could be guessed pretty safely
it was by no means the first, but it was the first to be detected
and brought down, this was a little embarrassing: this meant
that without intercontinental ballistic missiles these
wretched things that some day, let's say, will be capable of
being popped up and dropped on to the precise spot in another
continent even in the absence of those, quite clearly, aircraft,
flying at a suitable height, couiA deliver nuclear
weapons deep into the Soviet Union. In other words, the nuclear
deterrent was disc losed in one flash as being immeasurably more
powerful than Khrushchtev had ever been prepared to admit. And
all his protestations to his own people that the counter-attack
was ' kn absurdity, just fell to the ground. And that, I am
sure, with suitablecomplaints in his headquarters, induced in
him this fit of rage which may have begun by being synthetic
but ended up by being very real, in which he just blew the
whole thing out.
Wiell I don't suppose that that is the end of it, because
you remember that very shortly afterwards he said that we
might perhaps have a Summit in another six or seven months'
time, meaning by that after the American Presidential election.
And I don't myself despair of that being the case: I think
that very well might turn out to be the case.
I don't quite knew what the famous Khrushchev has in
his mind on that point because that was, I thought, just about
as good an indication as anything could be, that he would wait
until he could deal with a Democratic President. And if I had
been a Democrat in the United States of America I would have
thought that was very dubious assistance to have my Party told
that it would be more likely to be agreeable to Mr. Khrushchev
than the Republican Party, I don't think for one moment that
that is true, but they have strange ideas in their minds
occasionally about the Western psychology. I hope, and believe,
that after the Presidential election he will get an unpleasant
surprise whichever candidate wins.
Now, Sir, the ether thing that I want to mention to
you is thils I was talking about this Cold liar. W~ e have
seen two things of dramatic importance in the Middle East and
in the Jest in our recent lives: the first of them was Suez,
whore, in the result Colonel Nasser got awray with it had a
great success, developed immense prestige in the Middle East,
with the result that the Middle East has been in this place and
that in a state of foment ever since. And the second one is
the incidents in Cuba.
You know we have fed so well on sensations in our
lifetimes, in this century of sonsations, that we hale almost
lost our capacity for surprise everything just seems to be
another incident, and what of it.
But this performance by Fidel Castro in Ct': ba is on
all fours with the performances of Nasser. And as you haven't
failed to observe, not only has he been treating the United
States, his near neighbour, with open contempt, but he has been
getting away with it, getting away wi-th their investments,
getting away with their money, getting away with their interests
calling in aid, the Soviet Union, getting large and
posihive help from Khrushchev, doing all that he can to convert
Cuba into a Soviet base right off the shores of the United
States. That to me is one of the great crucial things that has
happened of late. It indicat * es something that you and I have
to give a lot of thought to. 14hat it illustrates is that small 
countries today are not unwilling to treat with contumely the
large powers of the world. They will turn to them for protection;
but they will use their own voice, and the voice of an
aggregation of other small countries, to defeat and humiliate
them if they can.
I hope that the United States of America, with its
passionate belief in the United Nations, as the saviour won't
be too disillusioned if Castro rallies in the United Nations a
few score of countries, small in themselves, all willing to
" have a go" at the big fallow.
This is a very disturbing state of affairs and it will
require two things: it will require immense strength and
readiness and determination in the great powers in the United
States of America, in the United Kingdom, in France, which is
recovering rapidly in modern terms great strength and determination
on their part, great unity between them so th~ at
they are not divided and conquered. And for us, who are of the
free world, it reminds that we should be increasingly conscious
of what is going on outside, of our duty to our friends of our
readiness ourselves to play our part in the affairs of the free
world, and in our capacity, because of character and determination,
to earn the respect and friendship of these great countries
upon whom the security of the world depends,
These are vitally important considerations. I know
that there are some people who say: " Oh, what has that got to
do with Australia?" Some fellow, the other day in Melbourne,
I noticed, talked about Foreign Affairs, " What has that got to
do with Australia?". Voll if that state of mind prevailed in
this country we would be finished. vie are an adult nation. We
are ten million people it's quite true but believe me, we
are listenedtto in the rest of theo world in a Prime Ministers'
Conference, in a meeting of the South-East Asian Treaty, in a
meeting of ANZUS with the United States of America. In all
these things in Whitehall and in Washington Australia is
listened to and, I'm proud to say, listened to with sympathy
and respect. ( Appla~ use). We are not to underestimate our-selves0
And because of that I believe we must look forwad to a
period in front of us when Australia will increasingly become
known as a country with internationai outlook and intc-, rational
ideas. These very matters that I have mentioned and thoe
are only a few out of miiany are the best proof that thla-oe
matters on the world stage are immeasurably more important than
any of the things that we argue about of a domestic kind inside
our own country. And they have a great habit of coming home,
Twice in this century they have dome home. Does anybody suppose
that if the world fell into nuclear war or indeed a global war
of any kind, we would be innocent bystanders? Not at all. And
the contribution that a country can make to the solution of the
world's problems is not measured by the population of the
country. There are some very large countries in the world that
have contributed mighty little to the solving of the world's
problems one or two of them not far away from us, like
Communist China. And yet on the other hand there are smaller
countries which make a contribution. I venture to say that
under Mr. Harold Macmillan, Great Britain is more and more
restoring herself to a position of, intellectual and moral
leadership in the world. ( Applause)
Now, Sir, Cuba may seem a long way away, That phrase
reminds me, if I may interrupt myself, that back in 1935 I think
it was, I had a conversation with President Roosevelt in Washington
at the Vhitehouse and I asked him a highly hypoi. hetical
question about what the attitude of America would be if Australia~ 
got into any kind of trouble. And ' iith that characteristic
smile of his, he said: " Well you know what my mind is on that,
but what my people would say I wouldn't know!. You know they
might say: ' It's a long ways away'.' 1 I couldn't object to
that, because that's just what we say, isn't it, about some of
the events of the world.
Today that attitude has entirely disappeared. One
never meets an American who doesn't know about Australia and
Australians, and very seldom does one meet one who hasn't either
himself or by a brother-, or a cousin, or an uncle, been in
Australia either during the war or after it. And ther-, fore we
are on c-lose easy friendly terms with them.
But, despite all that, you may say: " IVell Cuba is a
long way from us". But Communis China isn't. If we look up
north: Indonesia is not far from us; Singapore is not far
from us. I only realised the other day how short a distance it
is to Singapore, because if you leave Darwin by plane today you
are in Singapore in about three htours' time. North of Singapore,
you have Malaya and you have Thailand; you have South
Viet Nam, Laos, Cambodia and all around them on the top and at
the sides you have the Communist forces whether they are the
forces of North Viet Nam, or the forces of Continental China
itself. And there is in all these places a constant pressure.
Communist China, they estimate, will have by the turn of the
century a thousand million people. And they won't be untrained
or ill-informed. That is a long way off it's forty years
hence and in 40O years enormous strides can be made in industrial
development, in the organisation of military activities
enormous strides. A thousand million people.
My friend, Mr. Nehru, the Prime M nister of India,
ought to be the last man to be undier attack by Chou En-lai, of
China, because sometimes, at the risk of unpopularity with some
of us, he has sought to explain their point of view, has
maintained diplomatic relations with then he is no Communist
himself, of course but he has always tried to act as a sort
of moderating and interpreting element between Communist China
and the rest of the free world. And for his reward he finds
that Tibet is dealt with by Communist China in a most violent
fashion, rofugoes are streaming over the frontier and the
frontier2 of India have boen violated and are at this rioment,
violated by Communist China, A pretty poor reward for honourable
conduct. And the result of it, of course, is that India,
now, is in a state of mind of feeling apprehensive about the
thrust of these arrogant people.
We have the South East Asia Treaty Organisation. It
was my own Government that played a leading hand in organising
it. We have the ANZUS pact with the United States and New
Zealand of which we were certainly -the promoters. These are
of great potential value. In the South East Asian Treaty we
have Pakistan, and we have two or three of the Asian countries
plus Great Britain and France, and the United States and New
Zealand and ourselves. And there we are, 1Wbhra d a meeting
in 1-Jashington. There is, I think, a greowing sense of community.
But there again I had occasion to point out that all the
organisational arrangements, all the military planning in the
world, wouldn't make our Organisation effective if there were
internal disputes inside our own frontiers, so to speak.
And to take an example:, Cambodia, which is one of
the protected countries under th. is iireaty, has a quarrel with
Thailand and it gets very heated. It is over something that I
would have regarded as quite trivial, but it goes on. Then
another country has another argument with somebody over a couple 
of islands of no great intrinsic value except as a matter of
prestige. And, as I pointed out to them, unless you can settle
these irritating points of difference, you will find that the
Communists are not fools they love to intervene where there
are private disputes, they like to exaggerate them, they like
to fish in troubled waters. And so long as they can fish in
troubled waters our side of their frontier then we are
weakening our own position and exposing ourselves to great risk.
Well I hope that those things will be solved because
and here again is my point it is only by the utmost unity,
not only by treaty, but by the spirit between the nations in
the South East Asian Treaty Organisation, that we have any
chance of ultimate salvation. Unity, unity, unity must be the
thing to be achieved all over the free world, whether it is in
our own Party or in our own nation or in the international
field. Disunity means disaster.
Our opponents, to go down to the political field, in
Canberra have an expert know~ ledge of that truth.
Now, Sir, I have spoken a long time Jout those
matters, but I have spoken about them because I believe that we
are going through a tough, rough, international period. That
doesn't mean that I believe that Khrushchev wants to start a
war. As always, he will go as far as he can, as boldly as ho
can, as bullyingly as he can, up to the point at which he sees
a strong prospect that this will be resisted by force. And in
the meantime they go on, probing here, probing there sometimes
it is a relatively small matter; sometimes it is a
relatively g,, reat mattes:. But every time there is a probe of
that kind and it succeeds, and we simply fall back on vague
generalisations and arguments with each other every time that
happens another step has been taken in the march of Communism
in the world a march which, of course, is welcomed by the
Communist Fifth Columnists inside Australia; and apparently not
entirely disfavoured by those) who are willing to ally themselves
with them, but a march of the greatest gravity for all of us.
I Trould just like to add to that that there is going
to be a Presidential election in Ameirica; there is going to be
an election in Ceylon shortly: " Uhat though the tropic breezes
blow soft o'er Ceylon's isle". Some of us have been there a
lovely place, marvellous place, happy people. They have two
Communist Parties in their Parliament and those Parties, in this
election, are active and make no secret of the fact that if they
can socure an alliance what you might call a unity ticket
with one of the major opposition parties, then they will be
inside that Party if it wins and they will ultimately get
command of it. I am most unhappy and you would be too at
the very thought that it might be possible for Ceylon to come
under Communist influence.
B~ ut it is not the only place. Before I finish, let me
say this to you: people have talked so much about South Africa
that they have, perhaps, forgotten that that is only a small
portion of Africa. There are 200 million people in Africa and
all moving with tremendous speed towards self-government.
People have a great itch for political self-government it is
understandable. Very few of them worry a-bout economic selfgovernrment".
It is rather, to people like ourselves,-" a little
astonishing to find that there is no recognition that there is
a distinction between political independence and economic
dependence on the rest of the world. But there it is. And it
has this effect: political independence they are going to
have willy-nilly. Sometimes, as in the case of Ghana, with
grea goodwill; as in the case of Nigeria very soon, with
great goodwill; sometimes, as in the case of the Congo, with
the absolute certainty, as most of us believed, of riot and
bloodshed which is now going on because circumstances were 
I 8.
differaint. Gr~ eat Britain is the one power, in my opinion, in
the world that understands or has understood the colonial
problem, and how to bring people up to a stage of governing
themselves. But there is one remarkable truth, greatly forgotten
I fear, and that is that if these nations in Africa achieve
their political independence at a time when they are not
economically capable of survival, and therefore need great help,
economically, they will either get it from the free world or
they will got it from the Soviet Union. And if they get it
from the Soviet Union, which is busy today examining Africa,
then before long they will find that they have fallen into the
hands of the Soviet Union, that they are mere catspaws for the
Soviet Union. And therefore, from that point of view, there is
an enormous task in front of the doestern world not to diminish
its help to other countries, but to increase its help to other
countries. Unless we of the destern world, we in our small way
and other great countries in their large way, face up to the
duty of doing something about these emergent African States we
may wake up, or our children may wake up some day, to find that
there is a great Communist Continent. That would be, I think,
more than Australia could surviv3.
There is another aspect of it and it is a very humane
one, and as we are a humane Party with, I am happy to say, a
magnificent record of humanity in legislation and provision, we
might think about it. One of the ironies of the (, Iorld is that
the highly developed industrial countries are developing more
and more rapidly every year, as technology, technical skills,
scientific efforts and the progress of an industrial country
improves. It is remarkable. But in these under-developed
countries, like these emergent nations in Africa and in Asia
progress is nothing like so fast it can't be: they do no
have the technical resources; they do not have the technicians.
And therefore their rate of progress is slow, while our rate of
progress is rapid. And that means and this is a simple truth,
easily to be overlooked that the gap between their standards
of living and ours, instead of diminishing, is increasing. Now
that, I think, is something wihich must make us all furiously
think that in spite of what g; oes on, the gap increases. And as
the gap increases, so will the inevitable resentment and
frustration of these people grow more and more strong. And in
that atm.-osphere, the Com-. munists, the overthrowers, have a great
opportunity. And therefore so far as all the free world is
concerned, it will have to divert more and more time, and
thought, and money a-, nd sacrifice to helping other human beings
in the world to raise their standards of living, to get into
that condition of life in which Communism will not interest
theom, will have w appeal to them and in i , hichi by their very
realisation that there has been a warm and friendly atmosphere
in the world, they may themselves powerfully contribute to the
peace of mankind. 



P. M. No. 22/ 1960
BENDIGO BY-ELECTION
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Once more Mr. Calwell's prophecies have been
falsified. The result in Bendigo is, I think, quite remarkable.
Sixty-eight votes changed would have led to a Labour defeat.
, hen one considers that in the middle year of a Parliament the
stocks of the Government arc never at their highest because
inevitably many criticisms " ariso, it is, I think, very
encouraging to find that in a seat like Bendigo, with now a
considerable Labour tradition, the Government has actually
improved its position since the last general election.
I recognise that this is in no srall measure
attributable to the high quality of the Liberal candidate and
the vigorous work that was put into the campaign. I hope and
believe that Mr. Snell, so far from being discouraged, though
on such a close finish . he will undoubtedly be disappointed,
will determine to continue his political activities which should
undoubtedly bring him victory when a Goneral Election comes
around. CANBERRA, 22nd July, 1960. 



P. M. No._ 24/ 1960
AUSTRALIAN MEDICAL TEAM FOR CONGO
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies,
The Prime Minister announced today that the
Government had agreed to make U5', 000 available to the
Australian Red Cross Society to help to send an Australian
medical team to the Congo.
Mr. Menzies said that the decision had been made by
Cabinet yesterday within 24 hours of a request from the League
of Red Cross Societies in Geneva and the World Health
Organization for medical assistance for the Congo. The
Australian team would probably consist of two doctors and a
male nurse and its task was expected to be to assist in the
rehabilitation of Congolese hospitals and medical services
which wore short of staff following the withdrawal of the Belgian
administration. Mr. Menzies said he hoped that the Australian medical
team, which would serve in the Congo for some six months,
would be ready to leave Australia within a few days.
CANBERRA, 3rd August, 1960. 



FAO Hunger campaign
parliamentary Committee on i4ew~ GIuinea
Guinea
Clyde Caferon
Congo
Genorali ssembly
Constitutional Commfittee
,. estrictive tradie pr Ictices etc.
Imports Blue Str'eak Rocket London Minister
Dutch vrarslips
Visit by Dr. 3oekarno
Flioor in King's Hall
Empire Games in Perth vitit by ER
Fighiter for RAAF
Visit by King of Thailand
American Presidential Election
Crimes Act 
QUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER;
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RT. HONo R. G. MENZILS AT CANBERRA ON
FRIDAY, 5TH AUGUST, 1960, AT 10.30 A. M.
Any decision yet Sir, on Australia's contribution
to the Hunger C. mnoaign Food and
Agricultural Organisation; I think you mentioned
earlier in the year you would consider some
contribution. I cannot answer that off-hand. I have a
vague idea something has happened about it, but
it is not clear in my mind. I will find out.
Mr. Ca3lwell has suggested a Parliamentary
Committee on Now Guinea, Sir a joint committee
to investigate the position there.
Yes, I noticed that. I thought that perhaps
when he comes back and when we are in touch with
each other, I ; ight have a word with him about
that just to see the shape of what he has in
mind. It will need, of course, to be discussed
with the Cbinet then.
Hzve you any other observations on New
Guinea at the moment, Sir, that you can make?
I don't think so. Except that since there
has been a lot of artifically created confusion
about our policy with allegations of differences
between my policy and Mr. Hasluck's there
being no differences whatever he and I have
in hand the preparation of a short statement of
policy which we will submit to the Cabinet
with the idea of making it available quite early
in the forthcoming session.
For debate, Sir?
I won't have any objection to it being
debated.. I think that will be useful. Nor will
there be any novelty in the statement, because as
I say there are no differences about it.
Will the statement by the one, Sir, in
which the target dates will be set?
No. This will be one on the broad policy
that we have in relation to the Territory of
Papua and New Guinea.
There have been suggestions, Mr. Menzies,
of discrimination between the natives and whites
in New Guinea. W4ould you care to
I have seen them only in one or two sections of
the newspapers, particularly in one newspaper
which spares no pains to create the impression
that these discriminations exist in Australia.
How about Mr. Clyde Cameron's activities;
Well, I would have to rely on hearsay if I
said what I would like to say about them. Get
/ 2 
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
PRESSMAN: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTERQUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTIONPRIME MINISTER: 2
that down accurately that's a good sentence.
Do you wish to elaborate further on that
No. What sections of the Press are you referring
to, seriously?
Oh, now, come, come. What's the next
question? Anything on the Congo, Sir?
No nothing more.
It looks pretty sticky.
Yes. Well it is a fine example of an unprepared
country getting self-government.
Does it pose any lesson for New Guinea, Sir?
It does not I think, have any particular
bearing on that. The British colonial policy has
always been somewhat different from the colonial
policy of some other countries, and the whole
idea has been to prepare the idigenous populations
for ultimate self-government by steady stages so
that they don't find themselves plunged into
responsibilities that they are not trained to
discharge. That is thc. tragedy of the Congo:
this is going back to tribal warfare, very largely.
You said a month ago, Sir, that the Prime
Ministers had decided about the question of
technical economic aid for the African countries.
Has that take-n on any specific form?
Not yet.
Are wc contemplating doing anything for the
Congo? The Congo is in thu hands of the United
Nations and I have no doubt that they are examining
both the economic as. woll as the military
aspects of it. it is a tremendous problem.
Incidentally a lot of white people have been
killed in the Congo, as well as many others.
Has Australia received any request from the United
Nations to supply any troops at all for the Congo?
No. Unless there is some Staff Officer or
somebody from some other force, but you had butter
ask Mr. Townley about that. But " troops" in the
sense that you me: an it, No.
Will we be sending a Minister to the General
Assembly this year, Sir,
I do not know. I have not settled the team
yet. But I think that having regard to certain
developments you know certain problems that
are current it will be necessary to send a
Minister. / 3
S. 
IL 3
QJESTION: PRIE " INIoTER
QUESTION
PRIBE } IISTER
QUESTION' PRIE LI. I3TER:
CJESTION:
PRIME MINI ISTER
QUESTION: PRI1E MIISTER:
QUESTION; PRIME HIISTER:
PRI-E MII' ISTER
Q: ULSTION
PRI-E VINISTER Will you go yourself, Sir?
No.
Could you give mc a lead on who will go?
No, I cannot.
Is there anything you can tell us -bout
legislation for the cci-. ng jession, Sirs
No. You h-' d better ask the Attorney-
General bout that:; he can answer those questions.
Or Kolt H-olt would know what he is contemplating
in the legislative programme. I
Haven't discussed anything with him yet.
Kr. i'enzies, assuming your Government is
going to bring down a balanced budget, will many
people get hurt in the process'
You may make no assumption whatever about I.
the Budget except that it is not yet disclosed.
Is it going to be a good one, Sir?
What's the next question? ( Laughter)
The Constitutional Committee? What is
the progress that has been made on that, Sir,
since your return' Have you given any consideration
to it? Has Sir Garfield'
We have had no Cabinet on it. He is
examining it, and so am I. But I don't think
you need anticipate any legislation in this
Session. Anything further on the restrictive trade
practices and monopolies mentioned in the
Governor-General's speech earlier this year,
Sir' Well I cannot answer that off hand. I have
not got around to that: we have had other
matters in Cabinet. If anything is to be said
about that it will no doubt be said in the course
of this Session.
Imports are running at a level which is
alarming manufacturers again, Sir. Do you think
that there is any...
It is to be anticipated that there will
be some fall in our overseas reserves in the
course of the financial year. That was
contemplated at the time Import Licensing
was, in substance, lifted That is not to say
that it is contemplated that that is a process
which goes on indefinitely. It seemded to the
Government to be clear that the first effect
of raising import restrictions would be to
produce a quickened demand for imports which
might form a sort of hump in the import graPi
But the whole policy has been based on the
assumption that there will be some decline in
overseas reserves. 
L
QUESTION PRIME . I*. ITER!
QUESTIO1: PRIJTE EIIISTER*
PUET ION
P. IlkE MIilSTER:
QUESTION! PRIIE UIilISTER
QUESTION
PRIME MINISTER:
UESTION:
PRIME MI1TISTER:
U. LF-STION:
PRIME FLiSTER:
QLJESTIO\: You do not see anything for concern in the
situation, Sir?
1o. There is nothing unexpected about it.
ire you satisfied, Sir, wlith the capital
ihflow that occurred in the last year and this
one. I aimi, and I do not see any reason why it
should not continue.
Is the width of that import huirp, Sir,
a bit wider that Cabinet m:-ay have first anticipated
back in Scberuary2
I do not think so, no.
The Director of the . Associated Chan* bers of
1anufacturers suggests th-t australia ray be
flooded with second-hand cars from the United
States as a result of thec removal of import
restrictions. Has th. t bccn brought to your
notice r. Kenzies'
No. Unless there is something quite
uncommon, I would not necessarily know about it.
You might ask r. lcEwen about that.
Sir, it has been reported from London that
Britain will send a inister to Australia to
discuss the posqsible development of the Blue
Streak Rocket as a space research vehicle,
Sir, could you give us any indication of the
tiing of those talks or "' Yut us in" on the
Blue Streak. I am at present in communication with 1r.
Macmillan about it, and I think it is quite clear
that he is going to send a Minister, probably
with so: 1c expert people. But as to ' when' and
' wlhat work' ought to be done in advance, well
those are ;-atters that we are discussing by
conmunication with each other. As to who the
: inister will be, I do not know, but I expect
that he will be a fairly senior Minister.
Sir, have you reached any decision on the
programme for Australian Space research put
forward by the Academy of Science'
No, there is nothing I can say ibout that.
It was anrounced in the Cor-rmons, Sir, in
respect of th. is visit that Britain was completing
and would shortly send to you a technical
appraisal on the prospects of space research
here. Have you received it yet?
e have had some papers from them, but we
anticipatE that we will have more before we
arrive at any conclusions with the visitors.
Sir, the Iindonesian Government, thl-rough
its inbassy hcre, has made some rather strong
statements on the visit of the Dutch warships
to lest 1\ ew Guinea. Does the Australian
Government have any risgivings at all about the
20OO0G 
PRII-E , MINISTER:
QUESTIOL: PhIE IhISTER:
QUESTION: PRI ME MINiISTER
QUESTION: PRIME MIiNISTER:
QUESTION: PRl E MINISTER:
QTUESTION: PRIME MIi,' ISTER: presence of the Dutch warships going to ' lest
New Guinea? We think the Dutch have a perfect right
to send a warship there if they wish to. It
would. be a very strange thing if our attitude
was that the Dutch were not to maintain a
posture of defence in respect of Jest New
Guinea. At the very best their forces in West
New Guinea are a tiny fraction of the forces
available to Indonesia. I am perfectly certain
th.. t the Dutch are not proposing to do anything
provocative, nor will their warships, I am
perfectly certain, enter Indonesian waters.
There is no reason why the Dutch should be
provocative. Anything, Sir, about the visit by Dr.
Soekarno? No. The next nove, I think, is at their
end. But it does not appear to be on the cards
this year. Lasn't there an announcement from Djakarta,
Sir, shortly before you returned that it had
been cancelled? That could not have been right, because it
had never been made, so it could not be
cancelled. Let us put it this way, then, Sir:
Yes: but he had never said he would..
I remember hearing about that but it was just
" tosh". You do not cancel an arrangement if
you have not made one. The position is that
I invited him to come. I said I thought there
would be advantages in it and that I thought he
would find it a very useful journey just as I
had found my journey through Indonesia-and that i
contact with our own Ambassador if his people
could fix a convenient date for his visit, we
would be delighted. fell he has not been able to.
That will stand for next year
Yes. It is an open invitation. But that
earlier story rather suggests that he, having
agreed to come, has now decided. not to come.
WJell that is quite wrong: he has not broken
any arrangement, because no arrangement was made.
Sir, there has been some surprise expressed
at the re-construction of the floor in King's
Hall. Did the Cabinet authorise it?
This is not a Cabinet matter. Presumably
the Parliamentary authorities who have a vote
for repairs and maintenance arranged this. It
certainly did not ever come before me or the
C:. hinet. B': t then, it would not. I suppose it
will be just as slippery as the old one: we
will all have to practise walking with bended
knees and rubber heels. You can tell a Canberra
man anywhere in the world by his gait. 
6
QUESTION PRIME IINISTER:
QUEST IN:
PRIIE MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME ISTER:
QUEST 10:
PRI: LE FI'ISTER:
QUESTION PRIME " INISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME FINiISTER
QUESTION PRIME MIiiISTER:
PRESS AN
PRIME ' MIN. ISTER:
QUESTION:
PAIIE II ISTER:
QUESTIONPRIME MINISTER How long do you expect Kr. H olt to be
away, Sir' I think it is during the Budget
3ession. I think probably about six weeks;; but you
had better ash him that.
Who will be acting Treasurer, then, Sir
I will.
' Jill you be rather loaded down, Sir, with
External Affairs, tooc
Oh, I am not without experince of these
things. Any indication, : ir, of ho; long you will
maintain the Foreign Affairs portfolio.
No. So far I an doing rather well, I
think. ( Laughter)
Do you expect to go travelling on it, Sir?
No, thank you. Somebody else can do that.
Sir, it has been announced officially that
the Queen and Prince Philip will be going to
India next year and the next year the Empire
Games will be held in Perth. Has the West
Australian Premier had any talks with you about
a Royal Visit for 1962.
Yes. Can you say what the result of it is, Sir?
Io. I never make any statements about
those things. I think it is fairly ' notorious'
that he did have a word with me about it.
I-there anything more we can say, or
advance anything further, Sir?
No, you just engage in your usual guess
work. Oh! No' I never do that, Sir.
He is under new man: agement: he has given
up guessing. Could you say whether a visit is actually
being arranged.
I cannot say anything about it.
When do you think you will be in a position
to say something, Sir?
I do not know.
Can we take it that you have not wiped the
suggestion, Sir?
You can take nothing. You cannot get a
headline out of this. 



iU: TRALIAN TIONAL UNIVIiB'ITY ACT
Statement. by th Prime Ministe 7_ the Rt. Hon. R. . Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said today that the
Governor-General now approved the 30th September as the date
on which Part II of the Australian National University Act
should come into operation.
The Prime Minister recalled that the legisla-tion,
which was passed in the last session of Parliament, provided
for the association of the Australian National University and
the Canberra University College, but left open the date from
whiich this association would formally operate. The effect of
the Governor-General's proclamation is that the Canberra
University College and the Australian National University would
become one institution from the 30th September.
The Prime Minister added that the Univei-sity
authorities expected that the new Council of the Australian
National University would meet for the first time on the
September. It is necessary for the Council to meet on the
first day of association to maintain continuity and to make
certain formal arrangements necessary for the administration of
the new i. istitution.
CAN B ' 2RRAI
9th August, 1960 



EXTRACTS FROM THE SPEECH OF THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES AT THE 71ST ANNUAL
ASSOCI ATION DAY BANQUET OF JHE COiMEiRCIAL
TRAVELLERS' ASSOCIAfION OF NE. J SOUTH IJALES, ON
H AUGUST 1360
I rould just like to say three things to you.
First of all, I have already said, and I believe it
is true, you represent one of the freshest elements in the
nation competition. Competitive enterprise: a state of
affairs in which a man's skill and personality will produce
better results than in the case of a man without skill and
without personality. That, I think, is very -ood. The
competitive element is one of the great secrets of stability in
the country. I hesitate to think what wjould happen in this
marvellous country of ours if we all played the same tune, we
all had the same minds. I do not think Australia would present
to the world, under those circumstances, the same magnificent
and exciting field for interest to the rest of the world as it
does as a result of your labours and those for whom you toil.
The second thing that I wanted to say is that the
work you do, and I hope it will long continue, is a contributor
to the stability in the nation. So do not forget this stL~-v1
in this country. Not a dull stability, not a sort of half-dea
state of affairs, but a lively, bustling stability, if you can
imagine such a thing, is of tremendous importance to us in
regard to the rest of the world.
I have travelled, as I said to you before, a roat d
and I meet people wherever I go who have considerable interest in
this country. Wherever they may be in the United States or
Great Britain these people are vastly interested in this
country, not just because Fidel Castro has been naughty in Cuba.
No. Not just because some old source of repository of inrestment
has become politically crazy; not only for these reasons, but
because in the long run people will make the investments of
their fortunes in a country which they reoard as stable and
sensible. Stability and sensibility are not monopoly of mind;
nog, is it a party matter. It is where people, whatever their
politics may be, have a sense of responsibility, are fair, w~ here
they treat people fairly .: nd more and more they are looking to
Australia as a source of inspiration to them and a place in
which they can invest their capital. Some people are becoming
very anxious and are looking at , very dollar, every Swiss franc
invested in Australia as piling up obligations for the future.
I think it is a very limited way in which to look at it,
because all these investments from overseas have tended, I om
happy to say, so far to create industries, to create employment
and to create production and bring us more into the field in
wihich we will be -ble to sell manufactured and processed goods to
the rest of the world. It has been of tremendous importance to
us. Only the other day, metaphorically speaking, my own
Government decided to terminate Import Licensing. I do not
need to go into the reasons for that, but, of course, one of the
chief reasons for this is that the overseas balance has been in
a healthy state, and it is all for the good of Australia that we
should have more goods and services in this country,
But if -eo wore to ablish Import Licensing and nothing
more happened, then the demand for imports would become so great
that our overseas balance would run down, and . ec might find
ourselves, at some time in the futuro, a little oe. barrassed, by
a fall in our overseas balance, . hich is vitally important to the
well being of Australia. At that moment we say ' yes, but one of
the great elements to preserve our balances and to keep us
healthy overseas, is the most remarkable influx of private
investment in Australia ;. nd this has become one of the g-rat
factors in our economy. I am putting on one side the money 
2.
Governments may borrow institutionally overseas from the World
Bank or from the Export Import Bank, There has been now for
years an influx of private capital investments on private account
and for private purchases in Australia something exceeding a
hundred million pounds a year and I want you gentlemen to say
to yourselves: where would we be without it9 Weo have the most
remarkable increase in population; we have the most remarkable
tasks to perform to further the development of Australia, which,
if it succeeds, will give ample accommodation to all the
people who may be born here or wh. may come here.
If we did not have that inflow of capital from
overseas, we would be chronically short of capital for our own
development. Let us have that clearly ih our minds and,
therefore, one of the things you have to bear in mind, is that
you must help to create Government, of course, can do a
little, but by no moans everything you must create, or help to
create, a climate in Australia which will encourage the flow in
this country of capital of Irhich we are short and which, added
to the capital ro generate, will enable us to go along and
develop our country. And you won't got this investment unless
you have a sense of stability in the minds of people who are
concerned.
O So you see I started with you, your contribution to
stability, the contribution of stability for overseas investment.
And the final stage is this: that we are not at any time a
remarkably safe couhtry. We have ten million people, and we
have all sorts of turbulent and aggressive movements going
round in the world. Only the other day a 24 year-old man
executed a coup in Laos, one of the countries under the umbrella
of the South East Asia Treaty Orgnnization, an Organization which
is vital as the ANZAS Pact to our international security. We
must at all times so conduct our own affairs as to inspire the
confidence of other people and therefore, their friendship and
their interest in this country. Now I won't olaborate on those
things, because there are six other speakers, but you see my
sequence the kind of , iork you do in relation to stability and
what stability does in its relation. to investment and the
O provision of the capital required in this country.
The principal investor, Great Britain, and the United
States of America look at us as a country in which they have
invested, in which they are deeply interested, to whose dovelopmont
they are making a grat contributioh. And that has, I
believe, much to do with the security of Australia. The
security of Australia is not only deor to us who are grown up.
it is even more dear to our children and our grandchildren and
the whole future of a nation, which I am quite determined in my
own mind, is destined to be one of the great and proud, and free,
and responsible, and contributing nations of the world.
That, somewhat tediously expressed at rather more
length than I would hive wished explains why when I come here
to the Commercial Travellers' Association, I fool I am among
people who are at the very grass roots of these groat propositions,
which mean so much to me. 



FI1 3T TRANSCRIPT OF SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES IN BUDGET DEBATE ON
THURSDAY 25TH AUGUST. 1960
I was very interested in what I heard of the speech
of the honorable member for Wills ( Mr. Bryant), and I was glad
that he made a properly impassioned -ppe : l for instruction in
the country. If I may say so, Sir, he needs a little instruction
himself on the financial affairs of Australia. He took the
opportunity to say something that I did not expect ever to hear
from him, and that was the old bromide that if you can do it for
w. r, why cannot you do it for peace? If you can do it for
destruction, why. cannot you do it for instruction?
The honorable gentleman knows perfectly well that you
can do certain things for war, if you raise taxation to wartime
levels, if you control all investment, if you ration food
and supplies generally, and if you go back to all the. controls
that existed in Australia very properly, in the course of the
war. What he must go away and think about is rwhether he is
telling us, in this year of grace, that it is the policy of the
Australian Labour Party to secure enough power to do all those
things once more in time of peace, It is perfectly simple. It
is so simple that even the honorable member for Yarra ( Mr.
Cairns) ought to understand it. If you reproduce the conditions
and the powers, the circumstances and the authorities of war, of
course you can do it. But is the Leader of the Opposition
prepared at the next election or the one after or the one after
that as long as he is sitting there to go to the people and
ask them to authorize the Commonwealth Parliament to impose
income tax running up to 18s 6d. in the to control investment,
to control capital issues, to ration food and other coimmodities,
and to reinstitute all the controls of war? I am sure that he
knows, because he is an intelligent man, that unless he can
reproduce the conditions, he cannot reproduce the results.
Mr. Cairns:-Why do you not put up an intelligent argument?
MR. MENZIES: I uas under the impression that rwhat I had said
was quite intelligent, but I leave it to others to determine
whether it was. My main purpose in this debate, which i shall
not prolong very much
Mr. Hc. rold Holt: It is hardly a debate!
MIt. hiENZIES: I agree with that cojmment. My purpose is to say
something about what I understood to be the case of the Opposition.
I know that for unavoidable reasons, my friend the
Leader of the Opposition cannot be here tonight, but I think I
would be permitted to say that in the course of his speech,
twhich was as remarkable for its omissions for the matters it
dealt with, he seemed to me to put forward four proposals. It
was nothing like a positive speech from a Leader of the
Opposition. The first of his four proposals ras the admirable
suggestion: " Get rid of the Honzies' Government". All I can
say is that, if all the speeches made by Opposition members are
like his, the people will never get rid of the Menzies
Government, except by death. Mind you, that is not only a
probability but a certainty, in due course. In his second
proposal. he said, with a fidelity to his predecessor that I
could no6 but admirc, " We ought to h.. ve the Chifley Government
back again". I said to myself in the best Australian
vernacular, " Too right." The 6pposition is always living in
the past, never living in the present. That is what is-wrong
with the Australian Labour Party. It is practising a dead
philosophy with a dead collection of ideas.
Mr. Ilaylen: Do not repeat yourself,
Mi. MENZIES: That is all right I have to repeat everything
three times to you, for the most elementary reasons. 
0 The third proposal I have heard it at least four
times-is that the right way to deal with the Budget in 1960 is
to alter the Constitution to give more powers of control to the
Commonwealth Parliament. Is that the best contribution that
honorable members opposite can make to a Budget debate?
Mr. Costa: It is the only sensible one!
MR. MENZIES: I am familiar with your views on that. I am also
familiar, as no doubt my friend is, with the long history of
proposals to alter the Constitution. But to come along to
people in 1960 and say, ih. n dealing with the Budget, that at
some time in the future a Ka-thleon Mavournoen promise the
Gonstitution ought to be altered
Mr. Haylen: Do not become sectarian!
MR. M , NZIES: If there was a Scottish proverb about MacTavish, I
would use it. In his fourth proposal, the Leader of the
Opposition said that we must defeat inflation. There I thought
he was on good ground, but he refrained from tolling us how he
would do it. To defeat inflation, to restrain it, to bring it
to a halt is the supreme task of this Parliament.
Mr. Pollard: You have been telling us that for ton long yoars.
MR. MENZIES: Now Roggieo
Mr. Pollard: You are now no further ahead than you woro when you
started.
MR. I. ENZIES: I apologize. Through you, Sir, I want to tell my
old and esteemed friend that I have listened to him with great
paticnce and great mystification fot 20 years.
How does the Opposition propose to defeat inflation?
4o are not told. This is the great task of this Budged, as it
is of all budgets, and it is a very difficult task requiring a
great deal of serious thought and a great deal of close study.
How do defeat inflation while maintaining development? These
are the central problems of our oconomy today. It is a very hard
task and a task that can be solved only with constructive ideas.
In order to deal with that real problem, let us forgot the
unrealities of the Opposition casa if I may so dignify it, and
look at comments of the professional expert critics. , Je
have heard some of them and read some of them, end I want to say
something about them. Having been left la-menting for an
Opposition case, I must cast my net wider and find out what the
critics aresaying elsewhere.'
First, they say that there are no signs of cuts in
Government spending. Those are the very words of one powerful
organ. Hure we have a blissful silence on the Opposition side of
the chamber, because I do not think that any Opposition member
would believe that if his views were put into operation, he
would not increase Governfment spending by millions, or scores of
millions, or indeed, in an exuberant moment, by hundreds of
. millions. The critics say that there are no signs of cuts in
Govrnment spending. I want to remind the House of the facts,
bcause -fa. cts have a lovely intractable quality about them.
-Mr. Cairns: Is that why-you avoid-thcm?
MR'. iENZIES:_-That is why I am about-to-refer to them. Tehonorable
member for Yarra has never had evun a nodding
acquaintance with a fact in his life.
Mr. Curtin: I Don't think you like him'
MR. i. ENZIES: I do not. I think he is deplorable, since you 
ask me. I do not think you are very good, but I like you; that
is the difference.
Mr. Curtin: That will lose me votes at the next election.
MR. MENZIES: I hope so,
What are the facts? Expenditure of capital works and
services in this Budget is actually down on what it was last
year. It has fallen from œ 142,000,000 to œ 139,900,000. That
is not very much, you may say, but it is a fall. It is worth
remembering that at a time when the Commonwealth Government, in
order to help the States to carry out their vastly imoortant
duties in the public sector of capital investment, is doing more
for the States than has ever been done for them before, we have
in fact reduced expenditure on our own capital works and
services. As against that, our payments to the States have
risen by œ 29,000,000. Does any critic here or elsewhere say we
should not have done that?
Mr. Pollard; Only by
MR. MENZIES: I have heard you and many other people. I remember
everything you say with loving care, and I have heard you say
many times that the States ought to have more. Very well, the
payments to the States this year, under an agreement which they
all accepted with great satisfaction are up by œ 29,000,000. I
have mentioned those two matters.
Budget expenditure has risen by œ 89,700,000. Some one
says, " That is a tremondous increase. That shows you are not
controlling Commonwealth expenditure." I remind the committee
of the fact that this year allocations by the Australian Loan
Council for works and housing, every shilling of which will go
to the States, has risen by œ 10,000,000. Moreover, as a result
of the increases provided for in the Budget, expenditure on
social ervices and rupatriation benofits will rise by
œ 10100,000 I have already mentioned an increase of œ 29m. in
payments to the States. The increased cost of social services
at existing rates, apart from all changes proposed for this year,
will be œ 23,000,000. Does anybody suggest that provision should
not have been made for those payments? The increased cost of
repatriation benefits, apart from the increases provided for in
the Budget and to which I havu referred, will be œ 8,100,000.
Does anybod-suggest that we should repudiate our debt charges?
They have risen by œ 3500,000. In addition, according to our
estimato, which may turn out to be somewhat conservative,
expenditure on redemptions will rise by œ 2,600,000. All that
means that of this nominal increase of œ 89,000,000 to which I
have referred, the sum of œ 86,500,000 is in respect of items
which no one in the Parliament or outside it would challenge.
In other words, there has been an increase of œ 3,200,000, When
we set off against that the reduction in expenditure on capital
works, honorable members will see that the actual increase in
Commonwealth expenditure is quite nominal.
As responsible members in this Parliament we should ask
ourselves, " Has any body. any proposals to reduce any of these
items?" If he has, the Treasurer and, if I may say so, I will
be interested to hear them. But nobody has any proposal to offer.
There has boon no hint of one. Therefore, the first charge
against the Budget falls to the ground.
Next, it is said I know this is not what the
Opposition said that the Govarnment, by an ultra-cautious
approach, is retarding expansion. All I need say in reply to
that charge is that, on the facts, it is just silly. I have not
the time to quote all the figures; they are familiar to
honorable members from their reading of the documentso o have
had record housing, record employment, record production, record 
-w
0 4.
average earnings, record national development and record contributions
by the Commonwealth in the field of education.
Mr. Pollard: And record inflation.
MR. MENZIES: To say that we are retarding expansion is to nake
a statement which anybody who cares to go anywhere in Australia
and look about then will see is contradicted.
The third charge against the Governmnt is that we
have inflation. That is true. It is referred to by the
Opposition annually during the Budget debate. But I ha. ve never
known the Opposition to make a single proposal calculated to
retard it.
Mr. Cairns: You never deal with our case.
MR. MENZIES: How can I deal with a non-existent case? You
have no case. I am flattering you by even pretending to disnuss
it. I adrit, Mr. Chairman, that we have an inflationary movemont.
But we as the Government have a policy which has been stated and
been acted upon with precision. It is unfortunate that I should
have to repeat it. First, we adopted the principle that there
should be some sensible restraint not injustice in wage
costs. The Opposition has bitterly attacked us for that
approach. But the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission has agree with us. Secondly, we sai. d we would remove
import licensing in j~ ubstance. We said that because we wanted
the ordinary man and woman in Australia, rich or poor, to be
able to have more goods and to buy more services so that the
inflationary pressures night be reduced. What does the
Opposition say about it? So far as I h. ve understood honorable
members opposite, they have been opposed to getting rid of
import licensing. I thought for a while that the reason why they
wanted import licensing rete. nod was that they regarded it as a
protective measure for industry.
Mr. Peters: Is that why the Govcrnent implemented it?
MR. MENZIES: I seen to recall that the honorable member has
spoken on that subject. There is nothing like dealing with the
facts of life. When import licensing goes, that is a fact of
life. Therefore, I should have expected the Opposition to say,
" Let us do something that will prevent Australian secondary
industry from being injured by the inflow of imports."
Mr. Peters: Huar, hear!
MR. MENZIES: I an very glad that my honorable friend should
say " Hoar, hear". But when ny colleague the Minister for Trade
( Mr. McEwen) introduced a bill to provide for urgent temporary
import duties so that local industries should not be damaged by
a flood of inports, the entire Opposition in this Parliament
perhaps inadvertently I do not know voted against it.
Mr. Reynolds: You get close to the truth sometimes.
MR. MENZIES: The honorable member ought to think about these
matters. The fact is that the Opposition voted against the
giving of power to impose temporary import duties to protect
Australian industries while the Tariff Board conducted its full
and final inquiry. Honorable members opposite may go away and
laugh that off at their leisure. The fact is that they wanted
import licensing, but when they could not got it they could not
have cared less about what happened to Australian manufacturing
industries. They have made that peifectly clear.
Our third item of policy was that we would support
measures designed to avoid excess bank and credit liquidity. I
do not know -hat is the attitude of the Opposition on this 
matter. Everyone who have a rudimentary knowledge of how to
deal with inflationary process knows that the restraint of
credit is one of the great things that a central bank ought to
be engaged in. But we do not know what the Opposition thinks
about this matter.
Mr. Haylen: What about hire purchase?
MR. MENZIES: Honorable members opposite mumble about hire
purchase, but none of their colleagues in any State Labour
Governmont seems to do a thing about it. Fourthly and this
is the hub of the matter we said, " We will avoid deficit
finance in 1960-61." Ie sid that, many months back, and this
Budget is our performance of it. Does any responsible person
challenge the idea that we ought not to have a deficitthis year?
Is there a solitary sc-. l I use the words loosely on the
Opposition side who believes that we ought to be budgeting for
a deficit at a time of inflationary pressure? Is there a
single writer of any responsibility anywhere who says that we
should? Or course not, and, Sir, if nobody can challenge that
proposition, let the Opposition face up to it. How does it
propose to balance the Budget? Let us assume that it believes
that the Budget ought to be balanced and that we ought not to be
in deficit: How does it propose to do it? Not one word have
we heard from the Opposition
Mr. Bryant: Whose budget is it?
MR. MENZIES: It is ours.
Mr. Bryant: Well do something about it, then. ' Jo are barren of
ideas.
MR. MENZIES: The honorable member says that the Opposition is
barren of ideas. That is a perfect description of the
difference between these two parties. Does the Opposition say,
" Yes, we are going to balance the Budget by reducing expenditure"?
Certainly not because, on its own showing, it would
increase the Budget out of hand. On this great problem, the
problem that we have tackled in this Budget, the Labour Party
is futile and silent. Having mentioned these four points I just
say this, before I conclude: I am sure members opposite say
some of them have hinted at it that social services are
neglected Mr. Peters: So they are.
MR. MENZIES: Yes, I knew the honorable member would say that.
He is my over present help in time of trouble. I hope he never
leaves his seat. I could not live without him.
Mr. Clyde Cameron: Uhat about Lord Ward?
MiR. MENZIES: No, there is no risk of that, I hope. But, Sir,
think of it; pensions, medical benefits, hospital benefits,
child endowment all those things social services, about
which honorable members opposite talk ccasionally and
occasionally incessantly where we came in, just as they wont
out totalled œ 92n. and in this Budget totalled œ 330n.
Mro No wonder, with you in charge.
MR. MENZIES: I know I am going to have some clever fellow say,
" Yes, the value of money has fallen". Y; s, if we take either
the series index or the new consumer index figure which
has been evolved we find that there has been, over that period
of tine, an increase in the index figure from roughly 60 to
roughly 120. In other words, there is a change to that extent,
but that is only a faction of th-increase in social services
from œ 92n. to œ 330n. But having mentioned those global figures,
I 
0 6.
lot me say this; honorable mombors opposite have boon fairly
silont on the change that is emerging in the nemoas tost for
property and income. I wonder if they thoroughly' realize that
this change in the moans tost will give some benefit, and in
many cases a large benefit to 120,000 people in this country:
and therefore, Sir, broadly the Budget is aptly fashioned and
stands, if not unassailed, at least unbroken by his arguments.
It is aptly fashioned to slow down and to arrest inflation and
to maintain development; those two things being things that
have to live togetho-r presenting the greatest possible
difficulties of adjustment; and, above all things, to provide
social justice for 10,000,000 people in what I believe is one
of the great countries of the world. 


Ladies and gentlemen,
&nbsp;It is a sort of conjunction of the planets that goes on here. First of all, I used to be ordered along because I was told that it was to be the nearest Sunday to the outbreak of the Second World War, with which Dr. Benson has always had some impression I had some connection. And then it turned out it was " Father's Day". Then, of course, it turned out that for one reason or another it was the day of the year on which Dr. Irving Benson a man who, but for the wisdom of the Almighty would have been the Commissioner of Taxation ( Laughter) performs his annual extraction. And so it is a happy conjunction of the planets.
&nbsp;He said something about " Father's Day". I don't want to occupy any of your time, or mine, unnecessarily bt I have always thought that the great story about father and son was the one that was told by Mark Twain many of you will remember it who said, " You know, when I was a boy of sixteen I used to discuss things with my father. He was very, very ill-informed. He appeared to have everything all wrong. I had to put him right continuously. But by the time I was twenty one, do you know, I found it remarkable to discover how much the old man had learned in five years". ( Laughter) That is my favourite story on that topic. And if you remind me, over the next 26 years Dr. Benson, I will remember not to tell it.
In a rash moment I said to my old friend, Dr. Benson, that I would talk on not the future of civilization that is beyond me but the Test of Civilization. And as the right way to test evidence is to put questions to witnesses, and get them answered, then put them together as best one can, I am going to make my little talk to you this afternoon by putting questions to myself, and answering them myself, which is a remarkable advantage, believe me, for any man putting questions.
Just a few questions that might help us to test wrhether this is the great golden century of civilization; or whether it isn't. And in order to put questions, and answer them, it is necessary, I think, to get rid of a few illusions.
&nbsp;It is quite true that we know an enormous number of things that our grandfathers had never heard of. It is quite true thet instead of having the horse and buggy brought out and clip-clopping along a country road, you may now be hurtled along in a motor car. It is quite true that instead of going by a train frori one city in Australia to another, you may now get into an aircraft and be hurtled through the sky, It is quite true that instead of being compelled to listen to another man's voice only when you are with him, you may now be compelled to listen to him at a distance of ten thousand miles over a loudspeaker from a wireless set. It is quite true that there are some people whose faces you don't like, but if you have a television in your house you will see them whether you like them or not, And these are all signs, i am told, of civilization. Well, of course they are nothing of the kind. I think we ought to get clear in our minds as to what civilization is.
&nbsp;First of all: Is knowledge increasing? Now the answer to that must be " Yes, knowledge is increasing". Even the least informed among us today, has a greater stock of actual knowledge in his head than the most highly trained man perhaps, of three hundred years ago. Knowledge is increasing.
Is scientific skill growing? Of course it is. The scientists appear to be able to take almost any physical problem and solve it and produce marvels out of the sky, or out of the earth. Scientific knowledge in this century, scientific skill in this century, has boon at one and the same time the pride and terror of the world. Never, in the history of the physical sciences has any century seen what this one has seen. And therefore, yes, knowledge has increased, scientific skill has increased.
&nbsp;Is material prosperity rising? Of course it is. We may argue about the distribution of wealth, the distribution of prosperity, but taking it in the broad, nobody denies that the twentieth century, and this part of it, for countries like our own, has demonstrated a high advance in material living standards. And if that is civilization, then that is the third great step.
&nbsp;Is there a growing acceptance of responsibility, of social responsibility, by organised Government? And the answer to that is: " Of course there is". It is very hard to remember indeed very few of us would be able to, even by a singular effort a time when nobody in Australia had thought fit to instruct any Government in Australia to have a system of pensions at all. I first became Prime Minister, which to some of the older among you is a date that you may remember, back in April of 1939. Later on I was put out to grass, as you may remember, very sensibly, for a number of years. But I remember at that tine, April, 1939, I was not only Prime Minister but I was Treasurer. Now that, I understand, is a very bad thing to be: you know, you mustn't hold two jobs. ( Laughter) And I don't: I always like holding three. But I remember on that occasion introducing a Budget a very small Budget compared to the enormous figures that we talk about today. But I was remembering the other day that in that year after a number of years in which the social responsibility of Governments had grown in acceptance, the Social Services component in the Budget was œ 17 million! And the total Budget was about œ 100 million. Today, such is the growth and this is not a matter of Party politics at all of the acceptance of social responsibility by organisod Government, that this year in the Budget the Social Services component is not œ 17 million but œ 330 million' ( Applause) And therefore so far as Governments are concerned you may say that there is an acceptance of neighbourly responsibility, an acceptance on behalf of the rest of the people of Australia which is remarkable.
Is there an increasing sense of international responsibility? And I think again the answer is " Yes." I don't romebeor, do you, twenty years ago hearing anything in particular about granting aid to other countries. Nobody had ever heard of the Colombo Plan. Nobody had ever heard of Marshall Aid. Nobody had ever heard of this enormous programme of grants in aid conducted by the United States of America. On the whole wo allowed countries to look after themselves, or, as the Scots would say, ' to dree their own weerd". And they went along: if they were poor well, they were poor, and they could do but little. And if they were rich well, they wore rich and they could do a great deal. But they weren't our business: ' charity begins at hono'. All those frightful proverbs were prevalent. But today there is an acceptance, internationally, of responsibility for other countries which I think is one of the great, great ood things of this century.
Now therefore, all those questions I've put to myself and perhaps to you, since you've been listening in they are all questions, the answer to which marks some advance in civilization in our century.
But there are other questions that we sometimes conveniently put on one side and until the day cones when we can answer these in the sane happy sense, we mustn't be too dogatic about the advance of civilization.
&nbsp;Do we understand human beings and humanity better than our grandparents did? Do we? I know, Sir, it is the age of psychologists and people like to tallk out the psychological aspects of this or that you know. But do we understand human beings and understand huanity better than our grandparents did? It is a question worth thinking about. We can't say that we understand hunan beings better merely because we find so much more money to help them. That is not a matter of understanding; that mray be a matter of accepting, willingly or unwillingly, an obligation. But do we understand thoe as people? Because if we do understand then as people we will be a lot more tolerant than we are about other people; we will be a lot rore tolerant than we are about other nations. Do we consciously try to find out what is going on in the other person's mind: what exists in his history, in his tradition, in his feeling? Or are we a little too tempted to say, " Look at the marvellous things that we have done; why can't these people do them? All they have to do is to follow our example. Let them be like mo" like that song in the show, ' Why can't a woman be like a man' ( Laughter) ' Why can't she be like no?' Do you remember? Yes. Is ii; permissible to refer to the theatre? Yes. ( Laughter)
&nbsp;In the next place: Do we love our neighbour? This is perhaps the great question, the great test of civilization. Quite true this country of ours spends millions of pounds every year, literally millions of pounds, in giving help to under-developed countries under the Colombo Plan and under the SEATO Treaty under whatever it may be. And we do it. And the United States of America does this thing on a fabulous scale. But do we do it because we love our neighbour? Or do we do it for other reasons? I'll just come back to that in a minute or two, because that is a tremendously important thing.
&nbsp;Again, Sir: Are the Nations and the peoples of then less cruel than they wore a hundred years ago? This again is a great test of civilization. You would have to go back far, far more years than 100 years to discover parallels for the cruelties imposed by nations and peoples upon each other in our own life time. Never wore the wars more dreadful, more cruel; never were there practices in war so terrible to contemplate for humanity as in the lifetime of most of us in this room. The savage is never too far from the surface. Could we honestly say that the nations and the peoples of the world are less cruel than they were a hundred years ago?
&nbsp;There is something to be thought about in all these matters. Civilization is balance: we must balance the good with the ill; we -must identify the ill; we must work strenuously to cast out the ill before we can say that civilization is on the march to a state of almost perfection.
Now I said something to you just now about international aid. It is astonishing you know: I go around the world and I see people of great eminence in their own countries who will say, " I can't understand it: we have provided enormous suns of money for other nations, but we don't appear to got any thanks for it". And I've always said to them, " Well that is the last thing you : must expect". A man who does good because he expects thanks is committing a cardinal error. He must do good because he genuinely believes that it is a thing to do. It is very agreeable if somebody says " Thank you", but it doesn’t always happen.
There is a good deal of resentment in the world, and among individuals, about being under an obligation: " Why should he be able to have that money when I don't?". You know it is the most simple thing in the world. International aid can be given this great phenomenon of our time as a condescending charity. I am sure it is never designed in that sense, but if anybody gets the idea that it is a condescending charity, then it fails. It may be destined to buy goodwill: ' Well if we help country or country B or country C that country will think well of us and be friendly to us.' That, I think, is a false standard You can't buy goodwill. You can buy a sense of obligation momentarily but you can't buy goodwill. Goodwill is something that comes from the heart and is not purchased through the pocket.
Maybe that some international aid is given because it is thought to be good business, Let us face up to it: there are a lot of people in the world who think that it is; and that if some particular commodity is given to another country and it is manufactured by a particular manufacturer, it is good business, it is good advertising.
All of those motives, to the extent to which they exist in international aid are intelligible, but they have no relation whatever to civilization. What &nbsp;has relation to civilization is this: Are those great outpourings of wealth and of help in the world the expressions of a true understanding of what is involved in being your ' brother's keeper'? Are they based on an understanding to take two examples an understanding that in the world today and it is more true now than it ever was before the great source of irritation, the great basic conflict is between the " haves" and " have nots". If y., u have the " haves" on the one side and the " have nots" on the other, in a state of conflict, in a state of mutual envy, then you have all the seeds of bitterness. In our own country we have, by the wisdom of generations, reduced this conflict. We have reduced the gap considerably between the " haves" and the " have nots". But in the international world it remains the most tremendous problem.
May I just give you one illustration of that because I think it is of considerable importance. I said something about it only two or three months back at the University of Harvard in America where I was speaking at their Commencement Day.
Divide the world into the advanced industrial countries of which Australia is one, and the unadvanced, under-developed countries in which there are primary industries, primitive forms of production, very little technical skill, no institutions of technology. Well, obviously, the advanced country is richer and better off, and its people are. But as the years go by the tendency is for the advanced country, technologically, to advance at an increasing rate, because technical skill builds on itself and it , goes up, and up. and up. I mean a country like Australia given even circumstances will, in another fifteen years' time, have standards that we don't think of today, because immense technical skill produces a rapidly increasing rate of climb in productivity and in the production of wealth. But if another country has hardly any technique, if it still has oxen in the fields, if it still has simple homo industries, its rate of improvement is very much slower, , and you see what that means my friends? It means that every year the gap between the " haves" and the " have nets" in the world is increasing, not narrowing: the rich nations becoming richer and more productive and the poor ones slowly advancing, but at so much less a rate that the gap between then grows all the time. This is the vital problem of the world. I don't know that many people direct much attention to it and I've hardly seen a word written about it. But this is the key problem of the world. And whether we are to regard ourselves as a civilized world will depend upon whether we can solve it. And of course we can't solve it unless we wake up to the fact that for the advanced nations of the world to look at the unadvanced ones and to say, " You may have our spare change" is not good enough: that will never do it. What we will need to do will be to make provision to a point of sacrifice for the under-developed countries in the world, because if we don't we shall find an enormous state of disorder and more and more hatred.
You can’t establish peace in the world just by passing resolutions, or even by making disarmament agreements. You can establish peace only when you persuade the countries and peoples of the world that they live in a state of justice, that they have, each of thon, a fair deal.
Now, Sir, my tine is practically out. But before I finish may I put one other natter to you?
When we read our papers, when we listen in, we hear and discover a great deal about the newly emerging nations of the world Africa is full of them. We’ve had Ghana; we're just having Nigeria; we can look right across the Central African Federation in a state of sore disagreement - &nbsp;we can look at Kenya and Tanganyika and all this kind of thing. You nay run right around the world of Africa and Asia and there are new nations coning to birth. " Political independence" is the cry. And it is easy to talk about political independence: self-government is a nice mouth-filling phrase and if some people use it enough it is a great substitute for thought. Whereas the truth is that to give a country political independence when it is in a state of economic turmoil and incapable of sustaining its own life, is to present it with a cup of poison. ( Applause)
The great thing that the statesmenn of the world have to work on is that as they bring every nation to a point of political independence, so, side by side with that, must they build up its capacity for self-government, its economic strength, its reserves of administrative capacity. This is what wo, and I ac proud of it, are doing in Now Guinea and Papua. This is what was not done in the Belgian Cu. ngo. This is what was done in British Malaya. It is essential that in addition to fine words we should do a little bit of fine thinking; that we shouldn't satisfy ourselves that we are great civilized democrats because we believe in political independence and self-government. It is a much harder task to help to make all countries fit to enjoy it. We will never be able to say that we live in the golden age of civilization until we have not only made up our minds that we will help our neighbour, but have gone to some pains to discover, in truth, what it is that our neighbour needs. ( Applause)
&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT THE OPENING OF LEGACY lWEEK ON MONDAY,
SEPTEMBER, 1960
Mr. President:
I think it is a very remarkable honour to be invited
by you to open " Legacy deek" a great honour. But in one
sense a very easy thing to do because I think most people now
in Australia I would have hoped all people in Australia
regard Legacy as one of the finest things in our r. oderrp history
in Australia. It seems almost fantastic to me to look at the
Notice Paper and to see that it was founded only in 1923 by
your old friend and my old friend, Stan Savige one of the
finest Australians of our time and in 37 years it has
established itself as something, I think, quite unique.
We are all prutty good when we are in the right mood
at explaining to other people what our rights are, what would
be done for us if only justice wore done. I must not make an
exception of myself in that connection, because if justice were
done to me, I probably wouldn't be horo, at any rate in my
present capacity; but it is true that most people who give
service to their country create intheir country very properly,
a aense of obligation, and occasionally may be disposed to
emphasise the nature of that obligation. That is inevitable,
quite understandable, and indeed, in a groat number of cases,
most proper. But this organisation is unique an organisation
of people who have, on the basis of their service to their
country, accepted and poeformed addicional obligations whieb
they regard as arising out of that service. That is a very
remarkable thing, and all of us who have watched the work of
Legacy through all those years never ooaso to be thankful that
such a spirit should have found embodiment in-so many people.
A legacy. dhen one talks of a legacy a little
hopefully occasionally, it indicates an idea that we are going
to get something in cash or in kind. e are going to be at the
receiving end. Most people think of a legacy in that sense.
There are not too many people who think of a legacy in another
sense. It is a cant phrase to talk about certain evil things
in the world being a legacy of wi~ r. t has been left to this
body, almost alone in the world as far as I know, to regard this
legacy of war as something which imposes upon it a great trust
for other people, and an obligation to do things for other
people. This is a brilliant use of this word, and it is a very
fine thing for thousands and thousands of people that you
should have thought of it in that way.
e live in a time when people look to Governments
more and more for almost everything and because people elect
Members of Parliament, Members of Parliaent are under an
obligation to give effect broadly to lha the poople wanc; and
more and more over the course of rc ont years in Aus uralia
the last 20 years in Australia the position has boon that
Governments are expected to perform more things, and do, in
fact, perform more.
I was reminding another audience yesterday that when
I was first Prime Minister, which, believe it or not, isover
years ago now, the total Social Services bill of the
Commonwealth was œ 17m. and this year it is œ 330m. Now this,
of course, indicates how more and more Governments are to make
provision for people in the country who need it. But the thing
to remember is that Governments can act only in the broad.
They, so to speak, deal with human problems by vholosale; they
establish a rate of pension; they establish statutory
conditions for a man or a woman getting that pension. These
rules have to be hard rules, precise rules, because you can't 
have Social Services paid out by the Govorncont according to
the whim of individuals at any point of distribution and,
therefore, you have the broad swoop of the law. Injustices
nust happen in individual cases, but that is unavoidable if you
are going to have a body of rules laid down which will, in the
broad, do the highest comron measure of justice that Parliament
thinks appropriate, You are not in the wholesale business. You are doing
something which no Government could do if it had all the
goodwill in the world and all the money in the world. You are
dealing with people, not as icembers of a group, not as one
person out of a million who must be dealt with according to
the rules that apply to the rest of the million: you are
dealing with individual cases with humanity with knowledge,
with a capacity to select, with a capacity to understand how to
deal with this individual widow or this individual child: ho-"
to do something which will help this particular boy or this
particular girl to be educated, to be trained for something.
This is a tremendously human task, and it can be dealt with only
by looking at individuals and dealing with them on their merits
so that you don't have to say, and you have no desire to say,
" Well, there is a broad rule here and it doesn't fit this case,
but it is just too bad. iJe have the broad rule and it is
unalterable." The groat essence of Legacy, to my mind, as a man
watching its work, has been its capacity for selecting the
individual for individual treatment, and this is something that
no Government department can , o.
I an not among those who criticise Civil Servants.
There are an awful lot of thoe about, and no doubt a fair number
of you here today are, or have been, Civil Servants. The Civil
Service in this country consists of an honourable body of men,
of a level of capacity not inferior to the loval of capacity in
other undertakirn. Lot us not be too quick on the draw when we
are dealing with the Civil Service; but the Civil Service can't
do what you are doing. It must act under the rule. It iust act
according to the book, and if it didn't act according to the
book we would be in strife. But you are able to do the things
that the Civil Service can't do.
We have many departlments, if you will allow me to
repeat something that I have said before today. There is no
" Departient of Loving Kindness", and there cannot be " Minister
for Loving Kindness". " Permanent Secretary to the Department
of Loving Kindness". Dear mel The first thing that would
happen would be that someone iown the line would say: " But look,
I must have the book of the words. What are the rules of loving
kindness?" and you let us -et to work defining the rules of
loving kindness: we'll have a magnificent body of rules, but
there won't be any loving kindness. This is something that no
Government can provide for you. As individuals we're really
quite a soft-hearted lot. You'd be surprised. But wo cannot
dispense loving kindness as you dispense a pension or a benefit
under some Act of Parliament. And therefore, Sir, I am a groat
believer in Legacy. I think it is quite unique. I hope that
in this Appeal that is going out this week, you will raise at
least twice as much as in your wildest dreams you hope to, And,
indeed, if it becomes adequately known in Australia that this
Appeal is on, I want to tell you that I believe there will be a
response in the hearts and minds of people that will astonish
you. I wouldn't be too modest in what you are looking for;
wouldn't be too modest in what you tell people about what your
work is, because this is the groetest humane operation conducted
by individual private citizens, nost of whom. might say quite
well: J1ll, I've done my share. I've done my tour of
duty. Let somebody else look after this. 
3.
after this. Let the Governmuont look after this. This is a
magnificent hoart-waring thing.
Now, the only other thing I want to say to you,
though it nay take a little time, is this: Australia is one
country. It is in its way a sort of microcosm of the world.
What happens here is happening in oe form or anotho-in mot
other countries. What you are doing here the riatter that 1
have beeoon talking about provides. i ny opinion, a koy to
some of the great problnems now current in the world Ill tell
you one, because we discussed it a great d'al when I was in
London at the Prime Minis hors! Conforence,
I can go back to a time when we sat thoere five of
us Great Britain, Canad, South Africa, new Zhaiand, ! AustYrlit
We didn't disagroee about very uch; we had an agreCable series
of talks with each other. All that now, numerically, is change.
4e havencw nations, formorly colonies, becoming : eCobors of the
Comnonwealth every year. Ghana appearod for the first time
three years back. . ost Indies well on the way. TigerLa
will certainly be at the next Prire Ministors' Conferenco,
There are discussions going on u Malt. You know all th
discussion that's going on about thc Contral African Eopublic
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland on which the Monckton Coru: iission has
just booeen sitting? lie have Kenya; Tanganyi'ka, i-have the
vexed probln of the future of South Africa, should South
Africa become a Republic. You can hardly set a li. mit to the
dovelopont that is going on in the world a pol--cll
development. It's soothing that nobody visualisod even five
years ago, the speed with which now nati:&gt; ns are coming irntu
existence. There night very well bc 20 or 24 seeking _ oDborshi-p
of the Cor. onwealth or holding emonborship of the Commonwealth
inside five yors fron now. Now this mons that we are living
nor and moro in a different w'rorld, The tiy'. e has ) noe by Then
we can just look at South Africa at Africa, rathor, to use
the entire continent when we could talk about Africa and say:
" Oh, yes," a feiw cliches you know " Darkest Africa", or " I
wonder what is going on in the Congo", or " How is tl-he diamond
industry?" and all this kind of thing. The fact is that in
these years, and it will continue country after c -untry, sono
of the very nanes of which we will not have heard before, are
coming into existence and, of course, one of the facts of life
is that when an agitation bodins in any country for selfgovernont
and it is powerfully led, led with fire and
imagination by some leaders, it gro'rs. It grows on itself. 7t
accelerates its spcod and all the chancos are that the country
i-ight find itself with political indopendonce ' hen econ-1omically
it cannot survive off its own resourcos or its efffno rts,
This is a groeat problem of our tine intornationally how we
are to act so that political indepondenco with all its
implications for friendship . nd alliance aroundu the world can
be nmatched with econonic indopondence, with a gonuine capacity
to survive out of local resources. Woll, some time ag. o we had
a shot at this. It ought to be romombored here roith so:.: e pride that
just as Australia wias the c untry that croated Loeacy, so
Australia was the country that pro.. ated the Colombo Plan, and
we have at all tines booeen active contributors to the Colonbo
Plan not just to mTake gPood follows of ourselves. You don't
do your work in Legacy to mnake good follows of yoursolves: you
do it with both eyes on the end result, the end result being
the helping of somobody to live a fuller and freer and better
life. And similarly, when uw) ive aid internationally we -uss
be vastly careful to soee we are not doing it to be just " good
follows", not doing it just to advertiso some goods, hut that
we are doing it because wo realise that a rise in the econom! ic
standards, a rise in the standard of living of these neol,
I 
countries that have cone to political indopondenco is the one
thing that will not only do justirc to their people, but enable
then to maintain their independence and to resist the onset of
the strange, nad doctrines of Communism. The best defence
for them against Conmunism, against any other form of w'hat I
will call disorder, is that they should develop their own
strength, that their people should look forward to a rising
standard of living, generation by generation.
Now that imposos a tromndous obligation on the
nations of tho free world, just as you said, and this is all in
parallel. It isn't' sufficient to have won a war or helped to
win one. It is now our obligation to help others who have
suffered in consequence of that; so it isn't sufficient for
the nations of the free -world to say: " Well, we won this war.
We nay now attend to our own business. Just too bad if you
people down there or out there are not doing too well, but
charity begins at hore: o we're going to build up our own
strengths we're going to go around telling each other how high
our standard of living is." It is very nice to be able to do
that, but there will be no peace for the world if more than half
the people of the world are living under circu-istances i; which
the glories of political independence have become croplotol:
Dead Sea fruit-have proved to be nothing but a misleading
circumstance because in their own homos and in their own lives
freedom is not accompanied by a rise in the standards of life,
Now, the United States of Al'erica has, I thin':,
faced up to this responsibility magnificontly not to get
thanks, because she hasn't had many thanks; not to buy some
smile from sonebody, because you can't buy that kind of thing
but because I genuinely believe that the people of the United
States who pay the piper for these enormous grants in aid, have
realised that the power which is theirs after e. merging
victoriously from two wars must be accompanied by a sense of
responsibility. They, theseolves, have accepted that particular
legacy of war in the sense in which I used it in relation to you
earlier; but it doesn't end there,
Wet must all do more and moreo: won't always be very
popular. Thereo's always somobody who's able to say: 1" Well,
look at the m,. ney you spend on Colombo Aid. Look at the money
you spend in relation t. the other powers of South-east Asian
Treaty Organisation. Look at tohe oney that you lay out on the
various Agencies of the United Nations. ! hy, if we didn't
spend that abroad, think of the houses we could put up in our
own country: think of all the slum clearances that could be
facilitated. Let us look after ourselves." If every nation in
the world, which is now a free nation, decided that from now on
it would look after itself each for itself and the devil take
the hindnost the world would be tumbling into the most
frightful catastrophe of history before we're 20 years older.
The whole condition of survival is that the new nations should
be made to feel that they have our sympathCtic, individual
interest, our desire to help, our desire to build them up,
There's one aspect of that which I have mentioned once before
publicly, but which I propose to mention wherever I have the
opportunity, and it's this: It was pointed out rather
yaphically at the last Prime Ministers' Conference by Mr. Nehru
himself in a very thoughtful speech. After all, if there's
one man in the world who can speak about countries a. chieving
independence and about their probles, it is hru himself,
with this enormous country of his own full of economic problems,
and, of course, now with intornational problems of a rather
unforeseen kind; but he pointed this out, and it bit itself
into my mind. We talk about this country being one of the " haves"
and that country being one of the " have nots". You reuember
that before this last war there used to be great discussions 
going on Jtbout the atti~ udo of Germ.-an.-because wo had coLonics
and Gormany didn't havo thorn to the sa-1mo extent thoi " haves" T
and tho " have nots" a: i'ld thero rust a conflict botwoon
thorn1, just as it's said thoro must arr. ays bo a co,-nflict b) ctwcon
tho rich and thopoor; Tu'his ., ivo: 3 risc to bittornos-s and to
hostilitics. 4ll there's a. let ofl -ruth in it, b, t the
ironical position zoday . s t'ut thi: last war ;. io KL,. vo
soon a most tremelndous to,., amioal improve::-. nt
Whoevor thought when thJ. s a e tl-at cep: r: 2c
knocking tho moo,. n about vith__ 0 ' s WhJ! 3Covo
thought that thoro would be vastu cerJvatiti-.: on V irsatellitos
into orbit alound Th o , arx.( that r: . ortt in
few yoars tiro or pe:, rhaps earlier hum., an bei-ng.-, s
taking obsorvations fromi those
Tho wonders of physical sco nco hae 1, vilod to
tho world more in the last ten years in term,. s ci Cp-, po2 ication
than in any other period of hur. ian history and tho ,-oat industrial
powers Unitod States of iAme1rica, GroaLt Britain,
Australia, because wo aro, ran tc, iman, a consi'lerabile
industrial power with consideorable ros ourcos of scientific
skill and of tochnology theso nation-s will progross as the
rosult of thtose th2. ngs at lan ono-,: mous__' y rapid rate. Wo' , o only
a-t the bo., innin g ofL it, but ,-ou take -; ho United States o::
An--orica: you can't have 180,000,000 -cop-l with ta Jir
resources of trainod scienit sts, 1,1it!_ geius ' or
production, for engineering prdctc -' ou c1 tK
nation like that without seeing thadu 11" ls P* 1od it-s
wealth, its standards of livin a: aou gcin7; u~ + o k1cer
increasing at 2 per-cent a yoar r;. re a.-. j.* i,. h-, xyo-ica1 T" OeSJOl
They'll beg in to increase by t11._ s3 u-~ Oeforo
knujw whore we are because of the enorm._ ous Ji:: pact, 1. Of dc7oo
cal resources and imaprovemeint. Iv1 yu go ' o 11i-. gria or 1hana,
oIc-or Tanganyika, if they cui-e a IonF into ine 1re,
they ' Jon' t have these technmical ) LUI. cces -a rie'e anro of
trained rmon scientificanlly or tech i:. cally, the Llost rud-ientary
fo.-rms of equipmDent as com_-paLrd the technological
c-) untrie-s and the result is tha,-t th---y wrill ad,. vance even
left to them-selves they will advance -but they will advance
only a little bit Lat a ti-, osat the best by aritihnetical
progression; certainly not b-&amp; g om, otricai progression0 And
the result of that is tha,, t ues the rest of the world does
something. ab-u it h a, beIe n tose countries and the
advanced countrios wJil3 ro-\ 4 eryc I thnink iti iS a ver
striking consideration, but i" rour rate of lmrjeotin tiie
free w,-orld is like-. that and theirs isLike th: it s ta-nLs to
reason thtat the g; ap between the thaves nd the have' n ill
become wider and w,. ider, and. as a) 4-of that a loj--f these
countries will be ter~ rmted ' c ad: Dpt" alien ideoas Ond ' ru-L
themiselves int, rbit around the--iroLng idea. o,,-LecaP. õ lanct.
ThiS is a mttor ) f gr--ave considera tion for the-.
world and, consequently. I bolie j, tr: a wero not ju," St to D
along, saying-" Ill, we're Jluing ovthn. It is L_ reasonable
minimum. Charity beg-ins at hom. W could spend this nmoney
with reat advantagec inside our ownm c-, untry. 1"
You g ont-cicon don~ t honour, t-he name f Le; cy by doing
as little as you can. You honour it by d gaF; imuch as you
can. The whole of the Leg-acy'rvmn is 1&gt; ased iion-: n
something, without technical obi nat -ll, Join-sc inething
voluntarily, doing something.-bocax&gt;, 3 you re,, alise J.. r. u treme-,. ndous
individual purposes to be served. ISrid in the same my we1, the
nations of the free world who enj ov -i; rosperity, who can see in
front of us a long vista of .1ranatildly iniproving. P stuamdards
rmust turn aside from time, to tim~ e end,' have a loc-,-k tat ou-.
neighbour, thaou:-h the neighbour T-ay ic: fi-o thousanil miles
away, adsay.-I". W 1ht about h~ im? Is ha crigaong" too? 
6.
Couldn't we take just a little less of the surplus of our o: n
comparative wealth in order to onablo him to devclop those
technical matters in particular i. n his own country, w;' hich will
enable him to live in a country that is frIc, but not only
self-governing, but self-supporting and proud and independet? 12
Now, Sir, that sounds sut. riciousy lb n sornion.
but if you invite no to coie to Loe.,. acy you proh.. de r2Qmw ith
text of the highest magnificncc c-n\ Prosbyt rian Can bo
presented with a text wifthou-cin tinlec tUivttijn ,, y up to
preach a serr., on. t 



-T EMBARGO: Not for publicaticn or broadcast before 7.10 p. m.
Tuesday, 6th September, 1960. P. M. no. 2/ 1960
BROADCAST BY PRIME MINISTER AND ACTING
TREASURER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, C. H.,
ON TUESDAY. 6TH SEPTEMBER. l96
Good Evening! Tomorrow, 7th September, the Commonwealth will offer
to the public three separate loans.
In one, we will be seeking to raise œ 30 million in
cash towards the Loan Council borrowing programme for this
financial year. Under this loan, there will be a choice of
three securities. Next, a new series of Special Bonds will be offered.
The rates of return on this series will be somewhat higher than
those of the earlier series and, as in them, the new Bonds will
have the attractive features that, after the first interest
date, the bonds can be cashed on one month's notice and the
amount to be obtained on encashment will increase at intervals
through the life of the bond.
Thirdly, we are offering for conversion two earlier
loans which mature on 15th September and 15th October respectively;-.
TIke-securities can be converted either into the new
securities offered in the general cash loan, or into the new
series of Special Bonds.
Perhaps I should say a word or two as to why we are
again this year seeking to raise l'rge amounts of loan money for
public works. In the last financial year, the total expenditure
on pub] ic works in Australia was œ 584 million, which was about
million greater than expenditure on uorks in the previous
year. The total must continue to grow for the simple reason
that our country is growing. Let me remind you of some facts
that show how the need for public facilities and services is
continually on the increase.
* During the current five years to the end of 1960/ 61
we will probably have added 1,100, CO0 people to our numbers.
0Within that total there will have been an increase of
some 450,0) 0 children under the age of 16 the school population
in other words. I look at the schedule of public works
and see that capital expenditure on schools and other educational
public buildings was last year œ 40 million, an increase of
just 100 per cent over the five years.
I look at another item the provision for supply of
electricity. The total spent last year was fœ 123 million. The
demand for electricity for domestic purposes, industry and
transport is growing at something like 9 per cent per year.
I see that expenditure on roads and streets was
something over œ 120 million. But then I also see that the
number of motor vehicles registered in Australia has increased
over five years by 580,0OO or 27 per cent. Small wonder that
there is a great and increasing demand for money to spend on
roads and streets. And so it is with almost every item in the
long list post office, railways, water supply and sewerage,
ports and harbours and so on.
We cannot raise all the funds we require for these
capital works by loans either here or overseas, but -e raise as
much as we can and it is entirely sound policy that we should
do so, because the benefits that will accrue to the community
will be spread over many years. 
-4k 2.
On the other hand, thn loans we float offer to the
public good, sound secure and quite remunerative investment.
Equally, it helps the Government, and the community,
if people convert maturing bonds into new securities. The
more bonds converted, the less cash the Government has to find
for redemptions, and that means loss out of Revenue.
May I therefore commend these loans to you and ask
your support for them whether as cash subscribers or as
holders of the securities put before you for conversion.
Goodnight to you all.
CANBERRA,
6th September, 1960. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, IN THE HOUSE OF REPAESENTATIVES ON THE
SEPTEMBE. i, 960
Before I refer to the principal topic of this debate,
I should like to refer to two other natters that have been
glanced at by other honorable mnmbers. The honorable member
for lentworth ( Mr. Bury), in a thoughtful speech last night,
made reference to the Public Service Board and offered some
criticism of the inordinate delay that appears to exist in
presenting the final report of the board to the Parliament. I
am impressed by that criticism, and I certainly propose to try
to get a better performance in that field. I know the reasons
offered for the delay, but I think that the delay is far too
great. The honorable member for Fremantle ( Mr. Beazley) made
reference to the National Library. Perhaps I should point out
for his information, because I know he is interested in this
matter that we have taken the steps necessary to appoint the
Council of the new National Library, and I hope to be in a
position to announce its composition within a few days.
Now I turn to the problem of the Commonwealth and
education. I do not want to deliver a long speech on it,
because the problem has been thrashed out more than once in this
Parliament, either in the House or in commiitteeo However, I
think that I ought to say something not for the first time
about the much-debated constitutional problem, the problem of
power. My friend, the honorable member for Bass ( Mr. Barnard),
pointed out that we seen to have no difficulty in making laws
with respect to health, medical services and pharmaceutical
benefits and in having Comuonwealth Ministers in charge of these
activities. I remind hin that that is provided for in the
Constitution. Je have express powers in connexion with those
matters as a result of the last successful constitutional
referendum. So no problem of power arises in that field.
There is no question as to the power of the Commonwealth
to make grants to the States under section 96 of the
Constitution. I do not know whether I am supposed to have been
dragged reluctantly to a knowledge of that fact. All I can say
is that, over 30 years ago on behalf, I think, of the State of
South Australia I advanced an unsuccessful argunont in the
High Cour' to the effect that the power under section 96was
limited to setting our financial terms and conditions. The High
Court, with unaccustomed unaninity, disagreed with me. It
rejected the argument and said that the terns of section 96
were as they stood that money could be granted to a State on
such terms and conditions as the Comnonwealth Parliament laid
down. That is now beyond all dispute, but honorable members
opposite, as well as those on my own side, must have this in
mind: If the Comonwealth proceeded to use its power to make
grants under section 96 in such a fashion as to take out of the
control of the States in adcministrative detail if you like
some matter over which'they exercise authority, then federalism
would disappear in a few years. The position of the States could
be undermined if that took place. Consequently, any sensible
government has been astute to avoid such unnecessary
interference. On the very day when somebody in this chamber
discovered section 96, and rather twitted me with notknowing
about it, I presented a bill to make grants to the States, under
section 96, with respect to universities. But although that
legislation contains provisions for matching grants, for the
distribution of the grants to the various universities and for
financial assistance to residential colleges, nothing in it
interferes with the internal management of universities by the 
0 university authorities. The autonomy of those universities,
including the great State universities, is preserved. ie have
not interfered with natters of policy and administration which
belong to the States.
I think it is essential to have that aspect of the
matter in mind. It is quite true that if the Cormonweolth
Parliament wished to provide another œ 10,000,000, œ 20,000,000
œ: 0,000,000 or œ 100,000,000 a year to the States over and
above what it provides now, and if it could prudently do so, it
could say, " This is a grant to the States for the purposes of
education primary and secondary or scientific". But that is
no discovery. The essence of this matter is that if the Coramonwealth
starts to interfere with the educational policies of the
States, with the way in which they go about their job in the
educational field, that will be a very bad day for Australia.
Although I have been very active in this field, as honorable
mrembers know, I have always made that approach, in principle,
to this problem. Although the argumont varies a little in detail, it
is always put in some way such as this: First of all, it is
said that education is vastly inportant; it is a great
national problem. So it is. The Loader of the Opposition
( Mr. Calwoll) was good enough to quote me as saying that it was
a great national problem. I onoaged in the trifling task of
looking at what was said on that occasion, and it is interesting
to note that I went on to say that land settlement was a great
national problem and so also were wateo supplies and power
supplies. These are all vastly important national problems.
The whole aspect of the matter is that some of them have been
given into the hands of this Parliament for this Parliament to
do what it wishes in relation to then, both in principle and in
detail, while other problems of great national importance, as I
agree, have been loft in the hands of the States.
But, Sir, some say education is a great problem; it
is vastly important. I agree that it is. Indeed, I venture to
say with great humility, that no Prime Minister of this country
has ever taken such an active and constructive interest in it as
I have iyself. It is a very great problem. The next step in
this strange syllogism is t. at the Conmronwealth, except in
university matters, is accepting no financial responsibility in
the solving of this problmr; it is leaving the problem to the
under-nourished State Governumnts. The conclusion from this is
that the Coi. i: onwealth Government ought to be condemned. Now
Sir, the answer to all that kind of argument is a simple iater
of facts. I just state it in this way: The Commonweaith by
express legislation and by express grant under section 96 of
the Constitution, has assumed large obligations in the field
of university education. When I m: iade my announcement in 1958
of our adoption of every recor. n-ondation of the Murray committee,
the then Loader of the Opposition, Dr. Evatt, said that our
attitude towards this matter was nunificent, That was his own
-word. Did we stop there, or do we stop there? It is quite
true that we do not make an ear-marked grant to the States for
secondary education or primary education; but we provide the
States with tax reimbursement and with support for a w orks loan
programme, and a very large : nd material factor in both is the
needs of the States educational systems. They nmow it; we know
it. Everybody knows it except those who want to pretend the
Commonwealth is doing nothing abut it.
Sir, it seems to be forgotten that only last yoer
in 1959 there was a groat conference with the State Premiers.
The Premiers are not incapable, in ny very long experience of
thon, of putting forward the claims and deserts of their own 
3.
States but in the 199 conference, a discussion took place
about the reimbursement rules or formula. A new agreement was
made for a period. of six years. This is an agreement an
arrangement created to endure for six years and containing,
in itself, all the oleoents of adjustment. It contains the
basis on which the grant is to be increased, having regard to
population and having reoard to increases in wages, with a
little accommodating factor in addition. That arrangement was
made after a discussion in which the State Premiers put forward
the problems that they have, among other things, in the field
of education because of imriigration and because of a rapidly
increasing school population. All these things were put forward
by the Premiers. They knew perfectly well that whatever figure
was agreed upon, it would be a figure that paid regard to their
educational needs.
Perhaps I might interrupt myself there to mak-one
point,-and indeed I ought to apologizc to the conmmittee for
rehearsing matters that are already well known. Older members
of this Parliament will remember that back in 1945 or 1946 I
forget the precise year the then Prime Minister, Mr. Chifloy,
arranged with the States for a form: ula on which tax reimbursement
would be calculated. It was a formula that was to pay
attention to increases in wages and increases in population.
It was worked out and it was unanimously accepted by the States.
In my own teor of office since the end of 19199, my own Governeont
has never held the States to that formula as adjusted on
the basis that was worked out. Jo have always added to it.
Year after yea-, wo have mado additional payments to the States,
sometimes running to as much as œ 20,000,000.
Mr. Cairns How could you avoid it?
MR. MENZIES: Jo do not have to worry about how to .' void it,
but the honorable .: ember would be none the worse for knowing the
facts. Indeed, he would be greatly improved. The fact is that
we did make those additional payments year by year and we made
then because we realized the pressures under which the States
lived and recognized that they must be given proper troatment if
they were to discharge their duties,,
In 1959, the now arrangement was nr'. do, . ts offect in
the first financial year was this: Whoroas in 1958-59 the States
got œ 205, 00,000 in reimbursement grants, under the formula
grants for 1959-60 they would got œ 2_ 14,000,00o Every State
Premier accepted the new arrangement. The Premiers did not
accept it, as might be suggestod, unwillingly needs must when
the devil drives but each of then accepted it with great
expressions of satisfaction, most of which are in the record of
the Premiers' Conference. Anybody who knows any of the Premiers
knows perfectly well that they felt this was a fine deal and
that it gave them a feeling of security over a period of six
years. During that period they would not need to co-ne back and
argue about the basis on rwhich reimbursoront ought to occur.
Indeed they could look forward to increasing roso. ircos to
discharge their responsibilities, including their great education
responsibilities. What is the effect of all that? I would like those
who think of the problems of educ.-tion solely in terms of
getting money over and above what is now provided from the
Commonwealth to-recognize something else. I take my own State
as an example, not because I iish to conpro the record df
Victoria with any other State so far as I am able to judge
every State has a very good record in this field but because
the figures for Victoria have just emerged. As a result of this
new agreement for six years , rwhich was entered into last yoer,
Victoria, which had anticipated a deficit of over fœ 1,00,000
actually had a surplus of over œ 300,000. That is an cxample of 
4.
how beneficial this arrangement -ras. But here is the point:
In Victoria it was announced only the night before last that
the 1960-61 Budget for Victoria would provide a record education
vote of about œ+ 4,000,000. The 1945-46 vote, when ny friends
opposite were in coi-mand of the exchequer, was œ 4,800,000. This
year, over and above our universities grant which is, of
course, a separate natter on our account, we have provided
œ 54,000,000. By 1949-50 the vote had risen to œ 10,500,000; last
year it was œ 45,600,000. This year the vote will rise from
œ 45,600,000 to about œ 54,000,000. In other words there will
be an increase of between œ 8,000,000 and œ 9,000,060 in one yearin
a year in which it is said that we are starving the States
of resources to spend on their educational needsl I venture
to says with all moderation, that the statement that the
Comonwealth carries no responsibility in the State educational
field is utter humbug and the people who say it know that it is
utter humbug. What they want to do is to deceive a lot of
people into believing that primary and secondary education are
being neglected6 As I have just demonstrated quite cloerly, we
provide for those categories of education scores of millions of
pounds every year through this fully accepted and woll-received
six-year agreement on tax roinbu: rsements.,
Apart altogether from tax reimbursements which deal
with revenue matters, each year, the States come to the
Australian Loan Council, very properly, and say, " We want to
borrow money for a works prograime". The ro. uost may be for
œ 300,000,000. The figure is usually a little high. t4e discuss
between ourselves how ruch money can be borrowed on the market.
It used to be the sole business of the Loan Council to decide
how much could be borrowed on reasonable terms and conditions,
and no other Commonwealth Government ever supplneented that
amount out of Cormonwealth icvcnuo, In the last ten years
however, we have supplemented borrowings out of the revenue of
the Commonwealth every year. Instead of asking simply, " How
much can be borrowed?" vo have tried to work out a reasonable
figure which would give reasonable prospects to the States of
carrying out their works prograLnnes, including the construction
of school buildings a not inconsiderable itoe,
This year, as usual, we agreed to a larger loan works
programme than in the year before and in effect, though not
technically so, we underwrote it. I say " not technically so"
because technically we do not underwrite this programme. Ule
make a monthly payment to the States of one-twelfth of the
agreed upon programe, whether the money is to cone fron the
loan market or not. Theorotically, Twe revi e this in ' anuary
but in practice the payments remain the sani. So, in teorn. s of
capital and revenue provision, this Co: IIonr'oal th is, by the
financial machinery now oxisting., accepti. ng and discharging
enormous responsibilities in respect of every form of education
that we have in this country. I do not corplain about that.
I am proud to be able to say that this is so because nobody
has a more vivid understanding than I have nyself of the great
importance of education to oor nation. 



I 41* SPEECH 3Y THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT.
HON. R. G. MENZIES, IN THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES ON 8TH SEPTEM3ER, 1960
Sir, I do not propose to take very long over this
matter because my colleague, the Minister for Territories ( Mr.
Hasluck) has made, I think, a very comprehensive statement,
with every word of uhich I agree. It might be quite adequate
for me to say that I have heard the Ministerts statement that
I have nothing to add to it, that I agree with it, and sit
down.
Mr. Pollard Why not do that?
MR. MENZIES I will do the next best thing: I will stand.
One aspect of this matter which was referred to by
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Uhitlam) deserves a
little mention. The activities of the 7Tniversity Staffs
Association and certain comments that have been published rather
suggest that academic freedom is involved in the exclusion of
this man from the Territory of Papua and New Guinea. I want
to refer to that because it exhibits a complete misconception
of this problem. Academic freedom yes. The Australian National
University enjoys it in the fullest possible measure; We do not
appoint people to the staff of that university. The university
authorities do so according to their own untraimmellod judgment.
I Ta not asked, as the relevant Minister, to approve of any
appointment made by the Australian National University authorities.
N Curtin It t8 just as well!
M. MENZIES: Indeed it is just as well, because perhaps a few
of the appointments that have boon made would not have received
my approval. But I believe in academic freedom, and therefore
I have maintained the view that when the university is appointing
people professors, lecturers, readers or whatever they may
be, it is the university's oinm business. But academic freedom
does not carry with it the right to enjoy immunity from the
immigration restrictions of the Territory which apply to other
eople. Although academic people occasionally confuse the
ssue, it is quite clear that you do not rise above the law
simply because you attain academic freedom, and whether a man is
free acad-mic or not, when he desires to enter this Territory
he must secure a permit to do so. I eaphasize that point.
Mr. Cairns No one put that proposition.
MR. MENZIES: On the contrary, it was put in the letter written
by the Staffs Association to the Minister. It was put as a
matter of academic freedom.
Mrb Whitlam I did not quote it.
MRa MENZIES I know you did not. but it has boon quoted, no
doubt. I am referring to the way ii % i it put by the_
University Staffs Association. The speech of the honorableao " y
member for Werriwa ( Mr. Whitlan), conta~ neo ht was
a glancing reference to that topic.
Mr Whitlam I was coning to it, in order to endorse it.
M MENZIES I an glad to hear that, because now I have come
to it in order to un-endorsc it. The first law of physics, of
course, is that action and reaction are equal and opposite.
The only other cosment I wish to make is this: the
honorable member for Verriwa has given us a great number of
testimonials. I do not know what those testimonials have to do 
A 0
I 0 I 
2.
with the case. Honorable nembers opposite can produce a
string of testimonials to say that this can is very able, as
he undoubtedly must be, or that he is distinguished in his
profession, as I willingly concede, or that the persons who
gave the testimonials like him, but what have testimonials to
do with the point at issue? To send newspaper representatives
prowling around irrelevant departnonts in Great Britain, asking
spokesmen whoever those n: ysterious persons nay be whether
they have certain things in nind, is to prepare the . akings of
a ludicrous case. The essence of this natter is not what
somebody else thinks about this nan or what his technical
qualifications are; it is whether the Administrator was wrong
in refusing hin a permit, on the information that the
Administrator had before him.
Mr. Barnard What is the information he had before him?
MR. MENZIES To find that out, of course, is one of the
objects of the exorcise. All we have to do is to publish the
information, and then Security can close up. That is the idea
motivating some honorable members opposite. I do not mean all
of then. I do not mean the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr.
Calwell) or the Deputy Loader. They take a different view.
But there are honorable nembers opposite who would dearly love
to force the publication of information coning to the Government
in relation to the proper security interests of this
country or-its Territo. ry, in order that its sources of
information would thereafter dry up. Lot ie say that I,
accepting all the responsibility that attaches to my office, am
not going to take any step which would involve us in the loss
of access to infornation bearing on the security, the territorial
integrity and the political integrity of Australia. 



SPEECH i3Y ' THE PRIME MINIS-TER AND 1INISTE'i
FOII EIr'ERNAL AFFIRS, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ON THURFDAY THE 8TH SEPTE MBEl
Oddly enough, I had decided to accept that invitation
before I heard it. Beore proceeding to deal with some of the
statements made by the honorable member w; ho has just sat down
some of the things said from Yarra and some of the things sail
from East Sydney, I want to mention two or three particular
points that have been raised with a rare sense of relevance by
one or two honorable members, particularly my friend, the
honorable member for Lilley ( Mr. light), who inquired about the
discrepancies to be seen in the charges in the accounts for
postage, telegrams -and telephones, and in the following item
relating to courier service and diplomatic mails. it is
purely a matter of transferring dertain amounts from one head to
the other. If thle honorable member looks at the totals, he
will see that the total of thie two is substantially the same as
thne total of the two -for last year.
The honorable member for Lilley also said something
with which, if he will allow me to say so, I warmly agree. That
was that technical assistance is a side of the Colombo Plan
scheme which deserves increasing emphasis. I do agree with
that. I think that we must devote more and more time to w~ hat
I will call this increase in personal skill, the development of
the capacity of the receiving countries.
Somebody else I have forgotten who it was nowreferred
to the allegation that has appeared that the Netherlands
had adopted a new policy in relation to Netherlands New
Guinea. 4e made an inquiry about that, and we have been
specifically and officially informed that there is no change
in the Netherlands position; that, in point of fact, this
last statement that has had some publicity does not vary from
the position taken by Mr. Luns, the Foreign Secretary, in
February of this year, and which was at that time widely
reported. Having said t1~ at, I want to come back, not in
chronological order, but as I recall them, to three remarkable
speeches that have been made from the Opposition side of the
committee. I will begin, wiith proper courtesy, with the
honorable member for v4ills ( Mr. Bryant), who has just sat down.
He always fascinates me because, when he makes two speeches, I
am never quite sure whether he remembers, when making the
second speech, what he said in the first. His second speech
was one in which he went to some pains to establish that you
could be interested in a problem without knowing the answer, and
he did not profess to know the answer. I think that is a very
admirable attitude. But in his earlier speech, he knew the
answers to the problems of South Africa! What hie knows about
the internal problems of South Africa could be written on a
postage stamp, but there he is not troubled by those philosophic
doubts that assailed him in his second edition. At
that time he said: " The policies of South Africa are monstrous.
We all 3 now how wrong they are." He did not give us thne
benefit of his opinion as to how they ought to be changed, in
what way they ought to be changed, or what oughit to be done
about them. Obviously and I thinkc this does him no injustice
he thought the problem singularly easy to solve, I do not
think I am unfair in saying that because, if it were not
singularly easy to solve, he would not be comfortably solving
it from a green cushioned seat in Canberra thousands of miles
a~ ray. Therefore, I take it that in his first edition, in what
one might call the authorized edition, he found South Africa's
problem very easy to solve. The honorable member perhaps
might be invited to ponder over a few questions. Does he
believe in our immigration policy? 
Mr. Bryant -do
MR. ME~ NZIES -The honorable member for -dlls. I am not
expecting him to answer now because these are questions on
which he will need to take advice, if he is wise, before he
gives the answers. Does he believe in Australia's immigration
policy? If he does not, he is oddly placed in the Labour
Party. If he does, why does he? Does he believe in it
because he does not want to have created in Australia multiracial
problems? is that the reason? It must be the reason.
He does not want to have set up in Australia the kind of
problem which could arise if we-bir oke down our immigration
policy, and which has existed, and in fact now exists, in the
Union of South Africa. Yet, if he is right, that is not a
difficult problem! Why believe in our immigration policy if
it could not matter less if we had a problem of mixed races
and of large communities of people of different basic races in
Australia? The honorable member says: " That is quite easy. I
know what I would do." I wonder whelther he does? I wonder
whether he knows what the answer is? I wonder whether he
realizes what an impertinence it is for people with no
experience of these problems or of the misery of these problems
to be getting up, blowing out their chests and telling another
country in the Commonwealth how it ought to manage its own
affairs? I want to say no more about that. It is a matter
that hie can chew over to his heart's content.
But I want to come back to a couple of speeches that
have been made in the course of these discussions, and which
really do deserve some attention. The honorable member for
Hume ( Mr. Anderson) made, as always, a speech in which he
valiantly expressed w-hat he had in his mind, and he was
attacked subsequently for what he had said. The honorable
member for Hume said that the U2 incident was not a failure and
that Khrushchev had net gained any propaganda value from it.
He was scoffed at later on by the honorable member for Yarra
( Mr. (; Cairns) who, though no doubt he is tho-most ardent of
Labour men, has a singular spiritual consanguinity with the
people who dictate the policy of the Kremlin. He never fails to
deliver that particular line, and he made a speech in which he
was prepared to say that the U2 incident was a co2. az 21 crash
in public relations for the i4estern world. In fact, he
appeared to me to take some pleasure out of his belief that it
was such a crash in public relations.
What effect the U2 incident has in terms of
propaganda depends on what side you are en. I am g; oing to say
something about it, because I was in London when this occurred
and I was able to discuss it both there and in the United
States of America,, Anybody who knows anything about these
things knows that it was Khrushcheov who wanted to have a
Summit Conference. It was he who put himself in the position
of the advocate and inviter.
1vir. Reynolds -What about Macmillan?
kv1R. MENZIES -He was keen on it: but after some to and fro and
some hesitation, an agreement was secured by do Gaulle and
Eisenhower that they would attend a Summit Conference in Paris..
As sensible men, they got together. They threshed out their
general problems and arrived at what I shall call a broad
community of mind on the matters that had to be considered. At
that moment it appeared that Khrushchev, the great advocate of
a summit meeting, was determined to frustrate it. There was no
profit in it for him. He was going to meet three people whom he
could not divide and conquer. He was g oing to meet three
people again ' st whom the characteristic Commuunist technique of
theo past ten years would fail; and he must have been the most 
3.
delighted fellow in the world I have always believed it
when they said, A U2 aircraft has come down. ' e have
captured the pilot. We now have evidence that the United
States of America is spying on us." I am perfectly certain
that Khrushchev was very pleased.
Mr. Clyde Cameron Why?
MR. MENZIES Because this gave him the excuse he was looking
for not to go on with that Summit Conference. I am not defending
the timing of that particular U2 flight for a moment.
Mr. Cairns Ah
MR. MENZIES You need not worry. I have told that to better.
men than you in the United States of America. I am not
defending the time of the flight, but what I am saying is
that this came to Khrushchev as glad tidings in the first
place until, of cours; he realized and was reminded by his
assistants that after all the thing had come down over 1,000
miles inside the frontiers of the Soviet Union, and therefore
the nuclear deterrent delivered by aircraft was more effective
against his country than he had ever conceded. Therefore, his
momentary joy was succeeded by a genuine passion, and that
genuine passion wras expressed when he spoke at his famous press
conference in Paris.
The honorable member for Yarra has said that this was
great propaganda for Khrushchev. Before anybody settles down
to that idea, let me put this to him: Nobody with his five
wits would believe that the Soviet Union does not engage in
espionage. Of course it does; it has the master spies of our
time. Does anybody believe that you can make a nuclear weapon
a deterrent unless you know at what target to fire? You don't
poop off to use that expression a missile at the map of
Russia. You have to aim it at a target, and it is one of the
oddities of the world today that on our side because after all
the United States of America is on our side anybody in the
United States of America may discover where all the installatiors
are and where the various firing points are, within pretty
narrow limits, by subscribing to the illustrated papers. As a
matter of fact Khrushchev pointed that out to a very
distinguished American last year a man who happens to be a
close friend of mine. Khrushchev said, " You ta~ k about open
skies! I do not need them. I have only to subscribe to your
journals. Do you think I am going to give away the advantage
I have by the secrecy of my installations? You must take me
for a simpleton." Therefore, of course I would have been
bitterly disappointed if aircraft had not beeoon spotting these
places and giving the rest of us in the world a chance of
survival in a global contest.
One aircraft was apprehended, and of course the
friends of the Soviet Union seized on that. they said,
" this is terrible stuff." Only those who arc instinctively
predisposed to accept Soviet propaganda will fail to understand
the basic truth that on this occasion Khrushchev preferred to
score his debating point and frustrate the meeooting at the
Summit. He preferred that to the interests of ordinary men and
women all over the world who had hoped that out of the Summit
Conference there might come something at any rate some little
point settled, some gloam of hope, even some agreement about
nuclear experiments or a moratorium on Berlin. These are the
most tremendous issues in the world and these are things,
whether Khrushchev knows it or not, that sound in the ears, the
minds and the hearts of ordinary men and women all over the
world; and ordinary men and women all over the world will not
forgive him for taking his debating point and scattering a
meeting of the heads of governments to the wind. 
4,
That is the first thing I want to say. The second is
this: The honorable member for Hume made some reference to the
cold war. He said we should try to win the cold war. By a
monstrous perversion of the words of a gallant and respected
gentleman in this House, the honorable member for Yarra said
that this meant that the honorable member for Hume anted to
convert the cold war into a hot war, Those wore the very
words of the honorable member for Yarra. I wrote them down at
the time. He said the honorable member for Hume wanted to
convert the cold war into a hot war. That was a diabolical
statement to make. If it had been made about a gentleman with
a career less clear and distinguished than that of the
honorable member for Humo it might have been a hurtful remark.
The honorable member for Hunc, of course, meant what we all
mean. je did not start the cold war. we are not responsible
for the preservation of tension in the world. There is not
one single cause of tension in the world that does not lie
squarely at the door of the Communist powers. : oI did not begin
the cold war, but, since it has been commenced, we must win it.
You win a cold war by maintaining every effort to remove
tension and by maintaining every effort to confer and to discuss
at any time. You win a cold war by maintaining every
effort to keep up your defences and your strength and by
maintaining every effort to keep your world friendships green.
That is what is meant by winning a cold war, The honorable
member for Yarra, by his contemptible perversion of what the
honorable member for Hume said, alleged that we want to win
the cold war by having a hot war presuimably a deterrent war.
Tlhere is another aspect of the speech made by the
honorable member for Yarra. He can always be relied on to put
the case of the free world in the worst possible way and the
case of the Communist powers in the best way. He is quite
famous for that. Consistent with that attitude of mind, he
said that the Comm: unist powers have taken the lead in
disarmament talks and in talks on the suspension of nuclear
tests.
Mr. Cairns That is right.
MR. MENZIES Of course, the honorable member continues to say
that. All Communist propaganda is repeated again and again and
the honorable member can be relied on to repeat it in this
place. His statement is utterly untrue. One has only to refer
to the l.. st meeting of the Disarmamont Commission at Geneva to
discover that at a time when the two sides, particularly in
relation to nuclear tests, were by no moans 100 miles apart a
good deal had been agreed upon and, with a little exercise of
control, other matters might have been agreed upon the
representatives of the Soviet Union walked out. They did that
because th. y know that on the next morning constructive
proposals by the estern powers were to be placed on the table
of the conference. These are the people who are honoured in
this place by the gentleman from Yarra as having taken the
lead in disarmament talks. I received a letter from Khrushchev
himself about this natter and I replied to hin. I was not
specially favoured in receiving the lettor, because I think
similar letters were sent to all other leaders of governoment.
No doubt my reply was frightfully old-fashioned, I am sure
that it would not get the slightest acco: mmodation in the mind
and judgeont of the honorable gentleman from Yarra. However,
I propose to read a paragraph or two. I said
" I deeply regret, howover, that the five Eastern
European countries represented at the ten-nation Disarmament
Committoe, led by the Soviet Union, have seen fit to walk out
of the Committee's meetings without waiting even to ho: r, let
alone discuss, the ! estern powers' considered views of your
proposals and the new proposals of their own, which it was 
known were being prepared for early submission to the
Committee. I cannot see that the delegates' action will
help to further the general cause of disarmament,
I regret the latest development all the more because I
had been glad to note your assurance that your new proposals
had taken into consideration some of the views of other
Governments participating in the Disarmament Committee's work.
It had been our hope that careful study in the Disarmament
Committee would have justified the expectations raised by
news of your approach. We had hoped particularly that the
proposals would be followed by the elaboration of concrete
measures for control related to each stage of the
disarmament prograrme and effective from the very beginning
of the disarmament process, so that disarimament and its
control would proceed hand-in-hand.
That is not an unconstructive statement of our
policy. I continued
All these hopes have now been dashed.
It was with concern that I noted in your letter the
statement that the Soviet Government doubts whether the
Western Powers represented in the Disarmament Committee
really want disarmament; and I see that similar statements
have been made even more forcibly recently by the Soviet
delegate in Geneva. The policies followed by the Western
Powers since 1946, including their record in the many
disarmament conferences held over that period, are, however,
sufficient to dispel any such doubts. For my own part, I
am convinced from my experience and contact with Iestern
Leaders over the years that these doubts are entirely
misplaced. I am certain that the Western Powers, no less
than Australia, stand ready to work out measures leading
toward general and complete disarmament under effective
international control, which was the aim of the unanimous
resolution of the United Nations General Assembly last year."
I venture to suggest that my reply represents the honest view
of Australians on this matter. The other view is the view of
Khrushchev. I now propose to say a word or two about the views
of the honorable member for East Sydney ( Mr. ! Ward). He is
firmly of the opinion that Cormunist China should be
recognized. He believes that recognition of Communist China
would go a long way towards solving the problems of Asia. I
wonder what reason he has for that belief. Oddly enough his
attitude on this matter is completely academic because, in
effect, he is saying that here is a country that has a
settled government a government in authority. He says that
the country has all the earmarks of one that is entitled first
to recognition do facto and secondly to recognition de juro.
Ho asks why we do not recognize Communist China. W1ll, if
the matter were as simple as would indeed be simple.
But the honorable member must know that you , will get nowhere
with Cormunist China by recognizing it unless you recognize
also Communist China's control over Formosa. That is the
simple truth of the matter. The United Kingdom Government
years ago, when my friend Lord Attlee held the reins of office,
recognized Communist China and has had some kind of diplomatic
post there, but that has not had the slightest effect. That
recognition has not made the slightest difference to United
Kingdom relations with Communist China because Cormunist China,
being a Communist power, being devoted to an expansion of its
jurisdiction and being, as all Communist powers . re,
imperialist in its quality, must have Formosa. I have heard.
people say that Communist China should have Formosa. I do 
not want honorable members opposite to tell no that Chiang
Kai-Shek says that mainland China and Formosa are one
country. I am not interested in that. What I am interested
in is the fact that 10,000,000 people live on Formosa. A
groat many of them live there because they object to living
under Communist rule. The simple truth of the proposal that
we recognize Communist China is that we must also advocate a
course of policy that will hand over those 10 million people
now free into Communist control. I invite honorable members
to consider what that would mean. Nothing short of that
would be of any interest to Communist China. What would it
mean? First, it would mean, of course, the complete destruction
of Seato. There are some people people who did not
have the responsibility for negotiating the South-East Asian
Treaty who think nothing of that organization. ' o think
something of it. Je think something of a treaty which results
in the United States of Amer' Great Britain, France,
Pakistan, New Zealand and Australia, the Philippines and
Thailand, standing side by side. But if, cynically, we wore
prepared to hand over Formosa to the Communists in China, what
effect would that have on the protocol countries Laos,
Canbodia, Thailand, South Vietnam and Malaya? They would say,
" Woll, if you can give away 10,000,000 people in Formosa, you
can give away 10,000,000 people somewhere clse". It would
utterly destroy the whole basis of confidence on . which Seato
rests. I said so at the ministorial conference of Soato in
Washington, with the unanimous approval of all -he ministors
there present. There would be another effect of saying to Commuunist
China, " You may have Fornosa", quite apart from its effect on
the general defensive structure of the Pacific. Such a move
would represent the greatest diplomatic triu ph, produced by
voluntary concession, in the post-war history of communism.
What its effect would be i. any of the Asian and South-East
Asian countries I leave to anybody's imagination.
When people venture into the field of foreign affairs
I suggest to them that they should take a vow that before
going to bed each night they will have a good, long, thoughtful
look at the map and try to real izo whe-ro we live and whore our
friends live. I have spoken at rather greater length than I
intended, and I daresay that most of what i have said and what
I have been answering is completely out of order. After all,
as honorable mmnbor for Coranga:. te ( Mr. Mackinnon) reminded
us yesterday, we are debating the Estimates. But since these
matters have been raised, and since there is a chronic
disposition on the part of honorable members opposite to
believe that the Governmont has no point of view, I have stated
the Government's point of viewnl hope, most unambiguous
terns. 


9 September 1960
Sir and parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen: My friend may say that this is the most satisfying experience of 35 years. I want to tell him that having endeavoured to open quite a few enterprises in my time, I've absolutely run out of ideas for something fresh to say. And of course the difficulty is always added to in my case, because I look around and you would be surprised how many faces I see here today who were there last time (Laughter) somewhere else, and the time before that. I am, satisfied that there must be quite a few people who ought to put down as their hobby: "Visiting the opening of new factories'. (Laughter)
&nbsp;I am very indebted to the Mayor for his reception. He has already given me one, I don: t mind telling you, down in the heart of what I insist on calling " the city", though he tells me it isn't one. And on that occasion he got a long speech out of me so he won't expect another. But I am certainly having a good look at Banks; own today. The only previous time that I can recall going into Bankstown some of you know about this very well was when the then member for this area in the Federal Parliament who lived in Bankstown was offered by me a lift from Canberra to Sydney. That was in the old, old, frugal days when we didn't travel by air. (Laughter) And I gave him a lift. He was a very great friend of mine. And we had a wonderful journey down together, talking about all sorts of things except politics, And as : re got on to the fringes of Bankstown I said, " Now by the way, Joe, I think I had better give you a lift to your house. Where do we go?" " Oh! No", he said, "wait a moment. wait a moment &nbsp;a little bit careful if you don't mind", " Oh!: I said, '' nonsense. &nbsp;&nbsp;Come on", And as we turned along towards Bankstown he sank lower and lower in the seat. &nbsp;(Laughter) That was a novelty to me then. Of course I've been in politics . long enough since to regard it as one of the normal things in life. (Laughter) But he sank lower and lower. And I said, "Come, come, what's wrong? Are you feeling ill?" And he said, " Look old man, I've enjoyed coming down with you, but for heaven's sake let me out at the next quiet corner, because if I'm seen travelling with you, it will cost me three thousand votes". (Laughter) It didn't seem to me to matter very much: he could have lost thirty thousand without being beaten by me. (Laughter)
&nbsp;But, Sir, these occasions are really very stimulating. I suppose that everybody of my vintage will remember his earliest impression of what a factory was like. They always seemed to be dark, dismal places, a lot of smoke around, very bad lighting, terrible old corrugated iron places, intolerably hot in the summer and intolerably cold in the winter. This was rather the stock pattern of the old factory: what Blake called in the well-known poem ' the dark satanic mills'. Very characteristic. In my lifetime and I have no responsibility for it whatever, nor will anybody think I ha-e there has boon a revolution in this field of human activity. The .modern factory is, I think, one of the glories of contemporary civilization because it is human it is not only a wonderful thing to work in, to move around in, but it is a humane idea. People live and work under the best possible circumstances. It is one of the very great revolutions in modern times. We talk about the modern industrial revolution: quite true, in the case of Australia, that in the course of my own lifetime Australia has moved from being a predominantly agricultural and pastoral country to being a very great industrial power. And that is, of course, a great revolution, a great and beneficial one, the benefit of which we have already had some. reason to understand and which we will understand more and more as the years go on. Because a country that stands precariously balanced on one log of production is much easier to knock over, much easier to knock back, much easier to incommode, as we saw in the depression, than a country which stands robustly on both feet: has a great industrial development potential and a great primary production potential and achievement. Now that has been the great economic revolution in Australia in my political lifetime.
&nbsp;But side by side to that has been this revolution in technique, this understanding that you are going to produce successfully only if you can produce to the highest possible standards; that in a competitive world it isn't only price that will determine it, it is quality, consistency, reliability that will have much to do with whether the market is maintained. And if you are going to achieve those things, you want, not only more and more scientific skill in the laboratory, more and more scientific skill in management because it rapidly becomes a science but you must also have a sort of circumstance of work which enables everybody engaged in the enterprise to do his best, or her best, with good light, plenty of air a happy surrounding. All those things mark the Australian industrial revolution.
Sir, you referred to the fact that you thought you had some competitors here. I am sure you have' I have walked around with you and two or three times I have, with the scepticism that Prime Ministers develop if they remain in office too long, said to you, " Oh, I see that's so-and-so. That is substantially the same as such-and-such isn't it?" you know, naming one of the competing..(Laughter) &nbsp;I've been told every time, "No; it has a particular ingredient in it". And of course the moment, sir, you told me that, that the key to it was this particular ingredient, I realised why all your competitors were here. (Laughter) Have you made any provision for searching them before they leave? I think it might be a pretty good idea. (Laughter)
But I think all the same, that this Company has two claims to our regard one of them perhaps is a little frivolous; but if you will permit me, My friend Mr, Wheeler over there, he's always a bit frivolous so I' 11 join in the frivolity on this occasion.
I understand, Sir, that the first Warner was the first man to put a sugar coating on the pill. I was surprised to read that. I thought that a man who hod the genius to apply sugar coating to a pill, how is it that he never became the President of the United States? ( Laughter) I assure you that the one genuine explanation of such political success as I've had, is that I'm the politician who discovered how to put the sugar on the pill. ( Laughter) And the interesting thing is, that although the pill having been taken, and having done its deadly work whatever it is people tend to remember the deadly work when it comes to the next pill, it is the sugar that attracts them. Now that is the law of continuity of life in politics. And therefore we are on common ground.
&nbsp;But the other thing, Sir. that I like about this is something that I've heard some people criticise. And that is that this represents an enterprise from another country established long years ago now, but now further and brilliantly developed in Australia. I like this kind of thing. I hope that we are not going to permit ourselves to become too narrow minded about investment in Australian enterprise by overseas operations. Because it is the law of life for Australia. Almost the same size as the United States, Sir, we are, and with one eighteenth of the population of the United States, We have developed enormously since the war,, both in terms of population and actual industrial and productive achievement. This has been a marvellous period to live in. And there is no reason why it shouldn't go on.
But, Sir, it can't go on as fast as we would lip, or as fully as we would like, unless we can by obtaining the confidence of people in other countries continue to draw into Australia resources of capital and skill and experience that can be used hero for the benefit of Australians, for the benefit of Australians whether they are employees or employers, or simply the common-or-garden &nbsp;hum-drum consumer, as they say. We have ten million people: we are not a thriftless lot. There are those who when they read the sporting notes some of which are sporting only in a technical sense say, " Oh, Australians, oh, they're mad on sport in Australia. They're either mad on it, or sometimes mad about it. And they are a community of gamblers". People get frightfully troubled about it. You will be happy to know that Australia has no superior in the world for the saving and investment of capital. We save money, we invest money, out of our own resources I'm not talking about imported capital for this purpose a very high percentage indeed: just about as high as you can find anywhere in the world: we're not a thriftless community. Some of our saving is done voluntarily, which is very agreeable; and some of it is done involuntarily, which is very disagreeable. But between the two of them, if you were to cast up the capital investment tables in Australia, you would be proud of the extent to which this country does conserve and apply its own resources for its own development. But on top of that, of course, we've had, I'm happy to believe, large sums of money now ranging well over 100m. a year coming into Australia not on Government account, but for private investment in capital enterprises, and capital enterprises which, in themselves are an enormous contribution to the further and further development of Australia and our employment, and the future of our children.
&nbsp;I know, Sir, that it is rather fashionable to talk about one or two spectacular successes and to say that they have succeeded cll too well, Well I am a great believer in success. I would sooner that a business succeeded spectacularly, almost fantastically, and made a lot of money than that it should come here and fail.
And so when I am opening this factory, Sir, I hope that what I would imagine to be a reasonable profit level in the past, will go on. -Ad I don't mind if it gets better and better and better. I'll take another 6d. in the out of it more. (Laughter) One way or another we will arrive at an accommodation with you, ( Laughter) on that matter. More investment of this kind, more superb factories of this kind, more successful profitable enterprise in this country the happier we will be.
&nbsp;And so, Sir, I say to you that I wish you Good Luck. I am sorry that going around today I couldn't give vent to my usual instinct of wanting to souvenir something you know: if it is edible, taste it. It is great fun opening a biscuit factory, or a food processing factory (Laughter). That is a wonderful idea, because, you know, you take a little nip here and you think it is very good. But I thought of that for a start and then I realised that it really wouldn't do because I wouldn't be able to come up to the barrier. (Laughter) So, Sir, I conclude with great pleasure in saying that I have immense pleasure in declaring this factory open. (Applause)


The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced to-day that&nbsp;negotiations had been commenced in New York for the raising&nbsp;by the Commonwealth of a new $ 25 million Commonwealth loan.&nbsp;Mr. Menzies said that the Australian Loan Council had given&nbsp;its approval to these negotiations being commenced and that&nbsp;the proceeds of the loan would be applied towards&nbsp;Commonwealth and State 1960-61 borrowing programmes approved&nbsp;by the Loan Council.
If negotiations are successful, the new loan will be&nbsp;issued in New York towards the end of the month. However,&nbsp;in accordance with United States legal requirements, a&nbsp;Registration Statement relating to the proposed new&nbsp;borrowing was filed with the Securities and Exchange&nbsp;Commission in Washington on Thursday, September 8.&nbsp;
Mr. Menzies said that this loan would be the first&nbsp;overseas raising by the Commonwealth for the present&nbsp;financial year. He added that two loans, each for $ 25 million,&nbsp;were raised in New York during 1959-60 and one, also for $25&nbsp;million, in 1958-59.
CANBERRASeptember 9, 1960&nbsp;


10th September, 1960
Sir and gentlemen:
This year I had two experiences, in a very intensive journey really, that are worth mentioning here to you gentlemen.
The first was at the Prime Ministers' Conference in London where we could easily have got into almost irreparable trouble if we hadn't been able to fall back, consciously, upon the inner sense of unity and understanding which characterises the British Commonwealth. This is the great thing about the British Commonwealth: that we may disagree violently; we may have people who go into the newspapers and offer all kinds of views I am a little cagey about them myself but there are those people. And when you meet and you have some problem before you which might easily divide you, and therefore might easily break up the Commonwealth Association it is a good thing to be able to sit there and say, " But, you know, the Commonwealth means something". And if the Commonwealth is not united, it doesn't mean very much. Unity is strength one of the few true proverbs in the language. And in the long run, because we constantly kept coming back to the idea that unity was strength, the Conference which might have been a disaster, turned out, in my opinion, to be the most remarkable success. Now that's one thing.
I went over to Washington where we had a meeting of SEATO the South-East Asian Treaty Organization a ministerial meeting. Well I haven't been a Minister for External Affairs before, so I was in a sense a new boy. This was very interesting to me. I have taken an interest in External Affairs quite a lot, as some of your newspaper friends will tell you. But on ' this occasion I was there qua Minister for External Affairs. And there we were sitting there very important to Australia, New Zealand, Great Britain, the United States of America, France, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand. This is this semi-circle of power, semi-circle of community of interest which, after all, stands between us and the most aggressive power and movement in Asia. This is of tremendous importance to us. And the more we discussed things with each other, the more it became clear that there are individual points of difference between South-East Asian countries which are quite avoidable, some of which are quite trifling, but all of which got blown up and irritated, exacerbated, by people who want to capitalise on them. And once more the whole lesson of the matter was: Are we to be united? Or are we to be divided and conquered? Unity, unity: this is the business.
&nbsp;And there are no people more than the people who are sitting in this room tonight who know what unity means, who know how to regard unimportant things as unimportant, who know how to take the prime things of life on which we agree and concentrate on them, and never yield.
&nbsp;We are living in a pretty difficult period in the world's history. And the potential opponent is all the time looking for ways and means of dividing us from our friends, of weakening somebody's resolution, of making us, for example, criticise the Amerior: ns; or to make the Americans criticise the people of Great Britain. All this is nonsense. In the twentieth century there has never been a time in which all these great free communities have been united, that they have been defeated. It is only when they have succeeded in disagreeing with each other, as in the case of the Suez, that . a species of disaster has occurred,
&nbsp;And so, Sir, unity is the thing. And I am here with great pleasure, because I know that tonight there are people of every conceivable kind of political belief. But you are all united, not only in the good fellowship of the evening, but united in your sense of service to this country and of concentration on the good future, not only for Australia, but for all those countries and peoples in the world . who are our friends.


11th September, 1960,
Good evening ladies and gentlemen:
This talk,as I suppose you would call it, that I am to give to you this evening is called the "Wind of Change". That phrase, of course, has been rendered immortal by Mr. Harold Macmillan after his visit to South Africa.
It is perfectly true &nbsp;that, at in our time your time and my time the wind of change is blowing more and more in the history of the world. Sometimes in one country it is a mere gentle zephyr; in other countries, in other circumstances, a raging hurricane. But that the "wind of change" is blowing is beyond question. And one of the purposes of my talk to you is to show in what places and in what fashions that wind is blowing.
As a matter of fact, do you frequently think, as I do, about the changes in the maps? The maps we used at school seem strangely out of date today, There have been more changes in the maps in the last ten years, or fifteen years, than I suppose for a hundred years of history before: map-changing; new countries; new problems.
One of those new problems a very important one for us relates to the British Commonwealth. Now when I was at London earlier this year we had a discussion between the Prime Ministers many discussions between them and one of the things that we had to consider, and are still considering, was the future of the Commonwealth. Because it is changing so rapidly. I first attended one of these meetings, not I confess as Prime Minister, but as deputising for the late Mr. Lyons, years ago. And at that time there were just the old five members of the Commonwealth. Today we have increased in numbers. Before we are very much older we will have Nigeria as a new member. It may very well be in the next three or four years that there will be several others. The result is that this is becoming a much larger Commonwealth in terms of membership oi Prime Ministers; though to people who look back with some nostalgia to the past it may seem a smaller Commonwealth because it is not so cohesive as it used to be. But that it is changing is quite clear. , and that you and I have to accommodate ourselves to the change is equally clear.
&nbsp;I suppose that one of the things that we have to bear in mind is that these changes are largely an expression of nationalism. It is very curious, when you look back on it and remember that during the war a lot of people thought that there would be an increase in internationalism, it's very curious to realise how quite the opposite has occurred. True there have been international movements. But the feeling for nationalism in individual countries has become more intense. And the result is that in Africa, in particular, we have seen the surge towards nationalism grow. In Africa I am putting the Congo on one side at this stage we have seen Ghana, we have seen Nigeria, we can glance over the map and have a look at Kenya and Tanganyika and the countries of the Central African Federation. These are all countries which, only a few years ago, were colonies, were completely controlled, for all practical purposes, by the colonising power. Today each of them is moving rapidly: Ghana has already moved there; Nigeria has already, for all practical purposes, moved there; and the others are on the way. And that means, whether we like it or not and I certainly have no objection to it myself that nationalism, the growth of now nations, newly politically independent powers, is with us. And unless we face up to it, until we realise that it is the fact and that we must live with it, we may very easily fall into error about it,
Now I said just then that these countries were reaching political independence It is not enough to have political independence. That, indeed, is one of the great problems of the world: that political independence has outreached economic independence. People who say, and rightly, " We have our political independence" are still all too frequently in the position of having to go to the rest of the world and ask for help on the economic side. That we will have to do it of course is quite clear; but it is one of those oddities about the new nationalist movement which has to be noted, and which has to be respected as one, of what I call " the facts of political life".
Indeed there is another point that you ought to have in mind and that we all ought to have in mind. And that is that as the developed countries of the world, with their new technologies, become more and more prosperous, so does the gap between their standards and the standards of the underdeveloped countries grow. Because the under-developed countries have not the technical resources. Therefore they don't improve their position so fast. And the gap between the "haves" and the " have nots", in consequence, so far from narrowing tends to grow. And that is full of trouble for the world unless the advanced countries in the world take every opportunity of helping in the highest possible technical degree these countries of what we are pleased to call an undeveloped order, or an under-developed order.
Now I think I should turn from that matter of African nationalism in the broad just to say word about the Congo.
The Congo &nbsp;- and I'll talk about it comprehensively now, whether French or Belgian - &nbsp;is in one sense an illustration of the dangers of precipitate action. You know we all have ideas about when a colony should be given self-government. Some people want to do it very, very fast; and some people don't want to do it at all, perhaps. I belong to the school of thought that says: " You must prepare a colony for self-government it is no use throwing it, metaphorically, to the wolves and having done that, then you should not hold up the grant of independence too long, once you are satisfied that in effect the country can govern itself". That is a perfectly simple view and there is no very great novelty about it. But in the case of the Congo I fear that the preparation had not been made and we have all soon how, when the colonising power began to withdraw, all sorts of internal disputes broke out almost in a sense, a sort of tribal warfare, With the result that the United Nations has had to intervene; with the result that the rest of the world represented in the United Nations finds itself carrying a very substantial burden as the cost of intervention in the Congo for the preservation of law and order or for the restoration of it in the first instance.
We are all helping tc pay for this, you know. Australia, as a contributor to the United Nations, is a contributor to what the United Nations is doing in the Congo. If, contrary to the facts of history, the native people of the Congo had boon brought along to take their share in self government, had been taught administration which can't be learned over night then the whole position in the Congo might be different from the position that we are now looking at.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I am sometimes asked by people: "What are the chances for democracy in those countries in Africa?". I don't know. But I do just want to say this to you. Don't fall into the error of thinking that democracy is something that you hand over on a plate, or that is conveyed by a book of instructions: " Well here you are you govern yourselves: this is how you elect a Parliament: this is how you get a Prime Minister and a Cabinet". It isn't as simple as that. A lot of these countries emerging into independence have got there because they have been led by some outstanding man of dynamic energy. And of course when they get independence, as in the case of Ghana, you are bound to find that that man, their leader, has far more power than you would expect a Prime Minister to have and that their Parliament is nothing like the power or influence that you expect your Parliament to be.
All sorts of forms of government will be evolved in these countries. They will evolve their own, because they have a right to evolve their own. It need not be like ours. It may have far more executive authority in it. It may occasionally make you think that it is dictatorial. But these people will come through all that: they will ultimately find their own way of ruling themselves. And when they do, well, that will be democracy. Not necessarily our sort of parliamentary democracy, but democracy in the sense that the people are ruling themselves.
Now that perhaps means at this stage that I ought to say something, in this context, about South Africa. As one South African said to me: "You know, Mr. Menzies, everybody knows how to solve the problems of South Africa except the South Africans themselves". There is a good deal of truth in that. It is marvellous to me how swift we are to solve other problems of which we know very little. but to solve them out of hand sometimes with dogmatism and sometimes in a rather abusive way. The fact is that South Africa has a set of problems of which we, in Australia, of our own experience, know nothing: a great problem of mixed races: three million white people; nine million Bantu, as they say, meaning by that the indigenous inhabitants, either black or coloured. This is a tremendous problem and only the South Africans can solve it. That is why: I want you to remember only the South Africans. You don't suppose we are going to take steps to tell them in some compelling fashion what they are to do? We wouldn't like anybody to tell us that either. I think they have a difficult task in front of then. I can see all the troubles involved in their policy. But all I do is to point out to you that that policy is as old as the great J. C. Smuts himself. Because apartheid was first of all devised and laid down by him as an instrument of policy separate development of the separate races, a long, long time ago. You and I may think it won't work. But it will be for South Africa to work out its destiny.
But in relation to the Commonwealth, of course, there is a quite different problem coming up. Because the South African. Government has announced that it is going to have a referendum on the question of Republic or no. The Government, under Dr. Verwoerd of course, is strongly Republican and it will be asking for a vote for a Republic from the people who are entitled to vote in South Africa. I, of course, don't know what the result will be. But I do know that on this occasion there will be a difficult problem as to whether South Africa, having become a Republic. will be allowed to remain in the Commonwealth. You may say, " Well of course that would be fanciful because India became a Republic and stayed in; and Pakistan stayed in; Ceylon gave notice and was allowed to stay in; Ghana, only at the last meeting, Republic, allowed to stay in. How could it be denied to South Africa?"
.Well you and I may look at it that way, But one of the oldest things about this Commonwealth of ours is that we don't have votes: we have unanimity. is not a subcommittee of some other body. This is a meeting of heads of Government &nbsp;and unless they agree, then they say nothing,; of their joint wisdom, if they do agree, they say so. But everything, so long as I can remember it, has been conducted on the footing of " No votes", " No lobbying", " No majorities", " No minorities". And consequently the position has. been, so far, that if a member of the Commonwealth, being a monarchy at the time, says, " well, we've decided to become a Republic, but we want to remain in the Commonwealth" then all the other Prime Ministers have had to agree and have in fact agreed before that is approved of. And therefore we have the problem and it is a real problem as to whether, if it becomes a Republic, South Africa will secure the unanimous approval of the other members of the Commonwealth, some of which have violently criticised her racial policy, when the time comes. I don't know. I make no prophecy about that at all, But I certainly, though my own views are very well known, would not risk any guess as to whether the unanimous agreement will be forthcoming, That is one of the problems in front of South Africa.
Now turning from there, in this very disjointed survey, just could I say a few words about Asia - South East Asia.
This continent of Asia, of course, is very close to us. Africa, about which I have been talking, is a great problem, but a problem, in particular, because the propaganda of the Soviet Union is increasingly directed to the African countries and the African races. But with us here we have an immediate concern with Communists China. with the propaganda-of Communist China, and the constant probing of Communist China -probing which one day takes it in the direction of the Matsus and Formosa, and on another occasion into Laos. or on another occasion by pressure on South Vietnam or wherever it -may be, there's constant probing relaxing of tension, increasing of tension, which is. of course the classical communist manoeuvre, , Well Communist China is a country so enormous that : we can never afford to forgot it. It is estimated that by the turn of the century. there will be a thousand million people in Communist China &nbsp;- and -a thousand million people under Communist control and with all the fervour of the Communist when he is engaging in propaganda and pressure.
Cne of the favourite techniques of the Communists, and we've seen it in South East . Asia, is to get inside a country, to identify himself with what can be made a nationalist movement so that he himself becomes prominent in what is regarded as a war of independence. It can always be said that it is a nationalist movement. &nbsp;We may say it is -a Communist movement. I have heard men, whose opinions I respect, defend vigorously a lot of these movements on the ground that they are quite shortly and simply nationalist movements and that we mustn't attribute any communist colour to them .Well my answer to that o f course is that you must judge the tree by the fruit, The fact is that the troubles in Indo-China, French Indo-China, at the time when North Vietnam, under the influence of the Communists, began to infiltrate and then to attack, a'. l those troubles were re-presented to the world as a nationalist movement. But the fact is that right down to the frontier between North Vietnam and South Vietnam today, the communists are in control. And but for that wonderful little man Ngo Dinh Diem, in South Vietnam, who has defended and that country so well they would now be in charge in South Vietnam ,
We know what mischief they have been up to in Laos. I am very glad to think that there are sobering forces in Laos which are calculated to produce some stability of government. But it has been for a long time just touch and go as to whether the Communists in that country would not get the upper hand. In which case the boundaries of influence of Communist China would be pushed another number of miles in the direction of Australia.
Thailand is not a powerful military country, nor indeed is it a country of old established and powerful self-government. Burma is, of course, outside the Commonwealth now living pretty constantly under threat. And therefore across this movement we have now for some years thrown SEATO the South East Asian Treaty Organisation whose annual ministerial meeting I attended in Washington this year. SEATO, with Pakistan in it; on the other side the Philippines in it. And apart from that, Thailand, Australia, Now Zealand, France, Great Britain, with other countries who are within what we call " the protocol area" the countries we have, in effect, guaranteed from aggression in order to preserve this defence against the onrush of Communism.
One of the things that emerged in Washington was this and it is quite important: that it is easy to talk about South-East Asia, the free world, as we might call it, in South East Asia - the SEATO countries and so on - &nbsp;easy enough to talk about those. But we talk about them, primarily, as if they were a geographical area: " Oh, yes; that's South-East Asia". But you can't look at it in that completely simple fashion. You can't just say: " That's South-East Asia" unless you are creating in South-East Asia a community of feeling, a sense of community. And so far that is not entirely present. I warned my colleagues at that Conference that the Russians not the Russians for this purpose, the Chinese, the Communists, wherever they are are the great experts in the world at fishing in troubled waters. And that if there wore differences between Thailand and Cambodia as there are or differences between Thailand and Laos, or between one country or another out there, then those differences would be exploited by the Communists; and that therefore we must do everything that wo can to eliminate them.
Now I am sorry to have taken so long on that because I just want to say a few words to you about Now Guinea.
I don't need to say as much as I would have needed to say if Mr. Hasluck had not made his statement in the House comparatively recently. It was a magnificent statement of Australia's relation to Now Guinea, our policies of the past and our policies of the future. It wasn't a Party statement: it was made on behalf of Australia. That ground was covered, covered the activities of two administrations, at least one of them Labour and one of them my own. I thought it was something, a story, of which we could be proud.
It is a very great misfortune that there should be people in our own country who so little understand what has been going on in New Guinea, so that they voice their criticisms frequently, most frequently, at third hand, and have those criticisms advertised to the world. The truth is that we in New Guinea we Australia, in New Guinea have a remarkable record, particularly since the war which left New Guinea completely debilitated in terms of administration, just the mere broken remnants of administration; so that starting from the end of the war everything had to be built up, as we might say, from scratch. I would like everybody to read the story of what has happened since the war, because it is a good story. And the interesting thing is that the Trusteeship Council, of which Australia was one of the promoters, has always taken a favourable view of what we have been doing,. But we go on: we are quite confident that we are in the right direction, because we believe that in due course New Guinea will become a self governing community. And we hope that when it does, it will make its own choice of friendship and continuous association with Australia.
Well there it is ladies and gentlemen: that is a very imperfect sketch of some of the problems that surround us. We have to get used to looking at them, thinking about them and solving them. It is only in that way that we will be able to live with happiness in the new world. If we continue to think too frequently that we live in an old world, with old problems, then we shall miss the whole point about the new, and we shall end up by being unhappy at novelty, in a world in which we should have welcomed it, and learned to live with it, and to improve it, and to understand it.
Goodnight ladies and gentlemen.
&nbsp;


P. M. No. 30/ 1960
I have the honour, Sir, to send you greetings from&nbsp;the Australian Goverment and people on the occasion of the&nbsp;opening of the Swiss National Fair at Lausanne.
Australia is proud to have been invited to&nbsp;participate as Guest Exhibitor at this year's Fair. We&nbsp;greatly value this honour, both as further testimony of &nbsp;growing European interest in our country and as assting in&nbsp;achieving closer relations with the peoples of the European&nbsp;Continent and with the Goverrm-ent and people of Switzerland.
Australia has always had close ties with Europe.&nbsp;Modern comunications present us with opportunities to&nbsp;strengthen these ties by developing exchanges in cultural,&nbsp;comnercial tourist and other fields, not merely for our own&nbsp;benefit but in the interests of international accord.
In particular, I wish to pay tribute to the great&nbsp;contributions made to the development of Australia by our&nbsp;many new citizens from Europe. They have enriched our way of&nbsp;life and have given us a new appreciation of the traditions&nbsp;and culture, the industry and skills of Europe, to which the&nbsp;Swiss people have made such a splendid contribution.
The people of your country enjoy a high reputation&nbsp;in Australia for their industry, skill and good citizenship.&nbsp;Further, Swiss investors have contributed notably to the&nbsp;economic development of Australia, particularly through their&nbsp;support of Australian Govern: ent loans raised in Switzerland.
I have asked our Treasurer, the rigft Honourable&nbsp;Harold Holt who will be representing the Government of&nbsp;Australia at the Fair and at the Australian Economic Seminar,&nbsp;to convey to you ny warm personal regards and my eanest wishthat Australia's participation in this year's Fair will reflect&nbsp;both our gratitude and our realisation of the high honour&nbsp;accorded to us
CANBERRAllth September, 1960.



P. M. No. 3j/ 1960
CHAIRMAN OF COMMON LEAL TH GRANTS COMMISSION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, today announced the
appointment of a new Chairman of the Commonwealth Grants
Commission, the statutory body ihich makes recommendations to
the Commonwealth for the payment of special grants to the
claimant States at Present Western Australia and Tasmania.
Sir Alexander Fitzgerald, who has been the
Commission's Chairman for 15 years does not wish to be reappointed
after his present term expires on 30th of this mont'.,
The Commonwealth Government has appointed Mr. P. D.
Phillips, of Melbourne as Chairman of the Commission for a
period of three years commencing on 1st October, 1960. Mr.
Phillips has had a distinguished career at the Bar from which he
retired in 1958. He retains a lectureship in law at Melbourne
University. The new Chairman has a wide knowledge of Commonwealth
and State affairs and has been active in matters relating
to public administration. He was Chairman of the Victorian
Transport Regulation 3oard from 1934 to 1937; Deputy Chairman
of the Commonwealth Liquid Fuel Control Board in 1944/ 45. He
has also served as Chairman of the Australian Institute of
International Affairs and of the Victorian group of the
Institute of Public Administration and as President of the
Victorian branch of the Economic Society.
The Commonwealth has re-appointed Sir Alexander Reid,
of Perth as a member of the Grants Commission for
a similar three-year term. The other member is Professor Wilfred
Prest of Melbourne. The Prime Minister said that as Chairman of the
Commonwealth Grants Commission, Sir Alexander Fitzgerald had
served Australia with distinguished competence. He had taken up
the post towards the end of 1945, which meant that his work
spanned the whole period since the uniform tax system had been
established on a permanent basis. Those years had seen immense
changes in the Australian economy and in the relationships of the
States with the Commonwealth and with one another. At every
stage new difficulties had emerged and these had often had a
severe effect upon the financially weaker members of the Federation
with whose position the Grants Commission was especially
concerned. With his colleagues, Sir Alexander had brought to the
solution of these probelms great skill, tact and impartiality.
Mr. Menzies concluded that the Commonwealth had always had the
utmost confidence in Sir Alexander's judgment and so, he believed,
did all the State Governments with whom he had to deal.
CAN BERRA,
13th September, 1960. 


The Prime Minister today announced a further development in Australian participation in the Scheme of Commonwealth Co-operation in Education formulated last year at the Oxford Conference.
Preparations are at present being made for two educational survey teams to visit some of the Commonwealth countries and territories of Africa. These teams, each comprising three prominent educationists, will study at firsthand the problems of educational development in these countries. They will spend approximately six weeks abroad and on their return will advise how, in relation to our resources Australia can best assist education in the countries visited.
The members of the teams are as follows
To visit East African countries: Mr. D. H. Tribolet, Director of Education, Tasmania, Mr. O. E. Nilsson, Chief Inspector of Technical Schools, Victoria, and Mr. H. E. Hughes of the Commonwealth Office of Education.
To visit West African countries: Mr. H. A. Dettman, Deputy Director of Education, Western Australia, Mr. T. R. M. Sloane Assistant Director of Education, New South .Wales, and Mr. J. S. W4alker, Superintendent of Technical Schools, South Australia.
The Prime Minister said that he wished to record his appreciation of the way in which the States were co-operating by making available the services of these senior officers, He said that Mr. G. K. D. Murphy, Deputy Director-General of Education for Queensland, and Mr. J. M. Carswell of the Department of Technical Education, New South Wales, had recently visited Fiji and the British Solomon Islands on similar types of mission. The information gained from these v4sits was already proving most valuable, and it was anticipated that this will also be the case with the visits to Africa.
CANBERRA,14th September, 1960.



0 SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R.
G. MENZIES AT THE CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
DINNER IN SYDNEY ON THURSDAY, 15TH SEPTEMBER,
960
Sir: I am delighted to be here in such delightfully mixed
company at the top table. I say nothing of the rest of you
who, after all, are paying for us, but I must say I've never
seen you look more relaxed or more human.
The first time I ever attended a dinner of the
Chamber in this place, in which I felt instinctively as I
looked around, " After all, they are all human beings"
( Laughter) Rather a pleasant sensation.
But up here of course, we're a mixed grill: I have
Dr. Heffron ( Laughter my old friend. Je both became
Doctors on the one day, did you know that? Of course not:
you're very ill informed. You are so busy attacking the
Government that you have no time for more interesting matters.
( Laughter) Bob Hoffron and I became Doctors on the one day ho
a Doctor of Letters, not including letters to the Sydney
Morning Herald ( Laughter) and I a Doctor of Law.
And also 1e have at the top table if I may make a
brief selection, my distinguished telegenic friend, Arthur
Calwell ( Laughter, Applause) who has torn himself away from his
television fans ( Laughter) for this night only, bringing with
him his Deputy, Gough 4hitlam. He's here somewhere tall,
good-looking fellow. They always have to travel together
otherwise they might disagree. ( Laughter)
So that wc at the top table here very properly
are the dead heads tonight and you, thank Heaven, are the
contributors. Judging by the Company reports that I have been
reading, you can jolly iell afford to entertain us ( Laughter)
at dinner. Now I've been tricked tonight. In the past what has
happened has been this: I've been about number five on the
list and somebody has got up and made a most offensive speech
about meno which has increased my blood pressure to such a point
that it has become normal. And then I've sort of fought my
way out. And tonight some low cunning I think it must be
the new secretary some low cunning has been exercised and I
have to break the ice. I go first. I can't feed on the
crumbs that fall from the poor man's table. I have to go
first and break it up. And I have to say something, I believe,
about Australian industry.
Nov, Sir, this is a most interesting title because I
can remember young as I am I can remember a time when the
toast would be " Australian manufacturing" or, in another
setting, " The / ool industry", or, in another setting, " The
Wheat Industry" according to where you were, and the particular
political circumstances in which you found yourself.
But tonight it is " Australian Industry". And that
very title tells me all that I want to tell you. Because
Australian industry has now begun to see itself as something so
closely related, one part to another, that it is almost
indivisible.
-j 
No longer do we need to go along and say to
manufactures, " Oh, it's quite all right, we ought to havo
manufacturers. Whatever they say against you, my dear boy, I
think there is a little to be said for you, you know,."
That day has gone. And the day has gone when
people in the great primary industries devoted their waking
hours to denouncing the existence of manufacturing in their
own country. And the day has gone by when both of the, or either
of then, occupies any time in talking about, what shall I call
it? " tertiary" industry: all the complexities of modern
commercial existence upon which, in the long run, we all
depend. And so " Australian Industry" it is. Industry
inter-dependent; industry in a country, a great and growing
and marvellous country, which itself enjoys inter-dceendence
with other groat free communities in the world.
It is really one of those occasions. I think it is
almost historic when the very name of the Toast conveys to us
something of the quality of the now Australia.
In my very earliest days when I was a boy, if you
can exercise your inagination to think of such a time, it was
many, many years before I ever became Prime Minister it is a
long time ago and in my very earliest days, born and bred
in the bush with whoatcrops nodding over the fence, I had a
father who used to say to me in the long winter evenings:
" Robert we must have manufacturing in Australia. you must grow
up to be a protectionist". Well at the age of ten you don't
quite know rhat a Protectionist is, do you? But I learned, I
learned. The old man gave me the works. By the tinm I was
fourteen I was a much more bigoted protectionist than a ro) dern
member of the Country Party. ( Laughter)
But those wore the days when it all had to be done
defensively. Those wore the days when Australia was thought
about in other countries, and perhaps even in the nother
country of our race, as a farming community. Those days have
gone. Australia today is two things. And it is worth
remembering them: It is a great industrial country and it is
a great trading country. are one of the groat tr; oaing
nations of the world. And how do we trade? Not just by
buying; not just by selling. But by doing it buth ways. A
great trading country'
Now up to now, or up to the oti-r day, owhe . ave sold
to the rest of the world predomrinantly the products of the
soil and of the pastures and of the skill of the c. untry. As
manufacturers we have predoninantly provided for ourselves.
We have said, 1oll we have a good ho-e market;
it's adequately protected". I say that loosely and
rhetorically gentlnmen ( Laughter) because I know that you all
feel that it never has been. But still, by and largo, you're
out of the Bankruptcy Court. Therefore I venture to say that
on the whole our manufacturing industry has been adequately
protected. But primarily we have sold to ourselves, to our
neighbours in our own country. Australian manufactu-ing
doesn't need to come of age in Australia: it came f ' go a
long time ago in . ustralia. But it does need to come of ae
in the internatio nal sensc. 
3.
I can't believe that Australia will occupy the place
that she ought to occupy in the world if her balance of
payments, her overseas reserves, depend primarily and substantially
on the price of wool, or the wheat crop, or the
price of wheat, or the prospects of the beef industry, or
whatever it may be.
These are, of course, troeendously important things.
But what has any groat exporting country in the manufacturing
field, what has it got that we haven't got? More skill? I
decline to believe it. I'n vain enough to say that in any
comparable fields of human activity, Australians ought never to
take second place in skill, or character, or quality, or
courage ( Applause). So wo don't give way in that field,
Somebody says, " Well, of course, we don't have the
same turnover; we don't have the same volume of business". I
don't suppose they did, once. I am prepared to assert that if
we have enough imagination to get up out of our own backyard, we
will find, in this new world which is blossoming all around us,
a field for our activities which will make those who were
gloomy about business turnover today, wonder what happened to
them in ten years tine.
All this requires an imaginate effort. We must get
up over the border of our c) untry and have a look at the world,
And if you look at the world, well what do you see?
You see new-nation after new nation coming what to? To
political independence? Yes. That is perhaps relatively easy.
But it is of no importance whatever unless they also cone,
perhaps not quite so fast, but in the quick run, to economic
independence. You look across Africa. You read the newspapers an.,
you see that there are eight, nine, now African countries
seeking to join the United Nations. oleo pen the newspapers and
we read all the horrors of the Congo internal disputes. We open
our papers and we read about Asia and Sjuth-East Asian countries
and all the turbulence that exists in countries from Laos to
Cambodia, to South Vietnam, moving down into Indonesia, our
nearest neighbour. Jell do we just look at this? And fool afraid? And
feel apprehensive? Or do we take enough time off to say to
oursclves, " What's going It nay be extraordinarily
uncomfortable at present; it may be marred by all sorts of
revolting incidents. But what is joing on is that you have
hundreds of millions of people struggling, not only to the
political life, but to a new standard of life and of living.
And here we are, Australia, right on the corner of
this development: the most advanced country, industrially, to
be found in the Southern Hemisphere, with people all of whom
are free and intelligent and active at least 49-or 50Jo of
them are intolligent politically ( Laughter). But let us use
it broadly and metaphorically: an intelligent people, a
people accustomed, each of him, to a standard of living, a
material standard of living better than his father's and ruch
better than his grandfather's.
This is a wonderful country to be in. And here we
are with all the advantages of technique, of technology, of
experience, of skill, of courage, of imagination. Why can't
these things bring about a result that in 50 years' time we
needn't worry: we won't be here but in 50 years' time
Australia is one of the great exporters of the product of her
factories, one of the leading exporters, and is able to say
that so far as she goos with the rest of the world her oconomy 
is as soundly placed as any of the groat exporting nations of
the first half of the twentieth century.
Now I just say that to you. Not to be rhetorical,
but to urge you to soe with the eye of imagination what a
remarkable opportunity we have.
I know you nay , o away and say, " Well, of course we
could do that if it were not for the Government". Well
Governments, I'n happy to say, cone and -o and if we happen to
enjoy your favour we begin to think that we did a fri htfully
good job. We nay not be right.
As an old political sweat I want to toll you this:
That all the good things that have been done in Australia,
all the wonderful adhiovenents that have been made in
Australia, have been made by ordinary Australian non and wonen
with courage and with enterprise.
And because I believe that, I have the greatest
pleasure in the world in standing up before you tonight, never
having yet, contrary to all precedent, boon hooted even once,
and propose to you, not just as Manufacturers, but as prominent
citizens of a great all-round country, with groat all-round
industrial achievement, I stand and ask you to drink the
health of " Australian Industry". 


".By this method, it was thought, the evil results of competitive borrowingwould be eliminated and the national credit backing would improve theprospects of effective loan raising.
8.This system worked in strict accordance with its terms for aconsiderable time, I can well remember, for example, that in the yearsimmediately preceding the second World War it was the practice for theCommonwealth Bank, as it was then constituted, to underwrite the loanprogramme. The Prime Minister and Federal Treasurer would meet the StateTreasurers; discussion would occur; there would be argument as to whetherthe borrowing programme ( believe-it or not!) should be 120m. or œ E22m.;constant reference wa's made to the Commonwealth Bank to see how much it wasprepared to underwrite. In the upshot a figure say of œ E21m, would be arrivedat; it became the borrowing programme; the success of the programme wasassured by the underwriting; the next business, and the important businessof the Loan Council, was to divide up, what Sir Thomas Playford nowadayscalls " the turkey"; whereupon each State Government representative wouldgo away to work this into his Budget proposals for the forthcoming financialyear. Though, after the war, underwriting ceased to be the rule, itstill remained true that the prime business of the Loan Council was todiscuss how much money could be borrowed on reasonable terms and conditions.There was no question of the Commonwealth underwriting the programme, andtherefore programmes were fairly realistically arrived at. But by thetime I came back into office myself, at the end of 1949, it was becomingincreasingly clear that instead of the depressed circumstances which somepeople had anticipated the country was on the verge of a great expansionistmovement. This involved not only very high demands onfor private capital expansion, but equally, and no lessgrowing demand for public works which would provide thefor private capital expansion. private capitalimportantly, aessential foundationWhile this growing demand for capital works programmes onbehalf of governments was manifesting itself, it became at the same timeclear that the competing demands of enormous expansion in both the publicand the private sector limited the amount which could reasonably beexpected to be borrowed by Governments. The Commonwealth Government therefore,without obligation, but in order to meet the realistic economic needs of thecountry, adopted for the first time the practice of aiding the loanraisingsby adding to them, where they fell short of the programme, fundsfrom Commonwealth sources. On one or two occasions this was done by whatwas a virtual underwriting of the programme by the Commonwealth. In morerecent times there has not been a formal underwriting but if and when theState representatives have adopted a public works programme which, in theview of the Commonwealth, is a reasonable one under all the circumstances,the Commonwealth has made payments to the States on account of the programmeat equal monthly amounts for the first six months, with an indicationthat the position will then be reviewed. In point of fact, however, the,4
9.monthly payments have been made throughout the financial year withoutreduction, so that in substance the States, when the works programmehas been approved of as a financial total, have had some assurancethat the money will be available to them.That this procedure alters the nature of the Financial Agreementis, of course, quite clear. No longer is the question: ' How much moneycan be borrowed on reasonable terms and conditions? but ' How muchmoney is reasonably needed for an attainable works programme?' Inconsequence the Commonwealth has, year by year, accepted additionalliabilities out of Commonwealth funds, sometimes on a very great scale.Though this practice has been of great advantage to State governmentsand was intended to be so, it has, of course, led to a state of affairsin which the States are increasingly dependent upon Commonwealth actionfor the carrying out of their works programmes.I confess that I regard this as another of the centralizing,or centripetal, developments in our own Federal Constitution. But I equallyconfess that I can see no way by which it could have been avoided, thoughit has involved the Commonwealth in paying for its own Works programmeout of revenue. There are financial purists who take pleasure in saying that,it is quite unsound to carry capital works on revenue account. That may,in strict theory, be right. But ' needs must when the devil drives'. ifthe Commonwealth had not been prepared, at some political inconvenience,to carry its own works programmes on revenue account, there would havebeen two conse~ quences: one, that the States would have received nosubvention for their own works programmes out of Commonwealth revenues; andtwo, that the Commonwealth works programmes would have been considerablyreduced. What this could have meant in terms of the non-performance ofthe Snowy Mountains Scheme and a considerable damping down of expansion inthe postal and telegraphic services, I leave to the imagination of thosewho are familiar with these problems.Another provision of the Commonwealth Constitution under whichthe original Federal balance has been changed, is that contained in Section96 of the Constitution. That Section provides that:During a period of ten years after the establishment of theCommonwealth and thereafter until the Parliament otherwiseprovides, the Parliament may grant financial assistance toany State on such terms and conditions as the Parliamentthinks fit." It may very well be the case, particularly having regard towhat I may call its initial character, that the draftsmen of the
Constitution felt that such grants by the Commonwealth of financialassistance might become necessary having regard to some purely temporarycauses during the period of Federal transition. But the Section hascontinued to operate, and nobody supposes that it will be changed.There was in some minds a feeling that Section 96 providedfor the making of a grant but did not enable the Commonwealth to attachto the grant conditions which amounted to the exercise by the Commonwealthof a legislative authority not otherwise accorded to it.In the case of Victoria v. the Commonwealth in 38 C. L. R.,p. 399, I myself, as Counsel, made a valiant but quite futile attempt topersuade the High Court that this was the position. The case concernedthe Federal Aid Roads Act of 1926. My argument-in that case, on behalfof the State of Victoria, was that the Federal Aid Roads Act was " invalidbecause it was a law relating to road-making and not a law for grantingfinancial aid to the States." I therefore argued that it wasn't warrantedby either Section 96 or by the legislative powers granted by Section 51of the Constitution. I argued that one must look at the substance of theAct, and that, so regarding it, it was one to provide for the constructionof roads, a matter over which the Commonwealth had no general jurisdiction.This somewhat engaging argument was dismissed by the HighCourt quite unanimously, in the following emphatic words:it The Court is of opinion that the Federal Aid Roads Actis a valid enactment. It is plainly warranted by the provisions ofSection 96 of the Constitution, and not affected by those of Section99 or any other provisions of the Constitution, so that exposition isunnecessary. iThis made it clear that, provided that a law is one providingfor a grant to a State, the terms which may surround that grant are mattersentirely within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth Parliament. Thisview has subsequently been judicially confirmed.This broad interpretation of the power has, beyond question,been of considerable practical value to the-States. A very recent exampleis the system of State grants for Universities made by the CommonwealthParliament. This is a development which probably was not foreseen in1901: it is one which has affected what was then thought to be theFederal distribution of powers between the national Parliament and theParliaments of the States. But it undoubtedly has had the effect ofsaving the State Universities from financial disaster. The whole matteris a very good illustration of how something which was not'anticipated inthe Constitution when it was first enacted can come into existence byjudgicial interpretation and the inexorable demands of new circumstances.
The institution and subsequent maintenance of what is calledUniform Taxation ( though it applies to Income Tax ( individual and company)only) also deserves special though necessarily inadequate mention. Thatit has profoundly affected Australian federalism is beyond question, thoughit turns upon no formal constitutional amendment whatever.The scheme, which involved an Income Tax Assessment Act, anIncome Tax Act, an Income Tax ( War-time Arrangements) Act, and a StateGrants ( Income Tax Reimbursement) Act, was introduced in 1942 as a wartimemeasure, though in the nature of things it was bound to continuewhile high war-caused rates of tax continued. Its validity was challengedin the High Court, but was upheld ( 65 C. L. R. 373) under the taxation power,the defence power, and Section 96. That decision has more recentlybeen upheld on the points of substance.The judicial arguments made it clear that the Commonwealth'staxation power, with or without the Grants power under Section 96, islegally capable of being used " so as to make the States almost completelydependent, financially and therefore generally, upon the Commonwealth"( see per Latham C. J. 65 C. L. R. at p. 429). This means that to preservethe true nature of Australian federalism certain questions became vitallyimportant. As the high war-time level of income taxes subsided, would itbecome practicable to restore to the States the use of their own incometaxing powers? Could the growing Commonwealth financial power be keptin check by a public political consciousness of the need for maintaininga high degree of State autonomy for State purposes? At the same time,could we avoid carrying State-consciousness to a point at which the trueessence of the necessary national spirit became weakened?The restoration of State taxing powers has been debated severalLimes in Premiers' Conferences, and many more times in other politicalcircles. There has been no positive evidence that most of the StateGovernments really want a return of taxing powers on terms which would bereasonably acceptable to the Commonwealth and still permit it to dischargeits admittedly major responsibilities. Yet a return of taxing powers byunilateral Commonwealth action would be pregnant with disaster if agenuine agreement between Commonwealth and States were not arrived at.At a Premiers' Conference on this great matter, which I specially convenedin 1953, there was a close discussion, which left it, if I may speakquite frankly, most unlikely that Uniform Tax would end unless therearose a revolutionary change in the opinions of governments.Yet, of the Premiers, two, from Western Australia and Tasmania,declared unequivocally that they did not want their income taxing powersrestored; one, New South Wales, requested that the Commonwealth should
12.reduce its taxes by twice the amount of the tax reimbursement an obviouslyfantastic proposal which was only another way of saying that Uniform Taxshould continue; another South Australia, was prepared to accept areduction of over œ. 60m. more than the Tax Reimbursement!. Queenslandpointed out, which was obvious enougjh, that as its taxing capacity waslow and its pre-war State income taxc had been very high, it was betteroff under Uniform Tax, and would, ihould State tax be restored, eitherneed to impose State tax at a much higher rate than New South Wales orVictoria, or would need a special annual grant from the Commonwealth underSection 967-which would cut across the principle of matching power andresponsibility. There was another grave question that of Company Tax. Ata time when the rapid development of Australian industry is extending theoperation of companies and is producing inter-state operations on thepIa rt of more and more of them, there is much to be said for a UniformCompany Tax imposed by one authority. The position would be bothchaotic and discouraging if the one company found itself taxed twice onthe same earnings once by the State of its residence, and once by theState of the source of revenue.This great controversy does appear to have been put to rest,for six years at any rate, by the conference of Commonwealth and StateMinisters of June 1959, where a new Tax Reimbursement formula was workedout, accepted on all sides, and by agreement made to apply for six years.You may well think that the end result of this examination isuntidy, inconclusive, and unsatisfyi ng and perhaps self contradictory.Federation in Australia is a good thing, and should bepreserved; butThe centralising forces acquire strength every year.Constitutional problems attract little public attention exceptduring the actual currency of a campaign; and even then there tends to berather more heat than light. This is not surprising. Federalism isin its very nature legalistic. A proper understanding of it involves aconsiderable intellectual exercise in both synthesis and analysis. Thevery notion of Federal and State Governments elected by and dealing with thesame people, but with sovereign powers divided between them according to theterms of a legal instrument as interpreted from time to time by the judiciary,is complex. Many try to understand it, and confess failure. Many,perhaps wisely, do not even try. This is basically, the reason whyConstitutional Amendment by popular vote has proved so difficult.
13.The electors have voted fairly consistently against anyformal addition to the powers of the Commonwealth Parliament, but to anoverwhelming extent they accept those changes in financial power whichhave substantially the same effect.There is a marked and growing tendency to look to theCommonwealth Government to accept financial responsibility for the performanceof State powers by the State Governments and even for thefunctions of local governing bodies created by the States for local purposes.Yet at the same time there are inadequate signs of a united national spirit.I venture to doubt whether Uniform Tax will ever be changed.Except in one State, Victoria, I have seen no evidence of a real desireto re-create two independent direct taxing authorities. Most people,I think, feel that we have learned to live with " Uniform Tax", and thatto put the constitutional clock back to a time before the second WorldWar is not feasible. If this is true, as I fear it is, Australian federalism hasalready sustained a great change which affects the originally designedbalance or distribution of powers. Centripetal movements are not likelysuddenly to halt themselves. Except in the unlikely event that thereis a wide public demand for confining financial demands upon theCommonwealth to those matters which fall within Commonwealth legislativepower, and for re-establishing the independent taxing power and responsibilityof State Governments, the centripetal movement must be accepted. If thisbe the position, we are confronted by two tasks of great practicalimportance. One is to see that the growing financial power of the Commonwealthis exercised in such a way as to permit the States to dischargetheir own constitutional duties. The other is to abandon, not theprinciples of federalism, but that excessive emphasis upon purely localrights which is proving such an impediment to the creation of a trulynational sentiment and pride.


P. M. No. 34/ 1960
SPACE RESEARCH AT tIOOMvERA
Joint Statement by Mr. Menzies and Mr. Thorneycroft
The United Kingdom Minister for Aviation, the Rt.
Hon. Peter Thorneycroft, has had discussions in Canberra
with members of the Australian Cabinet on the general question
of conducting space research from Woomera with particular
reference to the use of Blue Streak for the launching of
satellites for communications and other purposes. The talks
have been purely and necessarily exploratory; for no decision
about proceeding with this matter has yet been reached by the
United Kingdom Government. The United Kingdom Government has
not at this stage been seeking firm commitments and
consequently no commitment direct or indirect has been
accepted. The subject matter is vast and no proposals could be
formulated with precision at this stage.
The purpose of Mr. Thorneycroft's visit was to give
the Australian Ministers an account of the way in which the
United Kingdom Government has so far viewed the possibilities.
The discussions which ensued were concerned also with
the feasibility which has been established of a space research
programme based on ! oomera and with seeking to get some
picture of the eventual application of such activity.
Australian Ministers have been greatly assisted by
the information and ideas laid before them by Mr. Thorneycroft
and his advisers, and various aspects of the matter have been
closely examined. A good deal of the discussion has directed
itself to the very important issue of priorities having regard
to the developmental problems which confront Australian
Governments. Mr. Thorneycroft has come first to Australia because
of the close association of the two countries in other projects
but he proposes to visit other countries in relation to these
matters and, should occasion arise, further exchanges between
the United Kingdom and Australia will occur.
During his stay in Australia Mr. Thorneycroft has
made a visit to ioomera to inspect the Range facilities. He
has also taken the opportunity to review with the relevant
Australian Ministers the progress of the weapon development
programme at Woomera. Irrespective of any decision which may
be made about Blue Streak, there is a considerable load of
work on the remaining weapon development. Talks have taken
place about the planning of this work and also about the still
further improvement of the arrangements for joint Australian/
United Kingdom co-operation during the formative stages of new
weapon projects.
CANBERRA
21st September, 1960. 


23rd&nbsp;September 1960 -&nbsp;The Menace of Communism
&nbsp;Liberalism and Communism are at the very opposite poles of thought and action. A victory for Communism would involve the destruction of literally everything we stand for.
This week sees the launching in New York, at the General Assembly of the United Nations, of the greatest propaganda campaign in history. What is it about? Is it for us just a distant event of rather less importance than who wins tomorrow's match? Does it concern us just academically, or does it concern us vitally?
The leader of the propaganda campaign is, of course, Khruschev, the master of and the spokesman for the Soviet Union. But what is the remarkable character of this campaign?
The Communists have the most concentrated and aggressive record of imperialism to be found in modern history. They have pursued their territorial and ideological campaigns in the most unscrupulous and predatory fashion.
But in the course of their campaign they have actually and impudently preached against imperialism and have, I fear, persuaded many dupes that imperialism is the great characteristic of the Western world and that they are delivering many nations from it.&nbsp;
They have by conquest or by cunning converted many historic nations, which were once proud and independent, into subservient colonies of the Kremlin. They have done this in the most opportunist fashion. Thus, in the recent war, acting under an agreement with Hitler-Germany, they invaded Poland and Finland. They annexed Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, and compelled Rumania to yield some territory. When the Nazis attacked the Soviet Union in 1941, our war against Hitler, according to their propaganda, ceased to be an " imperialist" war it became, once they wore in it, a " war for freedom". When the war ended they continued their evil work, They absorbed the once free people of East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Bulgaria. They inspired their Chinese friends and pupils, who had established Communist government in China, to absorb Tibet, Outer Mongolia and North Korea and to maintain tension in relation to neighbouring countries.&nbsp;
But at the very time of doing all those things they sought to enlist the sympathy of former colonies by denouncing colonialism as an evil characteristic of the Western Powers.
They have talked about freedom and expressed their sympathy with those struggling for it in other lands,
But they have reduced hundreds of millions of once free people to a form of regimented slavery; a kind of slavery prevalent in the Soviet Union itself where industrial conscription is the rule and where the movements of people inside their own country is subject to a close system of internal passports.
They have kept the world in a state of ferment and apprehension; they have imposed upon the free peoples of the world a necessity to maintain great armaments and of standing ready to use them in their own defence.
But they have all the time preached peace and have promoted so-called " peace" demonstrations in countries like our own whose great ambition is to have peace, but who know or ought to know that the only threat to their own peace proceeds from the headquarters of Communism.
They have practised espionage on the grand scale; they have cunningly seduced from their allegiance western scientists and diplomats.
But they pretend horror at the U2 incident and are setting about the task of persuading the free democracies that counter-espionage is disreputable, and that nothing is further from the Soviet mind than a desire to penetrate the military and national secrets of any other land.
They have actively denied religious beliefs and pursued entirely godless and materialist aims.
But they have, through their agents, sought either to cultivate the friendship or to disarm the fears of people of religious faith in other countries.
They have in Russia destroyed true trades unionism by making it a subservient creature of the State; they have prohibited under violent penalties all strikes and direct action; they have eliminated all free choice of occupation.
But their devoted agents in Australia, for example, seek to use the trades unions for their own purposes; to creep into positions of union power; to proclaim the right to strike and to exercise it under circumstances which inflict the maximum of inconvenience and ultimately the maximum of danger upon our own people.
All of these facts are or should be well-known, but they need to be re-stated with precision because there is a grave temptation in the minds of all of us to escape from such problems and to regard all as being for the best in the best of all possible worlds,
In brief, the Soviet propaganda campaign is the most superbly organised piece of hypocrisy that the world has yet seen.&nbsp;
Because the Liberal Party of Australia stands foursquare against the success of this campaign, I propose tonight, in a non-election period, to discuss some aspects of this great problem and to urge you to renewed understanding and effort.&nbsp;Time, mercifully for you, is limited. But I am deeply concerned about some matters that we cannot or should not ignore:&nbsp;
The Khruschev strategy and tactics
Our own security measures, and the attack upon them
Some of the sentimental fallacies which are distracting us
The duty of government
The duty of the people.
I now say something about the Khrushchev strategy, That strategy is to stir up mass agitations in non-Communist countries; to seek to lead those agitations in the great name of nationalism: to sow distrust of democratically established authority and to brand all those who reject and resist this kind of Communist activity as the enemies of peace and tools of capitalists; to avoid recourse to actual war on the grand scale, but to pursue all means of paralysing or confusing thought in non-communist countries.
Anybody with half an eye witnessing the events of the last twelve months can see this demonstrated to evil perfection. Take the Congo. Rightly or wrongly the Belgium Government handed over complete self-government to that country. The country was clearly not ready for it. It fell almost instantly into what may be described, not unfairly as a state of primitive tribal warfare. Events became so terrible and bloody that the United Nations intervened, established a United Nations force and went in to try to restore order and to assist in the establishment of peaceful and economical viable Government. What did the Soviet Union do? It took the first opportunity to intervene: it sought to create hostility to the United Nations action: it provided weapons and other equipment for partisans: it offered its own form of economic aid. In short it proceeded at once to buy its way into a position in which it would be the deliverer, the price being that it should become the master. Unfortunately for the Soviet, the now nations of Africa outside the Congo have rejected this manoeuvre and have upheld the United Nations. But the story is of course not yet finished. If there was one thing generally accepted at the last meeting of Prime Ministers in London earlier this year, it was that Africa and the emerging nations in Africa are the prominent target for Communist infiltration. This means a great deal to us, for if Communism strikes a deep root in Africa both that continent and Asia, particularly Communist Asia and South East Asia, will represent the greatest accretion of strength to aggressive Communism that the world has over seen. We, in Australia, cannot afford to witness these things unmoved. We would be guilty of the most suicidal blindness if we thought that an isolated position in the South Pacific could be long maintained by us, if we were confronted at close range by literally thousands of millions of people under Communist orders. But the Communist strategy goes further.
&nbsp;Look at Cuba, the repository of vast amounts of productive investment from the United States and from Great Britain. A fanatical dictator establishes himself and, to put it quite shortly, steals the investments. He defies the western world. But at the very moment when he is engaging in this defiance he is in close communication with the Soviet Union and is securing from them, on their own terms, economic aid and violent political support. Do you suppose that even if you lived in the traditional safety of the United States you would feel comfortable or secure if Cuba became in effect a Communist base? Khrushchev conducts all these operations with a mastery of propaganda and a capacity for abusive and truculent speech which oven Hitler could hardly have hoped to rival. He takes the initiative: he presses for a Summit Conference in Paris and then torpedoes it on the most flimsy grounds: he , goes barn-storming to the United Nations in Now York; he peremptorily calls on the leaders of the other nations to meet him there: he professes to believe that, in a vast assemblage of hundreds and hundreds of people from scores of countries, he can have a Sui-, it Mooting in an atmosphere of sweet reasonableness.
I never can understand how anybody who loves peace, as we all do, and would wish to see a true Summit meeting seriously and responsibly conducted, should fall for the present bullying tactics.
These are very grin thoughts but they are in no sense exaggerated, Vie will either take then into account and take stops to protect our own lives and ideals while we have tine or the day will come when we will either live to regret it, or die without having any chance to regret it at all.
Let me now turn specifically to matters in Australia.
In recent times nothing has been more disturbing and indeed frightening, than the organised campaign against Australia's Security Service. At the time of the Petrov Commission., and the antics performed before that body by Communists their sympathisers, we became accustomed to hear and read attacks on an organisation which after all was properly set up by Mr. Chifley himself and carried on by ne, and designed to be one of our protectors. When this propaganda proceeded from clearly Communist sources most people no doubt ignored it, or regarded it as a tribute to the Service's efficiency.&nbsp;
But the campaign has recently been renewed with great virulence and has been forwarded by various people and writers who would resent any suggestion that they were either Communists or fellow travellers. Thus a Sydney newspaper only this week permitted itself to say in a leading article that " the people's service, the Security Service, could become its masters a new gestapo operating with the blessing of the law."&nbsp;
This kind of extravagant observation makes it necessary to remind the people of Australia that the Security organisation was established, and is maintained, not as the agent of any democratic Australian political party but as the skilled and zealous enemy of those who would seek to destroy democracy in Australia and bring us into the Communist orbit.
Is there anybody in Australia so naive as not to know the nature of the activity of the Australian Communist Party and its associates? They are not inhibited by considerations of patriotism, They follow the Party line; their leaders, from time to time, repair to Moscow for refresher courses and instructions; they have no more belief in democracy than has Mr. Khrushchev himself; their loyalty lies outside their own country. Anybody with the slightest knowledge of current events, both overseas and here, knows that the strategy and tactics of the Soviet leader are faithfully adhered to by his friends in Australia. It is therefore tremendously important to us who are her and to our children and grandchildren who will hope to live in a free Australia, to realise what the Communist tactics are.
I say something about that because I believe that we are, in this very year facing one of the crucial periods of history. I want to put one or two questions of sheer common sense to Australian people, who are rich in that commodity. Do you suppose that the Australian Communists, not perhaps tremendously large in numbers, not electorally strong, but zealous, active and devoted, carry on their operations in public and according to the rules of Law? Do they publish their debates and their decisions or do they work underground, sneaking their way into Union control with the aid of unity tickets, outing themselves at the head of every new industrial demand, socking at all times and by all means to undermine the authority of democratically elected Governments and always directing their activities into places and positions where in the event of a great War, they could do the greatest amount of damage in the shortest possible time on behalf of their foreign masters?&nbsp;
If your answer to –these questions is in their favour, and if that represents the view of the Australian people, all I can say is that we are hell bent for disaster. But if your answer is against them, as every instinct in me tells me that it must be. then I ask you further would you wish to be without a Security organisation . working quietly and secretly in the field of counter espionage? The Security Organisation must, in its very nature, be anonymous and unadvertised. Its activities must never be advertised for, if they were, it could not hope to deal effect-with the enemy's spies and agents.&nbsp;
My predecessor, Mr. Chifley, adopted the sensible practice of not answering questions about the Security Organisation which he established, I have pursued that practice. I will continue to pursue it. I decline to be put in a position where I nay; be called upon to handicap and indeed to render completely futile, the work of able and honest men who are in the true sense the protectors of our freedom.&nbsp;
The Sydney newspaper to which I referred earlier, in the very sane article, affected to agree that the workings of our Security Service should not be made public and that, for obvious reasons, its sources of information should not be disclosed. But it went on to say " how would the Security Service be affected if not its workings but its accusations wore made public:" Did you ever hear such a fatuous proposal? This indeed is a proposal for McCarthyism. Whenever the Security Service in pursuance of its duty reports to me , v-hat it has learned about Communist activities and about individuals involved in then, I am presumably, automatically, to name these people and to accuse them. . Even a child could understand that if I resorted to such a practice, the very first question would be "what evidence have you to support these accusations?". And then to produce such evidence in any sense intelligible to our Law would involve a disclosure of all the relevant operations of the Service, the calling of Security officers as witnesses and a disclosure of their 1eans of securing their information. If I were a Communist, I would like this.
&nbsp;I have a very great respect for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation. Its honesty, its integrity and its objectivity are, in my long experience, beyond question. Of course the Communists distrust it and they occasionally induce some newspaper writers to spread their propaganda of distrust. But for myself I confess that the hostility of the Communists is something which I welcome. It proves the efficacy of the Organisation, It would be oven more violently expressed if the Communists knew how much information we have, thanks to the Organisation, about-their workings, their plans and their plots,&nbsp;
I seem to remember that when an iceberg is seen floating in the sea, its major bulk is under water. That is where the danger lies. What sort of a responsible Prime Minister of a free and democratic country would I be if, on your behalf, I insisted that our Security Organisation should conduct all its operations in the light of day, should be subject to public examination and the disclosure of all its activities, while the eneny worked in darkness and below the surface?&nbsp;I take leave to warn you that this bitter campaign in which so many decent people who have not thought the matter out nay find themselves involved, not only represents a propaganda triumph for the Communists but, if it succeeded, would deprive us of a protective mechanism without which Communist propaganda would soon pass into Communist achievement.
&nbsp;There is another example of the kind of attack which is made on our national self-protecting measures, and the way in which people are misled about them. A lawyer was dismissed from temporary employment in the Attorney-General's Department after ten weeks' service. Even one of the greatest newspapers in the country saw fit in relation to this natter to criticise the dismissal on the ground that the : victim, so called, had not been given any right of appeal or a chance to rebut any charges made against him. Now this, I confess, seems to me to exhibit a most careless attitude of mind. This was the case of a man temporarily employed. He had no rights of continuity. He was, on his own subsequent statement and on those . made on his behalf in Parliament, engaged in work which gave hin access to material of a security nature. He was assisting in the preparation of opinions relating to various Departments including External Affairs, C. S. I. RO. and the Atomic Energy Commission. He therefore saw files covered by categories of " Confidential", " Secret" and " Most Secret," Those facts are admitted and therefore call for no rebuttal. It turned out, though perhaps it should have been discovered a few weeks earlier, that this nan had been a very active Communist beginning in 1947. I quote the words of his Champion in the Federal Parliament, who brought the case up, Hr. Ward M. P. Mr. Ward said that this man "was a Communist Party candidate for the Lakemba electorate of the State elections held in 1956. .But in November, lcj6 he was expelled from the Party", It might be said " Ah well, perhaps he was expelled from the Communist Party because he had repented, and had come out in opposition to their ideas," I must confess that if a man with that record came along to me, I don't think I would set him loose among my private papers! Would YOU? But it turned out, according to Mr. Ward, that he was not expelled because he ceased to be a Communist. Not at all.. He was expelled for " criticising the people who were in charge of the Australian Communist Party for having suppressed the report of a speech by Mr. Khrushchev denouncing the Stalin regime" Here we have a man who is presumably a strong supporter of Mr, Khrushchev, and who objected to a speech of that gentleman not being published. I must say that under all these circumstances, which are proved by the man himself and his spokesman in Parliament, I can see no case for charges or appeal. I would have thought the Attorney-General's Department lacking in its duty if it had not taken the action which it did in fact take.
You may quite naturally say to me, after my brief observations on the Communist menace, “What are you doing about it?" To this first of all I reply that the greatest line of defence against the Communist manoeuvres is an informed, healthy and active public opinion. That is what I am tonight trying to urge you to create. But in so far as the question relates to the Government I will answer it. As you will remember, we passed Legislation on this matter some years ago, the particular purpose of which was to place a ban on the Communist Party and proscribe its activities. This legislation was challenged successfully in the High Court, which in effect held that legislation about Communists as such was beyond the legislative powers of the Commonwealth Parliament, We then sought constitutional powers by an amendment which was rejected by the electors at a Referendum. Being in consequence thrown back upon more limited and indirect measures presented to the Commonwealth Parliament a law relating. to secret ballots for union offices, because we felt that if union members were able, by properly conducted secret ballot to vote for union officers, the rank and file of the unions, who have no love for Communism, would by a free and unthreatened vote, have an opportunity of getting rid of Communist leaders who, while they profess to serve the interests of the union, are in reality serving the interests of their overseas principals. It is worth noting that although this legislation went through Parliament, the Labour Opposition unanimously voted against it. For a time the secret ballot law was remarkably effective. Many Communist officials were dismissed. The Industrial Groups, as they were called in the unions, men and women devoted to opposition to Communism, were able to put into operation legal machinery which , gave all the members of their particular union their opportunity. But within a few years the Australian Labour Party, under its strange leadership, began an active campaign against those Groups. It sought to help the left-wing elements in the unions. Whether it realised it or not, its activities wore designed to strengthen the position of the Communists and to weaken that of their opponents. This remarkable campaign by the leaders of Labour soon produced the formation of an anti-Communist labour group in the Federal Parliament, every member of which, as far as the House of Representatives was concerned, subsequently lost his Seat. The D. L. P. about which there is so much contention, was formed as a consequence of this remarkable A. L. P. policy. As a result of A. L. P. action, anti-Communist activities in the unions were frowned upon and discouraged. Those Communist union officers who had been dismissed found themselves coming back.&nbsp;
We have reaped the harvest of this fantasy in the form of some widespread strikes organised and carried through by Communist led unions, for example in the Railways. The L. P. ought to be proud of the results of its work. For that party has, in its anxiety to please the Communists, put itself in a position of ambiguity which is the major reason for its continued existence in Opposition. It has indeed developed a strange sense of national values. Even Mr. Calwell himself, who must personally have no sympathy whatever with the atheistic materialism of the Communist creed, was reported only a few years back as tolling the New South Wales Labour Conference that " Capitalism was the No. 1 enemy in Australia and Communism only No. If this means anything ( and of course it may not) it means that he would regard the overthrow of capitalism and the institution of state socialism as a more important task than the defeat of our greatest external and internal enemy. Sone of his Parliamentary followers have made even more astonishing remarks. Early this year a Labour Senator admitted that he would much rather support the Communist than support the while only in June the Secretary of the Melbourne Trades Hall Council told the Victorian State A. L. P. Conference " that he would choose the Communist in front of the D. L. P. or Liberal".
It is clear from this that in the fight against Communism no help is to be expected from the A. L. P. The position therefore is, in practice, that the great weapon of the secret ballot, conferred upon the members of unions for their own protection, has been in large measure sabotaged by our political opponents.
Again, we have waged an active campaign against the deplorable practice of the issue of Unity Tickets for union elections. In such tickets, the A. L. P. Candidate and the Communist candidate stand side by side and help each other to achieve victory. What is the attitude of Labour on this matter? I can only describe it as ambiguous and futile. Sometimes it says that there is no such animal as a Unity Ticket. When a few actual Unity Tickets are exhibited in all their nakedness the reply is that " we really cannot do anything about it. It is a Union matter and we do not interfere". What a remarkable attitude this is. They did not hesitate to interfere in union affairs in an attempt to destroy the Industrial Groups. But they have no power or desire to interfere in union affairs to destroy the Communists
The latest example of what we are in course of' doing relates to the Crimes Bill recently introduced by the. Attorney- General It will be open to full public examination pending resumption of the debate in a few weeks' time That the Communists are conducting a campaign against any law which proposes to increase the defences of the Nation against treachery and sabotage is something I can well understand,. The Communist newspapers have already launched a full-blooded campaign, full of the usual vituperation. That campaign is to be expected, since in their very nature active Communists are to be expected to prefer the interests of their foreign masters to the safety of their own land. But I greatly fear that, as usual, a lot of people who are not Communists at all are beginning to be fooled by the propaganda. Part of that propaganda relates to the Security Service, about which I have said something. Part of it consists of allegations that the proposed legislation violates the normal rights of an individual who is charged with a crim. It is, I suppose, gratifying testimony to the traditions of British justice, whose principles are utterly rejected by Communism, that even the Communists should seek to obtain protection from British- Australian law while they go on with their evil work of undermining; it,&nbsp;You would be here for a very long time if I endeavoured to reproduce the speech made by Sir Garfield Barwick when he introduced the Crimes Bill. I hope that people who are really interested will read, it, and will do so before committing themselves to public comment.
But I will take just one example in this Bill which shows how careful y'; u must be not to be le0 away by superficial commentators.&nbsp;
The Bill contains a provision about sabotage the elements of which are that an article directly material to the safety or defence of Australia is destroyed, damaged of impaired for a purpose prejudicial or intended to be prejudicial to the safety or defence of the Commonwealth. To most normal Australians that would appear to be a very proper matter to be dealt with, The clause :goes on to provide that the Crown must prove all the elements of the offence. There is no question of putting the onus of proof on the accused. But there is a sentence to the effect that in establishing the offence the Crown may rely, for the purpose of inferring the purpose for which the proved act is done, upon the "known character of the accused as proved". This is where the critics leap to action, They point out that in an ordinary criminal case no evidence can be given about the character of the accused man, except in certain circumstances which are not relevant for my present purpose, and-that consequently this proposed law departs from the normal criminal rule.&nbsp;
Now it is true that in ordinary prosecutions for criminal offences, the normal rule prevents the Crown from leading evidence about the accused's character, But in the Commonwealth Crimes Bill we are dealing with offences against the very safety of the Nation and, in particular, offences which in the present state of the world are more likely to be committed by potential enemies than by any others. Should, the Nation under these circumstances be precluded from proving the character and associations of the accused, not as a substitute for clearly establishing the acts which he performed, but as some &nbsp;evidence as to the purpose for which they wore performed. Let me take a simple example
A man is employed at say Salisbury on important work in connection with the construction of missiles or rockets. When a particular piece of very costly, complicated and significant equipment-is complete and is being tested, one of the men engaged on the job drops a heavy spanner into the works, literally, and causes irreparable damage, throwing the whole program. out of gear and setting back the achievement of an important defence project. He could not, under the proposed law, be convicted of sabotage unless it was proved that he did the act complained of. It might be that there could be proved against him statements that indicated that he had the purpose of sabotaging the machinery. But in the absence of such evidence the man night well be hard to say, when charged with sabotage, that his hand was greasy and the spanner " just slipped out". Now suppose further that the Crown, having investigated this man, was able to call evidence and prove to the satisfaction of the jury that the man was an active Communist, closely associated with other Communists. Does anybody really tell me that the Crown should not be at liberty to prove these facts, which must have the most obvious bearing on the purposes which actuated the man in the act which he performed? That is what the provision in the Crimes Bill sets out to achieve. The onus .of proof, I repeat, is in every aspect, on the Crown. If the jury has real doubts upon any element in the charge, the man will be acquitted. Yet we are going to be told, quite frequently, that the Communist activities of the man should be kept a dark and deadly secret from the tribunal. I have given you this example to indicate to you that the Communist propaganda in Australia is not always engaged in by Communists but is sometimes engaged in, innocently, by people who seem to be quite unaware of the grave problems which confront the world and the grave dangers which may well arise inside our own country.
I have chosen to speak on this great problem tonight, not only because it is in all our minds as a result of the activities in New York, but also because I . o not desire that the issue of Communism should be regarded as something suddenly whipped up in the currency of an election It is at a time like this, when no election is in the offing, that there is an opportunity for asking the people of Australia o' study the realities of the great national issues, to beware of our enemies whether open or hidden, and to establish and maintain a healthy public opinion against which either the cunning or the violence of Communism, will be unable to, prevail.



PRESS CUTTINGS
* from
Mingay's
ELECTRICAL WEEKLY
issue de.. C . L9page* I.
With~ the compliments of the
AU ST. EXPOftT FUTUMt
SYDNEY.-Australia could be one
of the world's greatest exporters of
manufactured goods in 50 years'
time, Prime Minister R. G. Menzies
told members of the Associated
Chambers of Manufactures of Australia,
Sept. Speaking at the
ACMA annual dinner
at the Australia
Hotel, Mr Menzies
said: " If we
have enough Imagination
to get up
out of our own
backyard we will
make those who
appear to have
business booming
about them won-
R. G. Menzies der what happened
to them In
years' time What has any great
exporting country in the manufacturing
field got that we haven't got?
More skill? I don't believe it."
Other points made by Mr Menzies
were: e Australia was right at the corner
of Industrial development.
e We are already one of the great
trading nations of the world.
Australian manufacture does not
need to come of age in Australia-it
came of age a long time ago. But
It does need to come of age in the
international sense.
9 The tarming community days
have gone.
Australia was two things today
It was a great Industrial country and
a great trading country. i
e All the good things that had bean
done in Australia had been done ' by
ordinary Australian men and wom
with courage. 


WOOL MARKETING COMMITTEE OF ENQUIRY
Statement by the Prime Minister? Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.
Late last year L-announced that in view of the
importance of the wool. industry the Government had agreed to the
request of all the federal wool growing organisations that an-ejquiry
be arranged into -Australian wool marketing methods.
After mature consideration the Government has deqided
to appoint an independent Committee of Enquiry comprising a Chairman
aAn d two._ members. The Chairmanwill be Sir R. slyn Ph] i p Justice
of the Supreme Court of Queensland and the members will be Mr. A, M. C.
Buttfield, who recently retired from the position of General Manager
of the Australian Mutual Provident Society, Sydney and Mr. D. H. Merry;
B. Com., Chief Economist of the Australia and Now Zealand Bank,
Melbourne. The organisations all requested that the Chairman
should be a member of the Judiciary.
The Government will be guided by the Committee itself
as to whether it may perhaps be necessary or desirable at some stage
to formally retain consultants to assist the Committee in the conduct
of the enquiry. The terms of reference of the Committee of Enquipy will
be to enquire into the present systems of marketing and
of promoting the sale of the Australian wool clip and
matters relating thereto, and to report upon the
efficacy of these systems;
to report upon the merits of any other systems or of
modifications of the present systems which may be
advocated to the committee of enquiry or which the
committee itself considers would be of long-term
benefit to the woolgrowing industry and in the best
interests of the nation.
The Government considers that the terms of reference
of the Committee are sufficiently broad to provide for a full scale
enquiry into the problems of disposing of the Australian wool clip
to the best advantage. If it should transpire however that they
do not fully cover all matters of importance the Government will be
prepared to look at them again.
It is expected that the Committee of Enquiry will have
its first meeting early in February to consider the general arrangements
for the conduot of the enquiry and the procedures to be adopted,
including the taking of evidence.
In view of the great national importance of this enquiry,
having regard to the key role of wool in jur economy, I appeal to all
organisations and others concerned with the outcomie of the enquiry to
co-operate fully with the Comriittee in the complex and arduous task
ahead of it. 
[Exact date unconfirmed]   



M. 1. No. 33Z1260
MR. MENZIES TO ATTEND U. N. GENE-RAL
ASS Ed1BLY
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for External
Affairs
The Prime Minister and Minister for External
Affairs, Mr. Menzies, made the following announcement by leave
in the House of Representatives today
Mr. Speaker, in view of my reply to a question
yesterday, honorable members may enjoy a little wellearned
hilarity today when I tell them that contrary to my
first desire I propose no-. to make a quick journey to the
United Nations General Assembly Jhere, of course, I will
look foruaard to seeing my friend the honorable member for
Banks. As the meeting of the Assembly has-developed, it
has been attended by an increasing number of heads of
government, including heads of Commonwealth Governments,
the latest announced yesterday being the Prime Minister of
New Zealand. having regard to that fact, I should think that
honorable members would not wish Australia, speaking in
terms of heads of govornment, to be conspicuous by its
absence. Matters of great importance are under discussion,
and if one may make even a small contribution to the
solution of the rorld's problems, the trip will be
worthwhile. CANBERRA,
28th September, 1960. 



FOR RELEASE NOT BEFORE 8.45 P. M. 29TH SEPTEMBER, 196o.
FOR PRESS P. Mo/ 37
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINTSTERRT. HON. R. G. 14ENZIES
SALARIES OF FEDERAL JUDGES
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) said before leaving Canberra
today that the Government would introduce bills during the present
sittings of Parliament to increase the salaries of the judges of the
High Court and of the Federal Courts created by the Australian
Parliament. Explaining the decision the Prime Minister said that the
salaries of the Commonwealth judges had not been altered since 1955
although since that time the salaries of other public offices for
which the Commonwealth was responsible had been increased more than
once. The salaries paid to State judges in New South Wales and
Victoria have been increased several times since 1955, and the
remuneration, including allowances, of these judges is now in every
case but one, in excess of the salaries paid to the Commonwealth
judiciary.. For these reasons the Commonwealth Parliament will be
asked to establish proper levels of remuneration for its judges,
In' New South Wales the increases made, subsequently to the
Judges' Remuneration Act 1955 ( Commonwealth) were
Chief Justice
195 œ 5575 plus œ 350 allowance
1957 5850
1959 6200
1960 6900
Puisne Judges, Supreme Court
1955 œ 4725 plus œ 250 allowance
1957 5000 " 1
1959 5500
1960 6250 
2
Industrial Com-mission
1955 œ+ 725 plus œ 250 allowance
1957 5000 I
1959 5500
1960 6250
and in Victoria Chief Justice
1956 œ 5750 plus œ 500 allowance
1958 600 1
1960 6750
Puisne Judges. Sunrem Court
196 O150p lus œ 30 allowance
1958 40
1960 61-0
The allowances do not bear tax to the extent that expenditure
incurred against them is deductible,
By way of comparison the present salaries of the Judges of the
High Court are for the Chief Justice œ 8,000 and for the other Justices
œ 6,500. For the Chief Judge of the Commonwealth Industrial Court
and the President of the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission the salary is œ 6500; and for the puisne Judges of the
Commonwealth Industrial Court the Federal Judge in Bankruptcy and the
Deputy Presidents of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission
œ; 5,500. The proposed now salaries for the Judges of the High and
Federal Courts will include œ 10,000 for the Chief Justice of Australia
and œ 8,500 for the other Justices of the High Court. The Chief
Judge of the Commonwealth Industrial Court and the President of the
Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission will receive
œ 8,000. The puisne judges of the Commonwealth Industrial Court,
the Federal Judge in Bankruptcy and the Deputy Presidents of the
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission will receive œ 7,000. ./ 3 
-3-
These figures represent an increase of œ C2,000 ( gross) on
present figures in the case of the High Court, and an increase
of fœ 1500 ( gross) for the other judges.
The Hligh Court is established by the Constitution. It
is the suprem~ e court of the Co-mmonwecalth and the ultimate
court of appeal in Australia; the new salaries are designed
to reflect its special status and responsibilities.
The Prime Minister said that these were the main changes.
There were special considerations applicable to the Supreme
Courts of the mainland Territories; the salaries of the
judges of the Territory Courts would be deter." Aned later.
CA NBERRA
29th September, 1960. 



A US TRA L IA N ST EEN
A T
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
TEXT OF SPEECH
by
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES,
PRIME MINISTER
Wednesday, 5th October, 1960
S T A T E M E N T 
AUSTRALIAN STATEMENT
a t
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Text of' Speech by the Right Honourable R. G. Menzie. E,
C. HI 10) M. P, Prtm e MiniLs ter
I', dinev-Iay, 5th October, 1960
I join in the congratulations which have been extended to the new
President and the new member nations. Each of them, in a sense, needs our
sympathy, our understanding, and our disinterested help. I have heard only
some of the speeches. for I arrived from Australia only on Friday last, but I
have read most of the earlier speeches, and have endeavoured to sense the
feeling of the debate. Each delegate must try to make his individual
contribution to our discussion from the point of view of his own country.
I should therefore present myself to you I am afraid for the second time
to-day as the Prime Minister of a nation which grew out of six colonies;
a nation of relatively small numbers something over ten millions-but of
considerable productive and trading development, and a lively interest in the
world Australia is, indeed in terms of international trade, one of
the first seven trading nations. This being so, it will at once be seen that
the continuance and expansion of peaceful trade is, from an economic point
of view, vital to us,
The proportion ' of our trade which sails the seas is immeasurably greater
than that of countries of high population and resources, who could, if they
wished, live to themselves much more successfully than we could. We therefore
not only have, as human beings, a passionate desire for peace; we have, as a
nation, a great vested interest in its preservation, It would seemn to most of
us a happy circumstance that sentiment and interest should coincide. " 1Here",
we would say, " is the perfect marriage", Future generations, if huiman follies
do not destroy them in advance, may well, with the clear " hindsight" of history,
wonder how it came about that the 20th century was so marred by war, and how
it was that, in 1960, representatives of 100 nations could not make peace.
" Surely", they will say, " if each nation had peace as its heart's desire, and
also wanted peace as the condition of prosperity, nothing could have stood
in the way". Can we all honestly look into our own hearts and mindsand answer
those implicit questions? As a newcomer to this Assembly: I have been
shocked at the evidence that there are some who have no peace in their hearts,
and who appear to believe that by threats of aggression, by violent propaganda, 
by actual conquest if necessary, they will extend the substance of their
material wealth and the boundaries of their economic influence.
I thought that President Eisenhower made a statesmanlike, constructive,
generous speech. In a conference in which there appears to be a
disposition in the minds of some to play for the ideological support of the
new member nations, and to bring them within what I believe are called
" Spheres of influence" for purposes of aggrandisement, the American President
took a high line.
He said in effect, and I most respectfully agree, that we are not
to look at our new colleagues as if they were voters to be collected, or as
pawns in a vast international game, but as independent, co-equal, and free.
The new nations have not won their freedom only in order to barter it
away. It is offensive to them to regard them as potential satellites. Let
me, for my own country, address some words directly to the representatives of
these nations. They have not failed to observe that there are those here who seek
to inflame their minds with a spirit of resentment, and to make them believe that
their best friends are those who produce with monotonous but fierce regularity
slogans about " colonialism" and " imperialism".
It is I believe, a simple but sometimes forgotten truth that the
greatest enemy to present joy and high hope is the cultivation of
retrospective bitterness. I beg of all these distinguished representatives
to put bitterness out of their minds.
So far as they are concerned, the past has gone. The dead past
should bury its dead. It is the present and future that matter. Most of them
know that political independence can be won more swiftly than economic independence
and yet both are essential to true nationhood.
Under these circumstances, nations which are older in self-government
should not be looking at the new nations as people whose support should be
canvassed, but as people who need objective assistance with no strings if the
material prosperity of their people is to be improved. It is one of the
significant things in contemporary history that the advanced industrial
nations are, because of their scientific and technological advantages,
improving their standards at a phenomenal rate; while less advanced
countries, lacking the same techniques on the same scale, are advancing at
a slower rate. This is not one of the facts of life which one may observe and,
having observed, forget. Its significance is that gap between the advanced
and the relatively unadvanced tends, unless we do something about it, to grow
wider every year. It is not a state of affairs which civilised and humane 
thinking can indefinitely tolerate.
If in this Assembly and in the nations here represented, we will
constantly remember that our trust is for humanity and that, indeed, the
United Nations itself has no other reason for existence, we will more and
more concentrate our efforts on providing economic and technical help for new
nations to the very limit of our capacity; not because we want, to put it
crudely, to buy them into our own ideas of things, not only because we really
and passionately believe in independence and freedom, but also because we
believe that our fellow human beings everywhere are entitled to decent
conditions of life, and have enough sense to know that independence and
freedom are mere words unless the ordinary people of free countries have a chance
of a better life to-morrow.
This point of view seemed to me to underlie the temperate speech
of Mr. Macmillan and other speeches made by democratic leaders.
But there are others who have so far misunderstood the spirit of the
United Nations as to resort to open or veiled threats, blatant and in some
instances lying propaganda, a clearly expressed desire to divide and conquer.
They should learn that " threatened men live long", and that free nations,
however small, are not susceptible to bullying.
I will permit myself the luxury of developing this theme, though
quite briefly, in the particular and in the general. In his opening speech,
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Khrushchev made his usual great play about " colonialism".
As Mr. Macmillan reminded us, the a'iswer to much of his story is to be found
in the presence in this Assembly of many new nations, once colonies and now
independent. Mr. Khrushchev said among other things " nations who oppress other
nations cannot themselves be free. Every free nation should help the peoples
still oppressed to win freedom and !-ndependence". This was, in one sense, a
most encouraging observation.
It made me wonder whetheT we were perhaps about to see a beginning
of an era in which the nations of Eu~ rope,, which were once independent and are
now under Soviet Communist control, were going to receive the blessings of
independence. What a glorious vista of freedom w3uld be opened up by s-ich a
policy. How much it would do to relieve the causes of tension, and promote
peace. I venture to say that it is an act of complete hypocrisy for a
Communist leader to denounce colonialism as if it were an evil characteristic
of the Western Powers, when the facts are that the greatest colonial power
now existing is the Soviet Union itself.
Further, in the course of this Assembly, Mr. Khrushchev wab good
enough to make some references to my own country and its positior la~ ion
to the Territories of Papua and New Guinea. He calls upon Australia to give 
immediate full independence and self-government to New Guinea and Papua. As
a piece of rhetoric this no doubt has its points. But it exhibits a disturbing
want of knowledge of these territories and of the present stage of their
development. Nobody who knows anything about these territories and their
indigenous people could doubt for a moment that for us in Australia to abandon
our responsibilities forthwith would be an almost criminal act.
Here is a country which not so long ago was to a real extent in a
state of savagery. It passed through the most gruesome experiences during
the last war. It came out of it without organised administration and, in a
sense, without hope. It is not a nation in the accepted term. Its people
have no real structure of association except through our administration.
its groups are isolated among mountains, forests, rivers and swamps. It is
estimated that there are no less than 200 different languages.
The work to be done to create and foster a sense and organism of
community is therefore enormous. But with a high sense of responsibility,
Australia has attacked its human task in this almost unique area. Since the
war some form of civilised order has been established over many thousands of
square miles which were previously unexplored.
We have built up an extensive administration service from nothing to
a total of thousands of public servants, local members of the public service
and administration indigenous employees.
We have created five main ports with modern equipment, We have
built over 5,000 miles of road; constructed over 100 air fields; established
and improved postal and tele-communications services. We have built four
large and modern base hospitals, 101 subsidiary hospitals and 12,000 aid
posts and medical centres. There are in operation 778 infant and welfare
clinics. We have built from nothing, medical services which include 119
doctors, 347 trained nurses, 236 medical assistants, and thousands of native
medical assistants, medical orderlies and nurses.
In a little more than a few years, we have established 4,100 schools
which are attended by 200,000 pupils; large stock stations have been
established; and a great forestry industry founded. I could go on like this
indefinitely. All this has been done in a few years since the war. The
achievement has not been without cost. We are a very strange colonial power,
if I understand the sense in which that term is used. We have put many
more millions into Papua and New Guinea than have ever come out or will ever
come out. Like the Netherlands. whose representative spoke last night about
its side of New Guinea we regard ourselves as having a duty to produce as
soon as it is practicable an opportunity for complete self-determination for
the people of Papua and New Guinea. We have established many local
government Councils in order to provide training in administration, and we
have set up a Legislative Council on which only the other day we substantially
increased the number of indigenous representatives. 
Mr. Khrushchev includes us in his diatribe against " foreign
administrators who despise and loot the local population". I have shown
how exactly opposite to the truth this is in our case. His further
extravaganza about the " overseer's lash" and the " executioner's axe" must
relate to areas with which he is more familiar than he is with New Guinea
and Papua. I must say with complete clarity that we do not need to be lectured
on such matters by a man who has no record whatever of having brought colonial
people into freedom and self-Government. We indeed are proud to be in the
British tradition of the 20th Century a tradition which has by sensible
degrees and enlightened administration brought the blessings of self-
Government and a seat in the Councils of the world to many former colonies.
Why has this General Assembly become so significant a forum on this
occasion? Why has it attracted the attendance of what I must imagine to be
the greatest number of Heads of State and Heads of Government in its history?
These are interesting questions and I should like to try to
answer them. The dominating fact is that world's peace is under threat and,
as Mr. Nehru pointed out on Monday, peace is the paramount problem. We
are not living in a time of peace.
The " cold war" is intensifying. The heartsand minds of men and
women are distressed. Most delegates have come here hoping that tensions
might be reduced, that some ray of light may come through some opening door;
that the new nations here represented for the first time here because they
have achieved an independent freedom and are, as I hope and believe,
determined to maintain it would make a fresh contribution not to
recriminations but to achievement.
Running through all these ideas is the widespread world feeling that
the United Nations represents the great hope; that it is better to debate
freely about grievances and occasions of difference than to make war about
them. But what has happened so far? A highly organised group, threateningly
led, has developed an attack in at least four directions.
It has engaged in a colossal war of propaganda, singularly uninhibited
by facts and marked by gross falsity of argument. The old slogans
have been used ad nauseam. Mr. Khrushchev talked on Monday last in a somewhat
macabre fashion about corpses. But I point out that the whole of his
heated propaganda about " imperialism", of which his own country is no doubt
itself the chief current practitioner, has been designed to put pressure
on the newly free nations to move into the unfree Communist orbit, to foment
bitterness in their minds about the past, to disinter the corpses of old
grievances and sorrows; to persuade our new colleagues, if he can, to
forego the joy and hopes of their new and independent nationhood. 
Mr. Khrushchev has engaged in an attack upon the Secretary-
General, the distinguished choice of the United Nations, a man with whose
opinion anybody has a right to disagree, but whose ability and integrity
are beyond challenge. He has the complete confidence of Australia.
Mr. Khrushchev has without a shred of evidence, called him the biassed
representative of Western capitalism, and has asked for his replacement by a
triumvirate of Secretaries-General.
In this triumvirate there will be what I will describe in the
modern jargon as an " in-built" veto; a triumvirate whose work would be
clearly doomed to frustration and fatuity, leading to the consequential
collapse of the United Nations executive machinery. Since the result of his
proposal could be no other than this, it must be presumed that he intends
it. There is an old maxim of the English law that a man is presumed to
intend the reasonable consequences of his actions. It is a trite saying,
but it is worth thinking about.
Mr. Khrushchev has sought to convertthe United Nations into the
dis-United Nations by dividing the nations ( as ancient Gaul was, according to
Caesar) into three parts, which he conveniently though perhaps not very
accurately described as the Communist world, the free aemocratic world
( or as he might prefer to call it so as not to step outside the slogan line
the capitalist world), and the neutral world. Neutralism is of course, one
of those rather rotund words which does not readily admit of definition.
If, when we say that a nation is neutral, that it will not under
any circumstances take arms in any conflict which does not concern the
protection of its own immediate boundaries, it seems to be a notion hard
to reconcile with the Charter of the United Nations which contemplates under
certain circumstances the use of combined force in terms of the Charter
itself. Mr. Nehru, the distinguished leader of India, has not, I think,
used the word " neutral" in this sense I hope I accurately represent him,
He and his Government maintain large defences in their own country, and are
active supporters of the Charter.
What he has consistently made clear is that he stands for nonalignment
in the sense that he will not engage in any special military or
quasi-military alliance.
My own country does not subscribe to this view although it
respects it, since we are party, for example, to the South-East Asian
Treaty with the military associations which are either expressed or implied
in it. But we do not quarrel with each other about these matters 
0 
4 7.
I would think it i mpossible to believe that some of the
greatest leaders of so-called neutral countries would regard themselves
as being neutral in the great conflict of ideas. The real point that I
want to emphasize is that you cannot make the United Nations effective by
converting all of us into pledge advocates of groups of conflicting
interests in this Assembly, in the Security Council, in the whole operation
of the United Nations and its specialised agencies.
Unity must be the aim. Common action for peace must be the
procedure. In short, Mr. Khrushchev has on this occasion, so far from working
towards an easing of the cold war, for the very existence of which his country
carries a grievous and major responsibility, set out to exacerbate the cold
war by fomenting tension, by encouraging bitterness and by seeking to paralyse
oftconfuse the minds of the free peoples. I speak for a small nation with a
love of peace, without nuclear weapons, with a burning desire to develop
itself, a task which consumes every ounce of energy it possesses; to raise
. its standards * of living; with no ' aggression in its heart;
utterly independent, though with strong historic and present ties with its
sister nations of the Commonwealth.
In Australia-we are as I will not need to say, resolutely opposed
to communism. It will never prevail in an unconquered Australia. It runs
co ' unter to all our traditions, our instincts, anO our hopes. But there is
a distinction to be made. , Free democracies are not aggressive. No free
nation or combination of free nations desires either to send political
missionaries into the Soviet Union ( a courtesy which we would be glad to have
reciprocated) or to resort to the futile arbitrament of war. In this true
sense, we stand for peaceful co-existence. We believe that Communist countries
have as much right to their own system as we have to ours. It means that
for other countries, emerging from colonial rule, we believe in selfdetermination,
uninfluenced by threat or guile or purchase.
It is an appropriate occasion on which to remind delegates that
Australia is situated in a part of the world in which the immediate threat of
aggression comes from Communist China, a nation of vast resources of manpower,
and with leaders deeply devoted to Marxist principles. It is small
wonder that such nations as Pakistan and the Philippines, Thailand, Great
Britain, the United States, France, New Zealand and Australia have banded
themselves together for mutual assistance and to do their best to avoid a
further exposure of the area to Communist control. This treaty is paIlpably
one of non-aggression. It deserves the careful thought of delegates
because it will recall to their minds the fact that Communism is not expansionist
in the West and South-West only.
I used the well-known phrase " peaceful co-existence". Perhaps
I should make it quite clear that we would welcome " peaceful co-exist~ ence" if 
4 8.
the Communists would only practise it. Nobody denies or regrets the great
modern development of the resources of the Communist powers. The technological
achievements of the Soviet Union for example have excited our admiration.
All that we ask is that we just be left alone to enjoy our own forms of
government and our own type of civilization.
I was profoundly interested in what Mr. Nehru said about disarmament,
and about the need for establishing contemporaneously, arrangements for
disarmament and inspection. There are, however, two aspects of this matter,
about which he and I have exchanged ideas before to-day, which are worth
mentioning. The first is that the problem of disarmament itself cannot be
divided into parts.
As has already been said, disarmament and inspection are inseparable.
Again it is to me unthinkable that we should imagine that the risks of war
would be diminished if the nations disarmed in the nuclear field but not in'
the field of what are politely called " conventional arms". For the fact is
that it is only the possession of nuclear weapons, terrible though they
are in their possibilities of destruction, horrible as it is to contemplate their
continued development, which deprives the Communist powers of instant and
overwhelming military superiority in the relevant areas. Nuclear, thermonuclear
and conventional arms must, therefore, all be dealt with together.
The second point I make is that I cannot honestly accept the view
that armaments are the major cause of world tension. That view seems to me
a serious over-simplification. True, if any power or combination of powers
has shown that it is aggressively-minded and seeks to extend its boundaries
of control wider and wider by force if necessary, then the possession by
that power or group of powers of vast armaments will be the cause of tension.
But if the non-aggressive powers are in result driven into maintaining and
developing great defensive armaments, it is proper to say that their armaments
are the result of tension and not its cause.
In effect, what we need in the world, just as much as the vastly
important disarmament talks, is a serious attempt by negotiation to encourage
freedom and understanding, to remove the causes of friction and to persuade
nations that aggressive policies and proselytising political religions are the
ememies of peace. There are many other matters which I could speak about.
But time marches on, and I wish to avoid repetition.
I therefore conclude by saying, for Australia, that we subscribe to
the sound principle of foreign policy that no nation should seek to interfere
with the domestic affairs of another. This, indeed, is the " good
neighbour" principle. If it could be accepted seriously and generally, the
world would become a happy place. 


6th&nbsp;October, 1960
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies would you explain, Sir, what you hope to&nbsp;accomplish by going to the United Nations?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well I've never been in the practice, or in the&nbsp;habit of saying in advance what I think might be&nbsp;achieved.
But what has happened at this Conference has been&nbsp;that something that began only a few weeks ago as a&nbsp;normal meeting of the General Assembly of the United&nbsp;Nations, which is normally attended by foreign ministers,&nbsp;has steadily become a meeting of the heads of Government.
Under those circumstances I came to the conclusion,&nbsp;finally, that Australia ought not to be conspicuous by&nbsp;not being represented by the head of the Government.&nbsp;
That doesn't mean that I have any lack of &nbsp;confidence in the Attorney-General vho is a very able&nbsp;man, and very well able to say what we need to say.
But I did finally come to the conclusion, and my&nbsp;colleagues thought so too, that we ought to be&nbsp;represented by the head of our Government at a time when&nbsp;such a violent attack is being made, not only on the&nbsp;United Nations itself, but on the whole of the&nbsp;democratic world.
And, frankly, I don't expect that I'm going to&nbsp;accomplish very much as an individual. I mean I'm a&nbsp;fairly small potato, and we're not a very large country.&nbsp;
But I think that as part of a group of people I may&nbsp;be able to say something in fact I think I can-which&nbsp;exhibits Australia's point of view, which is not&nbsp;necessarily the same as other people's point of view,&nbsp;but which is sturdily democratic, and our own interests&nbsp;are great.
In particular we have very lively interests in&nbsp;relation to South-East Asia, and I will endeavour to put&nbsp;these things as clearly as I can.
QUESTION: Would you tell us, Sir, what you think of Mr.&nbsp;Khrushchev's attitude towards the United Nations?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp;Well I have never met Mr. Khrushchev. One of the&nbsp;great attractions, one of the few attractions about this&nbsp;rather strenuous journey, is to see, and hear, and&nbsp;perhaps to meet Mr. Khrushchev. Because, of course, ifyou took him literally on what he says the result would&nbsp;be ridiculous. But it may be that there is something behind all&nbsp;this: 1, fhat is he getting at? Is he just bully-ragging&nbsp;the rest of the world?
That doesn't matter much to us: we are not easily&nbsp;bullied in Australia. Or is there soriething else behind&nbsp;it? I am looking forward with fascinated interested to&nbsp;discovering what there is behind that somewhat stormy&nbsp;facade.
QUESTION: Do you plan, Mr. Menzies, to make a defence of&nbsp;Australian policy in New Guinea?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't like the word " defence". I think that the&nbsp;Australian policy in New Guinea is first class. If it&nbsp;needs to be explained, I will explain it.
QUESTION: I was thinking in view of Mr. Khrushchev's attack&nbsp;on New Guinea.
PRIME MINISTER. Oh, I think he threw that in for good measure,&nbsp;that's all. 4e have a superb story about New Guinea and&nbsp;I shall tell it; but I assure you I won't tell it on&nbsp;the defensive: I'll tell it as a man who is proud of&nbsp;it.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, it has been reported that Mr, Macmillan&nbsp;has rung you from New York and requested you to come to&nbsp;the United Nations. Is this true?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I'm sorry to disappoint all the writers but&nbsp;I've had no telephone conversation with Mr. Macmillan&nbsp;whatever. I've boon very familiar with his own mind&nbsp;about this because we've beeoon in comraunication by othermeans over the last month.
And all I can say is that when I decided to go I&nbsp;advised him, and I have reason to believe he was very&nbsp;pleased. But all this rather picturesque stuff about&nbsp;" long distance telephone conversations" " My dear&nbsp;fellow, do come" this is the mere picturesque decoration&nbsp;that goes on. But I didn't start it.
QUESTION: Finally, Sir, would you comment generally about&nbsp;your feelings at this present stage of the position in&nbsp;the United Nations for the West?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I'm bound to say that so far as one can&nbsp;judge at present our friend from the Soviet Union hasn't&nbsp;been doing so well. He was set back pretty severely on&nbsp;the matter of the Congo. His own Embassy in the Congo&nbsp;had to secure protection from the United Nations mission&nbsp;which is a rather amusing fact, I think well amusing&nbsp;in a sense and he doesn't appear to have had any&nbsp;success over inscribing the item of Red China.
No, I would think that so far there has boon more&nbsp;sound and fury than result from his point of view. Still&nbsp;I'll know more about that when I'm there.
I might even have the chance of having him thump&nbsp;the desk when I speak, which will be a great change from&nbsp;respectable political meetings.
QUESTION: Mr. Monzies when can we expect you back?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; Oh, I would think in 10, 12, 13 days. I don't want&nbsp;to be long. I just want to go. When the things that I&nbsp;need to do something about are over I'll come back very&nbsp;swiftly. I don't regard it as a holiday.&nbsp;
Thanks to Qantas and all these great people I leave&nbsp;here, I think at 5.30 today, Thursday, and arrive at&nbsp;San Francisco 25 minutes ago - &nbsp;5 past 5 on Thursday.
Thank you very much.
&nbsp;



DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
INWARD CABLEGRAM
JRR1.2645 Sent: 5th October, 1960.
0200
Rec'd: 6th October, 1960.
2032
FROM: Australian Mission to United Nations,
NEW YORK. UN1109 UNCLASSIFIED
Repeated Washington 1298.
Following is outline of the Prime Minister's
speech introducing amendment to the Five Power Resolution on
Khrushchev and Eisenhower contacts this morning:
2. Australia dissented from only the final paragraph
of the Five Power Resolution believing that, if carried, its
effect would be undesirable. Sukarno had had reservations
even about a Pour Power Summit Conference but had finally
moved resolution requiring not four leaders but two to renew
contacts. Many millions of people had hoped that the Summit
Conference in Paris might serve to create some atmosphere of hope
and settlement of some problems including Nuclear Tests Treaty.
But the Summit failed even to begin because the Soviet leader
would not participate. The other leaders had then expressed
willingness to take part in negotiations at any suitable time
in the future. This was a fair and good tempered proposition
and tenacious in the cause of peace. If talks were now to
proceed why should we, by carrying the Five Nation Resolution,
dismiss the United Kingdom and France from the first act.
3. Mr. Nehru had frankly stated that there were serious
limitations to the usefulness of bilateral talks. Was there
any reason to think that Eisenhower was in some way the stumbling
S block and that he should therefore be the one leader of the
West to be brought under persuasion or pressure? He was in
fact passionately devoted to peace. Moreover it was a well
known Communist technique to seek to describe the drama of the
Y7orld's problems in terms of antagonism between the United
States and the Soviet Union alone. It was a dangerous fallacy
to regard others as insignificant or at least uninterested onlookers.
The real conflict was between authoritarian Communism
and systems of Free Government. To narrow the issue down
( by excluding France and Britain) to discussions by the leaders
of two Governments was to put the world problem out of
perspective., this was the reason for Australia's amendment.
4. Australia believed that Summit Talks should be
resumed but recognized that they could not be arranged quickly
and doubted whether they should be rushed. A meeting of
the Four could not solve all or many of our problems. Some
great matters, within the responsibility of the United Nations,
could not be delegated to a few but some have been recognized
by all to be in a special way the concern of the Four Powers.
They could also make a beginning on matters of wider concern
such as disarmament. Moreover in practice the events of
the last four days raised a doubt whether there was a genuine / r
A 
j 4
I 0 w S 
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
-2
INWARD CABLEG" 4
hope of useful bilateral talks. ,,. ustralia was concerneCl to
avoid the perpetuation of the notion that the World confli,, t
was between the United States and the Soviet Union.
JV'MIN. DEPT. EA..
MIN. DETm. DE~ FENCE
P. M's. 6th October, .960. / l
7/ 


QUESTION. Mr. Prime Minister, apart from making a statement on behalf of Australia before the General Assembly, you have been a leading figure in one of the most discussed movements taken part so far in this Assembly, namely the move to have the Assembly approve, the meeting of another Summit rather than the meeting of the President of the United States and Mr, Khrushchev as proposed by five neutral Nations. I would like to know from you, Sir, why did we take the initiative in such a move?
PM: &nbsp;Well, there are various-reasons for that. I saw the Five Power Resolution, as I will call it on the Friday when I arrived when it was first mentioned in President Sukarno's speech and, quite frankly, I didn't like it. I didn't like it for a variety of reasons, but perhaps the main one was that it concentrated attention on two people named as individuals and that seemed to me to lend colour to the propaganda that goes on in the world; that the whole division in the world the whole conflict is between the United States and the Soviet Union; that all the rest of us presumably are mere onlookers all in a sense, all of us, neutral.
I don't believe that that is true. I think the conflict is a much wider one than that and I object very much to having a state of affairs suggested which appears to isolate the United States in the Western world. Therefore my instinctive reaction was against it and I then began to consider in my own mind whether I would try to meet the Resolution head on by speaking against it, and vote against it, which could easily have been misunderstood, or putting up an amendment. The amendment, I hasten to say, was my own amendment, drafted by me and suggested by me. I say that because I notice that some people think I have been what in Australia we call a " stooge" on this matter. On the contrary I promoted it and the United Kingdom and the United States agreed that it was a wise course to pursue and that is how I came to move my amendment.
By the time I moved the amendment on the Monday morning the Five Power Resolution, I thought, had become quite useless, because in the meantime they had communicated it to President Eisenhower and to Mr. Khrushchev, each of whom had said he would not meet the other except under conditions that were obviously not capable of being reconciled, and therefore the Five Power Resolution became, in my judgment, useless. I didn't quite like the idea of the United Nations passing a Resolution which it knew in advance would be useless. That's a pretty powerful reason for not supporting it and of course you can add to that that there is a new President going to be elected. The whole countryside is buzzing with it here. Great arguments going on &nbsp;- nobody yet knows who is going to be the new President, but it would be very difficult for the retiring President to think he could solve some problem at this moment when the whole country is just within weeks of choosing his successor. That was another reason for not pointing at him in particular and therefore I moved the amendment, the effect of which I thought was perfectly clear.
&nbsp;The effect of it was that there should be not a meeting between two but a meeting between four, the Summit Powers who really choose themselves for this purpose because they are four Atomic Powers. This has been greatly overlooked I think by some of the Delegates at the Assembly. The four Atomic Powers, They have an enormous responsibility in the matter of war and peace, They had an abortive meeting at Paris. I want to see them meeting again and actually you know the most fascinating thing about this matter is that although my amendment was defeated very handsomely, or unhandsomely, according to the point of view, it was supported by three of the four powers the United Kingdom, the United States and France and was not voted against by the Soviet Union, Not one of the Four Powers concerned with the Summit voted against a Summit meeting. That, I thought, was a pretty considerable advancement,
QUESTION: While we are on the question of the numbers on the actual amendment vote, there has been a lot made of the fact that they represented this so-called Neutral Bloc and thus was the first example of where they had stuck together very solidly. Many people think that this is, in some ways, an omen of the future as far as the United Nations is concerned. What do you feel yourself on the question of this new Neutral Bloc or Third Force as people are now discussing it here in relation to the East and West?
PM: &nbsp;Well, look if I may speak with my usual frankness, I think that there is an awful lot of nonsense being talked about a Neutral Bloc. You first of all have to define your terms. What is neutralism for this purpose? Are you a neutral because you have no connection with the firm next door and will not conduct operations of war except in immediate defence of your own immediate frontiers? Or are you a neutral because you won't become engaged in war except under terms of the Charter, which is a very different matter? It may involve you in using troops far away from your own frontiers. Those questions have to be answered in the first place.
But in the second place this is an absurd notion that is getting currency that because a series of Nations come from, say, Africa, they are all to be lumped together as a Bloc as if they were not all different. They have become independent Nations because they think they are different. Each of them has its own history, its own people, its own language in may cases. Why are they all to be lumped together? You may as well talk about the European Bloc, including every European nation in it, simply because they live in the same Continent.
I think we are going to find a very enriching variety of opinion coming out of these new Nations and I don't think so poorly of them as to believe that they will simply settle down on some dogma that makes them all look the same and sound the same. Anybody who listened to the speech by the Prime Minister of Nigeria, as I am sure you did, would be profoundly impressed by the fact that here is a new wise voice, a balanced mind, and I think that his contribution to this thing will not only be on the footing that he comes from an African country, but it will be on the footing that he is a citizen of the world and his country is now a considerable nation in the world. So I am not very much impressed by this easy assumption that there is a Neutralist Bloc and that something has to be done about it in toto.
QUESTION: On the question though, Mr. Menzies, of treating these at the moment as Groups, such as we have heard a great deal ever since this Assembly started, from both sides of the field, if I may say so, of the new African Nations, they do have specific problems pretty well related to them at the moment and it does seem, don't you think, that the United Nations and others that are going to be made to assist them will have to be in a sense as treating them as a Group unit from the point of view of economic and educational assistance?
PM: Well, I am not sure that I agree with that. There must be great assistance, technical aid all sorts of things. I have no doubt as I said in my main speech this is one of the great problems to reduce the gap between the under-developed countries arid the extraordinarily highly developed industrial communities. That is a very great problem, but I think that it would be a mistake to just treat that as a global problem and say, well, what are we going to do for the African countries. Each of them is different. One of them may have resources of water which would lend themselves to hydro-electric power to considerable industrial development. Another one may need assistance in agricultural or pastoral development, Each country is different, but we must stand willing to help them all. I don't doubt but that we should try to help them all by the same methods using, to use a rather ridiculous metaphor, the same yardstick for all of them I think would be a blunder. These are individual nations, That is the whole basis of what I am saying about them.&nbsp;
QUESTION: Well, Mr. Prime Minister, you have played a big role in an attempt to get the Assembly to agree to support the question. Do you see any prospect, let's say, for the European Spring, of the Summit Powers getting together again when there will be a new President in the White House?
PM: &nbsp;Well, don't despair of it,. It is to be remembered that although my amendment was defeated, the Five Power Resolution was ultimately withdrawn so that this ground stood clear, and the one thing that emerges from all this is that of the Four Powers concerned in the Summit meeting not one voted against my proposal. Three of them positively in favour. I emphasise that. It seemed to me to be rather a helpful result from the point of view of the Summit. Well, of course, the new President of the United States isn't sworn in until January and he is not going to, I imagine, rush off at once to a Summit Meeting. He must compose his Administration or whatever changes may have to be made, depending on who wins. He must prepare his own mind for this matter. But talking in terms of European Spring April, May I wouldn't despair of seeing a Summit Meeting. I don't believe that Khrushchev will resist it. I don't believe that Mr. Macmillan will resist it. He has been a very strong advocate for it. I know that President de Gaulle has a few other problems at the moment on his plate, but I should imagine that he would be willing. And the new President, I am perfectly certain without speaking with the faintest authority will be Summit minded at the right time, So I don't expect it early in the year, but I am not at all without hope that it will happen before the middle of the year.
QUESTION Sir, both Senator Kennedy and Vice-President Nixon have both said very very recently that they are quite prepared to attend a Summit meeting, whichever one is elected President, but each makes the point that they would like to see negotiations go on at lower levels beforehand, before they go to another meeting such as the last Paris meeting.
PM: &nbsp;Yes, well that is I think consistent with the line that is being taken. They want some preparatory work and of course that is quite right. Before you meet at the Summit is is, to say the least of it, very useful to have Foreign Secretaries, the Secretary of State and so on meet with expert officials gathering up the relevant facts, trying to isolate if you can one or two aspects of the international problem that could be discussed at a first meeting. Nobody has ever suggested, you see, that in one Summit you'Will settle the problems of the world. What has always been the objective has been to relieve tension on one topic or perhaps two nuclear tests for example. That would be I think a fruitful subject for discussion at the first Summit Meeting. But preparation yes, I recognise that that it why I am not putting my unauthorised prophecy early in the year. but more toward the middle of the year.
QUESTION Mr. Prime Minister, still the big question mark around the Assembly is Nikita Khrushchev. Do you think that he has gained or lost ground during his time here at the Assembly?
PM: &nbsp;Well of course that is anybody's guess, but I think he's lost ground. I think that he over-played his hand. His speeches were very violent, very threatening, and, you know, grown up men get a little tired of being spoken to in that way. The effect it has on my mind is to make me say well I well I won't say what I was going to say but every Australian will understand what I was going to say. And I don't see why it shouldn't have a similar effect on other people. I felt that he did over-play his hand; he failed very badly on his attack on the Secretary General very badly. I don't think he has come out of the Congo argument very well. Of course, he is a powerful man and he represents an enormously powerful country, but by and large I think that he has lost ground in this Assembly and of course I am prepared to say that I am very glad that I do think so perhaps it is wishful thinking. I don't think it is.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister I would like to thank you on behalf of our television audience for coming here to-day to the United Nations Headquarters in New York City to speak to us in Australia. Thank you very much.
PM: &nbsp;Thank you very much. Well, in point of fact, I welcome the opportunity because for the last fortnight I haven't been able to talk to them in person.
QUESTION: Thank you, Sir.
PM: &nbsp;And therefore this has been, I think, a very useful chance. Thank you very much.
&nbsp;



Dutch " Vest Nev Guinea
Vlorld situation
Smrnmit United Nations
Mr. Khirushchev
Mr. Nehru at U. N.
P. 1iat U. N.
Mr. K. Four power Conference?
P. m. as " fall guy"
S~ mrnit Meeting 
PRESS CONFELEANCE GIV BY THE PRIiE 1iINISTED9,
THE RT. HON. R. G. IENZIES AT KINGSFOrD SI TH
AIRPORT ON '' EDNESDAY, 19TH OCTOEILR, 1960
PIDE MHINISTER:
QUESTION: PR9DIME iINISTER:
QUESTION:
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRD,, E M:, INISTER: I'd like to put you on warning that I'-
supposed to make a long statement in the
House tomorrow night on my deeds and misdecd. s
abroad, stated with proper reticence, so Id
better not try to make it now. I think perhaps
we might try to concentrate on a few points.
Now which ones, from the newspaper point of
view or television point of view would you like
me to say a little about?
Inaudible Could you tell us anything ab'out
the Malayan proposal for Dutch jest New Guinea?
That is not one of the matters that I've been
discussing.
That's why I asked you, Sir.
Yes I thought so. Oh, I knowi a little about it,
but I don't think that any comment about it will
be useful at this stage. I'll find out what the
developments have boeen over the last couple of
days.
Could you toll us Sir. whether you think as a
result of the proceedings at the time you were in
Now York the world situation has improved or
worsened? , ell I think it would be very difficult to say
whether the state of the world was easicr or
more tense. I sup ose that depends on what you
think about whether Khrushchev's tactics were
designac to cae tension or to increase it.
Frankly I thought th-. at he camnc thoro lo increase
tension though he's a strong aLvocato, judging
by what he tells me, of a Summit Conference.
But it's very difficult w'iith a man like that
who's a mixture a dictator with a strong
earthy sense of humour, a certain notion of th*
ridiculous, a fellow who thoroughly enjoys beating
his shoe on the desk and hopes that somebody
will take it seriously. I mecan he's a mixture.
( Aside This is a nice sound-proof room).
But I think going back to th! at I think that
one thing he arrived there to do was to wveaken
the present United Nations, primarily by an
attack on the Secretary-General. Bccause he
repeatedly made very savage attacks, usu. ally
of course saying that Hram-in-arskjoeld was a tool
of the capitalists, and such like original
phrases that one becomes familiar witt, that
he represented the western Doers, that no good
could cone out of him, that what Khrushchev calls
the Socialist power ought to be in the picture
and that instead of one Secretary-General there
ought to be three, 
-2-
QUESTION: PRD MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRITE MINISTER:
QUEST ION: A remarkable proposal Because it meant
disuniting the United Nations. It meant having
one Communist Secretary-General, one neutralist
Secretary-General whatever that word
means and one from the democratic western
world, each of them presumably, so far as one
could understand it, with a veto over the other
two. It would, of course, have reduced the hole
executive arm of the United Na tions to futility
and therefore would have ben a dea. ily blow at
the United Nations,
It was taken very seriously by the United
States, very seriously indeed. And if the
outcome had been anything other than it vwas
there might have been serious consequences.
However, in the result, of course, he failed
hopelessly in his attack on the Secretary-General.
( Inaudible):
I think that he sees himself as the focus of
another kind of world organisation. After all,
if he's to get the better of the western powcrs
in the long run, it's very desirable for him to
make a play for the support of people who are
as yet uncommritted the African powers for
example, who are very numerous now, and most of
them very new, And ' sian powers not to be
overlooked in this connection.
: hen he said two or three times the United Nations
ought to be established in Moscow, this wasn't
merely a joke on his part. It cdid I thought,
represent something that was ha If-sriously
formed at the back of his nind.
Have you any comment to nake Sir, about your
interview with Mr. Khrushchev?
I found it extremely interesting. I thought
that it would be rather foolish to come back
to Australia not having had a private talk with
him and so I got my office to put in a bid
through the usual channels, indicating, with
my usual modesty, that 10 minutes would be very
satisfactory if I could get them. And in the
result I had 70 minutes. Indeed, so far as I
know, we might still have been tal-'-ig but for
the fact that other engagements emerged. But
it was very interesting, very interesting.
He's still something of a mystery to mec but
perhaps not quite so much as before, because he
has undoubtedly an earthy sort of humour,
Did he thump the table, Sir, while he spoke to
you? 
-3-
PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION:
PRIME HINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIIE MINISTER: Oh, no. Everything was quite relaxed and easy.
He evern looked me up and down . and said for an
Imperialist I wasn't a bad specimen. ( Laughter).
And I told hin that as a Connunist he improved on
closer inspection. ( Laughter).
Pr. Mcnzies did you get the im. pression from him
that he was quite serious about wanting a Summit
Meeting? I think so. That's one thing I do believe. I
believe he would like a Sunnit Meeting. And that's,
perhaps, one of the positive results that I always
hoped would come out of this imtter over the
fanous amendment because the other three, France,
Great Britain and the United States voted for a
Sumnit Meeting as early as practicable which of
coUBle were words designed to acco1mnodate the
exigencies of the Presidential election in
lnerica. And he himself made it quite clear to
ne and I asked him whether there was any mystery
about it, and he said " none whatever', that he
wanted a Summit moeting, He realised it couldn't
occur now until after the Presidential election
and the new President had established hiLself. But
so certain an I that he does, and therefore all
four do, now, cearly declared, that most of our
convero: ation had to do with what natters could
usefully be discussed at the Summit. He nominated
Disarmament. He said that is something that has
to be discussed in the broad and in principle
between the four atomic power le. aders before it
can usefully be dealt with in point of detail.
And therefore that's his friority No. 1. He
thought that the problems of Berlin, for example,
to take an example, were though important, ninor
compared with the problen of disarnaIcnt. But
anyhow for three quarters of an hour I discussed
with him what sort of things could be discussed at
aSurmmit mceting. How usefully, what the
possibilities were of getting practical results, all
this didn't argue to me that he was just going
through the fom of saying that he wanted a
Conference. Do you believe he wants a four-power Conference,
not two?
He wants a four-power. All this proposal about
having a meeting between Khrushchev and Eisenhower
never did have any reality in it. Bless my soul,
before the thing had been tabled for hours each
of the supposed neeters had said ' No'.
Khrushchev had said ' I won't"\ except on terms
that are obviously unacceptable and Eisenhower
said the sane thing. I never have seen nuch use
in an Assembly of Nations passing a resolution
directed to two hunamn beings who have both
rejected it in advance, ha. t's the sense of it?
None. 
4-
QUESTION: P1LIEITh INISTER:
nUESTION: PA1I1, vE 7IINISTEik:
QUESTION: PRIPI,. E iI. 1INISTEPL:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: \ ivould you care to comme_, int on M. Nhi
attitude a. t the United ', ations, Sir?
Weoll I wa-s surprised," at hi spec 13e
surprised. Iltbeyond_ that.-L I have no ccalicl.
I daresa-y that he him-selIf 1wou! li reret, b3y now,.
some. i of the things th2. t hc though--t fit to say.
Aft er all1 theore i s cothim-tou he Ct: d aout
when someb) od-y j-oves for a ConfCrencc of tro and
someb) ody else, the two having sa3~ T't a
2-meaeting, sa-ys 7elI the r-ight t1, iJng to do is to
get the four together.
That' s a true, niacndmcn-u and' eonstructiv., c one)
and it's worth rememibering, or v.-ortn be-ing; known8
that before. the great day1: s cut, or at-Lany~ rate
it was one o'clock i~ n tGhe m: in -tecohnically
it was that nighit tLL five-powevr resolution had
7ec n so altered by votes that it wa-s 7ithdrawin
completely, so that that rsLutio_ faLe_ d.
My ameandme,, nt had, of course, beeon rejected, 3ut
not by the powers concerned In it, not 1b1 the
atomic poviers three oc iwhoa--ToteUd o itdLh
other abstained.
Did you ma-ke a chock-up be,. fere -vetvot on your
mc~ indrment, Sir,
I didn' t maake a-ny check-up. I a n1eVw-bo at
the General AssemblyDi. Therc arc toor three of
the old hanlds; I see theni fiittig, aroundl like
bats, and no d oub. t there is gra obiggoingon.
I couLd quite im: rginc, h~ avinj, rcgari. to the
distribution of the, five, that a mnmn
wouldn't be carried. That wiouldn'-t have
troubled rie a bit a-. nd df id1n't I 2 1-wva nted
to do was to d-o somac-hing first o.-f all1 to
prom-ote the idea of the true Summ. Irit Coference,
and that could best be, d-one-by sftting the vote,,
of those who w ere to be pirties to it a-nd in the
second p-la-ce to g&amp; t rid of th1; i-, noxious
idea because it is thaL tL. he wleconiflict
in the world is b-etwe( en th6 Uni-u6. L States and
" he Soviet Union, a notion which -wV-as alm-. ost
e,-nshrined in the five-powVee. res oluticn.
Did you sound out h'r. I reh-ru becforchand, Sir, to
see how he
Nobody sounded mc, out! The flist I hea rd of the
five-power re_: solution waCs whcnit was prod: ucedf,.
And indeedC it wa-s pro.-uco' ' m~ Tr interesting
way beca-use Soekarno Iac two-hour speeDch -tha: t
seem-. s to be -, ho u~ inimiiua at Asse-bl, 
5
QUESTION:
PRiME MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRTIE MINIST ER: consistent with self-respect and it was
distributed as he began to speak 65 pages of
foolscap. So it was formidable.
And with it, at the last nonent, came a page
to be inserted, at page 65 headed " Vital
Please insert this at page 65". And that
contained the terms of the resolution. That's
how much out of the blue it caie,
There has been a suggestion here in Australia
that because the amendment ( noise interruption)
having a very bad effect on our relations with
Asia.
That suggestion has been made only in Australia.
I'm sorry to say. Not a hint of . t at New York.
I've been in the closest touch for the whole
time that I've been there with a dozen of the
leaders in Africa, Asia and elsewhere. No, I
didn't see Soekarno because he left innmdiately
after Speech. I saw Subandrio and had discussions
with him.
I didn't see Nasser because he left, I think he
had actually gone the day I arrived. But I did
see his Foreign Minister, Fawzik, who was present
at the Suez talks that I had in 1956. I sat with
him at dinner and we had a very interesting
exchange of ideas.
Then there was the new Prime inister of Nigeria,
who, I thought nade the best speech of the entire
Assembly a very renarkable man and I've great
expectations of Nigeria as a wise and stabilising
influence in the new Africa.
Oh, I saw a lot of these people. Those are just
namcs that occur to me.
, hat did Mr. Nehru say Sir?
' ell it's very odd. Mr. Nehru and I rct after
he'd made his famous speech. He seelcd to be
quite amiable. And there. fter I spoke. I made
my main speech, which one or two people preferred
not to publish in Australia, It is much nicer to
try to underminc the position of the Prime M'inister
of Australia when he was abroad. But when I made
my nain speech I had occasion to make many
references to what I believe to be Mr. Nehru's
point of view. And so far as I know these were
entirely consistent with his own mind.
You don't want to build this up as if two people
had a dog fight. They didn't. This is not the
way to regard these natters. I have offered no
word to which anybody could take exception to
the distinguished leader of India. 
QUESTION: PRII'IE 1] IIISTER:
QUESTION: PRE1E Pi' 4BISTEi?:
QUESTION: P9] hI'E 1vINISTER: -6-
He's a vcry distinguished rman, ih t reasols
he r. y hve had, teiporar ily, in his m-lind for
saying what he did-, in thc way he sai]. it,. I
don't knowa. But those-tin: gs I wVas very
teml; pted, 1 to reply to until rlise tt t to
rcply in tha-t atmlosphere-,, wou: ld a very grcat
international headcr,. So T Tcfr. inneC.
You would c prepared to say con-i. c.' dentiy, Sir,
that our rel-tions -, With Asia arc strong a-s
ever? I think so. I' sure they are,,
( Inaudible).
Oh, I didn't. discuss the ! nnic ni; with
Mvr. Khrushchev because thv had( abstained.
You don't a aa. snk ilA'hy d. id you abstain?"
WJhat I w-a nted to find, out we-ire wh-t his views
on the i-matters of ir:-oortlancc,
There is so much talk gone on a. bout m,. otions and
amendants. These arc not the ilaortant things
in life. It's the result that m-atters
internationally. ihalt I wntd to d'iscover \ v-s -hether there
ere any real prospccts of putting the four
people together who hapjen to be the only
atom. ic powers in the worl-, and1 therefore have
the secret of peace and lVlr inr teir hands.
That wa~ s the thin. Tha t's a '-. atter c[ substance.
All this business about how rmany votes somebody
got I could' t cre less. It's very important in
a , enrl election in A. ustrali,
1. r. -lenzics could-you tell if hr. Khrushchev woulI
ha-ve preferred to havc the four powers leet rather
than just him. iself and Eisenhower?
Jell tht's quit( clear because he ha-. d already
sn. id " No" to a cctinn,, with MLr. Eisenhow-er.
A; fter all therc s another thing about it, you
know. Khrushchev's a tough follow, but he's
nothing if not a realist.
They're having a Pre sid_ entil E]. ction in
irerica before the m'ionth's oul.. E veryb ody' s
sleaking with waht us It tha' I; iJ. iy Hughes
once said with a tfl] inF inflexionu., If
you're going to ha vo a foarI-~ or iscussion
that really iloves in the d_' Lirection of settling
something, you don't want to e it w. ith a
Presioent who will hf' e had his successor elected
in a few weeks' time. 
QUES T ION
PRE1-l imISTER:
QUESTION: P11D, 0 i'ImISTER:
PT-1r. _ r" l1 7TP1 7
Khrushchev's a realis-c; he-' fdia;, s t , H
wants to have a i-eeting w.! it~ h the 1Pre1sid. cn.
of the United States speakinE with uthority,
and particulrarly anfter an clection, as he will
with fresh, a nd clear, auhriy
 hyeonu w r ta ng to M Khirush chev, S r
did-* you invite him.-to Australi-'?
I d-idn't discuss that ma-ter at
.0.. You credited' 11r, Khrushchev, w. i th a keen,
knowledge of Austra-lia-n affairs. or w,.-ord_' s to
tha-t effect.
He ha) s obviously taken sei; ne i~ ntero3st, He ' knew
somethin, about our geographical set up and ou2
econolm-ic set up. Oh, cs
Nr. Menios it' h-. s been s'z1in, CDCe
quarters thal-t yo--u a ' keirne . Of~' h
f or s ome. jpover in the capitali11st section.
You meian by tha,) t I was a o, r f'_ nneeent fellow
and I went into thei Lion'Is cen . iitli those
wicked Llen, Eisenhower and 1" aciiilan, andl they
said, we must ha-ve oebd who, ill put
this up; -; ic dI" on' t; wan to p1. ut it.: ust have
som-ebody, Here's this peer irocm colonial
sa'p from-. A ustra_ lia, ' we' 1 Lou! lle him -into
doing! it'.
Really, they would botla , et a-rreat; kickr if they
read that description.. 1ecause-yjou see as it
hap_-cns, and I reu~ eat this, I'~ re sa-Id it' before.
I happ,.,. n to havre -proposed the 1aof , in am.. endment,
because I thourght it much be rt,) me apstv
prop7-osa-l rather than just a~ doptL a bla11--nk negative
to a, prolrcal which I thoLght uSelc0s5 5 nd, in
some1 respects, dangerous,
This was, rig-htly or ,-iron,-1. y, my7 pro; oSal. If
I had all the timec over L.." iin T ; iculu still
make it. AInd( they d-iscl~ ussedJ tiie m-atter. it
wa[' snt accepted! b,-y them:, I im-a. clu it fcfrst on
Saturday night and it t ' cye pthtedm
until Sunda_ y i-ioXTKin,,.
So the " fall g-uyl took an eful 1o= w falling,
into the net. And finally, heIhddtd
it, m:, yself, and had it typed' d-ns cusoTi
with Mac-iillan andL Hertor afteLir l-unch on th(
Sundlay, they sa-id " Ye1s' tiey thoug2htU that wiaS
it andl so there we re. I ocquircd -what t. he
rules M-reand I -out it in. the nexIt d'ay.
4 
QUESTION: PRITM E INISTER:
QUESTION: PIMIE MINISTER:
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION:
PRIMDE HINISTER:
QUESTION: PRLE IMNISTER: -8-
I have complete responsibility for initiating
this matter. And all I can say is if we're
going to talk in terms of substance, as
sensible pcople should, then the substance of
my proposal was that we should not try the
futile task of getting two people together
who said they were not willing to neet anyhow,
but that we should add to the world pressure
for a meeting of the four powers at the Su unit.
And by the tine the day was ended that second
position was as substantially achieved as
anything should be. So why apologise? I like
that expression " fall Luy". Thank you very much.
That's Aerican isn't it?
You would think Sir, then that the prospects,
or the renewed prospects, of a Sunnit Meeting
some tine next year are worthwhile?
I do. I think that the new President of the
United States will naturally want to establish
his aidministration and all that sort of thing.
I would have great hope myself that these people
will get together by the northern spring,
somewhere around April or May.
The New York Times, Sir, refers to you in this
morning's paper as " the good Snmritan",
apparently because of your.....
Jell that shows you have to go abroad to have
nice renarks made about you in a newspaper.
Mr. Menzies both the Anerican Presidential
candidates stated that the only reason they
would attend a Peace Conference, if elected, is
if they had somne, alost written guarantee that
sonething ( Airport noises)
', iho was supposed to have said this?
Both the An. erican Presidential candidates.
Not in one of those debates, in one of those
television debates?
That's right sir.
, ell don't ask : n about those because all I
want to say about Television debates is " Never,
with my approval, in Australia".
4' S. 



P. M o 18J/ 96o
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. R. G. erleske
Sir Josiah Francis, our Consul-General in New~ York,
ill return to Australia at the end of the year upon
completing a very distinguished period of office..
I think that only those who have L. een at close hand
the work done by Sir Josiah and Lady Francis can fully
appreciate the immense service they have rendered to
Australians for five years.
have had g-reat pleasure in observing the high
standing of our representative in financial and business
circles. Sir Josiah will take up private and business
activities in Australia.
CAN. BERRA, October, 196o. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA. PZ/
STATEMENT BY
The PRIME MINISTER, the Rt. Hon.
R. G. MENZIES, M. P.,
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS.
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 20th October, 1960.]
Mr. MIENZIFS .( Kooyong-Prime Minister
and Minister for External Affairs)
-by leave-Sir, I arrived at the United
Nations General Assembly on the afternoon
of Friday, 30th September. The general
debate was on. President Soekarrio spoke
for two hours. He circulated a copy of
his speech. The speech consisted of 66
pages of foolscap. There was an added slip
circulated. It was marked ." Vital and
was to be inserted at page 65. This sheet
contained the terms of the proposed fivepower
resolution, of which I became aware
' for the ' first time, the five powers being
Ghana, India, the United Arab Republic,
8764/ 60. Yugoslavia and Indonesia. The terms of
the proposed resolution were these-
The General Assembly
Deeply concerned with the recent deterioration
in international relations which threatens the
world with grave consequences
Aware of the great expectancy of the world
that this Assembly will assist in helping to prepare
the way for the easing of world tension
Conscious of the grave and urgent responsibility
that rests on the United Nations to initiate
helpful efforts
Requests, as a first urgent step, the President
of the United States of America and the Chairman
of the Council of Ministers of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics to renew their contacts
interrupted recently so that their declared willingness
to find solutions of the outstanding problems
by negotiation may be progressively implemented. 
For some reason my distinguished friend,
the Prime Minister of India, rose at the end
of President Soekarno's speech and formally
moved the resolution. I was, I confess,
greatly concerned about the terms of the
resolution, not because of its opening paragraphs,
with which everybody would agree,
but because Jof the operative clause, that
opertive clause being the request that the
President of the United States of America
-named as such-and the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics should renew their
contacts. That was a very, very important proposal.
First of all, it had defects and it had
dangers. " To renew their contacts, interrupted
recently" was a clear reference, if
to anything, back to the Paris conference
when there was to be a summit conference,
when the four people were to meet. That
was the only period of interruption, and the
contacts which were interrupted were interrupted
at Paris when those four great men
were to meet. Yet, Sir, the resolution moved
by Mr. Nehru did not call for a summit
meeting of the four; it called for something
quite different. It did not call on the four
great men, the four responsible men, the
four men who led atomic. powers, to meet
again; it called on two people out of the
four. That seemed to me to lend colour
to what I believe to be the false but not
uncommon propaganda that the real world
issue is between the Soviet Union and the
United States of America.
The first real step was to get the four
atomic powers, the four powers which have,
beyond all understanding, the great powers
of peace and war in their hands, to meet.
I would have thought that that was the first
thing-to get those four people to come
together, not because of some oddities about
Great Britain or the United States or France
-not at all-but because they happened to
be the people who had atomic weapons and
who, therefore, had enormous powers of
life and death for all the rest of us in the
world. Something could come, from my
point of view, of a meeting between the
four; nothing could come of a resolution
which'said: that two out of the four ought
to meet'together.
That reolution was moved, and then the
distinguished Prime" Minister of Great Britain, the Right Honorable Fld.
Macmillan, and I-he very naturally, and I
by some chance-were invited to come to
Washington to see the President of the
United States early on Sunday morning,
2nd October. Very naturally we agreed.
We said we would go.
On Saturday, 1st October, I had lunch
with Mr. Macmillan and with Lord Home.
We had a little talk and we then flew to
Washington. I dined with them at the
Australian Embassy, with our Ambassador,
Mr. Harold Beale. We dined, and we talked
about these matters. Like me, they were
troubled about the resolution-and they
were troubled about it for very obvious
reasons. Straight-out support of the resolution
would be travelling, we all thought,
in the wrong direction. Here was a resolution
which said, " Let two people get
together and then everything may be
arranged But, on the other hand, straightout
opposition-if we all voted " No"-
would be misinterpreted. People would
look at the first three or four recitals in the
resolution, all in favour of peace, and then,
if we voted " No we would be told that
we did not want peace. Therefore, straightout
opposition would be misinterpreted.
That was a very difficult problem, Sir. I
suggested on the Saturday night that an
amendment in positive terms might be put,
and my distinguished friends, Mr. Macmillan
and Lord Home, having heard what
1 had to say about this matter, said that they
would like to think it over. On the next
morning at 9.30-a rather intolerable hour
on Sunday morning-we went to the White
House. My former colleague, our distinguished
Ambassador, Mr. Beale, was
there, and we had a close discussion-
President Eisenhower; Mr. Herter, the
Secretary of State; Mr. Macmillan the distinguished
Prime Minister of Great Britain;
Lord Home, the Foreign Secretary, and
myself. I think, Sir, that I might be allowed to
say that that morning, and under those
circumstances, the Americans were worried
about the position that had been created by
the five-power motion. The President himself
had received letteirs from the five
powers-India, Indonesia, Ghana, Yougoslavia
and the United Arab ' Republicenclosing
the resolution. The President had 
bteen working on a draft reply setting out
reasons why a personal and special meeting
wvith Khrushchev was not, in the then atmosphere,
acceptable. I would not wish honorable
members to believe that this was A
rather dour attitude on the part of the
United States of America. All who have
witnessed these things know th at
Khrushchev had made it just about as
difficult as anybody could make it for a
meeting to occur.
In the course of the talks on the Sunday
morning, I said-and let me say at once
that I take full responsibility for this-that
I thought it quite useless to be coming down
in favour of a resolution which, on the face
of it, did some wrong things, as I understood
them, or to be coming down flatfooted
against the resolution, in which case
a lot of people would misinterpret tfie vote
and misinterpret the views. Therefore, for
better or for worse, and I still think for better,
I said, " This kind of resolution is not
one that you can flat-footedly oppose or
flat-footedly support. Why do we not have
an amendment of this resolution which will
bringa the whole of the United Nations back
to the realities of the position?"
I say this, because I understand there are
some people who think that I was a sort
of fall guy think that is the term.
On the contrary. I have great pride in
being the Prime Minister of this country
and in having views of my own on behalf
of my country. Therefore, I said, Well,
why not ' have an amendment? Why meet
this thing full face? Let us have
an amendment which in positive terms
will say what we believe to be the
truth? We had a discussion about
that. I do not want anybody to believe
that they all agreed at once with what I
had to say, but at least I said it.
I want honorable members to understand
that the United States of America was
itself deeply concerned about this matter.
It knew that to have a resolution passed
which put the whole onus on the President
of the United States was wrong. The
Americans knew that this was putting the
whole situation out of balance. They
knew, as I believe, that this idea that the
whole conflict in the world is between
the United States and the Soviet Union is
a false idea, a wicked idea; something that
has been devised and promulgated by
8764/ 60-2 people for no good purpose. Therefore,
they were deeply concerned. So, Sir, after
an hour and a half of discussion that morning,
I said that I thought we ought to have
an amendment. I did not care very much
who moved it, but we ought to have an
amendment. There we were-the President
of the United States of America; Mr.
Herter, the Secretary of State; Mr.
Macmillan, the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom; Lord Home, the United
Kingdom Foreign Minister; and myself.
We were all discussing this matter to and
fro. In the meantime, President Eisenhower
had received a letter from the five powers,
signed by Dr. Nkrumah of Ghana, and containing
the resolution, about which I will
say something later. The President himself
had been, for the previous 24 hours,
discussing with his advisers the problem of
how this letter ought to be answered. For
better or for worse, for richer or for poorer,
I came in with my idea that you could not
deal with a problem of this kind by saying
Yes" 1 or No that you might deal with
it by saying, Here is a positive proposal
And the positive proposal that I had to
make was that there ought to be a renewed
effort to get a Summit meeting of the Four
-not some theoretical meeting of the Two,
but a positive Summit meeting of the Four.
We debated that and they said, Well, do
you have an amendment in mind? I said,
Yes ". They said. " What is it?" I
indicated it in a rather vague way, and said,
" All right. I will go away and draft it."
This is very interesting. We finished at
11 o'clock on Sunday morning. I went off,
, having promised to draft an amendment and
to send it to the Secretary of State, Mr.
Herter, at lunch-time, and to Mr. Macmillan
and Lord Home. They got it by lunch-time.
There it was. With some small amendment,
that was the amendment that I moved in
the United Nations General Assembly.
They received it at lunch-time, and after
lunch we met at the British Embassy-the
British Prime Minister, Lord Home, Mr.
Herter and I. They had the terms of this
proposed amendment. By the time we had
talked it out on the Sunday, I understood
-1 have no reason to believe now that I
. had been wrong-that they approved of it.
I think it is proper, Sir, to tell this House
in my own country what the proposal was. 
In the early part of the five-power resolu-
. tion there had been three paragraphs with
which nobody could quarrel. My amendment
was designed, not to omit the earlier
paragraphs, which were quite good, but to
omit the last paragraph. The amendment
was in these terms-
Omit the last paragraph of the draft resolution
submitted by Ghana, India, Indonesia, the
United Arab Republic and Yugoslavia ( A/ 4522),
and substitute therefor the following:
I must ask honorable members to forgive
me for this strange form of words used in
the United Nations-
RECALLING that a Conference between the
President of the United States of America, the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the President
of the French Republic and the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland was arranged to take place in Paris on
17 May 1960, in order that these four leaders
should examine matters of particular and major
concern for their four nations,
I think that is something that every honorable
member would agree with: Recalling
the fact that the four great leaders had met,
not to discuss all the problems of the world,
but to discuss matters on which they, as
-the leaders of the four great atomic powers,
might have something to say. The amendment
continued-
RECALLING FURTHER that the Conference
did not actually begin its work,
NOTING that the President of the United States
of America, the President of the French Republic
and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland thereupon
made a public statement in the terms following:
I quote the words of three out of the four-
They regret that these discussions, so important
for world peace, could not take place. For their
part, they remain unshaken in their conviction
that all outstanding international questions should
be settled not by the use or threat of force, but
by peaceful means through negotiation. They
themselves remain ready to take part in such
negotiations at any suitable'time in the future."
I think it is not a bad idea to recall the
minds of honorable members to the fact that
three out of the four leaders of the powers
at Paris used those words, and meant them.
I went on from that to say in my amendment-
Believing that much benefit for the world could
arise from a co-operative meeting of the Heads of
Government of these four nations in relation to
Sthose problems which particularly concern
them,-Obviously, those problems were, for the
atomic powers, Berlin and all those things
which are flash-points of international
affairs-BELIEVING FURTHER that progress towards
the solution of those problems would be a material
contribution to the general work for peace of the
United Nations,
URGES that such a meeting should be. held at
the earliest practicable date.
I would have expected, Sir, speaking in my
own Parliament and among my own people,
that nothing would be said against that
view. Here it was. Here was a call to the
four great powers to sit down together and
try to make the world more safe for ordinary
people.
I put in my amendment. That was on a
Monday. At that moment, it was well
known that Khrushchev was not going to
meet Eisenhower-unless, of course,
Eisenhower went through the remarkable
performance of apologizing about the U2
incident and withdrawing all his claims
about the RB47 dincident-and that the
President himself had said that he was not
going to meet Khrushchev on those terms.
Therefore, the position was that the current
President of the United States and the current-
if that is the right word-head of the
Soviet Union were not willing to meet personally
without conditions which mutually
were completely unacceptable. On top of
all that-and let us be sensible about this
matter-at the very time at which we were
having this debate, a new President of the
United States was about to be elected, and
what he would do or say, who would know?
I want to pause here, Sir, to make a few
observations, because I have been told by
my friends-nobody is so frank as a friend
-that some complaints have been voiced in
Australia. I have tried to understand them,
because I am really a tolerably broadminded
fellow. I understand that the first
complaint is that I was being used by the
United States and the United Kingdom,
which happen to be the two greatest powers
in the free world and our most powerful
and devoted friends. I hope I have answered
that complaint. For better or for worse,
the proposal for an amendment was mine,
not theirs. I thought, in my new-found
innocence, that Australia was entitled to a
mind of its own. Indeed, I have been told
by some of my friends opposite in the past 
tl, their great complaint is that we do not
have a: mind of our own. As I have said,
I thought we were entitled to a mind of
our own. Believing that a certain course
was right, I advocated it. I need not add
any words to that.
In the second place, I gather from the
critics that, in the interests of Australia, I
should have preferred pleasing the five
nations which I have named by supporting
something with which I strongly disagreed
-and with which I utterly disagree at this
moment-to acting in concert with our most
powerful and most unambiguous friends.
If that is the price of admiralty, then I
resign from admiralty. I have learnt, perhaps,
very little in my life, but I have learnt
to know who are our friends.
Contrary to my expectation, it was ruled
that the five-power resolution and my
amendment should be discussed separately
from the general debate, on Wednesday
morning, 5th October. My major speechwhich
appears to have missed fire here, for
some reason or other-had been listed for
the afternoon. Therefore, unlike anybody
else at the United Nations, I had to make
two separate speeches instead of one. Therefore,
on Wednesday morning-knowing that
on Wednesday afternoon I had to make my
most considerable speech--I moved my
amendment. At question time this morning, when I
was treated so kindly, my distinguished
friend, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition
( Mr. Whitlam) said to me, " I would like
to know what you said on your amendment
I want to say at once that I have
arranged that the full text of what I said
will be made available to members, because,
unhappily, it does not appear to have been
rather widely reported. I will permit myself
the luxury of quoting a few of the things
that I said that morning to the cold and
unresponsive audience of the United
Nations General Assembly. I think I should
do so. A motion had been put down in the
name of five powers, and I was moving an
amendment. Among other things, I said-
Let me say at once, that nobody can more
warmly appreciate the high motives of the sponsors
of the resolution than I do. They feel, no doubt,
that it would be a bad thing if all the Heads of
State and Heads of Government departed from
this Assembly without leaving behind some visible
evidence in the shape of a decision. They believed, no doubt, that the people of the world would be
disappointed and perhaps disillusioned if we all
departed and nothifig at all emerged. They therefore
introduced this resolution and part of its
purpose, as it has. been explained to me, was to
try to take advantage of the presence in North
America at the same time of President Eisenhower
and Mr. Khrushchev. But if I believe, as I do,
that the effect 6f the resolution, if carried, would
be undesirable, then I am bound to say so.
I hope that honorable members will realize
that that was an authentic Australian voice
upon thi matter. I went on to talk about
the conference in Paris-the conference
which did not occur, the conference which
broke down because of Khrushchev's
attitude. I said-
Many of us had thought that the discussions
about nuclear tests could have been brought
within reach of finality.
I still believe that. I continued-
After all, the great nuclear powers were not so
widely separated on this issue that some effective
lead could not have been given. But the Paris
conference failed even to begin, because the leader
of the Soviet Union would not participate. I have
my own view about his stated reasons, but at
this moment I would not desire to debate them.
This was said in the morning.
The material and relevant fact was that the
leaders of the United States, the United Kingdom
and France, promptly made a statement in which
they said:-
I trust that this will be remembered for
years, but not, I hope, with tears.--
" They regret that these discussion, so important
for world peace, could not takeplace. For their
part, they remain unshaken in their conviction
that all outstanding international questions should
be settled not by the use or threat of force, but
by peaceful means through negotiation. They
themselves remain ready to take part in such
negotiations at any suitable time in the future."
My speech continued-
This, it will be agreed, was a fair enough
proposition, good-tempered and. tenacious in the
cause of peace. Should it be rejected now? If
we have now reached a point in our discussions
when we feel that talks of this kind should
proceed, why should we not say so? Why should
we, by carrying the five-nation resolution, dismiss
the United Kingdom and France from the first
act? Then I went on to say this, and it is worth
remembering-Mr. Nehru himself has frankly stated that there
are serious limits to the usefulness of bilateral
talks; but what I would wish to know is whether
any valid reason can be advanced for supposing
that in some way the President of the United
States was the stumbling block, and that therefore 
in any renewed discussions he should be the one
leader of what we call the Wes: ern World to be
brought under persuasion or pressure.
My own view is that we should encourage the
resumption of these summit talks. No doubt, a
meeting at the Summit cannot be arranged quickly
or without preparation. We shall have to feel
our way forward, and a way may be found.
But it will not be found in the next few days,
and I doubt whether it can be found by trying
to rush at it. The Australian amendment reflects
what I believe is the view of the majority here,
that we should try to recapture the hope that was
offered to us in the early part of this year when
we were moving towards a Summit meeting.
I concluded this excerpt by saying-
There may indeed be other amendments. I
should like to say for myself that I am much less
concerned about the details of draftsmanship than
I am to avoid the perpetuation of the notion
that the world confict is between the United
States and the Soviet Union.
Well, Sir, before the morning session
ended, in the course of which I regret to
say that my distinguished friend, Mr.
Nehru, made a somewhat remarkable commentary
upon my amendment and my
speech, the President indicated that two
further amendments were being circulated
and that the matter would be concluded
at the night session. This was on the Wednesday.
I will by-pass, for the moment,
the afternoon session. At the night session
Cambodia, which after all is an Asian
country, indicated that it would have supported
my amendment as a separate resolution.
This was a merely technical objection
to its form. For some reason or other,
and I still do not understand it, because. in
these United Nations affairs I am a new
boy, the foreshadowed further amendments
that had been referred to by the President
in the morning were not submitted.
So, the first thing which happened after
Cambodia had said this was that we voted
on the Australian amendment. Of course,
the result has given immense pleasure to a
few people. I do not know why they should
be so pleased that an Australian amendment
should be defeated. Still, one lives
and learns. So the Assembly voted on my
amendment. It was supported, on the vote,
by France, by the United Kingdom, by the
United States of America, by Canada and
by ourselves-not a bad voting group, I
think. There were 45 people who voted
" No" and 43 who abstained. Very interestingly,
among the people who abstained
and so said neither " Yes" nor " No" were the Soviet Union, the entire Sc. t
bloc, Japan, Laos, the Philippines, Thailand,
and Cambodia-for the reason I have referred
to. It was then proposed that
separate votes should be taken-this is a
highly technical but fascinating problem for
us who are parliamentarians--on the inclusion
in the five-power resolution of the
words " the President of". See what I
mean? The President of the United States
of America-and then " the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of This, of
ccurse, is something which we min our
innocence in this Parliament know nothing
about. Anyhow, it was proposed that
' separate votes should be taken, and my
distinguished friend, the Prime Minister of
India, Mr. Nehru, objected, I thought, with
great force, that if these words were omitted
the five-power resolution would be meaningless
because, of course, diplomatic relaticns
had not been cut off between the
United States of America and the Soviet
Union. They had never been interrupted.
I might say I thought he had a great
deal of force in that but, as I did not like
the five-power resolution, I remained relatively
unmoved, except intellectually, by
this argument. Sir, what happened?
Separate votes were put to the vote of the
Assembly. I want to mention this to
honorable members because some people
rather foolishly have tried to make it appear
that I, representing you in this Parliament,
had done something foolish and had been
left out on a limb. But when the separate
votes were put to the vote those in favour
of separate vo: es-in other words those
who must be regarded as being not in
favour of the five-power resolution as a
whole-were 37, and against them were
36, with 22 abstentions. It is lovely, you
know. Some of you have been there, but
I had not been there before. Somebody
says " abstention" in English and somebody,
being brought up in the French language,
says " abstention" in French, but
it amounts to the same thing. There we
were, 37 in favour of separate votes, 36
against and 22 abstentions. Those in favour
of separate votes,-and I mention this because
some silly fellow who tried to pretend
that I am becoming bad friends with
the Asian countries suggested the contrary
-included Pakistan, China, Japan, the
Philippines and Thailand. 
if I may permit myself to say so,
1 do not mind finding myself standing, as
to three of these countries, alongside our
colleagues in the South-East Asian Treaty.
When the separate votes were taken,
because it had been decided there ought to
be separate votes, those in favour of retaining
what I will call the separate phrases"
the President of the United States of
America, the Chairman o the Council of
Ministers of the Soviet Union-numbered
41 with 37 against and 17 abstentions.
The President ruled that there should be
a two-thirds majority. There was not a
two-thirds majority, and the President's
ruling was upheld. All this was going on in
the one day when oddities of all kinds-
Heaven help me!-were being published in
my own country. Those who voted against
the retention of these personal phrases, in
other words those who voted against the
idea that we should be telling President
Eisenhower and Chairman Khrushchev to
get together, included all of the South-East
Asian countries. That, I think, is something
worth noting.
After all this argy-bargy-I think that is
the expression-Mr. Nehru, the very distinguished
leader of India, stood up and
said that, having regard to the voting, the
Sfive-power resolution would be withdrawn.
So at one o'clock in the morning of the
same sitting day the five-power resolution
had gone. You may ask what had happened
to my amendment submitted on behalf of
Australia. Many people have been eager
beavers to say that my amendment was just
ridiculous and that I had made a fool of
C my country. When I make a fool of this
Scountry I hope that you will expel me.
The fact was that by one o'clock in the
morning the resolution to which my amendment
had been an unsuccessful alternative
had been withdrawn-withdrawn because
. other amendments had been moved or other
procedures had been adopted which persuaded
its sponsors to withdraw it.
I want to stress to honorable members
that this is not a party political matter.
All of us are Australians and we want to
feel that our country counts. The fact is
that by the end of that day two remarkable
things had occurred. First, the proposal
sponsored primarily by Yugoslavia, the
United Arab Republic, Indonesia and others had gone. It had been withdrawn. In the
meantime, in the course of the voting, four
atomic powers-the only four atomic
powers-had been called to the ballot. You
may think that I am rather foolish, but at
any rate I called them to the ballot. Four
6f them, Great Britain, France and the
United States, had voted unhesitatingly for
a convening of the Summit conference as
contained in my amendment, and the Soviet
Union had not voted but had
abstained from voting.
Four days later, under circumstances
which vex the honorable member for East
Sydney ( Mr. Ward), I had a talk with the
head of the Soviet Union, Mr. Khrushchev,
in which he made it abundantly clear that
he wanted a Summit conference. That was
why he had not voted against my amendment.
He wanted a Summit conference
and by one o'clock-after midnight that
day-I went back feeling in my simple
vanity that at any rate we had now got to
a state of affairs in which there would be,
after the American presidential election, a
Summit conference. It is very difficult, even
for such an old hand as myself, to understand
why this achievement-because it was
something of an achievement-should be
regarded as in some way discreditable to
our country, to which most of us were born.
To sum up, Sir, my amendment was lost,
but the resolution was withdrawn. Three
atomic powers had voted for a Summit
meeting and the Soviet Union had abstained.
Not one of the four atomic powers was
opposed to a Summit meeting.
I pass on from that. I made a speech
that afternoon. In my simplicity I thought
that that was the major speech, and my
distinguished colleague, the Treasurer, who
was present probably-God bless himthought
likewise, because the speech in the
morning was on this technical problem. As
I have said, I made a speech in the afternoon.
It lasted for about 40 minutes. It is
very interesting for an Australian to go
abroad and make a speech on the great
United Nations platform. This was the
only occasion in my life when the American
press swept a speech of mine into its
columns. But that did not happen here in
Australia. A pity! It is a pity that we
should have this inferiority complex because
after all, Mr. Speaker, in my speech in the 
afternoon I had made up my mind that if
Mr., Khrushchev were to come and bully
people-taunt people, and beat things on. the
table, including his shoes-it was really high
time that somebody speaking for 10,000,000
people-that is all-should make it quite
clear to him that we are not frightened'.
Therefore I let myself go, as you might say.
But of course, what happened in the United
Nations Assembly, apart from all the beating
on the table and the wearinge out of boot
leather which was all very funny from our
point of view? I think that Mr. Khrushchev
wanted to persuade or terrify new nations
into coming into his camp. We know
n6thing about that. We are not easily
per suaded, and we certainly are not easily
terrified into somebody else's camp. But
that seemned to be his idea. He had his
heelers with him. There were with him
about half a dozen representatives from his
satellite nations who would not dare to
applaud without first looking round to see
whether he gave the high sign. Wonderful!
I wish. that I could organize that sort of
thing some day! Mr. Khrushchev talked
about co lonial ism. He tried to read into the
minds of some of the delegates a bitterness
about their old status. He was talking for
the most part to people who represented
countries in Africa which, by wise providence
on the part of the United Kingdom,
had ceased to be colonies and had become
independent nations. I thought that was a
monstrosity. Anyhow he did it. Therefore,
I thought on your behalf-if you do not
agree with what I did you will say so--that
I ought to use a few words mildly about this
situation. Let me quote one or two, of the
words that I used, because apparently there
has been some difficulty in reporting them in
Australia. I said-
I beg of all these distinguished representatives-
I was referring to the representatives of
the new countries, primarily -in Africato
put bitterness out of their minds. So far as
they are concerned, the past has gone. The dead
past should bury its dead. It is the present and
future that matter. Most of them know that political
independence can be won more swiftly than
economic independence.
I pause here to repeat the last sentence
because some rather silly fellow has said
that I was not on the same wave-length as the new countries. I leave it to the 1. A~ e
to decide. I said-
Most of them know that political independence
can be won more swiftly than economic independence.
And yet both are essential to true
nationhood. Under these circumstances, nations
which are older in self-government should not be
looking at new nations as people whose support
should be canvassed, but as people who need
objective assistance with no strings if the material
prosperity of their people is to be improved.
It is one of the significant things in contemporary
history that the advanced industrial nations
are, because of their scientific and technological
adv antages, improving their standards at a
phenomenal rate; while less advanced countries,
lacking the same techniques on the same scale,
are advancing at a slower rate.
This is not one of the facts of life which one
may observe and, having observed, forget. Itsignificance
is that the gap between the advanced
and the relatively unadvanced tends, unless we do
something about it, to grow wider every year.
It is not a state of affairs which civilized and
humane thinking can indefinitely tolerate.
I said this on Australia's behalf, and I am
sure that no honorable member will disagree
with it.
if in this Assembly and in the nations here
represented we will constantly remember that our
trust is for humanity and that, indeed, the United
Nations itself has no other reason for existence,
we will more and more concentrate our efforts
on providing economic and techn-ical help for
new nations to tho very limit of our capacity; not
because we want, to put it crudely, to buy them
into our own ideas of things, not only because
we really and passionately believe in independence
and freedom, but also because we believe that
our fellow human beings everywhere are entitled
to decent conditions of life, and have enough
sense to know that independence and freedom are
mcre words unless the ordinary people of free
countries have a chance of a better life to-morrow.
This point of view seemed to me to underlie
the temperate and persuasive speech of Mr.
Macmillan and other speeches made by democratic
leaders.
But there are others who have so far misunderstood
the spirit of the United Nations as to
resort to open or veiled threats, blatant and in
some instances lying propaganda, a clearly expressed
desire to divide and conquer. They
should [ earn that threatened men live long
and that free nations, however small, are not
susceptible to bullying.
I am still quoting myself, which is an ill
business. I continued-
I will permit myself the luxury of developing
this theme, though quite briefly, in the particular
and in the general.
I hope honorable members will not think
me boring but this was a phase of my 
speech which, I believe, had an immense
impact on the Assembly. I said-
In his opening speech, Mr. Khrushchev made
his usual great play about " colonialism As Mr.
Macmillan reminded us, the answer to much of
his story is to be found in the presence in this
Assembly of many new nations, once colonies and
now independent.
Mr. Khrushchev said among other things;
" Nations who oppress other nations cannot
themselves be free. Every free nation should help
the peoples still oppressed to win freedom and
independence." This was, in one sense, a most
encouraging observation. It made me wonder
whether we were perhaps about to see a beginning
of an era in which the nations of Europe,
which were once independent and are now under
Soviet Communist control, are going to receive
the blessings of freedom and independence. What
a glorious vista of freedom would be opened up
by such a policy! How much it would do to
relieve the causes of tension, and promote
peacel I venture to say that it is an act of complete
hypocrisy for a Communist leader to denounce
colonialism as if it were an evil characteristic of
the Western Powers, when the facts are that the
greatest colonial power now existing is the Soviet
Union itself.
This brings me now to the point. I said-
Further, in the course of this Assembly, Mr.
Khrushchev was good enough to make some
references to my own country and its position in
relation to the territories of Papua and New
Guinea. He calls upon Australia to give imme.
diate full independence and self-government to
New Guinea and Papua. As a piece of rhetoric
this no doubt has its points. But it exhibits a
disturbing want of knowledge of these territories
and of the present stage of their development.
Nobody who knows anything about these territories
and their indigenous people could doubt
for a moment that for us in Australia to abandon
our responsibilities would be an almost criminal
act. I am quoting this part of my speech
because, subject to correction, I feel that
these words impressed themselves upon our
friend. I said-
Here is a country which not so long ago was
to a real extent in a state of savagery. It passed
through the most gruesome experiences during the
last war. It came out of it without organized
administration and, in a sense, without hope.
It is not a nation in the accepted term. Its
people have no real structure of association except
through our administration.. Its groups are
isolated among mountains, forests, rivers and
swamps. It is estimated that there are more than
200 different languages.
Probably my distinguished colleague, the
Minister for Territories CMr. Hasluck)
would tell me that I underestimated the
number. I continued-
The work to be done to create and foster a
sense and organism of community is therefore
enormous. But, with a high sense of responsibility, Australia
has attacked its human task in this almost
unique area.
Since the war some form of civilized order has
been established over many thousands of ' square
miles which were previously unexplored.
We have built up an extensive administration
service Really, I do not need to trouble
honorable members about this. I told
them the simple, dramatic and moving
story of what has been done in Papua and
New Guinea, and I ended by saying-
I could go on like this almost indefinitely.
The achievement has not been without cost.
We have put many more millions into Papua and
New Guinea than have ever come out.
We have established many local government
councils, democratically elected on an" adult
franchise, and we have set up a Legislative
Council on which there is a growing number of
indigenous members.
Mr. Khrushchev includes us in his diatribe
against " foreign administrators who despise and
loot the local population". I have shown how
exactly opposite to the truth this is in our case.
His further extravaganza about " the overseer's
lash and the executioner's axe must relate to
areas with which he is more familiar than he is
with New Guinea and Papua.
We do not need to be lectured on such matters
by a man who has no record whatever of having
brought colonial people into freedom and selfgovernment.
We indeed are proud to be in. the
British tradition of the 20th century-a tradition
which has by sensible degrees and enlightened
administration brought the blessings of self government
and a seat in the councils of the world to
many former colonies.
I also spoke about neutralism, and I . inflict
this on honorable members-
Neutralism is, of course, one of those rather
rotund words which does not readily, admit of
definition. If, when we say that a nation is neutral,
we mean that it will not under any circumstances
take arms in any conflizt which does not concern
the protection of its own immediate boundaries,
it seems to be a notion hard to reconcile with the
Charter of the United Nations which contemplates
under certain circumstances the use of combined
force in terms of the Charter itself.
Mr. Nehru, the distinguished leader of India,
has not, I think, used the word ". neutral" in this
sense. He and his government maintain large
defences in their own country, and are active supporters
of the Charter. What he has consistently
made clear is that he stands for non-alignment, in
the sense that he will not engage in. any special
military or quasi-military alliance.
My own country does not subscribe to this view,
since we are party, for example, to the South-East
Asian Treaty with the military associations which
are either expressed or implied in it. But we do
not quarrel with each other about these matters. I
would think it impossible to believe that some of 
the greatest leaders of so-called " neutral" countries
would regard themselves as being neutral in the
great conflict of ideas.
Sir, having said all that at, I am afraid, too
great length, I now. turn, quite briefly I hope,
to some general observations about this
rather historic General Assembly meeting.
First of all, a determined attack was made
by the Communist powers upon new nations
to. encourage what I have already described
as retrospective bitterness I do not
think that on this matter the table-thumping
succeeded. In the second place, attempts were made
to defeat or to undermine the Secretary-
General. In particular, a very remarkable
proposal was put forward that there should
be three secretaries-general instead of one;
and for some very odd reason, one ought to
be from what we would call the Communist
group but what Mr. Khrushchev-I
apologize to my friends opposite-calls the
socialist group, a second from the neutralist
group and a third from the capitalist group
of which, no doubt, I was one of the representatives.
There ought to be three
secretaries-general, and everybody would
have a veto on everybody else, and therefore,
of course, nothing would happen, and therefore
the United Nations would come to an
end. He did not get very much success
with that remarkable proposal.
But there are some aspects of his general
campaign about which I think I should
report to this Parliament. First of all, I
believe that what he has been saying and
what he has been doing are designed to
divide the United Nations into the disunited
nations. After all. if there is one thing
about the United Nations that matters, it is
that it possesses a sort of universality. As
I said in my own speech, he wants to produce
a result like ancient Gaul-according
to our late respected friend, Julius Caesar,
all Gaul was divided into three parts. This
man wants to divide the United Nations
into three parts and therefore into the disunited
nations.
One of the groups that he wants to produce
in this disunited body is what he keeps
on describing as the neutralist group. What
is a neutralist group? Sir, one of the things
that I beg all honorable members on both
sides of the House to avoid is this fallacy of
easy classification. So-and-so is an African,
therefore he must think like all other
Africans! If one African is neutralist, therefore he must be neutralist! This is an iuult
to people. Does anybody suppose that
because people were born west of the Soviet
boundary in Europe, whether they are
Germans, Frenchmen, Englishmen or
Italians, they are the same kind of men with
the same kind of ideas? This, of course, is
utter nonsense. You may go over the whole
zone of Africa and tell me that so-and-so,
so-and-so, and so-and-so must think the
same way because they are all Africans and
they are all African leaders. Sir, I tell you
that the greatest speech made at this General J
Assembly was made by the Prime Minister
of Nigeria. He is a most remarkable man,
and his speech made an unforgettable impact
on the minds of all of us. It would insul'
this great man-the head of the Government
of the greatest single nation in the
whole African continent, a nation of
40,000,000 people-to be told that his
country must be classified, along with other
countries, in a group or a bloc. No one
could have been more explicit than he was
about the need for every nation to live its
own life, to face its own future, to accept
its own responsibilities. The people who
want to denigrate the whole of modern independence,
and to treat new nations as if
they were merely groups to be bought like
bunches of bananas, make a very great
blunder. That was perhaps the greatest
blunder that Khrushchev made.
Let us consider the ways in which Mr.
Khrushchev failed. He failed to undermine
the Secretary-General. He failed to destroy
the work that has been done with regard to
the Congo. He failed on occasion after
occasion, and I will not take up the time of
the House in recounting them all, because
I have already taken up too much of its
time. He had some success, no doubt. He
may have frightened somebody and he may
have weakened a little the position of the
Secretary-General; I do not know. You and
I in this House are fortunate to have grown
up in such an atmosphere that we can laugh
at nonsense and not be frightened by it, so
how am I to know to what extent Mr.
Khrushchev succeeded in frightening
people? He tried to disunite the United
Nations. He tried to introduce some strange
dogma about neutralist groups.
He had some point, I suppose. He said
that when the United Nations was established
it had 50 member nations, that now it 
haL nearly 100, and that therefore there
ought to be some reconstruction of the
structure of the organization. I do not
object to that suggestion, so long as it is
understood that one of the dangers that'
have grown up in the modern world is that
the General Assembly, which has relatively
little power, has become tremendously important
because the heads of governments
attend it, wvhereas the chief executive body
-1 am not using the word executive " in
( a technical sense-the Security Council, has
been put rather on one side. The Security
Council, Sir, must continue to include in its
membership people who represent the great
powers, which themselves are the backbone
6of the United Nations and which themselves
{ carry the major responsibility for peace.
KBut, subject to that proviso, I do not object
to the suggestion that a reconstructign of
the United Nations should be considered.
I want to say only one or two things
more. I had the very valuable opportunity
of seeing, on your behalf, a number of
world leaders. I would not wish any member
of this Parliament, on either side, to
believe that I was being exclusive,' talking
to this side and not to that side. In the
course of rather less than three weeks I
had the closest discussions with President
Eisenhower, with the American Secretary
of State, Mr. Herter, with Mr. Macmillan
and Lord Home and with Mr. Nehru. I
had a long interview with Mr. Khrushchev.
I sought the interview, and I tell you quite
frankly that the main reason why I sought
it was that I thought that if I came back
Shere and my friends, or friendly opponents
who sit opposite, asked me whether I saw
k~ Khrushchev and I replied that I had not,
they might think it rather odd. So I sought
an interview with Mr. Khrushchev.
I had already expressed myself, as honorable
members will have gathered from what I have already said, with a certain degree
of clarity. Nevertheless, I had 70 minutes
with Mr. Khrushchev. I want to say to the
House that I came away from the interview
quite satisfied that he would like a Summit
conference. Being more interested, as I am,
in substance than in form, and as what I
was trying for from the day I arrived at
the United Nations was the substance of
a Summit conference, I am very pleased to
say that three of the atomic powers voted
for a Summit conference on my amendment,
and that the fourth, through Mr.
Khruschev, has indicated to -me in the
clearest possible terms that a Summit conference
is considered a good idea.
I saw, of course, the Prime Minister of
Ethiopia, who is an old friend of mine. I
had a talk with President Tito. I spoke to
Mr. Luns, the Foreign Minister of the
Netherlands. Dr. Subandrio, of Indonesia,
was a guest of mine, and I had a long talk
with him. Indeed, one would be surprised
at the number of people who concern us in
this world with whom, in the course of
a fortnight or three weeks, one can have
useful talks.
I ' have occupied the time of the House
long enough. Having said that I believe that
Mr. Khrushchev wants Summit talks, and
that I think something might come of them,
I would like to conclude by saying that 1
have by no means been disposed to defend
myself on the matters about which I have
spoken. I believe in my heart and my
mind that I pursued the right course at New
York, and that I spoke and acted in the
best interests of my country.
I lay on the table the following paper:-
United Nations-General Assembly-Ministerial
Statement.
and move-
That the paper be printed:
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANRERRA. 



DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA
RELEAAD ONLY IN C-Y-ERRA PR 110
2. . D h 6
UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSVJBLY
Porliamentary Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister
for External Affairs
The Prime Minister -nd Minister for External Affairs,
Mr. R. G. Menzies, made the following statement leave in the
House of Representatives on October
I arrived at the United Nations General Assembly on the
afternoon of Friday, September 30th. The general debate was on.
President Soekarno spoke for two hours. He circulated a copy of his
speech. The speech consisted of 66 pages of foolscap. There was an
added slip circulated. It was marke d, " Vital," and was tc be inserted
at page 65. This sheet contained the terms of the proposed five-power
resolution of vyhich I became aware for the first time, the five powers being
Ghana, India, the United Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Indonesia. The terms
of the pro-osed resolution were these
The General Assembly, deeply concerned with the recent deterioration
in international relations which threatens the world with
grave consequences, aware of the great expectancy of the world that
this Assembly will assist in helping to prepare the way for the
easing of world tension, conscious of the grave and urgent responsibility
that rests on the United Nations to initiate helpful efforts, requests,
as a first urgent step, the President of the United States of America and
the chairman of the Council of M. 1inisters of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to renew their contacts, interrxpted recently, so that their
declared willingness to find solutions of the outstanding problems by
negotiation may be progressively implemented.
For some reason, my distinguished friend, the Prime Minister of India, rose
at the end of President Soekarno's speech and formally moved the resolution.
I was, I confess, greatly conce'rned about the terms of the resolution, not
because of its opening paragraphs, with which everybody wuld agree, but
because of the operative clause, that operative claize being the request that
the President of the United States of America named as suoh and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics should renew their contacts.
That was a very, very important proposal. First of all, it had
defects and it had dangers. " To renew their contacts, interrupted recently"
was a clear reference, if to anything, back to the Paris conference when there
was to be a Summit Conference, when the four people were to meet. That was
the only period of interruption, and the contacts which were interrupted were
interrupted at Paris when those four great men were to meet. Yet, Sir, the
resolution moved by Mr. Nehru did not call for a Summit Meeting of the four; 
* 2. it called for something quite different. It did not call on the four great
men, the four responsible men, the four men who led atomic power, to meet
again; it called on two people out of the four. That seemed to me to lend
colour to what I believe to be the false but no uncomming propaganda that the
real world issue is between the Soviet Union and the U. S. A.
The first real step was to get the four atomic powers, the four
powers which have it, beyond all understanding, the great powers of peace
and war in their hands, to meet. I would have thought that that was the first
thing to get those four people to come together, not because of some oddities
about Great Britain or the United States or France not at all but because
they happened to be the people who had atomic weapons and who, therefore,
had enormous powers of life and death for all the rest of us in the world.
Something could come, from my point of view, of a meeting between the four;
nothing could come of a resolution which said that two out of a resolution which
said that two out of the four ought to meet together.
That resolution was moved, and the the distinguished Prime Minister
of Great Britain, the Rt. Hon. HaroldMaaillan, and I he very naturally, end
I by some chance were invited to come to Washington to see the President of
the United States early on Sunday morning, October 2nd. Very naturally we agreed.
We said we would go.
On Saturday, October 1st, I had lunch with Mr. Macmillan and with
Lord Home. We had a little talk and we then flew to Washington. I dined with
them at the Australian Embassy with our Ambassador, Mr. Howard Beale. We dined
and we talked about these matters. Like me, they were troubled about the
resolution, and they were troubled about it for very obvious reasons. Straight
out support of the resolution would be travelling, we all thought, in the wrong
direction. Here was a resolution which said, " Let two people get together
and then everything may be arranged". But, on the other hand, straightout
opposition if we all voted " no" would be misinterpreted. People would look
at the first three or four recitals in the resolution, all in favour of
pease, and then, if we voted " no", we would be told that we did not want peace.
Therefore, straightout opposition would be misinterpreted.
That was a very difficult problem, Sir, I suggested on the Srturdnay
night that an amendment in positive terms might be put, and my el. stinguished
friends Mr. Macmillan and Lord Hone having heard what I had to say about this
matter, said that they would like to think it over. On the next morning, at
9.30 a rather intolerable hour on Sunday norning, we went to the White
House. My colleague my former colleague, our distinguished Ambassador,
Mr. Beale, was there, and we had a close discussion President Eisenhower,
Mr. Herter, the Secretary of State, Mr. Macmillan, the distinguished Prime
Minister of Great Britain, Lord Home, the Foreign Secretary, and myself.
I think, Sir, that I might be allowed to say that that morning,
and under those circumstances, the Americans were worried about the position
that had been created by the five-power motion. The President hinself had
received letters from the five powers India, Indonesia, Ghana, Yugoslavia
and the United Arab Republic enclosing the resolution, The President had
been working on a draft reply setting out reasons why a personal and special
meeting with Krushchev was not in the then atmosphere acceptable. I would not
wish honourable members to believe that this was a rather dour attitude on
the part of the United States of Amercia. All honourable members who have
witnessed these things know that Kr: u.-':. hev had made it just about as difficult
as anybody could make it for a meeting to occuro
In the course of the talks on the Sunday morning I said and let
me say at once that I take full responsibility for this that I thought it quite
useless to be coning down in favour of a resolution which on the face of it drid
some wrong things, as I understood them, or to be coming down flatfooted against
the resolution, in which case a lot of people would misinterpret the vote and
misinterpret the views, for better or for :-crse., and I s3-21" thir: for
better, I said " This kin-of reslutio i o J can
flat-footedly oppose or flat-footedly support. 
* OWhy do we not have an amendment of this resultion which will bring the whole
of the United Nations back to the realities of the position?"
I say this,. because I understand there are some people who think that
I was a sort of fall guy. I think that is the term. On the contrary. I have
great pride in being the Prime Minister of this country and in having views of my
own on behalf of my country. Therefore, I said to them, " Well, why not have an
amendment? Why meet this thirgfull face? Let us have an amendment which in
positive terms will say what we believe to be the truth?" Wehad a discussion
about that. I do not want anybody to believe that they all agreed at once with
what I had to say, but at least I said it.
I want honourable members to understand that the Urnited States of
America was itself deeply concerned about this matter. It knew that to have a
resolution passed which put the whole onus on the President of the United States
was wrong. The Americans knew that this was putting the whole situation out of
balance. They knew, as I believe, that this idea that the whole conflict in the
world is between the United States and the Soviet Union is a false idea, a wicked
idea, something that has been devised and promulgated by people for no good
purpose. Therefore, they were deeply concerned. So, Sir, after an ahour and a
half of discussion that morning, I said that I thought we ought to have an amendment.
I did not care very much who moved it, but we ought to have an amendment. There we
were the President of the United States of America; Mr. Herter, the Secretary
of State; Mr. Macmillan, the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom; Lord Home,
the United Kingdom Foreign Minister,. and myself. WLc were all discussing this
matter to and fro.
In the meantime, President Eisenhower had received a letter from the
five powers, signed by Dr. Nkrumah of Ghana, and containing the resolution, about
which I will say something later. The President himself had been, for the previous
S 24 hours, discussing with his advisers the problem of how this letter ought to be
Vanswered. For better or for worse, for richer or for poorer, I came in with my
idea that you could not deal with a problem of this kind by saying " yes" or " no"
that you might deal with it by saying, " Here is a positive proposal". And the
positive proposal that I htd to make was that there ought to be a renewed effort
to get a Summit Meeting of the Four not some theoretical meeting of the Two,
but a positive Summit meeting of the Four.
We debated that and they said, " Well, do you have an amendment in mind?"
I said, " Yes". They said, " What is it?" I indicated it in a rather vague way,
and said " All right. I will go away and draft it." This is very interesting. We
__ finished at 11 o'clock on Sunday morning. I went off, having promised to draft
V an amendment and to send it to the Secretary of State, Mr. Herter, at lunchtime
and to Mr. Macmillan and Lord Home, they got it by lunchtime. There it was. With
some small amendment, that was the amendment that I moved in the United Nations
General Assembly. They received it at lunctime and after luch we met at the British
Embassy the British Prime Minister, Lord Home, Mr. Herter and I. They had the
V terms of this proposed amendment. By the time we had talked it out on the Saunday,
I understood I have no reason to believe now that I had been wrong that they
approved of it. I think it is proper, Sir, to tell this House in my own country what the
proposal was. In the early part of the five-power resolution there had been three
paragraphs with which nobody could quarrel. My amendment was designed, not to
omit the earlier paragraphs, which-were quite good, but to omit the last paragraph.
The amendment was in these terms'
Omit the last paragraph of the draft resolution submitted by Ghana,
India, Indonesia, the United Arab Republic and Yugcolavia ( A/ 4522),
and substitute theref or the following:
I must ask honourable members to forgive me for this strange form of words used in
the United Nations
RECALLING that a Conference between the President of the United States of America,
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, the President of the French Republic and the Prime Minister of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland was arranged to take place 
in Paris on 17 May, 1960, in order that these four leaders should examine matters
of particular and major concern for their four nations,-I think that is something.
that every honourable member would agree with Recalling the fact that the four
great leaders had met, not to discuss all the problems of the world,, but to
discuss matters on which they, as the leaders of the four great atomic powers,
might have something to say. The amendment continued
RECALLING FURTHER that the Conference did not actually begin its work,
NOTING that the President of the United States of America, the President of
the French Republic and the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland thereupon made a public statement in the terms
following:
I quote the words of three out of the four
" They regret that these discussions, so important for world peace,, could
not take place. For their part, they remain unshaken in their conviction
that all outstanding international questions should be settled not by the
use or threat of force, but by peaceful means through negotiations. They
themselves remain ready for take part in such negotiations at any suitable
time in the future".
I think it is not a bad idea to recall the minds of honourable members to the fact
that three out of the four leaders of the powers at Paris used those words, and
meant them. I went on from that to say in my amendment
BELIEVING that much benefit for the world could arise from a cc-operative
meeting of the Heads of Government of these four nations in relation to those
problems which particularly concern them,
Obviously, those problems were, for the atomic powers, Berlin and all those things
which are flsh-points of international affairs
BELIEVING FURTHER that progress towards the solution of those problems would be
a material contribution to the general work for peace of the United Nations,
URGES that such a meeting should be held at the earliest practicable date.
I would have expected, Sir, speaking in my own Parliament and among my own people,
that nothing would be said against that view. Here it was. Here was a call to
the four great powers to sit down together and try to make the world more safe for
ordinary people.
I out in my amendment. That was on a Monday. At that moment, it was well known
that Krushchev was not going to meet Eisenhower, unlcss, of course, Eisenhower went
through the remarkable performance of apologising about the U2 incident and withdrewing
all his claims about the PB47 incident and that the President himself had said
that he was not going to meet Krushchev on those terms. Therefore, the position was
that the current Prcsident of the United States and the current if that is the
right word head of the Soviet Union were not willing to meet personally without
conditions which mutually were completely unacceptable. On top of all that and lot
us be sensible about this matter at the very time at which we were having this
debate, a new President of the United States was about to be elected, and what he
would do or say, who would know?
I want to pause here, Sir, to make n few observations, because I have been tcl.'
by my friends nobody is so frank as a friend that some caonLints have been
voiced in Australia. I have tried to understand them because I am really a tclcrablbroad-
minded fellow. I understand that the first complaint is that I was being used
by the United States and the United Kingdom which, happen to be the two greatest
powers in the free world and our most powerful and devoted friends. I hope I hrve
answered that complaint. For better or for worse, the proposal for an amendment was
mine, no theirs. I thought, in my new-found innocence, that Austrlia was entitled to
a mind of its own. Indeed, I have been told br some of my fliends opposite in the
past that their great complaint is that we do not have a mind of our own. As I h-vo
said, I thoughtthat we were entitled to a mind of our own. Believing that a certain
course was right, I advocated it. I need not add any words to that.
In the second place, I gather from the critics that, in the interests of Austra! ia,
I should have preferred pleasing the five nations which I have named by supporting
something with which I strongly disagreed and with which I utterly disagree at this : o
ment to acting in c-ncert ' ith our most powerful and most ancmbiguous friends. 
If that is the price of admiralty, then I resign from admiralty. I have
learnt, perhaps, very little in my life but I have learnt to know who are
our friends. Contrary to my expectation, it was ruled that the five power
resolution and my amendment should be discussed separately from the general
debate on Wednesd~ ay morning, 5th October. My major speech which appears to
have missed firedhere, for some reason or other, had been listed for the
afternoon. Therefore, unlike anybody else at the United Nations, I had to
make two separate speeches, instead of one. Therefore, on Wednesday morning,
knowing that on Wednesday afternoon, I had to make my most considerable speech,
I moved my amendment. This morning at question time, when I was treated so kin* dly, my
distinguished friend, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Whitlam) said
to me, " I would like to know what you said on your amendment."~ I want to say
at once that I have arranged that the full text of what I said shall be made
available to members because, unhappily, it does not appear to have been rather
widely reported. I shall permit myself the luxury of quoting a few of the
things that I said that morning to the cold and unresponsive audience of the
United Nations General Assembly. I think I shculd do so. A motion had been
put down in the name of five powers and I was moving an amendment. ' Among
other things, I said
Let me say at once thc). t nobody can more warmly appreciate the high
motives of the 3ponsors of the resolution than I do. They feel, no doubt,
that it would be a bad thing if all the heads of state and heads of government
departed from this assembly without leaving behind some visible
evidence in the shape of a decision. They believe, no aoubt, that the people
of the world would be disappointed and, perhaps, disillusioned if we all
departed and nothing at all emerged. They, therefore, introduced this
resolution and part of its purpose, as it has been explained to me, was to
try to take advantage of the presence in north America, at the same time,
of President Eisenhower and Mr. Khrushchev. But if I believe, as I do, that
the effect of the resolution, if carriedwould be undesirable, then I am
bound to say so.
I hope that honourable members will realise that that was an authentic
Australian voice upon this matter. I went on to talk about the conference in
Paris, the conference which did. not occur, the conference which broke down
because of Khrushchev's attitude. I said
Many of us have thought that the discussions about nuclear tests
could have been brought within reach of finality.
I still believe that
After all, the great nuclear powers were not so widely separated
on this issue thaLt some effective lead could not have been given. But the
Paris conference failed even to begin, because the leader of the Soviet Union
would not participate. I have my own view about his stated reasons, but at
this moment I do not desire to debate them.
This was said in the morning
The material and relevant fact was that the leaders of the United
States, the United Kingdom and. France, promptly made a statement in which
they said:
I trust that this will be remembered for years but not, I hope with fears.
" They regret that these discussions, so important for world peace,
could not take plice. For their part, they remain unshaken in their conviction
that all outstanding international questions should be settled not by the use
or threat of force, but by peaceful means through negotiation. They themselves
remain ready to take part in such negotiations at any suitable time in the
future."
My speech continued This, it will be agreed, was a fair enr'ugh proposition, goodtempered
ana tenacious in the cause of peace. Should it be rejected now?
If we have now reached a point in our discussions when we feel that talks of
this kind should proceed, why should we not say so? 
6.
Why should we, by carrying the five-nation resolution, dismiss the
United Kingdom and France from the first act? I went on to say this
it is worth remembering Mr. Nehru himself has frankly stated that
there are serious limits to the usefulness of bilateral talks; but
what I would wish to know is whether any valid reason can be
advanced for supposing that in some way the President of the United
States was the stumbling block, and that therefore in any renewed
discussions he should be the one leader of what we call the western
world to be brought under persuasion or pressure.
My own view is that we should incourage the resuoption of these
summit talks. No doubt, a meeting at the summit cannot be arranged
quickly or without preparation. We shall have to feel our way forward,
and a way may be found. But it will not be found in the next few days.
I doubt whether it can be found by trying to rush at it. The Australian
amendment reflects what I believe is the view of the majority here; that
we should try to rocalBure the hope that was offered to us in the early
part of this year when we were moving towards a summit meeting. I
concluded this excerpt by saying
There may indeed by other amendments. I should like to say for
myself that I am much less concerned about the details of
draftsmanship than I am to avoid the perpetuation of the motion
that the world conflict is between the United States and the
Soviet Union.
Before the morning session ended, in the course of which I regret to say
that my distinguished friend, Mr. Nehru, made a somewhat remarkable
commentary upon my amendment and my speech, the President indicated that
two further amendments were being circulated and that the matter would be
concluded at the night's session. This was on Wednesday. I will bypass,
for the moment, the afternoon session. At the night session Cambodia,
which after all is an Asian country, indicated that it would have
supported my amendment as a separate resolution. This was a merely
technical objection to its form. For some reason or other, and I still
do not understand it, because in these United Nations affairs I am a new boy,
the foreshadowed further amendments that had been referred to by the
President in the morningierenot submitted. So, the first thing which
happened after Cambodia hLi said this, vias th. t we vt-, on the AuBtrali-n
amendment. Of course this has given immense pleasure to a few people.
I do not kn.. w why they should be so pleasci that an . ustralian amondm. nz
should be defeated. Still, one lives and learns. So they voted on my
amendment. It was supporte, on the vote, by France, by the United Kingdom,
by the United States of . imurica, by Candada and by ourselves not a bad
voting group, I think. There w.: re 45 pc; ple who voted and 43 who
abstained. Very interestingly, amcng the people who abstained and who
said neither " yes" nor " no" were the Soviet Union, the entire Soviet bloc,
Japan, Laos, the Philippines, Thailand .' nd Cambodia, for the reason I
have referred to. It vcs then proposed that separate votes should be
taken this is a highly technical but fascinating problem for us who
are parliamentarians on the inclusion in the 5-power resolution of the
words " the President of" " The Chairman of the Council of inisters of".
This, of course, is something which we in our innocence in this
Parliament know nothing about. .' nyhow,, it was proosoe that separate
votes should be taken, and my distinguishoe friend, the Prime Minister
of India, Mr. Nehru, objected, I thought, vwith groat force, that if t'hose
words were omitted the 5-power resolution would be meaningless because, ., f
course, diplomatic relations had not been cut off between the United States
of Amorica and the Soviet Union. They had never beun interrupted. I
might say I thought he had a great deal of force in that but, as I Cdi
not likethe 5-power resolution, I remained relatively unmoved, except
intellcctually, by this argument. ' hat happened? Separ-te votes wcr: -u;
to the vote of the Assembly. I want to nmntion this to honorable members
because some people rather foolishly have trica to make it a:' pear that I,
representing you in t. is Parliament, had done someithing foolish an: d ad
been loft out on a limb. But when the separate votes worc rut to the vote
these in favour of separate votes in other words those who must be 
regarded as being not in favour of the 5-power resolution as a whole were 37,
and against them were 36, with 22 abstentions. It is lovely, you know.
Some of you have been there but I had not been there before. Somebody
says " abstention" and somebody, being brought up in the French language,
says " abstentia", but it amounts to the same thing. There were, 37 in
favour of separate votes, 36 against and 22 absteitions. Those in favour
of separate votes and I mention this because some silly fellow who has
tried to pretend that I am bcooming bad friends with the Asian countries
has suggested the contrary included Pakistan, China, Japan, the
Philippines and Thailand. And if I may permit myself to say so, I do not
mind finding myself standing, as to three of these countries, alongside
our colleagues in the South-East Asian Treaty. When the separate votes
were taken, because it had been decided that there ought to be separate
votes, those in favour of retaining what I will call the " separate phrases",
the President of the United States of America, the Chairman of the Council
of Ministers of the Soviet Union, were 41 in favour, with 37 against and
17 abstentions. The President ruled that there should be a two-thirds
majority. There was not a two-thirds majority and the President's ruling
was upheld. All this was going on in the one day when oddities of all
kinds, Heaven help met were being published in my own country.-Those
who voted against the retention of these personal phrases, in other wor'. s
those who voted against the idea that we should betelling President
Eisenhower and Chairman Khrushchev to get together, included all of the
South-East Asian countries. That, I think, is something worth noting.
After all this argy-bargy I think that is the expression Mr. Nehru, the
very distinguished leader of India, stood up and said that, having rig8
to the voting, the five-power resolution would be withdrawn. So at
one o'clock in the morning of the same day the five-power resolution had
gone. You may ask what happened to my amendment submitted on behalf of
Australia. Many people have been eager beavers to say that my amendment
was just ridiculous and that I had made a fool of my country. When
I make a fool . of this country I hope that you will expel me. The fact
was that by one o'clock in the morning the resolution to which my
amendment had been unsuccessful alternative had been withdrawn. Withdrawn
because other amendments had been moved or other procedures had been adopted
which persuaded its sponsors to withdraw it.
I want to stress to honorable members that this is not a party
political matter. iall of us are Australians and we want to feel that our
country counts. The fact is that by the end of that day two remarkable things
had occurred. First, the proposal sponsored primarily by Yugoslavia, the
United Arab Republic, Indonesia and others had gone. It had been withdrawn.
In the meantime, in the course of the voting four atomic powers, the only four
atomic powers, had been called to the ballot. You may think that I am rather
foolish, but at any rate I called them to the ballot. Four of them. Great
Britain, France, and the United States had voted unhesitatingly for a convening
of the Summit conference as contained in my amendment, and the Soviet Union
had not voted but had abstained from voting. Four days later, under
circumstances which vexed the honorable members for East Sydney ( Mr. Ward) I
had a talk with the head of the Soviet Union Mr. Khrushchev, in which he made
it abundantly clear that he wanted a Summit conference. That was who he had
not voted against my amendment. He wanted a summit conference and by one
6' clock after midnight that day I went back feeling in my simple vanity
that at any rate we had now got to a state of affairs in which there would be a
after the American presidential election a Summit conference. It is very
difficult even for such an old hand as myself to understand why this achievement,
because it was something of an achievement, should be regarded as in some way
discreditable to our country, to which most of us were born.
To sum up, my amendment was lost, but the resolution was withdrawn.
Three atomic powers had voted for a Summit meeting and the Soviet Union had
abstained. Not one of the four atoiic powers was opposed to a Summit meeting.
I pass on from that. I made a speech thatafternoon. In my simplicity
I thought that that was the major speech, and my distinguished colleage the
Treasurer ( Mr. Harold Holt) whe was present probably God bibss him thought
likewise, because the speech in the morning was on this technical problem. As
I have said, I made a speech in the afternoon. It lasted for about 40 minutes.
It is very interesting for an Australian to go abroad and make a speech on the
great itfdrations platform. This was the only occasion in my life when the
American press swept a speech of mine into its columns. But that did not 
0 8.
in the afternoon I had made up my mind that if Mr. Khrushchev were to come
and bully people taunt people, and beat things on the table, including
his shoes it was really high time that somebody speaking for 10,000,000
people that is all should make it quite clear to him that we are not
frightened. Therefore I let myself go, as you might say. But of course,
what happened in the United Nations Assembly, apart from all the beating on
the table and the wearing out of boot leather, which was all very funny from.
our point of view? I think thatMr. Khrushchev wanted to persuade or terrify
new nations into coming into his camp. We know nothing about that. We are
not easily persuaded and we certainly are rot easily terrified into somebody
else's camp. But that seemed to be his id3a. He had his heelers with him.
There were with him about half a dozen representatives from his satellite
nations who would not dare to applaud without first looking round to see
whether he gave the high sign. Wonderful: I wish that I could organize
that sort of thing some day' Mr. Khrushchov talked about colonialism. He
tried to read into the mind of some of the delegates a bitterness about their
old status. He was talking for the most part to people who represented
countries in Africa, which, by wise provenance on the part of the United
Kingdom, had ceased to be colonies and had become independent nations.
I thought that was a monstrosity. Anyhow, he did it. Therefore, I thqught
on your behalf if you do not agree with what I did you will say so/ ought
to use a few words mildly about this situation. Lot me quote one or two of the
words that I used, because apparently there has been some difficulty in
reporting them. I said
I bog of all these distinguished representatives I was referring
to the representatives of the new countries, primarily in Africa
to put bitterness out of their minds. So far as they are concerned, the
past has gone. The dead past should bury its dead. It is the present
and future that matter. Most of them know that political independence can
be won more swiftly than economic independence.
I pause here to repeat the last sentence because some rather silly fellow has
said that I was not on the same wave-length as the now countries. I leave
it to the House to decide. I said
Mostof them know that political independence can be won more swiftly
than economic independence. And yet both are essential to true
nationhood. Under those circumstances, nations which are older in
self-governmont should not be looking at new nations as people whose
support should be canv. issod, but as peo-ple who noed objective assistance
with no strings if the material prosprity of their people is to be
inprovod. It is one, of the significant things in contemporary history that
the advanced industrial nations arc, because of their scientific and tcchnelo-ical
advantages, improving their standards at a phenomenal rate; while loss
advanced countries, lacking the sane techniques on the same scale, are advanciat
a slower rate. This is not one of. the facts of lifo which one may observe an.;
having observed, forget. Its significance is that the gap between the adv:. nc
and the relatively unadvancod tends, unless we do som: thing about it, to .; row
wider every year. It is not a state of aff; irs which civilized and hu. ran;
thinking can indefinitely tolerate.
I said this on Australia's behalf, and I am sure that no
Honorable nmmber will disagree with it.
If in this Assembly and in the nations here repros'nted we will constant-t
remember that our trust is for humanity and that, indeed the United N-. ti
itself has no other reason for existence, we will more and more concertr. t_
our efforts on providing economic and technical help for new nations
very limit of our capacity; not because we want, to put it crudely, t. Ouy
then into our own ideas things, not only because we really and pas3: ion...-
ely believe in independence and frcddo);, but also becaus e believe that
our fellow human beings everywhere oa., entitl,;! to docont conditions of
life, and have enjugh sense to know th-t indepondence and freedom 
and mere words unless the ordinary people of free countries have a chance
of a better life tomorrow.
This point of view seemed to me to underlie the temperate and
persuasive speech of Mr. Macmillan and other speeches made by democratic leaders.
But there are others who have so far misunderstood the spirit of
the United Nations as to resort to open or veiled threats, blatant and in scme
instances lying propaganda, a clearly expressed desire to divide and conquer.
They should learn that " threatened men live long", and that free nations,
however small, are not susceptible to bullying.
I am still quoting myself, which is an ill business. I continued
" I will permit myself the luxury of developing this theme,
though quite briefly, in the particular and in the general."
I hope non mcibcrr will not think me boring but this was a phase of my speech
which, I believe, had an irimense impact on the Assembly. I said
" In his opening speech, Mr. Khrushchev made his usual great play
about " colonialism". Ax Mr. Macrillan reminded us, the answer to much of
his story is to be found in the presence of this Assembly of many new
nations, once colonies and now independent.
Mr. Khrushchev said among other things: " Nations who oppress
other nations cannot themselves be free. Every free nation should help the
peoples still oppressed to win freedom and independence". This was, in one
sense, a most encouraging observation. It made me wonder whether we were
perhaps about to see a beginning of an era in which the nations of Europe,
which were once independent, and now are under Soviet Communist control, are
going to receive the blessings of freedom and independence. What a glorious
vista of freedom would be opened up by such a policy! How much it would do
to relieve the causes of tension, and promote peace!
I venture to say that it is an act of complete hypocrisy for a
Communist leader to denounce colonialism as if it were an evil charactcristic
of the Western Powers, when the facts are that the greatest colonial power
now existing is the Soviet Union itself."
This brings ec now to the point. I said
" Further, in the course of this Assembly, Mr. Krushchev was good
enough to r. ikc some references to my own country and its position in rclation
to the territories of Papua and New Guinea. He calls upon Australia to give
imediate full independence and self-govcrnment to New Guinea and Papua. As
a piece cf rhetoric this no doubt has it points. But it exhibits a distur-bir
want of knowlcdge of these Territories and of the present stage of their
development. Nobcdy who knows anything about these Territories and their
indiginous peoppe could doubt for a moment that for us in Australia to
abandon our responsibilities could be an almost crirminal act."
I am quoting this part of my speech because, subject to correction, I feel
that these vords impress themselves upon our friend. I said
" Here is a country which not so long ago was to a real extent
in a state of savagery. It passed through the n. cst gruesome experiences
during the last war,, It came out of it without organized administration,
and, in a sense, without hope.
It is not a nation in the accepted tense. Its people have no rcl
structure of association expect through our acmninistration. Its groups arc
isolated among mountains, forests, rivers and swaaps. It is estimates thr. t
there are cmre than 200 different languages."
Probably my distinguished colleague, the iinistcr for Territories ( Mr. Hasluck)
would tell me that I underestimated the number. I continued
" The -work to be done to create and foster a sense and organism of
community is therefore enormous.
But, v&amp; th a high sense of responsibility, Australia has attacked
its human task in this almost unique area.
Since the war some form of civiliscd order has been establishc'd
over many thousands of square miles which were previously unexplored." 
S.-LU. We have built up an ex ensive administration service...
Really, I do not need to trouble honourable members about this. I told them
the simple, dramatic and moving story of what has been done in Papua and
New Guinea, and I ended by saying
I could go no like this almost indefinitely.
The achievement has not been without cost, We have put many more
millions into Papua and New Guinea than have cvcr come out.
We have established many local government councils, democratically
elected on an adult franchise, and we have set up a Legislative Council on
which there is a gowing number of indigenous members.
Mr. Khrushchev includes us in his diatribe against " foreign
administrators who despise and loot the local population". I have
shown how exactly opposite to the truth this is in our case. His further
extravaganza about " the overseer's lash" and the " executor's axe" must
relate to areas with which he is more familiar than he is with New Guinea
and Papua. We do not need to be lectured on such matters by a man who has
no record whatever of having brought colonial people into freedon and
self-government. We indeed are proud to be in the British tradition
Sof the 20th century a tradition which has by sensible degrees
and enlightened administration brought the blessings of self-government
anda seat in the councils of the world to many former colonies.
I also spoke about neutralism, and I inflict this on honourable members
Neutralism is, of course one of those rather rotund words which
does not readily admit of definition, If, when we say that a nation is
neutral, we mean that it will not under any circumstances take arms in
any conflict which does not concern the protection of its own immediate
boundaries, it seems to be a notion hard to r econcile with the Charter
of the United Nations which contemplates under certain circumstances the
use of combined force in terms of the Charter itself.
Mr. Nehru, the distinguished leader of India, has not; think used the
word " neutral" in this sense. He and his government maintain largedefences
ia their own ccuntny, and are active supporters of the Charter. What
he has consistently made clear is that he stands for non-alignment, in
the sense that he will not engage in any special military or quasimilitary
alliance.
My own country does not subscribe to this view, since we are party,
for example, to the South-East Asian Treaty with the military
associations which are either expressed or implied in it. But we do not
quarrel with each other about these matters. I would think it impossible
to believe that some of the greatest leaders of so-called " neutral"
countries would regard themselves as being neutral in the great conflict
of ideas.
Sir, having said all that at, I am afraid, too great length, I now turn, quite
briefly I hope, to some genural observations about this rather historic
General Assembly meeting. First of all, a determined attack was made by the
Communist powers upon new nations to encourage what I have already dscribed as
" retrospective bitterness" I do not think that on this matter the tablethumping
succeeded.
In the second place, attempts were made todbfeat or to undermine the
Secretary-General. In particular, a very remarkable proposal was put forward
that there should be three secretaries-general instead of one; and for some
very odd reason, one ought to be from what we would call the Commnist group
but what Mr. Khrushchev-I apologize to my friends opposite calls the socialist
group, a second from the neutralist group and a third from the capitalist
group. of whioh, no doubt, I was one of the representatives. There ought to be
three secretaries-general, and everybody would have a veto on everybody else,
and therefore, of coursenothing would happen, and therefore the United Nations
would come to an end. He did not get very much success with that remarkable
proposal. 
But there are some aspects of his general campaign about which
I think I should report to this Parliament. First of all, I believe that
what he has been saying and what he has been doing are designed to divide
the United Nations into the disunited nations. After all, if there is one
thing about the United Nations that matters, it is that it possesses
a sort of universali ty As I said in my own speech, hewants to produce a
result like anci" cn our late respected friend, Julius Caesar reported
that all Gaulwas divided . nto three parts. This manwants to divide the
United Nati. ns into three parts and therefore into the Disunited Nations.
One of the groups in this disunited body that he ants to produce is
what he keeps on describing as the neutralist groupo What is a neutralist
group. Sir, one of the things that I beg all honourable members on both
sides of the House to avoid is this f allacy of easy classification. So and
so is an African, therefore he must think like all other Africans' If one
African is neutralist, therefore he must be neutralist9 This is an insult to
people. Does anybody suppose that because people were born west of the
Soviet boundary in Europe, whether t hey are Germans, Frenchmen, Englishmen
or Italians, they a re t he same kind of men with the same kind of ideas?
This, of course, is utter nonsense. You may go overt he whole zone of
Africa andt ell me that so-and-so, so-and-so, and so-and-so must think the
same way because they are all Africans and they are all African leaders.
Sir, I tell you that the greatest speech made at this General Assembly was
made by the Prime Minister of Nigeria. He is a most remarkable man, and
his speech made an unforgettable impact on the minds of all of us. It would
insult this great man, the head of the Government of the greatest single
nation in the whole African continent, a nation of 40,000,000 people, to be
told that his country must be classified, along with other countries, in a
group or bloc. No one could have been more explicit than he was about the
need forevery nation to live its own life, to face its own future, to accept
its own responsibilities. The people who want to denigrate the whole of
modern independence and to treat new nations as if they were merely groups
to be bought like bunches of bananas, make a very great blunder. That
was perhaps the greatest blunder that Khrushchev made.
Let us consider the ways in which Mr. Khrushchev failed.
He failed to undermine the Secretary General, He filed to destroy the
work that has been done with regard to the Congo. Ho failed on
occasionafter occasion, and I will not take up the time of the
House in recounting them all, because I have already taken up far too
much of its time, He had some success, no doubto He may have
frightened somebody and he may have weakened a little the position of
the Secretary General; I do not know. You and I in this House
are fortunate to have grown up in such an atmosphere that we can
laugh at nonsense and not be frightencd by it, so how am I to know
to what extent Mr, Khrushchev succeeded inf rightening people?
He tried to disunite the United Nations, He tried to introduce some
strange dogma about neutralist groups. He ha d some points, I suppose.
He said that when the U. N. was c stablished it had 50-member nations,
that now it has nearly 100, and that therefore there ought to be some
reconstruction of thestructure of the organisation. I do not object
to that suggestion, so long as it is underst-cd that one of the
cangers that have grown up in the modern wcrld is t hat the General
Assembly, which has relatively little power, has become tremendously
important because the heads of Government attend it whereas t he chief
executive body and I am not using the word executive" in a
technical sense the Security Council, has been put rather on one
side. The Security Council, Sir, must continue to include in its membership
people who represent the great powers, which themselves are the
backbone of the U. N. and which themselves carry the major responsibility
for peace. But, subject to that proviso, I do not object to the
suggestion that a reconstruction of the UN, should be considered. 
V 12.
I want to say one or two things more. I had the very valuable
opportunity of seeing, on your behalf, a number of world leaders.
I would not wish any member of this Parliament, on tiehter side, to
believe that I was being exclusive, talking to this side and not to
that side. In the course of rather less than three weeks I had the
closest discussions with President Eisenhower, with the American
Secretary of State, Mr. Herter) with Mr. Macmillan and Lord Home and
with Mr. Nehru. I had a long interview with Mr. Khrushchev. I
sought the interview, and I tell you quite frankly that the main
reason why I sought it was that I thought that if I cmoback here
and my friends, or friendly opponents, who sit opposite asked me
whether I saw Khrushchev and I replied that I had not, they might
think it rather odd. So I sought an interview with Mr. Khrushchev.
I had already expressed myself, as hon. members-wi-l have gathered from
what I have already said, with a certain degree of clarity.
Neveitheless, I had 70 minutes with Mr. Khrushchev, and I want to
say to the Hoixse that I came away from the interview quite
satisfied that he would like a summit conference. Being more
interested, as I am, in substance than in form, and as what I was
trying for from the day I arrived at the U. N. was the substance of
a summit conference, I am very pleased to say that three of the
atomic powers voted for a summit conference on my amendment, and
that the fourth, through Mr. Khrushchev, has indicated to me in the
clearest possible terms that a summit conference is considered a
good idea. I saw, of course, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia who is an
old friend of mine. I had a talk with President Tito. I spoke to
Mr. Luns, the Foreign Minister of the Netherlands. Dr. Subandrio,
of Indonesia, was a guest of mine, and I had a long talk with him.
Indeed, one would be surprised at the number of people who concern
us in this world with whom, in the course of a fortnight or three
weeks9 one can have useful talks.
I have occupied the time of the House long enough. Having
said that I believe that Mr. Khrushchev wants summit talks, and
that I think something might come of them, I would like to conclude
by saying that I have by no means been disposed to defend myself
on the matters about which I have spoken. I believe in my heart
and in my mind that I pursued the right course at New York, and
that I spoke and acted in the best interests of my country.
I move 



P. M. No. 3 960
CYCLONE RELIEF EAST PAKISTAN
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. R. G. Mienzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. R. G. Menzies, announced
today that the Australian Government had decided to donate the
sum of to the Pakistan Government towards the relief
of distress caused by the major devastation of last -, eek's
cyclone and tidal Jave in :, ast Pak: istan.
Mr. Menzies stated that the Government had been in
touch with the Australian High Commissioner in Pakistan who
had advised that the cyclone wJas one of the most severe
experienced for many years. It was estimated that 5,000
people had l. ost their lives and the housing and livelihood of
many thousands more had been affected.
The Australian Government has already conveyed to
the Government of Pakistan the sympathy of the Australian
people for the people of East Pakistan who suffered by the
disaster. CANBLRRA,
21st October, 1960. 



O SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTEi, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES AT ORANGE ON MONDAY, THE 24TH
ocToB,. 3.960o_____
Mr. Chairman, Parliamentary colleagues, present and to come,
ladies and gentlemen:
One always has rather mixed feelings about a byelection.
I know that some of you think they are fun: they're
not really. They leave you with mixed feelings.
I'm sorry that we are having a by-election, because it
will seem very odd to me, and I think to you, no longer to have
a Howse in the Federal Parliament, because that is a name of
very great honour and distinction, not only here, but in
Australia. ( Applause)
But it will also, of course, , ive you the opportunity
of putting into Parliament, if you are disposed to elect my
supporter, Mr. W4allace Meares.
Now I want to confess to you that I have a certain
faint responsibility for his presence on the platform, because
I cajoled him a little on the subject of thlis by-election and
was delighted when I heard that he was submitting his name for
your choice. As a matter of fact he referred to his wife. I might
as well tell you, because these secrets arc bound to come out
( Laughter) that his wife's father '. as in politics with me.
, lell make the best of that, or the worst of it, as the case may
be. He represented a country electorate. My father sat in the
Parliament of Victoria with him, and he represented a country
electorate. I had an uncle who sat at that time in the Federal
Parliament, and he represented a country electorate.
In reality, Mrs Moares is bound to back her husband in
this campaign, because it means bringing him back into this neat
fold of politicians members of parliament, people who, at any
rate, have done something to serve their country in public
affairs. Now I noticed that he seemed to be a little modest
tonight about the fact that among his many qualifications is
that he is a very well-known, and favourably known, farmer of
great experience. That's a pretty good thing to be, if you're
going to be elected to represent a country constituency,
But as ho drove me in this afternoon from the airport
he was telling me the kind of thing that a new candidate for
Parliament can tell a battered old veteran like myself with
considerable interest, because Ican remember standing for
Parliament for the first time and all the arguments that went
on, all the rumours that were promoted. They are fascinating
things. The only trouble about them is, that although I go
back for 30 years, they've never changed in the whole of that
time. ( Laughter) He said to me that somebody had said to him, " You
know the trouble about you is that you won a competition of
some kind and therjfore you will be suspected of being an
' intellectual'" and I said " Well don't let that worry you
because I have a great number of critics, some of them very
highly paid '( Laughter) And they've never made up their minds
yet! Because they change the record about every fortnight as
to whether I'm a Jcreak-minded character who can never make up
his mind, which is one of the stories, or whether I'm a tyrant
and a bully, putting the whole Cabinet under my thumb, like a
tyrant". 
Well I can't be both, I can't be both. And, of
course, as I can assure him, it's neither, He really won't be
accused of being an intellectual, whatever that word means.
He will be profoundly respected as a man who knows his business,
has lived in a community and served it in many, many ways and
has served this State in many, many ways.
Now, Sir, somebody reminded me today that this is the
first public speech that I will have made since I returned from
New York. And perhaps I ought to say a little to you about one
or two of the issues that are provoked in my mind by that fact.
I want to say in the first place that I hope nobody
here has any ambition, from the point of view of personal
comfort, to engage in these jet flights to Khrushchev, and back
again. ( Laughter) Because I can assure you they are very,
very exhausting. I wont to bed immediately after dinner on Friday night
and I got up for dinner on Saturday night, and got up for dinner
on Sunday night and apart from that I've been in a state of
coma ( Laughter) from which I have emerged, happily, in order to
come on to this platform where I have spoken before and
addressed this magnificent audience in Orange,
Orange always has a soft spot in my affections
because it has always been kind to me; whether it has agreed
with me or not it has always come out and listened. And that is
a good thing, for me if not for you,
But, Sir, without rehearsing matters that are by now
familiar to you I do want to say something about the issues, or
one or two of them which arose in Now York; because they are
issues which don't just concern a few diplomats sitting in a
large Assembly Hall, but which concern us very very closely.
Because they are the great issues of peace and war and international
understanding. I had never attended a mooting of the General Assembly
at the United Nations before and believe me it: s an astonishing
experience. There are the representatives of 98 count'rios, r. bout
15 or 16 new members this year some of them countries, the very
names of which you probably have no riore hoard of than I had
before they t. ere declared and admitted 98 r-.-' i-ions represented
in what has sometimes been described as " the Parliament of the
' Jorld". It isn't a Parliament of the World in reality; but it
is a great debating forum for the world. And this year to that
Assoebly there went a very high pircentage of the heads of
government in the world, I confess to you I wasn't very keen
on that. I think that that puts the Assembly a little out of
proportion. But at any rate Khrushchev decided to , o and then
began, by various means, to persuade other people to go and,
in the long run, I arrived quiet] y ( Laughter) as the last and
the least of all of them. And it was an astonishing performance.
Khrushchev is not negligible m an, I don't need to
say that to yov: he is ; hys-. cally st2ong, roug., mentally
rough and shrewd. Ho has a iathe.-nine sei. se o-l ihat I hope I
might be allowed to call " farm-ya.-d hvaour' ( Lai. ghter, applause)
And he very socn di:; clos , d his ha:.. d.
Sam refo:' ring to this rattc' because there are still
people in Australia, I regret to -ho iegar'. all these 
0 j.
fulminations of his as something remote from our lives, people
who haven't realisod that his men in this country, his se: vants
and advocates in this country are the Australian Coraunists. A
lot of people haven't quite wakened up to that fact.
But he wont along to this Assembly with certain
things in his mind.
First of all he was going to attack the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. And he made some plastering
attacks on Mr. Ham. narskjold who, after all, is the Chief
Executive Officer of the United Nations and ought not to be
involved in answering personal attacks. But he made them. He
played hard for a vote against the Secretary-General. He failed
miserably to secure it. He had no support on that issue, except
such support as he could get from his satellites. I wish you
all could have been there to see how it works.
Australia, by some grave injustico no doubt, sat in
the back row. I know it very well because it's an awful long
way from the back row to the rostrum. It's a real route march
to go down there, to open your mouth. But if somebody wants to
take a point of order he has to walk so far, from where I was
sitting, that by the time he reaches the rostrum he's forgotten
what the point of order was. ( Laughter) Itis quite a place
this. But, over on that side sat the Soviet Union, with
their battered desks in front of them. ( Laughter) Every time
Khrushchev wanted to create a demonstration against some speaker,
whose views didn't suit him, he would raise his fist like
this, and then proceed to harmer on the desk. And the moment
he raised his fists all the members of his delegation hammered,
all the people from the satellite countries, like Roumania and
Poland, all round, they're all looking, they took their cue and
they hammered their desks.
You've never seen such a complete admission, and it's
a very important one, that there are satellite countries in
Europe, owned and controlled, body and soul, by the Soviet
Union. Mark that point. -IJ will be told as we have been
told before that the Government of Poland, the Government of
East Germany, the Government of Roumania, the Government of
wherever it may be, Czechoslovakia, that these are ill local,
independent, democratic bodies. All I can say is that when
the hand went up they all applauded, they all beat on their
desk. They took their orders instantly from the master of the
Soviet Union. I made some point about this when, on your behalf, I
spoke in that Assembly, by saying that I had never listened to
such hypocritical nonsense in my life as the talk that Khrushchev
had made about " colonialism" when he was, himself, the head of
the greatest colonial power in the world. ( Applause)
And that when, on another occasion in one of his
speeches, he had said that freedo, must be given to colonial
people, I said I ventured to hope that that went for Poland
and Roumania and Czechoslovakia and Latvia and all these other
European countries. Because if it did, it would be the
greatest contribution to freedom that the world had seen since
the war. But of course it doesn't mean that. They are his
servants. Now that is one thing that I beg of all of you to
have in mind. 
0 Then, in the next place he began to make a pla. y for
the support of the new nations. Now, if we go back five years
and have a look at the nap of Africa, a vastly important country
to us never forget where we are living ( here we are with
Indonesia above us, Asia there and Africa there, Africa with
over 200 million people) five years ago not one part of
Africa, except South Africa, was completely free, independent,
self-governing. And in the last five years, principally owing
to the humane policies of the United Kingdom, country after
country has come to its freedom. ( Applause) Ghana, Upper
Volta, Nigeria. All these remarkable places are now free selfgoverning
communities. And because there are now a dozen of
them the Soviet leader decided that this was the time, either
to cajole then, or to threaten then into supporting the
Corimunist scheme. Now it's all right for us, we're only ten million
people. But we have a magnificent tradition of freedom.
( Applause) Je are not to be frightened, as I pointed out to
him, by threats or by cajolery. We're in the tradition of
freedom. Jo stand on our own feet.
But countries with rather loss of that tradition,
entering tentatively upon their new experiment in life their
new power to rule themselves may easily be affected by
threats, or by a somewhat violent form of persuasion.
All I want to say to you is that I am sure that in
those tactics he completely failed. Because these new nations
at any rate understand this: that if they are to exercise
their powers as new nations, they must exercise those powers
with dignity and with self-respect. And there was neither
dignity nor self-respect in the way in which the Communist case
was thundered at them.
And therefore I believe, and my colleague, the Attorney-
General who was there also, was telling me only this
morning that he was strongly of the same opinion, I believe,
that Khrushchev's tactics with these people failed, that he
overdid it and that in fact he left them with a rather low
opinion, not only of his manners, which are, of course,
deplorable, but re not so important as all that, but with a
very low opinion of his -enuine respect for them.
Because if I come before an audience which I respect
I don't behave like a buffoon; I don't go on putting on an act
and thumping things and knocking the table and pushing
everything over as if I were wanting to direct attention to
myself. If I did that here, you would all go home and say,
" It was good fun; what a fool'.' and that, after all, Jallce,
wouldn't be quite the object of the exercise. ( Laughter)
And so in that respect I think that he failed.
But there was one respect in which I felt disturbed
about what went on. . And I want you all to think about this
because this conc. rns us so intimately.
Time after time, speech after speech, he and his
satellites kept talking about colonialism, stirring up
bitterness, bittomrness in the minds of people who, as H:: rold
Macnillan pointed out, were present only because they wore no
longer colonials, who wore present only because they had become
free independent people.
.' nd yet he went on and these other people uont on and
I'll quote a phrase that I used in my own speech " in order to
create in their minds a spirit of retrospective bitterness", to
concentrate their minds on their disabilities of the past. and 
by so doing to try to induce them to hate Great Britain, to
hate the nations who had boon the colonial authority.
And of course this is intelligible for the Communist,
because the Communist has no religion of love. Ho thrives on
hatred. And here were those nn, trying to blow up in the
minds of these people hatred, hatred of the people who had
boon, true, their colonial masters and who had helped thoe: 1 to a
state of freedom and assisted then in the establishment of their
own Governmient. Sir, that is a vastly dangerous state of mind;
something to be discouraged, I believe, at all costs.
I took whatever opportunity presented itself to me to
remind some of the leaders of these Governments, some of whom
are close personal friends of nine, how bad a thing this was.
But you know there is a certain " mob psychology" about
the Khrushchevs in the world, a certain feeling, shared by
Hitler and Goebbols, that if you keep on saying it, and saying
it, and saying it long enough, somebody will be affected by it,
somebody will believe it.
Now, Sir, I don't want to elaborate those matters, but
I do just want to say this to you: that I came away from this
Assembly feeling, on the whole, rather disturbed, feeling that
these enormous efforts that were being put forward, not to
pacify the world, but to embitter it, to increase hostilities,
presented a rather grim outlook.
And as I believe that the cure for nost of these
things is an enlightened and sensible public opinion, I'n taking
the trouble to speak to you about it. Because, for this purpose
you are public opinion. We must be clear. And, above all
things, we must be firm in defnce of the matters that we stand
for. No~ w, Sir, there are two things that follow upon that.
eo stand for a freedom of the mind that is, again, in our
tradition. We are the inheritors of British liberty. And
among its greatest defenders in the world! ( Applause) This is
a splendid thing. And a threat, of course, is always present
to the mind. But above that, or rather, beyond that in one sense,
beyond that, is the constant threat to the very integrity of
our country. I hope nobody supposes that by some mysterious
act of divine providence we are destined always to be
independent and free, ten millions of us, eleven, twelve,
whatever the nunbers may be. Because that is not true.
We will retain our right to live here, our right to
develop industries, our right to cultivate our soil, our right
to breed our flocks and herds, only so long as we have in this
world not only the will to resist aggression ourselves but
groat and powerful friends who will stand by us in that task.
( Applause) There is a bit of a disposition in soie quarters, and
in some muddled ninds, to believe that it's all right so long
as we speak everybody fair; as long as we are quiet and
agreeable, nobody will touch us.
There is one newspaper in Sydney, you may have heard
of it, I don't need to name it, which is not, you might say,
entirely devoted to ie. ( Laughter) Do you follow me? It's 
6.
done its best to get rid of me for t: renty solid yea-s without
success. But I didn't think the day would ever come when a
newspaper that would describe itself, I suppose, as conservative
perhaps, I don't know, would attack the Primn Minister of
Australia because he thought it was of prime importance to
retain the friendship and co-operation of Great Britain and the
United States. Yet the other day, after I had made a somewhat longiinded
statement, I fear, to Parliament about ny expedition,
this very newspaper referred to ny activities as " currying
favour" with the United States and Britain. Currying favourl
According to them ry prime duty was to " curry favour" with
neutral countries. I wonder what would happen, you think about itp I
wonder what would happen if this country of ours becaie involved
in war and I had to say I was so busy currying favour with
neutral countries, who by definition couldn't cone to our help,
that I forgot all about keeping our bridges up with our mother
country and with the United States of ierica who are the great
fighting defenders of freedom in the world. ( Applause) And
our greatest friends. ( Applause)
Sir, these tiings need only to be stated to explain
thoeselvos. There is too much woolly thinking on those matters.
I will -o through ny life, I hope, believing that I know who
our friends are and that we ought to be close to then.
Do you remember how all this arose? It's a tedious
narrative by now, but you might like to hear it, at first hand.
I arrived at this assembly and found that five nations
were putting down a resolution. Who were the five? The five
wore Yugoslavia ( Tito), United Arab Republic ( Nasser) Ghana
( Nkrumah), Indonesia ( Soekarno), and India ( Mr. Nehru). A
resolution? ! Jhat was the resolution? This is why they don't
like me: they say I behaved scandalously. I should have
supported it. The resolution was that President Eisnhower and Mr.
Khrushchev should moot: not that the United States and the
Soviet Union should oeet, but that the President of the United
States, who is L1r. Eisenhower, and Hr. Khrushchev should meet,
each of then having made it perfectly plain that he wasn't
going to root the other. Eisenhower, because he had said
categorically, " Y) u roloese these people from the aircraft,
the RB47, or submit their case to proper international trial,
otherwise I won't see you". Answer, " Nothing doing". And in
his turn, Khrushchev saying " I won't neet Eisenhower until I
have anspology for the U2". And in this state of affairs five
nations, two of whom, it is true, belong to the Conronwealth,
the other three of whom most certainly don't, five nations put
down a resolution which was bound to be completoly futile.
And in the second place they cre having an election in
the United States, a Presidential election. Candidates are
having television dcb:: tes and -11 sorts of other horrors.
( Laughter) ' And on November 8th, three days after Wallace
Meares is elected the member for C_-lare ( A. pplause) on November
8th, only three days later while ! allace is looking at his
dirty shoes and hoping ( Laughter) that the campaign rules still
obtain, they are geing to elect a new President of the United
States. Now c. uld you imagine anything sillier than to be
calling on President Eisenhower t, have a personal meoting, a
personal meeting, hen in a few weeks' time his successor is
going to be elected. 
0 7.
But that wasn't the thalo of it. That was a minor
point. It's a strong one, but it's a minor point.
I took -reat exception to this resolution. I know
I'n a very bad follow for having done it: I didn't intorpret
Australian opinion. I'll take your opinion on it, and thoro are
protty good Australians horo.(., pplauso)
I said, " Look, tho tine whon the negotiations woro
broken off was in Paris, uihon there wlas to be Surimit Mooting
of four-powoes". And of course they are the obvious four powrs,
because they are the only powers in the world with atonic
woapons, they are the only powors in the world uho, jointly or
severally, could hurl the ;. hiole of mankind into destruction.
Those are the four great powers with atomic rosurces; they are
theao people who -ought to noet.
Go back to Paris, so to speak. Got on with the
Sumit Mooting whliich was broken off by Khrushchev hi:. s-lf.
Thorefore we -ught not to be going through the foolish
exercise of telling two peoplo, who won't nmeet, that we w: Tuld
like them to loading horses to the water, when ' Joek now they
won't drink. lJo ouit to be realistic on this natter. Let's face
up to the fact that the only hope for the wiorld is that the
four great atomic powers should get to , othor and try to harior
out sonthing that will reduce the burden of armarents, that
will get rid, as far as possible, of nuclear weapons testing,
that will, to use my own phrase there, " opon a docor into,
perhaps, a more spacious chambor in the life of ireon and of
womon" WTasn't this right? Tasn't this good sense? To -ove
an amendment Wich said, " Go back to the Sui: iit". Don't talk
about impracticable things. Let the four ruprese-ntatives, when
the now President of tho United States has booeen eoctoA let thean
n. ot together and lot ther. mnean business, and lot thor see
whether they con't take the first stop, or two stops, or three
stops to relieving the great and terrible tension that exists
in the world. I proposed this, not at somobody else's request just
at my own. I felt I know that I was expressing the coanuonsonso
of ny own people. ( Applause)
-nd the intorosting thing is that although there are
all sorts of rather silly roaarks being miade by this rather
silly paper about it, the fact is, first I'm not tak. ing then
in order of timne the five power resolution by nidnioht, or a
little aftuer, was withdrawn, so that it was not put to a vote
and was not carried.
And in the second place ny resolution was voted for
by three out of the four atonic powers Great 3ritain, .1erica,
France and not vted against by the Soviet Union. They
2bstained. . nd whon, a few days later I had so; ething well over
an hour's privat discussih with ir. Khrushchev himsolf, he
mode it quite cle" ar that he was in fav) ur of a Summn. it
Conforence. ( Applauso)
It soons to ne to be rather od when we reemober that
, ustralians are lpractical people there m1ay be somo who don't
understand thon yet, but practical people we ore in ustralia 
0
and it soos a little odd that because the Prime Minister of
.' ustralia puts up a practical proposal, a proposal which I
venture t3 prophesy will find itself supported by the actual
fact of a Summ; rit Mooting before we're a, yoer older, it sccs
quite surprising to mo that that should be a subject for attack.
But there is another aspect of this Y. atter that I want
to say somthing to you about.
This resolution said " twu people". I'll just use
then by nario Eisenhowe:, Khrushchov. W1hat about Hacnillan,
and Do Gaulle? ' Jhy should they be out of this picture? Don't
they count? Has Groat Britain suddenly become neutral? It's
just as well for us that she hasn't. Has France suddenly
becone neutral? Just as well for us that she hasn't, Why
should they be out -f this?
fnd m. y answer t it is this, and I put it quite
plainly; There is too much of this niserable propa-anda toing
on, and it g-os on through the Corimunist journals and Conmunist
agitators in our own country that the one great issue in the
world is between ciAmerican capitalisn and Comnunism, as
represented by the Soviet Union. And that ail the rest of us
are innocent bystanders with no intorjst, except to see how
these two big peopl .; ot on with each other.
L.. dies and gentlcon, if that wore the truth, and I
denounce it as a -o. nstrous falsohood, but if that were the
truth, then presumably Great Britain, Canada, France, Jestern
Germany, Italy, theo 3nolux powers, ustralia, New Zealand, w. o
could all * o neutral, because we don't c unt, we don't c unt.
The argument is betwioon Aorica and the Soviet Union. I be:
of youl beware of false prophets; beware of that kind of
propagIanda. There are no people in the world who have a
reazter vested interest in free denocracy and a greator vested
opposition in us to Connunism, than the people of Australia.
( Applause) Now, Sir, perhaps I've said enough about those
uatters, bocause I'vo boon told, unsuccessfully for a long tine
now, that we'ro not vtry interested in foreign affairs in
1ustralia Hell I've never believed it. And I believe it loss
every year that , oos by. Because no country has booeen mnore
affected by foreign .: ffairs than we have. (. pplause) And no
c.) untry has, man for man, population for population, a better
right to have a view and oxpress a view in the councils of the
world in order to solve, or help to solve, the problo: Is of
peace and And therofore, I have booeen talking to you about
something that is every bit as important to the resident of
Orange or of this area, as it is to any other frooee independent
peison in the whole of the Coraonw; alth or, for that matter,
in the whole of the world.
Sir, it's a satisfaction to o to know two things.
One is that I believe that our ties with Great Britain and the
Comonwealth countries and our ties with the United States of
oerica were never strongor than thi-y are now. ( Applause)
In the case of the United tatos they are immeasurably stronger
than they were when mny Govcrnm. ont came into office at the end
of 1949 ( Applauso) . nd all I nooeed to say to you is that, along the lines
that I have boon discussing with y u, you nmay rely on us to
stand firmn in our loyalties, in our friendships, and in our
detestation of everything that Communism stands for.
NoJJ, Sir, before I finish perhaps I ought to say a 
0 9.
word or two about the local scene. I haven't yet had a chance
of discovo: cing what all the orgu: zont is about on the local
scene they tell me it's quite a quiet election. 3ut there is
one thing I want to say to you about it.
14e have a Liberal candidate. Here he is. ( Applause)
There is no need to tell you he is m.-y nan. I would be griovously
disturbed if he didn't become the ner. mber for Calare.
But, Sir, there is also a Country Party crndidato.
-nd every time you have a candidate from each of the two parties
naking up the Goviern: nt, there is a toe: mptation for supporters
of one candidate or another to be raising issues of discord.
Now I i ant to say to you, I hope you won't fall into that. I
hope everybody will roalise that, just as I want nothing half so
much as to see you put No. 1 against 1. llaco Mearos' namen so I
want to see you put No. 2 against the Country Party candidato's
namc. And if you're Country Party supporters, then I want to
see that your second preference doesn't -o astray, but that it
goes to the Liberal candidate.
Y : u will get all sorts of people who make all sorts of
funny little clail-ms and funny little arsgunnts. I've presided
over the longest Governnent, in point of tiro, that has ever
existed in Australia. 1And fron the first day until the last it
has been composed of Liberal Ministers , and Country Party
iMinisters. iMost of then arc Liberal mrinisters because of the
balance of nu. mbers in the House. But for eleven years we have
worked togethor, thought togethor. I have the iost profound
respect f,, r m!: y Country Party colloagices.
My Deputy Prino Ministe , Mr. McEwen, I think, Sir,
one of the reat non of this c. untry. ( Aipplause) But if he
wro here with me he would say at onco, with me I've hoard
him say it elsewhere that in the whole tine that we have sat
together, eleven years, there has never been a matter decided
in the Cabinet on Party lines, never once.
oe exchange our views. People make proposals; they
are thrashed out. ' To end up by etting the com-z: on sense of the
-Cabinet. Anybody who wants to make nischief between the Liberal
Party candidate and the Country Party candidate or between the
Liberal Party and the Country Party in this by-election is
opposed, primnarily, to the Governinont. Because a coQ posito
Govorment lives on hariony, and falls to pieces with discord.
Jo've had eleven years of supreme harrmony and I boj of all of
you: don't have that disturbed. Nobody can secure any
benefit from discords other than those who want to bring the
Gove rn~:-ent down.
You've got candidates here and, as I've said, in the
case of Mr. Meares, I find it hard to believe that you could
find a man miore qualified to express the practical view of the
. an on the land, and indeed, when he comes to Parlianent in
Canberra, he will find himself sitting, in 1. y o~ m Party7 in
company with soenothing : ver 20 people who represont similar
constituencies. And so at this by-oelction, No. 1, give us the benefit
of your backing. I d' n't know -hat the Labour Party has been
saying about these thin s that have happened overseas. I know
that poor Mr. Calwoll is now eobarrassed by riches. He's ) ot a
daily colunn in a newspapor, and a weekly broadcast soncwhere
else, and a Moot the Press here, or there. He never stops,
except to take his foot out of his mouth. ( Laughter, applause) 
I dn't know , rhat his views are, or w'hat the views of
his party nay be. But I have done my best to tall you ' rht ur
views are, 2. nd fhat wer stand for, -" nd I'll be tho -ost
surprised rman in i1ustralia if yu.) u do) n't give us your
enthusiastic support. ( Applause)
Interview at Bathurst .4. irport after 14CetinF
Intorvicwor-Mr. K. McIntosh:
Now,. 1 Sir, w _ uld you like to tell our listeners your
imipre ssions of theeeting to) night, and any other relevant
information that y'ou think niht be of intorest to ttie cl) ctors
in this area?
Prime iiiniste: Jell this is nit the first tie th t I h-ve
spoken in Orane, by a long chalk, and I've h d soe very good
i.ñ etings here in m-y tine. But tonight is the ratrst r.: ting
I'vO ever had therc, . ost enthusiast! ic. I was deigted With
it, I thought that iHr. 11oaros -ad a-2v ery, very good
ipression on a. large Oran -o audience, and T ca; o away froi:, the
mocting fueling e xtremely confidant about the result of the
electio) n. Bcauso, after all, Orange is very, very
imprtnt centre, a-nd thei votes there are a very co'nsiderable
factor in the Clere loctrate. I thought theo whole at:-: isph , io
of the neting couldn't ha-ve be--n better.
It seemed from~ i the speech that y) u made, Sir, which we
had on the air at 9 o'clock incidentally, before you finished
speakin, that you were very il.-pressed with the 1-roa as a, wliole
and you d1" id make the c; i. e. onts ab. out ha: ving beon in Orange be3fore.
wioe c quite iYn-ip s.; se,) 1d w.-ith the speoch tliat yo) u " id mae; the
hockling was non-xistent.
PrieMinister: That's right, non-existent. It's the only tineo
in my life when I haven't m.-inded the absence ' of interjectors
bccauso the audienco w. as quick, it was ale-rt, it tok every
p int .2. nd I found a note oxf enthiusiasL, in it iTich I thinkc is
very ood. is, f curs, very propr because I've
never seen the-i c juntry looking be,, tter. Ad if thi'o country were
lookin., bad no doubt the GovrmE. nt . r. w) uld be blameo d for it.
nd so I am always quite willing" to take a little bit o-f the
credit fo: r the fact that the rin has been falling and the
pastures are , reon. I 13loing, erwrd ruch vy to seem
Mr. heoaros at Canberra. 



DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA PR 116
October 1.960.
c
FREEDOM RO HLNER CAMPAIGN.
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs.
The Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs, Mr R. G. Menzies,
announced today that the Australian Government would contribute œ A8,000 to the
headquarters costs of United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization's Freedom
from Hunger Campaign.
The freedom from Hunger Campaign was approved by the Conference of the
Food and Agrieulture Organization held in Rome in November last year. An
Advisory Conmmittee of Member Governments has been s et up in Rome tua dvise the
Director-General ( Dr B. R. Sen) in his conduct of the campaign. Australia was
Selected as a member of this Committee.
Mr Menzies said discussions with the international organizations concerned
had now rea-hed a fairly advanced stag; e for establishing an Appeal Committee in
Australia. He was not yet in a pusition tu suggest any firm arrangements but he
could say that, pruvided suitable arrangements of the kind now being discussed
could be finalised, the GCovernment would encourage the e stablishment and activities
O of an Appeal Committee which would raise funds in Australia for the Freedomfrom
Hunger Campaign. M r Menzies recalled that the Freedom from Hunger Campaign would run from
1960 to 1965. If established, the Appeal Committee would probably cundurt its
appeal during 1961. 


P. M. No. 40/ 1960Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies&nbsp;Having regard to the importance of the wool industry,&nbsp;the Commonweal th Government has agreed to the request of all&nbsp;the wool growing organisations that the Government should&nbsp;arrange an inquiry into the present methods of marketing&nbsp;wool.
The terms of reference of the committee of inquiry&nbsp;will need careful study, and the Government will require&nbsp;time to appoint competent and available persons to serve on&nbsp;the proposed committee.
The composition of the committee and its terms of&nbsp;reference will be announced as soon as possible.
CANBERRA,28th October, 1960.



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES AT CO iRA ON THURSDAY, 3RD
NOVEMBE R, 126o
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Mayor, Mr. Wallace Meares and
ladies and gentlemen:
I think I should begin by thanking the Mayor for his
very flattering remarks at the beginning of the meeting.
Everything he said about other people was quite true.
Itll discount what he said about me for cash at 50% ( Laughter)
and still feel quite happy about it. Sir we're very, very
grateful to you indeed for your generosity.
I am delighted to have the chance of supporting
Wallace Meares. Perhaps I ought to make one or two things
quite clear at the beginning. He is my candidate: he is the
Liberal Party candidate for Calare. And I hope he wins. And
I'll be very, very disappointed if he doesn't.
But everybody who votes for him should take infinite
pains to see that the second preference goes to the candidate
of the Country Party which is a partner of mine, and has been
now, for 11 years, in the Government of Australia.
And in the sama way, if there are Country Party
supporters here I urge them to see that their second
preferences don't go astray.
There is always, in a by-election, a little
disposition on the part of enthusiasts, when you have three or
four candidates, to have little disputes on the side. I just
want to remind you, that for a longer period than has ever
been recorded in the history of the Commonwealth, I have been
the leader of a Government which includes a majority, of
course, of Liberals, having regard to our numbers, and a
minority of Country Party ministers; and we have lived in
complete amity and, I believe, to the great-advantage of the
people of Australia. Now don't let that be interfered with
in Calare. There is no reason why it should be.
Wallace Meares is a Liberal and has been a member of
the Liberal Party since I had the great honor of taking steps
to found it 16 years ago. And of course I want him to T-in.
And without being a prohpet, or the son of a prophet, I think
he will. ( Applause)
All I want to remind you about is this. It is worth
recalling and retaining this fact. There is a good deal of
argument about whether members ought to be in their
electorate or whether some member has boon out of his
electorate, or whether the man on the land is adequately
represented. I hope everybody realises that if ' lallace Meares
wins this seat when he wins this seat to be more accurate on
Saturday he will be of all the men who have represented
Calare in the Federal Parliament, easily the most experienced
in the practical work of a farmer on the land. ( Applause)
So, you wouldn't be able to say about him what you
might say about me if you felt that way disposed, " Wfell he's
only a city slicker". Bocause he's not a " city slicker".
He is I was going to say " earthy" of the soil, except that
that, of course, would be a better description of my friend
Khrushchev ( Laughter) than. it -Jould be of J4allace Meares.
Now, I do bog of you to remember that. I think that
we want more and more people in Parliament who not by way of 
theory, but by way of hard and intelligent experience,
understand the great rural problems. Because we have great
rural problems. I'm going to say something about that a little
later on. But at this stage, might I just remind you that the
prosperity, of Australia, thi very high prospority almoBto
threatening to become a boom at present, that prosperito is
still, to a vital extent, bound up with the success of the
great, rural exporting industries. And, if they fail, either
in terms of market, or in terms of price, or in terms of
costs of production, then the prosperity of Australia could
become a pretty sketchy thing, pretty quickly.
So don't let us take anything for granted. And lot
us understand that Parliament, if it is to be rich enough in
talent to discharge its responsibilities, must at all times
contain somebody of this kind representing a seat of this kind.
I think you have a great opportunity hero, and I am sure that
you will take it.
Now, I wonder if, for not too long a time, I might
talk to you a little about what I believe to be the main tasks
of Government and a little about how we try to approach them.
I think that it is a good opportunity for putting yourself in
my position, so to speak, looking at the world, looking at
your own country, knowing, inevitably, a groat deal about the
problems of the world and the problems of the country, what
is our objective. Because if we have an objective, if we know what we
are after, and we are normally intelligent, and above all
things honest and industrious, we will make headway towards
those objectives. Well0, externally, we want security. I made a long
speech I'm not going to repeat it, or even summaries it
at Orange the other night. But I understand, Mr. Chairman,
that somebody, as usual, wanted to know afterwards, " What that
had to do with us?".
I hope that Australians, who have been involved twice
in a great war ahich began many thousands of miles away, will
not fall into the error of thinking that the affairs of the
world are not our concern.
Because they are: they are our vital concern just
as much our concern as they are the concern of the people who
happen to be living in France or in Great Britain, or in the
United States of America.
And what we have done as a Government has been to
take every stop within our power to improve our external
security by getting and holding great and powerful friends.
When . e came into office the relations between
Australia and the United States of America were, to put it
quite simply, very poor. All that had happened with my
predecessors had been that they had succeeded in having a
quarrel with the United States over Manus Island, and had
refused the United States the opportunity of establishing a
powerful base as close as that to Australia, and out stocks
were, quite frankly, pretty low.
I venture to say that our stocks today are the
highest that they have ever been with the United States.
( Applause). So high, that the two most important engagements
to which we are parties in relation to our external security
ebrace the United States each time. 
0 3.
You have the ANZUS Pact a pact between the United
States, Australia and New Zealand. AIe promoted it. And we
ultimately secured it.
When you consider what a long period of time there
was in . merican rodern history, when that country was
isolationist; when you remember that in the First Ular, and in the
Second, they had a period of neutrality before they became
involved, because of this tradition of standing aloof from the
conflicts of the world;
when you remember those things you will realise what
a great thing it was in time of peace, to got the United
States to join in with Australia and New Zealand in what is,
in substance, a pact of mutual security in the Pacific.
This is a fact frequently overlooked. 3ut as an
item of foreign policy I regard it with some pride as one of
our greatest achievements.
And similarly, we have the South-2ast Asian Treaty.
And there we have a combination of countries Pakistan,
Thailand, Philippines, United States, Great Britain, Franco,
Now Zealand, Australia. This is a barrier in the path of the
advance of Comnunism in the north and north-west of Australia
of enormous potential importance.
I say " potential" becauso, as yet, it has to grow,
it has to develop its strength. And anybody who imagines that
Communist China has no territorial ambitions, that aggressive
Communism in South-East [ isia has gone to sleep, has gone to
sloop himself. Because as we stand, or sit, hero tonight there are
Communist disturbances in Laos; there are always a few
troubles in Cambodia; there is a growing throat in North
Vietnam to South Vietnam the old French Indo-China of our
school maps Communist activities in Singapore; powerful
Communist movements in Indonesia.
These are of tremendous significance to us. I should
not sleep comfortably at nights in the face of these events if
I had not, with my Govern iant, gone to infinite pains to help
to establish the South-East asian Treaty and the ANZUS Pact.
( Applause) Now, Sir, I say no more about that because as I tell
you i I have been warned that people are not interested. I
don't believe it. I don't believe it. I think what I have
been talking to you about is perhaps the most vital matter,
today, in our lives.
But let us turn away from that, external security.
Let us turn to our internal affairs. Now, our internal
policies inevitably find themselves confronting two great
problems, enormously difficult ones to reconcile.
First of all the problem of developing the country.
And second, the problem of how to prevent a great
movement of development from producing such inflationary
pressures that prices and costs go into the sky.
This is the practical business of governmentof a
Commonwealth governient. 
4 It is quite true that every now and then one he2rs,
or reads, how si. plo it is. It is extroi:: uly simple except
to people : ho understand it. But as a problen of Gov-ernment,
it is the all absorbing one. It far surpasses any particular
application. I was asked this afternoon by a highly intelligent
citizen of this tomn, what could be done about the small
farmnr. The answer to that is not some particular answer
about a particular farr, or a particular group of farmers.
The answer to that is, " Ho-w can we so handle our oneroral policy
that the country develops, our narkets increase, our
population rises, but our costs don't . ot out of hand?"
I don't profess that this problem is solved. 3ut
looking back over the last ten years I can ronenbor, i hope
not without pride, going t: rough a feow pretty sticky patches
on this matter, and co. ing out with the country in pretty
good shapeo. But it is not easy and it is not to be laughed off
by people who don't know about it.
You take the problem of diveloplent. in the
last ten years . re have had : roll over a iliion . i., rants to
Australia, w. ll over a million. It is almost fantastic to
think what that has involved.
People of my generation in this hall tonight -ill
remember how, in our y:) uth, we used to read :-bout the United
States of America and the great lmovements of population into
the United States fromn urop, In tcrns of percentago on the
base population are have had a greator -moveaunt into Australia
than the United States of america had in the reoat flush days
of iigration in the 19th and the first ten years of this
century. And this, of course, produces at once an asset and
a liability. Ain asset, because lwe have had moro and nore
scores of thousands of people willing to . ork, willing to work
in heavy industries, rilling to work to develop industries in
Australia. And at the sa. e ti, O, of course, the sa e people
have sot up doieands for houses, schools and hospitals wrhich
are not very easy doeands to meet because there is a limit to
manpower and a limit to natorials, and sometines, though
people don't believe it, a limit to noney.
Now, Sir, that rovmenant of irligration has been
phenomenal in its effect. I rent to a big factory, not in
Coura I regret to say, but in one of those bloated cities
further down, a very big factory. And I said, " How many
new Australians, as we call theia, employed here?". Sixty
per cent of those neployod were no . australians. They have
made, and are makingr a tremendous contribution to our
development. But at the sa.. o time there is a constart
pressure on aterials, a pressure on manpower.
In New S,) uth *: ales and in Victoria today -we have
obvious ove-full employeont. And that ioeans a rapid turnover
of labour and less efficiency and highor costs. So that you
have the problem all the timeo you must develop the country,
but you are not to ruin the currency and value of the
currency in the country in the process.
The development itself has becun, I think, phonomenal.
We're a very choeerful people in australia, and that's a very
good thing. Je're very optinistic. This is Cup leek and I
niy safely say that e are v'ery optimistic people. ( Laughter) 
( Applause) We are broad-minded. oJ don't mind whether the
New Zealandurs come over : nd take all the prizes. We're
cheerful people. But, we have one defect of our cheerfulness; we do
rather want to have everything at once. If it's Television,
well we want to have television now. If it's something
else, we want to have the best, and we must have it now.
Well ten million people doing as veoll as we are in
Australia still can't have everything that 180 million people
in the United States could produce, or become entitled to.
eJjou st go on getting the bst that we can.
And I must say that I am astonished as I look back
over the last ten years to soe the enormous development that
has gone on in the country. But of course whatever it may be
there will be somebody who has, particularly if ho is in
Opposition, some reason to complain.
Why, back in 1949, when we were coming up the
straight to the 1949 winning election, blackouts were the
regular thing, particularly in the big cities; there was a
tremendous shortage of coal, a tremendous shortage of power.
All those shortages had become as familiar as the
town clock. People had learned to live with them, just as a
dog learns to live with a flea. ( Laughter) I thought the
Mayor was going to rebuke . me; but he agreos with me.
What is the position today? The dovelop. ent of
production has been enormous, but the production of power has
gone on in Australia phenomenally beyond anybody's
imagination, and we are at long last a substantial exporter of
coal to other countries.
Those are dramatic changes. And I do want everybody
to realise they don't happen by accident. They will happen
only if there is a bit of sensu, and a bit of judgaent, and
determination among those who are responsible for the general
direction of affairs.
Over the same period we have had wonderful
developments in Australia by the importation of capital. I
want to say a word about this, the importation of capital in
Australia. I don't moan borrowing by Governcmnt; though
nobody has any reason to complain about the value of the
money that we have borrowed overseas for Australian development.
Because unless we had done what they told us was impossible,
our prodc-ssors, and borrowed hundreds of millions of
dollars, a lot of the developmental work done in Australia
would not have been done at all, for sheer shortage of
equipment. But putting all that on one side we have had a flow
of private investment capital into this country without
which we could not possibly stand where we do today in terms
of prosperity. A few years ago I was able to say to people
that private capital was coming into . ustralia at the rate of
œ 100 millions a year. In the last 12 months it has come in
at the rate of œ 200 millions a year.
These are enormous sums of money. The only person
who would think that rwas, as we say, " chicken feed", would be
the leader of the Opposition making a speech on the Budget.
( Laughter, applause) 
IAnd
the result of ill this has booeen, of course, the
most treondous irrigation of enterprise in the country.
Wherever you go in Australia, particularly, I agree, in the
manufacturing field, and so on, but sometios in other fields
than that, you will find the result of this invostmont some
of it from the United States, perhaps 40O of it, and about
of it from the United Kingdom.
Now, isn't that valuable? I wouldn't lieto soee
anything happon that cut it off. It is valuable in two ways.
First of all it actually does provide the wear-with-all to
expand. And in the second pliace, it is the most glorious
proof that people, shrewd people, hard-haded people outside
of Australia, have confidence in our stability, our integrity,
and out future. ( Applause) That is the 3reat importance of
this nratter. And anybody who wants to noss that up, anybody who
wants to lower the reputation of the Governnont for integrity
and stability in the world, or for that matter mine, is not
doing miuch of a service to Australia. Because, iherever I go
in these places, it is a certainty that at somne stage somno of
the nest influential non in the invest* ment world will mak a
point of speaking to ne nd saying: "\ Io are all fascinated by
the way in which ustralia hbs preserved an even kool, and has
developed at such spod at the sam ine".
That always gives ; e gr] oat pleasure. And I hope it
gives all Australians great pleasure.
. And yet, since this is a by-election, and since I
ams told on not very , ood authority that the Labor Party
expects to win it, it night be desirable for you to consider
what the Labor Party says on this point. Because, for the
last two years in the Federal P-rliame nt it has mado no bones
about it. It is aainst invostnoint from overseas. It takes
the groatest exception to it. If it finds that one company,
like the General Metors-Holdens, not to advertise one
particular car, cones here, establishos a motor car industry,
and makes a lot of 1.. Dney, and pl ughs back most of it into
expansion into australia, they rave about it on the Opposition
Benches. ? It's a scandall Jo ought not to allow this kind
of thing. Those people bringing their own money hero actuallyr
daring to mnako profits in Australia and taking son of the
profits out! This is anti-iustralian activity'.
I had groat fun at the last Geoneral Election: I went
down to Geolong ta that very distinauishod enterprise, the
Ford Company, at Gclong where they are always kind enough to
allow i. e to make a spoch from the tail-end of a lorry.
( Laughter) ( ind there are worse places than that too, if you
keep the engine running). ( Laughter)
4nd, just at that tino my then opponont my then
Leoader of the Opposition, had " gone to tirn" I think is the
expression, in a big way about overseas capital. And
addressing about fourtcon hundred em. ploycos if the Ford works,
I just said to then: " Do I take it that you are in favour of
preventing overseas capital being invested in Australia;
going back homo to mother without a job?". Jll, of course
it is too ludicrous. I werlcome investmont frol overseas. -s far as I an
concerned it is difficult to sooee how we could have too . iuch of
a . ood thing. And don't forgot this: where a iman's
treasure is, there shall his he. rt be also. 
And if other countries, groat and powerful, and
rich countries have some of their treasure in . ustralia, who
an I to be displeased about it? Because they will have an
interest in this country, and in its security, and in its
future, and in its prosperity, that perhaps no other would
provide so quickly.
And yet Labor doesn't like it. How it is going to
replace this capital, whore it is going to get it, it doesn't
say. Because although I have the deepest affection for then
as individuals, the follows sitting opposite no in the House
why shouldn't I? I have a deep affection f. r then but they
don't know anything about these problems. They are willing to
shrug off a couple of hundred million pounds cumin fromr
' ther countries, but when you say, " Well, what about it;
where are you going to get it?" all they can think of is that
you go to the Commonwealth Bank. ( Laughter)
Just let mn say one more matter about internal
probleos which has caught my eye in the course of this byelection.
I think, and I speak as an experienced politician,
that if you are disposed to be inconsistent you really ought to
have a good nreoory; you ) ught to try to reonmbor what you
said on some occasion; you ought even to try to roemeber what
your Party did when it had the chance.
Now, I don't want you to listen to the tiresome
rominiscencos of an old politician, but in 1946 to 1949, well
after the war, I was the Leader of an Opposition which
nunbored 17 in a Housu of 74. So that we woren't, numrically,
very strong. But we had a handsone majority at the end of ' 49.
But there we were, a misorable, sall well sall,
if not miserable Opposition. And, at that tin, the Labor
Party was in office with this handsorme majority, able to do
whatever it wanted to do; nothing to prevent it from putting
its financial or economic ideas into practice; nothing to
prevent it, at that time, if it had wanted to, for example,
from taking the whole of the Petrol Tax money and distributing
it to the States for roads.
But it didn't. ; And so I road with great interest a
placard, or whatever you : ight call it, of the respected *, LP
candidate for Calaro who says this, I must read it to you:
" Last year the Liberal and Country Party Gjvernonnt
pretended it had a generous plan for road assistance to
the States. The fact is, however, that at the end of the
planned five-year period, the Federal Government will have
collected in Federal tax about œ 100 million more than it
will have paid to the States in road grants. Labour
believes ( this is in double type) that all petrol tax
should be made available for road use. For better roads
in Calare, vote Labour on the 5th Nove: ber"
Now I've read it to you. That is a free advertisonont,
you see. ( Laughter) But I read it to you because I want
to demonstrate to you what utter nonsense this is.
First of all, it' all right to talk about us
" pretending" that we had a generous plan. I don't rind telling
you that not only did we have a goenrous plan, but we put it
into operation. And the effect of it is that over the next
five years the States will get from the Comno. nwcalth for road
purposes, irrespective of Federal T-x revenue, œ 250 million
instead of the œ 150 million that it wiuld h:. ve been on past
figures. 
In other words we put into operation a plan which
adds, over a period of five years, œ 100 million to an already
very substantial sun going to the States for roads. Fifty
million pounds a year frou the Coomronwealth is not a bad sun.
So I reject the idea that we hven't carried out our ideas.
But do lot rnoe -o back to what did I say it was?
' Labour believes that all petrol tax should be uade available
for road use". I wonder when they cane to believe it.
( Laughter) I sat in Opposition in the Federal Parliaeont for
ight years. It rnight not have soe cdI long to you, but it
seoccod an awful long tine to le eight years in Opposition,
looking at a Government that had a copper-bottom majority, and
looking at a Governeont which for four or five year s fter the
war had all the opportunity in the wrorld of putting its
beliefs into operation.
So, I got the figures taken out. In 1946/ 47, that's
the financial year, in their time, : ith a full majority, they
collected œ 16 million odd from Tax and they distributed to the
States, œ 4 million odd. That was odd wasn't it? ( Laughter)
" tre believe that you ought to have the lot we stand for
this but this year let us off with a quarter of it".
So they collected œ 16 million and paid œ 4 million.
The next year they collected œ 16 million and they paid œ 6
million. The following year they collected œ 17 million and
they paid œ 7 million. The following year œ 19 million and they
paid œ 9 million. The highest percentage of the Petrol Tax that the
Labor Government ever distributed to the States for roads was
47%, This year my own Government, collecting œ 58
million, distributes œ 44 million, or 78% ( Applause)
And now this qtimistic gentleman who is a candidate
for the ALP comes along and says, " Ah, yes, well it's a pity
that when we had the chance we paid 47%; and it's a pity now
you come to mention it, that we have to admit that you pay
78%; but give us our chance . and we'll pay over the lot".
I don't know if it's supposed that if the ALP won
Calare, if I may indulge mysolf in a flight of fancy, the
effect of this will be to alter the whole history of road
legislation. It's a great pity that people don't know about
these things. The whole of this roads grant was thrashed out by
us with the States, all of the States, some of them are Labor,
some of them are not, only two years back, rather less than
that I think. And we said at that time, ' Jo don't want to
be tying what you get to a particular tax because, after all,
we might for some reason or other want to reduce a particular
tax and if you are only to get a percentage of it, you will
find your road expenditure is reduced. VIe would much
prefer to forget all about the source of the money we pay
you, and put down a five-year plan so that every shire engineer
whose shire or municipality gets a share of this from the
State, will know where he stands; and every State will know
where it stands'. 
You can't have a road policy that lasts for six
months or has to be changed every year. . e saw this, and we
put it to them: " Let's have a five-year scheme . on this matter,
with a provision that will give you an increasing amount each
year of the five".
: de made certain arrangements about the distribution
of the amounts between the States; we put in the whole
proceeds of another tax that had been proposed on certain
vehicles. And, in the result, as I say instead of getting
these varying, and sometimes, in earlier years, sketchy
amounts, the average amount to be found over the period of five
years is œ 50 million œ 250 million over a period of five
years. I venture to say that if anybody had gone to an
election just before we made this agreement, and had said on
behalf of a Commonwealth party, " My policy is to find œ 250
million for the States for roads over the next five years", it
would have boon received with enormous applause all over
Australia. So that if that is an issue in Calare I wish our
opponent joy of it, because he won't get very much comfort
from it. Now, Sir, the other matter that I i½ antod to say
something about is the problem of reconciling development with
control of inflation. there is a great deal of
inflationary pressure going on. I announced on behalf of the
Government back in February, four points of a policy.
One was that we would go into the Arbitration Court
in broach of all our own precedents, and resist an increase in
thne basic wage. And we did that most deliberately. o
submitted to the Arbitration Commission a fully documented
case on it; and the Commission unanimously agreed with us and
made no change. Because coming on top of a very large
increase in the basic wage in the previous year, and a very
large increase in margins, do you remember? towards the
end of that year, we felt that this would put such a strain on
the economy that costs would be going up, and that they would,
as usual, come right back hor. m to the man on the land who for
the most part can't pass them on.
Well we announced that; we did it. And we did it
with success. i-e said that we were not going to budget for a
deficit; that in a time of inflation you should budget for a
surplus because you ought not to be increasing the supplies of
money when the supply of goods is not increasing at the same
rate. And so we budgeted for a surplus.
11e said that we would get rid of import licensing.
That was a bold stroke. The main purpose of it was to
increase the supply of goods available so as to damp down the
inflationary pressures, to match high purchasing power with
more and more goods, and services to be bought.
We put all these propositions up and they have all
gone into operation. L4ell it can't be said that so far they
have had a hundred per cent of success because, unfortunately
for the country, the market for -rool has boen far from
satisfactory. And wc live so much on wool that fluctuations
in that . ronderful commodity will perhaps determine the whole
economic color of the country. 
0 But we are always watching those thinrs. Jo are
constantly alert to know whether this change, or that change
may have to be made in order to restrain a wild boom of
inflationary growth.
As for the Opposition and, after all, you must
remember that elections present a choice you not like
me and I don't blame you but if you dislike the other man
more you probably vote for no. That s; ems reasonable.
( Laughter) Perhaps that is how I have got in so many times
in the past. But you are always bound to say, " what's the
other man going to do about this kind of thing?".
I tell you there is no symptom that the Australian
Labor Party recognises the existence of an inflationary trend,
is interested in the costs of production of our great
comnodities. Not a sy ptom.
Because every time that they condescend to speak
about these matters, which is usually on the Budget, their
proposals for new expenditure on the part of the Conmronwealth
are so phenomenal that today's inflationary pressure would be
a mere circumstance if they were adopted.
It's an old, and perhaps dull expression to say that
what the people require of a national government is a sound,
financial outlook, a steady financial outlook, and a clear
objective of preventing the country from pricing itself out of
the markets of the world upon which it so vitally depends.
Now, on all these matters you may say to no, " Yes,
there are some aspects of life on which I night claim to have
expert knowledge and a great deal of expert experience". But
we will always be better off, in Parliament, always, if we
can turn to a nan with vigour and experience, and practical
knowledge of a great number of these problems 2nd say to him,
" Cone in and have a talk with mno nd tell me what you think
about this matter".
And that is why, Sir, coming down here tonight, or
coming up here, I felt delighted to think that I night just
have one more opportunity of saying , rord on behalf of a man
whom I regard as one of the outstanding country candidates
I have ever supported on the platform, 
11.
Question: Mr. Chairman I would like to direct a question to
the Prime Minister which is in three sections. The first one
deals with Bank credit, or rather the lack of it, I should say.
I should like to ask the Prime Minister if he can inform us
what instructions, if any have been given to the Trading Banks
as related to primary producers in particular? And also if
any similar instructions have been given to Hire Purchase
companies?. If not is it your intention, Sir, to give such
instructions?
Chairman: I think it's mther a long question. It's going to
be one that no one is ever going to be able to remember.
All right, I'll let it go at that.
Prime Minister: I don't quarrel with it at all. The question
as I understood it fell into two parts. First of all bank
credit to primary industries and what directives have been
given on that matter?
The Reserve Bank has, right through the piece
urged upon the Trading Banks that they should continue to find
proper advances for their rural customers. And in order to
give some further protection to those customers, as you
probably know, Sir, the interest rate chargeable by the banks
on overdrafts has been calculated on an average so that
advances for rural purposes can be at the lowest rate of
interest and not at the highest.
That directive stands. It may very J1ll be that we
shall have to take some steps to strengthen it. But that
depends on some examinations that we happen to be making at
this very tine. I've been engaged in them myself, to an
extent, this week.
But you may take it from me, on behalf of the
Government, that we think that whatever movements in creditpolicy
may occur, and whatever restrictions nay have to be put upon
advances and of course they have to be put from time to time
there should allways be preferential treatment for those
industries which are the export industries of the nation.
That is a clear statement of what we believe to be the
position. In the second part of your question you asked me
whether similar directions are given to the hire purchase
companies. I regret to say they are not within our jurisdiction.
They do not fall within the banking system. They can't
receive directions from the Reserve Bank, and they can't
receive directions from us. The hire purchase companies are
operating under State law and under State control. The whole
position of the Hire Purchase companies is, as I don't need to
tell you, very complex. But certainly no Cormonwealth
Government can deal with the problem in a satisfactory way.
( Applause)
Question: Mr. Chairman I should like to direct another question
to the Prime Minister, one about which many of us are
concerned, and that relates to the question of overseas balance.
Of course you are no doubt aware Sir that having regard to the
existing drift in these balances it is likely that they
constitute a force of some œ 400 millions. Assuming that that
basis is correct would you please, Sir, tell us what action your 
12.
Government is going to take in this matter?
Prime Minister: Now, Sir, with very groat respect I don't
propose to toll you that. Of course everybody knows who
studies these natters that there has been a down turn, a down
movement in the overseas balances. But for no to got up,
casually, on a platform, and say what I am going to do about
that over the next few months when it is plainly a natter
that is going to involve the closest examination by the
Cabinet would be completely irresponsible. And if any
candidate tells you that he knows the answer I wish you would
write a letter to me about him.
Question: Is it a fact that the Bureau of Agricultural
Economics put out certain figures regarding the income
derived from capital invested by primary producers? Do you
consider that those figures are high enough to encourago
primary production development at the rate that has been
maintained over the past?
Prime Minister: Sir, I hope you will excuse me for not
carrying in my mind any figures that have been taken out by
the Bureau. But if the figures were taken out by the Bureau
of Agricultural Economics they have a very strong chance of
being right. I quite arec.
And there is no doubt about it, that for v rious
reasons that we cre familiar with there was, over the last
couple of years, a very serious fall in rural income. That is
a matter that h. s given us great deal of concern.
We have adopted various expedients in the past to
help, so far as we c. n. But, of course we rego: rd it as
serious. But I don't regard it as something which will
induce me to adopt a calamity outlook on the future of the
country. I don't thin: there is any occasion for that.
There is occasion for a lot of hard thinking and flexible
Spolicy, and doing what you can, where you can. But on the
whole I am an optimist about the future. ( Applause)
SQuestion: I should like to ask the Prime Minister another
question. If ry omeory servos me correctly, at one star,
Sir, you said ' bettor', this may not be the exact words, ' to
give self-governmont' something of that sort ' too early
rather than too late'. Sir, I wish to ask you, having regard
to developments in the Congo and the lack of confidence, I am
sorry to say, in those words of yours in relation to Now
Guinea, can you do anything to allay that lack of c) onfidence
which has developed in New Guinea we fool, and I in p:. rticular
feol, Sir, as a result of that statement which I believe you
made? Prime Minister: lecll, Sir, I ca. n ease your mind at once. I
am sure you read the wrong newspaper. ( Laughter) i am sure
you did. Now, let us be fair about this matter. If you have
any interest in what I s'. id it happens to h-ve boon printed
in a pamphlet typed from a tape-recording machine, so that
there is no chance of being mis-reported, and it was put on
the table of Parliament some time ago, and if you are
interested in this matter I'm sorry that you haven't taken
the opportunity of getting a copy of it. But if you will be
good enough to ive me your address zfterwards, I will see that
you get a copy of it; I'll have it posted to you. 
13.
What I said about Now Guinea was this: that we
obviously could not go out of Now Guinea in a hurry. I have
said repeatedly, though you haven't noticed it, that nobody
could do a greater disservice to Now Guinea than to create an
atrosphcre that we are leoving quite soon.
Because Now Guinea can't reach a period of proper
self-governnont development without the aid of export people
and moncy, particularly fron this country. And that to cut
off investrents by foolish pronises of being out in a few
years would be folly. Nobody has said this nore clearly than
I have, publicly. And it is all in print. I nust send you a
copy of it. What I did say and this is the piece that is torn
out of context that you referred to, and was torn out by one
newspaper in particular, with its usual desire to danage me
was that if some tine in the future the country of Now Guinea
and Papua had reached a stage of devolopment in which we had
just the slightest hesitation in our minds as to whether it
was just too early or just too late. the experience in nest
countries, modern countries, indicated it was better to be a
fraction too early, and give then self-government with
friendship than to be too late, and give them self-govcernment
with hatred. And that I believe is jolly good sense. ( Applause)
And I have never had any occasion to alter it. ( Applause) 



SPEECH BY THE PRIMI MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. ENZS T THE SECOND FREEDOM RALLY
ON NOVa _ o.
Sir, I didn't quite like that last little bit because it
made me sound so dreadfully old. ( Laughter) At a meeting
of this kind I assure you i feel quite boyish.
Like you I greatly enjoyed the very powerful and
eloquent speech made by Senator iMcManus, who has consistently
stood, for as long as I've known him, where he has stood
tonight in his speech. ( Applaue)
One other preliminary observation perhaps you will
allow me to make, and it is this. Many of you, all of you,
directly or indirectly, have come from countrie" now in a
state of bondage, but once the homes of scme of the greatest
leaders of freedom in history.
This is one of the most terrible facts of modern
times that great nations, familiar with freedom, by having
struggled to win it, by having produced great men and women
who have been its expositors, and its protectors, should now
find themselves what we call, politely, the ' satellites" Of
the Soviet Union; what, in fact, we ought to call the slaves
of the Soviet Union. ( appiause)
Now, to me there is always a ;: gct thrill about
speaking to people rwho find themselves in your case. Because
having come out of the ' house of bondage' you now have the
indescribable joy to yourselves of living in a free country.
And some-thing of that emotion was in your minds, I
believe, certain1y in mine, . hen, at the very beginning of
this meoting, the choir sang t. ho National Anthem. Never in my
life have I heard it so wr. ll sung. ( Applause)
I don't propose co make an unduly long speech to you.
Some of the things that are in your mxnds, and in mine, some of
the things that have been touched on this afternoon by the
Senator, engaged the attention of the repesentatives of 98
nations quite recently in eNo York. And on the occasion of
that meeting, speaking on behal f of . ustralia; speaking, I
think, on behalf of every non-Communist inhabitant of
Australia ( Applause) I took the opportunity of speaking direct
to an audience which included the Soviet Union, and included
the satellite loaders.
But, I just first of all give you one little view of
those proceedings which shows what utter humbug is involved in
the claim of the So-. iet Union that thes captive nations are,
in reality, willing, and free and join with the Soviet Union
of their own choice.
The leader of the Soviet Union is a rather remarkable
man. ( Laughter) Ho has a technique all of nis o. wn, One of
the techniques is to applaud very violently when a good
Communist sentiment is uttered by scioebody. And in order
that his satollites, in order that thosu h umble, obedient
servants, who ha eo eeon foisted on to your old and historic
nations, should know when to come in at the right time, he
always used to start clapping with his hands up. And they all
looked, took the cue. and then you could pick them all out,
applauding violen ly.
if, on th. cther hand, he wanted to donounce 
something that was being said by a person who expressed free
sentiments, he would beat on the desk, sometimes with both
fists and sometimes with a shoo. ( Laughter) And the moment
that began they would all be looking around, they would see,
they would get the cue then they would all begin to boat on
the desk. ( Laughter)
None of them used a shoe except him, because,
naturally, in a slave community it is only the mater who can
afford decent shoes. ( Applause)
Now, Sir, it has always been prominently in my own
mind that there is a good deal of nonsense, a good deal of
confusion of thought, if one may put it quite kindly, about
the position of the captive nations.
Khrushchev's great exercise, so he said at New York.
was to forward the cause of disarmament. Because, according
to him, if his ideas on disarmament were accepted, then oeaco
would come to the world. A very beguiling sentiment, that.
But so untrue! Disarmament is one thing, and we should all wish,
some day, to soe it guaranteed and honoured. But it is a
great mistake to believe that the existence of armis is the
cause of tension in the world. It is the result of tension
in the world, not the cause, is the Senator has pointed out
so accurately, you might arrive at agreements on maters of
that kind, but if, at the end of it all, the Soviet Union is
loft with its booty, is left with its enslaved ccmaniunities,
then peace will have come about on a basis of perpetuated
injustice. * ind a peace of that kind is not peace at .11.
( Applause) If the Soviet Union wants peace, if it want" to
remove the causes of tension, then its first task at home.
It's first task is to set free the people whom it has enslaved.
( Applause) Somebody, of course, may say, with a good deal of
cynical truth perhaps, that fine words won't set these people
free. You may say: " How are we to go about helping them to
recover their freedom?".
And on that I want to say that the most powerful
weapon will be the opinion of honest decent men and rwonen all
over the world. Don't let us fall into the error of thinking
that by waving a wand, a Communist dictator can strike out of
the hearts and minds of people their passion for f2eedom.
They may control them with their beliefs; they may control
them with threats and cormands. But freedom is not such a
fragile plant. Freedom dies hard. And there are rmillions of
people in ] urope today whose passion for freedom is not
destroyed by the presence of a Comimunist Commissar. ( Applause)
On the contrary, their passion for freedom will grow
the more they see the symbols of enslavery.
I am an i,-nsnse believer in the spirit of ;-Ian. The
spirit of man is the greatest and r. ost powerful thing in
creation. And you don't put it down in a year or two. You
don't put it down in a generation or two. You don't out it
down by laws or comands or by force.
Does anybody suppose, anybody who is of -ay own race
suppose, that we would knuckle down in perpetuity to some
foreign master? Of course not. 
3.
This spirit is the most powerful thing in the world
and I think it is a wonderful idea that every year you should
have a Rally of this kind. Keep on having Rallies of this
kind. ( Applause) Because the very fact that in one city
in Australia thousands of people can come together to offer
oncouragemont, mutual encouragement and encouragement to those
who are far distant from us, will have its effect,
These things get past the Iron Curtain; these
things filter around the world; these things will help to keep
the flame of the spirit burning bright in our friends in these
captive countries. A reference has been made already, and I propose to
make one myself to the hypocrisy of the current Cornmunist
attack on " Inperialisn" and " Colonialism".
I wonder if I might just to show that I didn't
think of this just this afternoon impose on you one or two
very short passages from a speech I made at the United Nations,
a speech which the great Khrushchev himself described to me
afterwards in conversation as " very sharp".( Laughter)
( Applause) I said, among other things, this:
" There are some who have so far misunderstood the
spirit of the United N-tions as to resort to open or veiled
threats, blatant and, in some instances, lying propaganda,
a clearly expressed desire to divide and conquer. They
should learn that ' threatened men live long' and that free
nations, however small, are not susceptible to bullying".
( Applause) I then said:
" I'll permit myself the luxury of developing this
theme. In his opening speech, Mr. Khrushchev made his
usual great play about " colonialism". is Mr. Macmillan
reminded us, the answer to much of his story is to be found
in the presence in this Assembly of many new nations, once
colonies and now independent".
( None of them, mark you, colonies of a Communist
power). " Mr. Khrushchev said among other things" and I quote
these rwords, they are an exercise in humbug " nations who
oppress other nations cannot themselves be free. ( Laughter)
Every free ( and I'm still quoting him) nation should help
the peoples still oppressed to win freedom and independence'.'
( Applause) This was the only point on which this old chap seems
to be on our side, ( Laughter) ' Every free nation should help
the peoples still oppressed to win freedom and independence'.
., nd I said myself,
" This was, in one sense nost encouraging obseovation.
It made me wonder whether we were perhaps about to see the
beginning of the era in which the nations of Europe, which
were once independent, and are now under Soviet Communist
control, were going to receive the blessings themselves of
independence. ( Applause)
". hat a glorious vista of freedom would be opened up
by such a policy. How much it would do to relieve the
causes of tension, and promote peace. I venture to say that
it is an act of complete hypocrisy for a Communist leader to
denounce colonialism, as if it were evil characteristic
, D 
of the Western powers, when the facts are that the greatest
colonial power now existing in the wrorld is the Soviet
Union itself". ( Applause)
Sir, it's a very ill business to quote yourself, but
having quoted that, you will see that we have here almost the
beginnings of a new and terrifying political alliance between
Senator McManus and myself. ( Laughter, Applause)
Now, Sir, I thought, and I still think, that the two
objects of Communist strategy as disclosed at the United
Nations itself are these.
First of all they want to keep under their control
the nations they already have stolen. And they want to keep
them without saying anything about it. They don't want other
people to discuss it. They want this taken as something that
has been done and that can't be undone; something that has
got respectable as the years go by. They just want everybody
to assume that " Well, there it is; it's there. -nd it can't
be changed". The statesmen of the Ueste. n world will do very
badly for the future of the world if they over allow the
Communist powers to forgot that they are the slave masters
if they ever allow the world to forgot that there can be no
true peace in the world until these people have been set free.
But that is the first object of the strategy.
And the second object of the strategy is to deal
with the new nations. This is something of the highest
possible order of impertinonce. There are new nations there
were a dozen of them this year at Now York, a large number of
then from , frica. as these new nations come along,
having once been colonies, having been granted independence,
having under the enlightoned policies which have been
practised in the Jostern w-orld, cone to be their own nrsters
to chose their own form of Government, the Soviet tactic is to
say to them, day after day, speech after speech, with
terrifying reiteration, " You must be bitter; you must preserve
your bitterness; you must go on hating colonialism" which to
then is a mere matter of past history.
This attempt to emoiJtter then, is of cou-, se, clearly
an attempt to put them into that frame of mind in which they
will be ready to receive the Cormunist doctrine, in which they
will begin to blame everybody else for all their troubles and
therefore be very very willing to say to the Soviet Union,
" Thank you so much; you've been very sympathetic; you've
nade us feel very bitter. Now you, no doubt, will be the
people to help us". And then they step in with their " loaded"
assistance. That is one way of doing it.
. nother way and this was practised very
considerably there was to adopt threatening attitudes. It
was almost strange, weird, to ne, to be sitting there,
listening to some of these terrible tub-thumping perforances,
and laughing at them, as we have the habit of doing in
Australia. We are not very responsive to tub-thumpers. And
we would be sitting there laughing at these ridiculous antics.
But I could see other deleoates from new nations who
looked interested, who looked occasionally inpressed, and
sometimes who looked a little apprehensive as to whether they
could afford to disagro with people of such strength and
violence. But that's the Soviet technique at the present time. 
I an happy to toll you that I don't think that, by
and large, those tactics succceded at all. i don't think that
Khrushchev understands the J. stern nind. I don't think that,
for all practical purposes, he is a Europe: n in his outlook.
He doesn't understand the . Jostern nind, moaning by that the
mind of all the people, or most of the people in the nations
from which you como, and in our own nation, and in all the
great powers of the Jedst.
The best proof of that to me was that here and here
and here, as one went around, one got the immediate reaction
of a lot of these represontatives, ' After all they have come
to froedom; they have cone to independence; they have a
proper pride in it.' They feel the dignity of freedom; they
feel the dignity of being in a country, the master of your own
system of Government. And they are not so impressed by
undignified rabble-rousing shouting and thumping as Khrushchev
appears to imagine. I venture to say that psychologically,
on the wholo, he lost ground with the now nations by his
antics at New York last month. And I hope that is true. I
believe it is true.
Now I said something a little while ago about
" woolly-minded" people. There are two groups of nations,
small nations, in the world in whom we are bound to have a
brotherly and continuing interest. One I've already referred
to you represent them here today the captive nations.
But the other group is those nations on the fringes
of Cormunism of Communist power who are at risk at this
very moment, who are liable at any time to find Communist
infiltration, Co-mmunist aggression, probing by thom, stirring
up Communist disorders inside the country, undermining the
Governnont, undermining respect for the law,
. nd these countries are in a state of danger and we
must never forget them.
In South-East . sia, look at them, Laos, Cambodia,
South Vietnam, South K'. rea, Formosa. And yet I've heard people
who would profess to be quite thoughtful and respctable
people, blithely say that if you should establish some terms of
peace with Communist China by handing over Formosa to them,
that would be a price worth paying for peace,
Did you ever hear such utter iruddlo-huadod nonsense?
If you can hand over one country because it is small, well you
can hand over another one because it is small. . Jo could go on
retreating and retreating and retreating before this
Communist advance until there is no free country left between
Australia and the..( Applause)
Now, Sir, we have been speaking this afternoon
about Communis. m, because C:: mmunisn is the enemy. People seem
to think, or sol.. e people do, that you can meet Communism by a
sort of reasoned logical 3rgument.
This is not a matter for logical argument. You just
cn. msider how the captive nations in Europe bucame captive
nations. Jhy when the second world war began it was, in
the view of the Communists in Australia who are the mere
faithful echos of the Comunists of Moscow, an Imperialist war,
when they did their best in Australia to sabotage it.
r. d at that time, with a friendly Germany the Soviet
Union picked up two or three powers. It ensconsed itself in
the Baltic States. It gathered in a few sl,.-ve cuntrios under
the guise of the friend of Hitler's Ger:. any. 
6.
But when Hitler i-oved into Russia to attack then,
then of course the war became a respectable one; they wore
our groat allies. And when the Iwar was over, as our friends,
they picked up a few nore European countries. ( Applause)
Now, that, ladios and gontlenon, is what we call
pure opportunismi. They are not working on a theory. They are
looking for practical results, And they will go wherevor they
can get a practical result and use any Athod, or any
association that is calculated to produce it,
œ. nd thorooro one of our perennial tasks is to watch
Conrunisio, to chock Cor.' unism, to put it down, so far as we
can, rherever we find it. ( spplausc)
It is a very trite saying that Covnunism is the
encimy of individual freoodon, Lot rino repeat to you frodon
is not someathing that you got by ict of Parliaiiont. Froodomn
is not somothing that you get as . a group of people. Freoodon
is individual, I an-a free m-an; or I a, not You are a
frooee an, or a froee woan; or you are not. And Comrmlunism has
no patience with individual froadon,
Of course they are able to show the world how clover
they aro, how technologically advancod they are, as indeed
they are, by putting Sputniks into orbit, d in. all these
strange things. Of course they can do it. Because they have
conplet control of every man and wonan in their boundaries.
And if they want to direct their scientists to got on with
these warliko, or thre:. tning, activities, they will.
Ihile wo, who enjoy the blessings of froodom, and
have done so for so long in . ustrali, in the United States of
miierica, in Groat Britain, have developed science for the
bonofit of mankind, in riodicine, in halth, in comnunictions,
in a thousand different ways on a scale that the Soviet Union
has never droamnt of. ( Applause)
Commnunisn is therefore the enomy of individual
freodomn. It is the eneomy of the law. There is nothing that so
turns m y stomnach as to read, either a Comunnunist or a fellow
traveller of whom there are mnany, talking about the law,
claiing sonothing about the law, invoking the law. I wonder
how much a lan can invoke the law in the Soviet Union, I
wonder : rhat'the rights of the ordinary individual may be in
Commzunist China. I've said somthing, to you about science controlled
science, slave science if you like, and the science of froee
men. But abovo all those things, and I think we find a great
common ground, above all these things Comnunis.: is the clear
enomy of religion, of religious faith.
Now what sort of world w'. juld it be if Comm--unisu,
through somo fault of ours, through su:_ o laxity on our part,
through some folly or idlenoss on our pcmt, achieved its
aimbition of conquering the world?
Sworld without religion a world in wvhich the
faith of our f::. Athols is proscribed and struck down by people
who are the m1ost blatant mat:. lists.
That is not somoathin that we can contlnplato. But
there again my great con'fort is this, That just as froodon is
not easily boaten out of the hoart of man, s-is faith not
easily beaten out ofhim, You cannot take thousands, nillions,
hundreds of nillions of people who have a faith of their own,
and destroy it, meorely by ordor or conand. 
I coi. e-back all tho tioto the fact that under some
circuustanco s thoso people, if they carry their ag, ;; rossion to
the point of a. rms, woul d havo tl be 1meti by ari-s, lbhatovor tho
disastor m-i~ dht bo.
But in te eaimone of the groat uarantcos
that have ag. ainst their at-L-rossion is that we prosorve in
our hoarts and i-inds an entl-usiastic faith, a7n enthusiastic
bolic-f, a missionary fooling of freedom,. That is vihat you arc
here today to rjncw. ( Applause))
Sir, it is a very -roat privili., o for mec to be hare.
I said to the Lord 1iayer just bofore I up that five
e'cl3ckI on Saturday afternojon s., emeid a rathelr odd tii-je for a
-roctin Do y-ou know r1hat he said to nie? Ho said, " It's
your faultl1 Beca,-use they wanted to h rve you, Cnd that was the
only time-, L tha-t suited you" t( A1* pplause)
., nd so, Sir, before I sit down, I apelo:-, iso to you.
But I also propose before I sit do3wn to thank you for a m--ost
: aioiu-orablo experience. Nothin. but uod can coinci of the
rafroshi-ont of spirit, the m-utual Dncour-, 1,, 2--ont, that a
ila::-nificont meeoting-like this produces for all of us. ( AIpplause) 


1. Introduction HistoryThis is the first major bill on library services to be introduced into this Parliament. It provides for the establishment of the National Library of Australia. Honorable members will, of course, understand that we are not in reality creating a new institution, but are rather proposing that the library services of the Commonwealth which have grown up without formal provisions since federation should now be the subject of legislation by this Parliament. But we are also looking to the future in that we seek to define the functions and role ot an institution which will increasingly play a national role of the greatest importance, similar to that of the great national libraries in other countries.The existing National Library collections and services are already widely used throughout Australia and are increasingly known abroad. Members are aware that they grew directly from the Library of the Commonwealth Parliament.The first federal government and the first joint library committee of Parliament gave imaginative and far-sighted consideration to library needs and took expert advice both from within Australia and abroad. It is worth noting that by 1907 the idea of a national library had crystallized and was reported to Parliament as follows: -“The Library Committee is keeping before it the ideal of building up, for the time when Parliament shall be established in the Federal Capital, a great Public Library on the lines of the world-famed Library of Congress at Washington; such a library, indeed, as shall be worthy of the Australian Nation; the home of the literature, not of a State, or of a period, but of the world, and of all time . . .”The development of such collections was limited during the first 27 years in Melbourne both by the resources available and by the presence of the excellent collections of the Public Library of Victoria and of the Library of the Parliament of Victoria in whose premises the Library functioned. However, successive Library Committees were active in collecting and publishing material of Australian interest.The Petherick Collection Act of 1911 brought to the national collection a great contribution of Australiana. It was developments such as these, culminating in the purchase of the notable collection of Captain Cook manuscripts, which led the Library Committee in 1923 to adopt the name " Commonwealth National Library ", by which the institution has been increasingly known since, although it has had, under that name, no statutory existence.It is important to remember that these national collections and services, and many others which have developed since, which are in fact records of Australian life and achievement, have not been separated from the collections and services for the Parliament itself. The need for some identification of the extra-Parliamentary services of the Library was recognized as early as 1935, when a sum was placed on the estimates of the Prime Minister's Department for the purpose of the National Library. In explaining the new item the Minister representing the Prime Minister said that -“Because of the Australia-wide nature of these services, which are of benefit to scholars and libraries throughout the Commonwealth, it is not thought fitting that appropriation for them should continue to be made on the vote for Parliament.”As these services developed and thencost increased, the Prime Minister became responsible to Parliament for the greater part of library expenditure. At the same time, the Presiding Officers were becoming increasingly responsible for library matters outside their normal sphere of interest.2. The Paton Committee’s ReportBy 1956 the Government felt that the time had come to review the functions and the form of control of this growing research and reference institution, which was discharging nation-wide responsibilities. It therefore set up a representative committee on the whole question and asked it to advise on the future development of the library.That committee, the National Library Inquiry Committee, under the chairmanship of Sir George Paton, Vice-Chancellor of the University of Melbourne, included three members of Parliament representing afl parties and both Houses. The report of the committee was tabled and ordered to be printed, and the Government is most indebted to the committee for its work.Its main recommendations were as follows: -There should be a Parliamentary Library and a National Library of Australia, each to be a separate institution, though closely related to achieve maximum efficiency and economy.The Parliamentary Library should be controlled, as at present, by the Presiding Officers of Parliament, with the advice of a joint committee of members of both Houses.The National Library should be controlled by a body with substantial responsibility for its development.The present division of the Library concerned with the records and archives of the Commonwealth Government should become a separate agency of Government under the control of a director, within an appropriate department, the Minister for which should appoint a small committee for his guidance.The National Library should be provided as soon as possible with a building appropriate to its functions.Meanwhile, the separation should be put into effect so far as possible.During this time the positions of Parliamentary Librarian and National Librarian should be filled by the one person.An examination should be made as soon as possible by the body controlling the National Library of the desirability of securing a greater co-ordination of Commonwealth Government Library Services.As these recommendations appealed to the Government as providing a satisfactory basis for future development, it set up an inter-departmental committee in 1959 to advise on the detailed measures necessary to make them effective. The committee worked in the closest association with the Presiding Officers and the Parliamentary Library Committee, whose co-operation and assistance have been most helpful to the Government in reaching the decisions on which the present bill is based.3. The Government’s consideration of the MatterIn reaching the conclusions to which the present bill seeks to give effect, the Government has been greatly assisted by having before it the views of the Paton committee, of the inter-departmental committee, and of the Parliamentary Library Committee. The Government gave special consideration to the following matters: -The separation of Government archives from the National Library.The maintenance of library services to Parliament.The functions of the National Library.The form of control of the National Library.I should like to say a few words on each of these matters, before passing on to some of the more detailed matters dealt with in the bill.First, Archives.Until 1942 the records and archives of the departments and authorities of the Commonwealth Government were wholly under the control of the agencies which created them. Administrative arrangements were then made which brought archives and semicurrent records under the Ministerial control of the Prime Minister, advised by a Commonwealth Archives Committee of historians and senior officials presided over by Dr. C. E. W. Bean, Official Historian of the First World War. The archives themselves were provisionally administered, initially by the Commonwealth National Library and the Australian War Memorial Board of Management jointly, and more recently by the Library alone. During this time systems have been developed, in cooperation with Government departments, to bring the archives together and under systematic control.The Government reached the conclusion that, as these archives are essentially a collection of the Government's own papers, many of which must remain confidential until at least a certain time has elapsed, they should come directly under the control of a departmental authority as recommended by the Paton committee, rather than under the governing body of the National Library. My own experience has convinced me that this is desirable. I attach great importance to the necessity for effective control over the disclosure of archives, particularly those of a private or semi-private nature. In my time as Prime Minister I have had applications made to me by authors and other people for access to certain documents written by my predecessors. When I have found that the document involved in a particular case has been marked " confidential " or " private ", I have always said that it could not be disclosed unless the person who wrote it was available to give his consent or his personal representatives expressed their views on the matter. That, I think, is the proper approach.Whether any part of the nongovernmental archives in the possession of the National Library should pass to the archives organiza tion is, we think, a matter which can best be left to the National Library Council and the archival organization to consider. In any event there must always be the closest co-operation between the two authorities.Next, as to the Parliament, the Government has been concerned to ensure that the development of the National Library as a separate institution should not prejudice, but rather strengthen, the reference and reading services available to the Parliament itself. The Government agrees that the Parliament of the Commonwealth needs the best library service that can be provided for it. Members should be able to draw with freedom and confidence on facts and opinions affecting the important public issues with which they have to deal.The Bill therefore imposes a special responsibility in clause 6 on the governing body of the National Library to provide services to the Parliament. The nature and extent of these will clearly depend on the needs of the Parliament and on arrangements made from time to time between the respective governing bodies. Co-operation between these bodies, which will necessarily be most close during the period of separation of collections and services, will be greatly assisted by the presence on the National Library Council of two members of Parliament. This will be facilitated by the fact that, at least during this period, the one person will occupy the positions of National Librarian and Parliamentary Librarian.The provisions in the bill to enable the transfer of much of existing collections and services to the National Library will, we believe, enable the Parliamentary Library to retain and develop specialized services and a specialized collection of material designed to meet the particular requirements of the Parliament.As to the functions of the National Library, the statement of functions in clause 6 of the bill is a very general one. It reflects the library's present activities, but provides for their development. This bill is so drafted as to permit and encourage the council to adapt the growth of the National Library of Australia to national needs as they develop and in the fullest co-operation with other authorities providing library services.Members will be aware of the powers and responsibilities for the provision of basic library services for the people. The remarkable progress of recent years, which has brought free public library services to so many local communities throughout Australia for the first time reflects great credit on State governments and local government authorities. University libraries are also being greatly encouraged, and many public authorities and private organizations, including business firms, have also set up libraries. Together, these libraries, which co-operate freely, make up a national system of library services which can be greatly strengthened through the development of a great national library. Already much is being done in association with the Australian Advisory Council on Bibliographical Services which represents all major libraries in Australia. Union catalogues are being compiled which will ultimately reveal to inquirers the location of any important book or periodical in the country.As to the control of the National Library, the bill seeks to establish the library on a formal basis as a body corporate. The arrangements follow the pattern for such bodies and the provisions are broadly similar to those of other government instrumentalities in related fields. The intention is that the affairs of the library will be effectively under the control of a small council of nine representative and experienced men and women. As honorable members know, the council has already been established on an interim basis, with Dr. A. Grenfell Price as chairman, two members of Parliament - the President of the Senate (Sir Alister McMullin) and the honorable member for Parkes (Mr. Haylen) - and six others: Mr. K. B. Myer; Dr. H. S. Wyndham; Mr. Justice Crisp, of Tasmania; Associate Professor Kathleen Fitzpatrick; Professor L. G. Huxley, the new Vice-Chancellor of the Australian National University; and Mr. E. J. B. Foxcroft, of my own department, who is a man of great and special interest in these matters. This council has already met, and the Government has had the benefit of its advice, and that of the Parliamentary Library Committee, in framing this bill. The Government is confident that the National Library will flourish under the control of this council, comprising as it does a group of people who are eminent and experi enced in many walks of life in the Australian community.There are some other provisions of the bill which I should perhaps mention, lt makes the normal provision, as I have said, for a council controlling a corporate body. It is the view of the Government that the library should be a substantially autonomous body, with ministerial responsibility limited wherever possible. The finance - which will be provided, of course, by annual appropriation - the staffing - which will come under the Public Service Act - and the other matters provided for in the bill all are quite consistent with the substantial autonomy of the council in the discharge of its responsibilities.We then think about a National Library building, Sir. We are under enormous pressure in Canberra in relation to building. This library is a going - and growing - concern, with some 500,000 books, as well as pictorial material, maps, films and so on. All these things lack a suitable building. At present, the library is accommodated in various places in a makeshift and highly inconvenient fashion and, I would have thought, in rather dangerous situations, some material being in a factory building in this city and other material being in these elegant igloos here.Mr Thompson - There is a good road to the library.Mr MENZIES - Yes. That is one thing. The Government has agreed that design and planning work for a new National Library building should begin, and the interim council is now discussing requirements with the National Capital Development Commission. The Government is very much aware that the library is experiencing acute difficulties in its day-to-day work and that these will increase as the collections grow, and therefore we are keen to see a suitable building. I cannot hold out any particular date to honorable members. The first thing to do in this matter - it will not be simple, but will require a lot of work - is to have consultations between the council and the National Capital Development Commission in relation to design and requirements.It may occur to some honorable members that the matter of copyright should be dealt with, because one of the oldest concepts of a national library which has persisted and has been adopted by many countries, including our own, is that a national library is the proper place to collect and preserve, for current and especially future use, material of all kinds illustrating the life and achievements of the people. This activity is usually supported by the law of copyright deposit, and provision was made in the Copyright Act 1912 for such deposit of copyright work in the Library of the Commonwealth Parliament. The Paton committee recommended that this privilege be transferred to the National Library. All I need say, Sir, is that this is just one aspect of the copyright law. Together with others, it is receiving the Government's attention. The Attorney-General (Sir Garfield Barwick) would like to have a comprehensive piece of legislation on that matter. We propose that until that is produced the material continue to be deposited in the Library of the Parliament. It can be transferred to the National Library as we adopt the change.Mr Beazley - I should like to ask a question about the site for the new National Library building. Is it to be down by the lake?Mr MENZIES - I cannot tell the honorable member. I have had it said to me - with what authority, I do not know - that the building would be near the lake and on the flank, so to speak, of the proposed new Parliament House. But I have seen so many other things that have to be done in Canberra that I have not allowed my mind to speculate so much.Mr Haylen - The right honorable gentleman has refused to be outflanked, as it were.Mr MENZIES - Yes.The Government's aim in giving the National Library a statutory basis and a wide charter is to allow it to play a significant and appropriate part in the Australian library system and in Australian life generally. This, as I do not need to emphasize to the House, is of great importance, Sir. We have, we think, done a good deal - and so have governments over a long time - to intensify research and inquiry through universities and through a variety of research bodies and agencies of govern ment. The development of library resources is a necessary and natural corollary.I think that before I conclude I should pay a special tribute to the successive Library Committees of this Parliament. These committees have over many years, by their far-sighted policies, laid the groundwork for the institution which this bill, when it is passed into law, will make a reality.&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT.
HON. R. G. MENZIES AT THE LIBE3E. L PARTY
COUNCIL iMEETING IN CANBE RA, ON MONDAY
14-TH NOVE3EK 1i60-. 2
Mr. President and ladies and gentlemen,
Before I begin I just want to say in amplification
of what the President said about Mr. Holt, that he's not late
just because he's late; he's late because the planCis
delayed. Otherwise he was looking forward very keenly to
being with us at the beginning of this meeting.
. This meeting is, of course, so I gather, the last
one that will occur before Election year. I don't know when
the Election will be, but I do know it : rill be next year.
And if we have our council meeting a little earlier than the
usual :. ime, we will be at that stage, all taken up, no doubt,
with clection ideas. Anyhow elections are a kind of fever
that is inclined to grow for about t; welve months before the
event. And, therefore, perhaps, this is a convenient time
for taking stock, a little, of our policy I kno, th. re is
going to be a good deal of discussion about the Platform a
very convenient opportunity for looking around us and
identifying, so far as we can, clearly, what lines we are
following. And I want, as usual, to do that by taking up two
broad topics: the first of them, naturally, the external
position of Australia in the iorld; and the second, the
domestic position. Because I venture to believe that on each
of these matters something may be said which I hope ;. ill be of
advantage to us.
In the first place, talking about the external
position. There is a problem which is constantly with us
you see it occasionally reflected in various commentaries.
And that is the problem of reconciling a good neighbour policy
with our friends in asia, particularly, a good neighbour policy
which we resolutely pursuereconciling that with our national
duty to ourselves to strengthen our co-operative associations
with the great powers of the Jestorn world.
It is foolish for anybody to say that one . should be
pursued to the extinction of the other. Jhat ie have to do is
to keep them both in existunce and strengthen both of them as
much as we can.
Now, Sir, recently I went to the United N-tions.
It is a strange expe..: ience, I confess. I had always escaped
going there in the past, so that I was having my maiden effort.
And the General Assembly of the United Nations is a very
strange body 98 nations there, each ~ rith the same vote a
country with half a million people having the same voting
power as the United States of America; two countries of half
a million each, able to out-vote the United States of America.
Quite all right so long as the Genercl Assembly is a debating
body, which it wacs designed to be,
But as the new nations come into existence and
there wero about 15 this year so it becomes very tempting to
some people to throw the emphasis . away from the Security
Council, which has some executive function, and into the
General assembly, ihich was designed to have none, but in which
votes, perhaps, may be more easily collected, than in the
smaller body of the Security Council. 
3,
And therefore you may frequently find some Jestern
powers voting on wvay, and some anothor, on almost any
question that comes before the Assombly. To make a comparison
between the utter monolithic solidarity of the Communists
with the scattercd views of the democracios, is to compare
utterly unlike things,
Then in the third plac, it is a dangerous fallacy to
talk about the " neutral" powers Many of then are uncommEittod,
I agree. But neutral? lords can be used in a very loose
fashion. India, for example, is supposed to have a doctrine
of neutrality. In reality it is a doctrine of non-alignont.
They won't enter into specific t-r atios with people they
wouldn't cone in on the South-East Asian Treaty for exaple.
But th; y are faithful nonbors of the United Ntions. And if
the United Nations on sono occasion, were to pursue , war-like
action to enforce sonathing, then I've not the slightost
doubt that India would play India's part as a eombeu of the
United Nations. Just as she sent troops to Korea in the
Korean incident. So that that is one form of noutr: lisn, if you care
so to describe it.
There are other places in the world, not quite so
conscious of the importance or comnanding significance of the
United Nations, Xho ar neutral in the strict sense. That is
to say, they say: " le will not fight anybody, except in
defence of our own innediate frontiors. Apart from that, 1we
accopt no obligation; we enter into no agruement"
So there are two diffreiont kinds of noutralisi, you
see. One is what I call a " participating" noutr-lism, under
the United Nations Chartor; and the other is an " absolute"
noutralism. Now it is very important that we should have these
things in our ninds, because this movement to divide the
United Nations up into three allogeod . roups, so that they any
balance each other, can have enormously dangorous implications
for . the iorld. First of all it would destroy the United NItions as a
body possessing any cohesion. And in the second place it
would tend to create hostilities and senses of difference,
when perhaps tnhere was no occasion for either; tend to make
us look at all the new African countries as if they were the
sane kind of countries, the sarc kind of people, all to be
put in a basket to ' thor and treated as the " nutral"
countries, or the " unconnitted" countries of Africa.
4o do :' avC some funny ideas in the ! orld. Nobody
looking at Europe ever supposed that an Italian, and a
Frenchman, and a German, and a Dutchman wore the sallo; that
you could put thom : All into one neat package and say that they
all possessed the European mind, or that they all possussed
common interests in Europe. Th y do, I know, 3ut it has
taken centurs to bring then to a point where, in the economic
field, they co-operato, one with tho other, But nobody wrould
droain of making that kind of error about Lurope
But when we look at Africa with a dozen or twenty
now nations in it, people are very m-uch inclined to lump them: i
all tog. ther and say: " J11 there you aro; now all these
people have just cono! e to . ndependonce. They are bound to havo 
4
the sane kind of ideas; you can put thrn together in a neat
parcel and take it for granted that they will make a
natural logical bloc, or group".
Jell, I just don't believe it. The best speech, the
greatest speech, that was delivered at the United Nations
General Assembly in my hearing was that made by Sir Abubakar
Balewa, the Prime Minister of Nigeria.
Nigeria is the biggest single nation in Africa. It
is four times the size of Ghana, its neighbour, though we've
heard a good deal more about Ghana. The Prime iMinister of
Nigeria is a man of quiet strength and authority and great
wisdom and great experience. His balanced, measured
utterance was so utterly inconsistent with any idea of forming
a bloc, or of falling into the orbit of somebody else: it was
indopeindnt, yet intelligent; it recognised the obligations
to the world, and yet he was obviously setting out, loading
his country in a proud destiny, friendly to the British,
because the British had brought them to independence; an
inheritor of all the best ideas in our own form of selfgovernment.
A wise, strong, thoughtful man.
Not all leaders are like that. Not all the
countries in Africa produced i. mn of that type. There are
some countries in Africa well advanced in the art and practice
of Government like Nigeria. There are others who are just
beginning in a very, very ' prentice fashion. They all
deserve our interest; they all deserve our help. But don't
lot us fall into the . rror of thinking that they are all the
same. Because they are not,
And that is why I believe that this mischievous
proposal to divide the United N-tions, a proposal of which we
have not yet heard the end, must be borne in mind by us so
that we may resist it while we can.
Now while I still believe, and believe without any
reluctance, that we must pursue in Austr-lia our good
neighbour policies with our Aisian friends, we must be willing
to contribute to the oconomic advanceeont of these countries
through the Colombo Plan, or South-, jast Asian freaty, or by
whatever mechanism may exist. I believe all that. It
doesn't need to be iade a matter of persuasion with this
audience, that that is of very, very great importance.
But I still you may call it antiquated, if you
like, I don't mind but I still believe that the very
foundation of our foreign policy, and of our defence policy is
close cor. munion, close co-operation with the Commonwealth,
and, of course, outstandingly, with the United Kingdom, close
co-operation with the United States of America; and the
making and maintenance of defensive arrangements such as those
cohtained in the iNZUS pact, end the South-East Asian Treaty.
These are the groat practical things which affect
the security of Australia. Friendship with your neighbours
that's good; that must be cultivatcd. Je must at all times
look for ways and means of elimin-ting points of difference,
so far as we can and there re not many points of
difference. inust be helpful. m-Jues t be neighbourly.
But in a practical world, it is essential that we
should never forgot that it is upon the rock of the Coimmonwealth,
and of the Com;: onwealth's association with the United
States of ; America that our national security is built. 
All I need add on that is that as the ANZUS Pact
was negotiated by your present Government, and the South-Fast
a. sian Treaty also, I think we can claim that in the field
that I have just been discussing re have a respectable,
concrete, constructive policy and achievement
Now I just want to turn from that to the ever
present domestic problem. And I'm going to say something
about this, ; which is designed, I hope, to help you to meet
certain criticism which I know commonly spring up.
One of the great criticism that I hear, and that I
read, because strangely enough we don't entirely live in an
ivory tower, is that this Government changes its mind on the
economic field too quickly, that it proceeds by " fits and
starts". This is one of those easy, slick phrases that come
trippingly to the tongue, c'nd therefore have groat currency
" fits and starts". They do something now, and they do
something quite different in six months' time.
It is very odd if you consider that that
criticism has validity that the country appears to have
proceeded vwith such a remarkable degree of stability all
these years; that really, the ship hasn't shown any signs of
foundering. It has encountered storms; it has had its
difficulties. But it goes on; its voyage continues. And
for 99% of the people of Australia it is a very happy and
successful voyage.
Why t; hen is it said that we proceed by " fits and
starts", that -Je change oar mind?
Now the answer to that is, that the people who make
those criticisms fail to understand the difference between an
economic policy and the measures that you take to give effect
to it. Because a policy may be constant; but the measures
taken to give effect to it must vary from time to time
according to the circumstances. To take , mother metaphor: the
strategy remains the same, but the tactics have to
accommodate themselves to the circumstances of the month, or of
the year, or of the day, somletimoes
It would be a very stupid GoveL'nnent, indeed, which
having said " This is our policy: we believe in stabilising so
far as iwe can the value of money. obee lieve in building up
the population as much as we can. Je believe in having
employment to the fullest extent" all this kind of thing
if, having said that, it took no notice of the circumstances
at all and just -went blithely on as if nothing had changed.
Let me give you an exae. mple of that which is
sufficiently detached from the Government to make one
impartial about it.
The Central Bank has an enormous responsibility in
dealing with credit policy, in dealing with monetary supply.
And one of the things that is available to the Central Bank
for its purposes, is a certain instrument vrhich enables it to
affect the liquidity of the trading banks and therofore their
capacity to make advances to creditors. And that is the
procedure of the Special Account, Special oeserve Deposits.
If the Central Bank, desiring to maintain stability
in the liquidity of the bank over a term, finds that the
liquidity is getting too high and that advance policy is
threfore making credit rather infltionary, it can call up
the Special Account. ( I'lL call it " Special Account" because
that was the old nare). It can call up deposits from the 
S6
Banks to Special Account. And that moans they take some of
the liquidity out of the structure
In three months' time, pursuant to the same policy,
but dealing with the circumstances as they arise, it may be
releasing money to the banks from Special Account in order to
increase their liquidity. Because the circumstances change,
quarteo' by quarter, You could, quite simply, draw a. graph
showing what the normal movements of liquidity are in the
Banking structure, quarter by quarter
And a sensible Central Bank, it pulls in or it puts
out, according to the circumstances of the time. Because its
objective is to maintain a steady management of the liquidity
position of the banks.
Nobody says that the Central Bank is proceeding by
" fits and starts". Because most people, I think, realise
that that is what a Central Bank is for. A Central Bank
ought to be watching things every weok, and ovury mont.. and
it does and taking whatever adjusting steps are within its
power to achieve its overall purpose, -ind the same is true
about Goveirnmonts, Unless you are prepared to make your policy apply
to changing circumstances, then your policy will co-me to ruin.
Now what is our broad policy? I won't profess to
state it exhaustively, but I will mention eight or nine
aspects of it. You need have no fear that I am going to
elaborate them. Nor do I put them in any order of significance
but just as they come to the mind.
To restrain inflation: Now that is a great
principle of policy. It is not very easy. Certainly not
something that can be done by a singlo stroke, or a single
act not at all. To restrain inflation involves the use of
a variety of weapons, from the Central Banking procedures
outward. And those weapons must be used according to the
circumstances of the time. You may tighten up on credit today;
you may loosen up on credit in throo months' ti~ u. Both will
be pursuant to the same policy.
Recently to take the most up to date example
we announced early this year do you remember? I announced
myself a four-point progranr; e, one of the points being that
we would strongly support the Central Bank in its restraint
upon credit. And we still continue to say that.
But we know perfectly well that a restraint upon
credit, which may have to be particularly powerful in a
particular time of the year, for a variety of reasons, , ay
ultimately have to be eased out so that you don't get too
acute a deflationary effect.
And so it is quite possible to be restraining credit
hard in December, and letting credit out in June:
These are not inconsistencies-, these are merely the
sensible applications of the one policy, the policy being to
restrain inflation. And, of course, under our current
circumstances something intimately associated with . it to
protect agcinst undue run-down our oversas reserves.
! eo have a policy a second item in our policy to
maintain employment. This is treendously important,
socially 2-nd htumanly, in the country. 
0 7.
But full employment sometimes becomos, as at present,
in at least Now South Jales and Victoria, over full employment,
with all the consequent troubles of increased turnover, loss
of efficiency, increased costs. And a Government must watch
that kind of thing, ready, occasionally to help, whore there
is some unemployment developing, by making provision for loan
money and so on, as we have from time to time in the course of
the last few years; ready, on other occasions, to put some
pressure on the economic system to reduce the liquidity of the
banks, to reduce, or control, advances of credit, partly so
that over-full employment nay not exist or be continued, with
all its evil, econoic consequences.
, Jc have a policy to build up population. And, in
fact, that has been maintained, I think, remarkably, when one
considers the aspects of this matter which, from year to year,
have m , de us wonder whether the inflationary pressures of
population growing at this rate by migration, were not too
great. But we have in that particular matter accepted the
risk. And I think with the warm approval of the people of
Australia. The result is that the country is far richer, far
more productive, far more solidly based, far nore capable of
resisting depression, than it was 10 years ago, if only because
it has all those hundreds of thousands, and now w ll over a
million, of people who have come from other parts of the world,
and have brought their own skills, and their own contribution
vith them. -o have a policy to develop our basic resources.
hnd we have had the opportunity of giving effect to that in
some rather dramatic ways, the most dramatic, of course, being
the great Snowy Mountains Scheme. Another one in Queensland
on which we have ultimately been able to make most helpful
arrangements, is the Mt. Isa Railway in Quoensland. One could
give other examples. But these are just sufficient to point
out that this is one of our great items of policy; that the
country's basic resources should be developed.
But they won't be developed if we lose control of
the value of monoy, if inflation gets utterly out of hand.
Because unless inflation can be checked, sometimes by stern
measures, always unpopular measures, then we will find that
the money is losing its value so quickly that loans will fail,
we will have to redeem all the war loan that comes in for
conversion, instead of having it converted into new loans,
and the effect of that on the Budget could very well be
disastrous. Therefore while we seek to develop our resources,
don't get the ida into our minds that you just have to think
of something, put it down, and start doing it. Because
whether you can do it at any particular tin will depend, very
largely, on your general view of your economic and particularly
your currency position at any given romnt,
Another item of our policy is to encourage
production. And I venture to say that there has been a very
considerable anount of success in that field, for which
Liberalism all over Australia. Federal and State, I think, can
claim considerable credit-the oncourago. ont of production
primary productions, secondary productions. But that doesn'tmean
you simply say, " Jell that's our policy. Therfore
anybody who wants a protective tariff can have it. Come
along in the . orning and get it". No. 
In all these natters there must be judgucnt as to
the merits of the proposal, as to how it fits in with the
general community interest. And if you are going to have
judgient of that kind, then you don't exercise it on January
1st and call it something done for the rest of the year
Because the thing about judgment is that judgment has to be
exurcised every day of the year, as all the circumstances
change or develop or w. hatever may occur to then.
We have a policy to increase our markets overseas.
This is one of the great problems on which I believe
immennsely good work has been done. And I pay tribute to my
colleague, the Minister for Trade, for what he has done in
that field by his terrific energy and enthusiasm. I believe,
and he believes, that we have just scratched the surface, in
effect, so far that there are rmarkets available for
Australia, not just for :. ustralian wool, or whatever it nay
be, bu: for things that we make in Australia, things that we
process in Australia markets available which will surprise
us if we can go about getting them in the right way.
But wo will have to find out the circumstances of
every case. W. e may have to adopt methods that are new in
some old countri. s, and m. ethods that are old in some other
countries. Judgeont, judg. ent has to be exercised fron day
to day and from month to month.
But if it turns out that some trade promotion
policy is adopted in Country A and happens to be exactly the
opposite policy to the one employed in Country C, I hope I
won't be told that we don't know our own minds. On the
contrary. It will be the best proof that we do know our own
minds, and know how to deal with individual cases in an
individual way.
I mentioned earlier about our reserves. That is
another great item of policy. Continuity of trade is
essential to Australia. Joe are one of the great trading
nations of the world, in absolute terms.
Some countries have a tiny fraction of their total
trade moving across the seas. We have an enormous fraction of
ours. We are intrinsically one of the groat trading countries
of the world. For the maintenance of our standards of living, so
high, as they are, it is . ssential that we should at all times
be able to ensure the continuity of trade, ensure a reasonable
flow of imports, to match an outflow of exports by maintaining
overseas financial reserves which will act as a buffer against
a sudden decline in export incone, or a sudden onrush of
imports. All this, in a financial sense, is quite ele: entary.
But to maintain reasonable reserves abroad again requires, not
some dogmatic idea that having said something goes in March,
you must continue to do the -same thing in Septoeber, but a
sensible approach which says to you: " You watch your
reserves; if they are building up, then you nay be in a
position even to encourage a further inflow of goods into the
country; if they are not building up, but are running down,
then you must watch that. Because after all, if you get to a
point you nay have to do something rather drastic about
imports" and that is the last thing that I want to have to
do, nor am I contemplating it " but you may have to take
measuros." And, of course, on top of all that, don't forgot 
4 0 9,
that the flexible, and yet successful way in which these
things have been handled, has been looked at by the rest of
the world. The most important critics are not those in some
newspaper here. The most important critics are the shrewd
people overseas who have their on. funds to invest and who
:: ako it their business to know exactly what the economy of the
country is in which they propose to make an investnont, Those
arc the people whose opinion may be valued.
And with all our " fits and starts", a few years ago
I was able to say to you that private inflow of capital
anounted to œ 100 millions a year. In the last financial year
it :' a: munted to œ 200 illions.
It is important fron our point of view, not only to
the dcveloplent of our oconory, to the onploynent of our
people, but also to the mnaintonance of adequate reserves
abroad that we should continue to enjoy this inflow of
capital. That is our policy. It is not the policy of our
opponents. But it:. n ours. And because that is our policy, it
becones even more important that we should constantly watch
the novenonts of inflation or deflation; the novenonts of
credit expansion; or of credit contraction; the ! ovenents
of our overseas reserves. Because, it is upon the securing by
flexible judgnent from. month to month of the best results for
stability, that this great inflow of capital will depend.
If the oconony of ustralia " was as jorky, as
uncertain, as sonoe wishful thinkers would have us believe, we
w:.. uldn't be receiving the tangible confidence of the business
world to the extent that we have been receiving it. And it
is vastly i. iportant, thierfore, that all of you who are so
imiportant in this org: nization who carry so n: uch authority
in this organization should find yourselves able to reject
some of these superficial criticisis, and to understand why it
is that a donestic econolic policy which isn't flexible, which
isn't prepared to appear to reverse direction in throe :. nths
or six : onths, would be a dangerous policy,
Jo have another iteo of policy and I will just
iontion it before I co:"., ude, to increase facilities for
higher educ. tion.
Now this is a : atter of . reat contention. The
Conn: onwealth bean, at the tine we ca-o back into office,
apart fron finding sone fees for rehabilitation of trainees
and so on after the war, had no educational obligations in
terns of n onky outside its own turritorios. None. I because
I confess that it all bogan with me said, "! WJe , ust do
son thing about the Universities because the Universities are
going to close unless we do. No State can carry the burden of
University training to the extent that it is going to. be
doeandod in this country".
Dea: r no. e Every figure that the Murray Com r: ission
set down by way of prophecy of University population has been
falsified. Before we are ten years older we will have a
hundred thousand people qualified for, and deoanding University
education. The capital expenditure, the whole vista, even
as one could see it eight years ago, was quite appalling, and
to my nind, something that no State, within the normal
reasonable liiits of its 2udoet, could hope to accomplish.
The only alternative then, would be enorrous
increases in fees, sonething which would frustrate University
develop: ont, or so; ething that me waits for rather in vain in
a country where ther are rich people, a nuch nore
enlightened outlook on the responsibility of the rich for their
Universities, than we have seen so far, 
I mention that just for good measure. Because if
one goes to America one sees exactly the opposite so
remarkably deoonstrated.
Now we have taken it on. Je had the Murray
Colmi. ttee's report. Je adopted it. It cost the Commionwealth
over a three-year period, œ 20 nillion. This, as we looked at
it at that tin, was a fabulous sun of money. We have just
had the first report of the Universities Commission for the
second three years and the Commonwealth contribution goos from
to œ 39 million, and the States even greater.
Now why an I mentioning that to you? Just to say,
"!" hat a good boy". No, not at all. But to point out to you
that the people who are constantly coning along and saying,
" If you can do it for the Universities, you can do it for
everybody else, for every other kind of school" have no
conception of the financial implications of these matters.
WJhen this thing be an eight years ago, nine years
ago, whenever it was, one or two of my colleagues said. to no,
very sensibly, that " if you once Jet into this field, you will
be told you have to find money for secondary education as such
and primary education as such, and aren't we buying into a
dangerous field?".
Perhaps in my folly I said: " If we can strike a good
blow for the developnont of the Universities, the tertiary
educational places in . ustralia, we will do something that
will have its reaction on all foris of education and training
in Australia, and we will deserve well of the Republic.
So, I tell you about that in order that you nay
understand quite clearly that in this great field we have
voluntarily, with no constitutional obligations whatever,
accepted these phenon. enal financial responsibilities. And we
ought to be busy naking it clear to people, how good this is,
how great this is for a great . ustralia in the future,
instead of succumbing to the rather slick logic of the people
who say, " Well if you can find it for one purpose, you can
find it for another".
The ninth principle of policy is to . aintain
industrial continuity of work on just terms. And there again,
to -n astonishing extent, this has been achieved. oJ have
been flexible. ' o have from time to time rade changes in the
industrial arbitration structure, admittedly one of then
forced on us by a High Court decision, but the others were nade
as an exercise of judS-ecnt from time to time. In the result,
while all stoppages, or threats, are well advertised, the fact
is that there has been a grator cntinuity of work, and
therefore a greater effective contribution to productive
effort in Australia, in the last ten years, than I can ever
rcnober before in the political history of the country.
Now, Sir, all those things are our policy. As I have
said to you, they all require individual treatment: you ust
adapt your tactics to the circumstances of the time your
fiscal action, your credit controls, your import policies. All
these things must be applied with intelligence, with jud. ment.
-e must never be afraid to undo what we have done, when undoing
it was always contemplated at the time we did it, as one of
these flexible instruments of policy. 4 e are not to be
nervous about that. worn't have been changing our policy.
! e will have been giving effect to it.
Now I hope that what I have been saying to you on
that field doesn't strike you as too much of a technical, or 
acadeniic exercise2. it isn't. I think there is nothing nero
iipcrtant than that we should into the last year of a
Parlia;:-' nt, not barren of ideas for the futuro, but thiat weo
should go in, feecling, a proper ) rido in what, between us all,
we have been able to do, feecling a. proper confidencoe in the
future of the country.
I don't believe for one riont, havin., rcigarcl to
tho history of our land and its rcent experiences, that the
people of ! Australia are to hand the n--attor over to
people whe have shown a much -re. ator faculty for quarrelling
xd th cach other, than they ever have for understanding-the
sinplost problem of the nationm I don't think t hat is going to
! appon. But we aite no,-t to live enmtirely on the division of
our enemies. it is fa-r better to live with-pride, with
co. ur. cy. e, with co. nfidenco in our ' own faith-and in our
righIt. ( a. pplausc) 



0 SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER9 THE RT. HON. R. G.
MviENZIES AT T'HE OPENING OF THE RUSSELL OFFICES)
CANB QI. T1J__ SDAY, 17TH NOVEMBEH, 1960.
Sir, Your Excellencies, Parliamentary colleagues and ladies
and gentlemen: I have many reasons for being very pleased to be
invited to do this task. One of them is that it is one of the
rare occasions on which I can see the Diplomatic Corps sitting
quietly, respectably, respectfully and with no grievances to
ventilate. That makes it a very notable occasion.
But there are other better reasons than that,
speaking with very great respect.
First of all this, or these buildings, this first
one in particular, as the first of the four, represent a very
remarkable phase of development in the national capital.
The transfer of departments, so that we may have in
Canberra almost literally, side by side, the great departments
of State; so that no longer will it be necessary for chiefs of
staff and those who toil with them to make long journeys to
Canberra, to be consulted, or insulted, according to the mood
of the moment. Here we are! We will r, 11 be together my o. m
Department, the Department of External Affairs, the Departments
of Defence, the Treasury the great Departments of State being
brought in to this one capital city. This rcpresents a
movement in national feeling, and in national efficiency which,
perhaps, some people in Australia don't yet recognise. io, for
ourselves, are determined to make the capital of Australia one
of the fine capitals of the viorld. Because we believe thatif
Australia is to take her place, more and more, as a nation in
the world not a large nation, not unduly significant you may
tell me, but still with a future then we must, so far as we
can express our national instinct in concrete visible terms
that appeal to the imagination.
The creation of a national capital in this lovely
spot is one of the great things to be done in the performance
of that task. I must confess I have very little patience with
people who appear to grud everything that is spent on
buildings of this kind not that they are elaborate but
buildings of this kind.
The moaning that goes on about the imminent
creation of a lake which will give to this city character,
and make it a city around alake, as nothing else could make it,
a coherent whole: I don't have any sympathy with those ideas
at all. I believe that the future of this country, just
l1D the future of any other democratic country, is largely
associated with creating the national capital as a focus of
intexest, as a focus of pride, as a place which will attract the
best possible men and women, not only for Parliament, for the
Public Service, but for all the activities that are associated
with Government on the grand scale.
So I believe that all the investments that we are
making in Canberra are dividend-paying investments in the best
sense of the word. 
2.
There is another reason why I am very glad to be
here. Something pretty good happened in Canberra not so long
ago. do had enough wit to establish a Commission; and we had
enough wit to make Mr. Overall its Chairman.
Now this man Overall occasionally frightens me. Ho
looks to you to be a mild and disarming character. Ho has
associated with him Commissioners of great talent who arc
equally mild and disarming. But I'll tell you the great secret
of this man: when he learns on the telephone that the Cabinet
has approved of something, some scheme, some project, that
concerns him, he has the bulldozers in on the site next
miorning. He knows of politicians, even by instinct
certainly not by expe. ience ( Laughter) but by instinct he
knows them. He has given us imagination, and drive in the
development of Canberra for which I, for one, as the Prime
Minister, w. ill be eternally grateful to him. And I say that for
him, and for his Commission.
SThis conception, now beginning to take shape.-the
offices here, the bridge, the other bridge that will go in, the
lake, the whole city grouping itself with, I hope, ioro fine
buildings in the future this is something that appeals to the
imagination. I am only sorry that I have reached such advanced
years now that I won't be able to come back in 50 years' time
and see the fruit of all these labours, a marvel, and a pride,
and a joy to Australians.
But over here, we are doing something, we are here
at a very remarkable step. Im delighted with it. I'n sure
you are delighted with it. I am proud of everybody rwho has
boon connected with achieving it. I am delighted to think that
my colleague, Mr. Freoth, is able to be here on this matter
he's had much to do with it and I: m vey grateful to think
that my colleagues in Cabinet, and the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia, have, in the most practical wiay,
supported these develop: mnts,
So here we are a growing city; a greator, and
more scientific aggregation of the people who work for us; a
vision of the future; and a remarkable :. chievomrnt in the
present. All these are great matters. They give me great
personal joy and satisfaction, and they will explain to you why
I am delighted to declare this building open. ( Applause) 



PUBLIC SERVICE BILL
Soco) nd Reading spoech by ~ oPrii-, o iiinistor ( Mr. 1.1, nzics)
House of Roproso-nt. a tivos
Tursay., 12bh1960
Thu, : Lain purpcwse, this 3i11 is to : i a0nd thorccruitae-,
nt r-nd appojinta.-ont proviLsions o) f tthe Public 3Service
ct follo. iing the Governme-nt's co) nsidratio-n of theto or of
thoe Corittoo, of Inquiry intu Public Service-Rocruit* aeInt.
Tle ovoan . of' a Public 6So rvice-; f t1: e h-ighest
quality and into , rity is a-first e; ssential-of v'ood -Overi~ iont;
Cand tho-quality ofL: the I2ublic Service itsjlf is closely re la-ted
to thei stand'a1rds jstablished fo.: r recruitiaa-nt. It fo) llows
thcroforc that it is prudent to keop standards of -racl~ uiti:: eont
undo.;? r eviow. Tic rocruiti--ant provisions Df thc P-ubli-* c Survicoe Act
ha,-' ve rol~ ltinod substantially unaltoered since the Acxt i~ as first
passed in 1922, The,. , eo. vcrionnt roadily agedtaar.-forc withi
a rcoi. ae.-ondat ior thr-2u. lhlic 3rv!. icc Boa,-rdL that aCo itc
of Inquiry ' Wdbc appointod to ; inquiro into a--nd rep. ort upon
rccruitrr'L V10thods w'ithi thic obje ct or iipr: ovinrg the qluality
of rool'uits-This Co; n. rittc consisted of~
Sir Richiard 3oyor, Chairr-. an, AUstra: lian 3roa): de . stinEg
Co-..., iiss i. n
Profe~ ssor Hy. tan, forrior Vico-Chancellor tii
Univo: rsity T. 7svnia.
Dr. Radfo,, rJ, D-* r-cto,. r of tho-.' ustralian Co--unicil
for Educa--tioLnal ieosc , rch
Mr. R. S. Parke: r,. Roador in Public Adiistration,
A'ustralian NH:., tio) nal University
1, r. F. J. Je-bb, Conr-, iissionor of thec Coriiomnwelth
Conciliation and 11rbitratio1n Corm-i ssi n
Tori-is of re ference:
Th-i tjrn-s ofœ cencf thoi Co)-jitte wii..
" To inquiro) into-and re-po-rt to the Priine Ministe; r on tho
rocruitiLent procosses and standards I-f ti-ic Public
Service) and ' L-joe reconne-d--indatio-ns fo-r any changes
wh-ich, in tho o) pini.: n t-. f the Coiittoo, 2re necessary
to ensure thiat re3cruit.-. ont is soundly based to uet
present and future neejds and efficiency o-f tho, Iublic
Service2 at al lvis"
1 should sa,. y at thec outse t that tho Gove)-, ricmt is
indeb-ted-to the--Bayer Coxoittoo for its com1--prehe-1nsive, and
thoroughn review oif the re-cruit problon---within the Public
Service-. Ti-c Co;-i: ittee, Ymade a1 nw-du. 1c-nf. re,-c-1-1i-endations which
wiore intere-, sting, challonging = nd cjnst)~ i-i~ j~ r.-, tho
r-. port is a vo luablo cortributi-n to", the currani anCL. * Ut6U. L
davelopmant o-f theo althi arinistra)-tion, In .*-any
respects Jso it will be, continuing docment of reference,
It is f-, onral conclusion of the Boyor Comm'i t tee,
that tho -Public Service is not obtaining sufficient re--cruits
of theo right quality to % e) t its gre! atly expanded tasks a-nd
thtat the Se-, rvice. is to-o tighitly closed a:-. Ainst rocrui. Kuent
froi, outsido to) positions at inte rimediate an': senior wrork-
Lvels. In a-ddition, the Csmiritteesugsts that policies in
espect o) f organisation staff dovclopmont should .) nsur,,
) ht theo be) st uso i-s n.-adc talent avaiabe
The rec,: rcendaLtions of the Cormtittoo, bout 70 in
all, have bee-n exmne . ost, carofuliy. Many themi have
b-mcn accepted by -120 Governme: nt, and of these, So1me 0.11
iflcrporatod in Bill before the House : 2nd the : e-aaindor
. ill~ put into e-ffect ad'i: trativoly. in ot-icr o~ s the
Governme*' nt encrc~ the -objoctiJves z-&gt; tby the .0, yOr
Corinittxc but preferls to : achie-vc the-se or'-, i , c by !, Oafls
diffe-rent fror: thos, suggested, by the Comittee'. in. ff ew
cases the_ Gove-rnTre-n-6. -as unable to a-ccept the ro col--, : oc~ at ions
-of the-Boyer : uttewhilist in other cases, for c: rplthe
emlyetof m-. arried: wome,. n, the im.. plicati. ons if theo
recommendations are so far reaching that mch further study
of theim-is rouirod before a final decision is taken by the
Goveornmelnt. I do not propose to develop a full analysis of the
ii. plications of 11 the recomm. 1e ndaticins Of the Boy.: r Comm-. ittee,
in the course of tis Lpechcn but I shall sny a. few wo-rds
about some. i ofth.
Ro-castinF' of rccruit...... prvsons o-f the Puli_____ c ict
There Jcs 3. nua-ber of difficultios associa--tud with
the aanhntof the e--xistings provisions o: f the A* ct in order
to achie-vc the objectives of t'Le CoDuri ttooes re-port for-, clear
. nd flexible) re cruit-1eint ia chine ry. It hnas beon decided
tL-iroforo to re-c-ast completely Division 4+ of Part Three of
theo Public Serivice A'ct rhl~ ich deals with recruitme~ nt and
appointmeont. T'r~ IS, nevertheless, no departure in the nowr
pr~ visions from) the broad principlos on whiich the present
leg-' islatJCion is founded.
AppoiAnti-ent to thenu rublic Servico will rjm:. ain in the
hiands of thao Public Service ' oard _ ts an independeontuhrt
and within the principle open com-_ petition. The 3oye2r
Comm-,_ ittee in endorsing thnis principle hnas re_-co-. nisedC that a
statemeont o" f it -in lce.: islat ion wo) uld' need to be qualified bya
number of impo,) Irtant exce-pti ) ns. The Gove rnme--int theire fore
propose: s to-co,, ntinue to apply the principle o f open
cormptition , tithL-out h-ving it ex-pressed forimally in the A'ct.
The stand ' rds for a,. ppointment will-bo sot by thec
Boaird fromi-time. to timei and notified in the) CoieKm'on*, alth-
Gazete. The Public Service Be,-rd will rotain auth-ority to
c.-nduct its own exam-ina-tions or to) use the standa7r.-s of
education authorities and prsiv. ision will be retcined for
proi-o: tion within theo Ser~ vice so that theo most junior -officers
will have hc T. htole field of thei Public Serivice Don tothm
provided they aire a-ble to-met the standards wh1[ ich aeset for
promotion withiin a Division _ r adva-nceme_ nt from-_ one Di; v-s ion
to anothejr. There will be a-firm mniu standard for
appointmecnt to the Third Division of thne Service abo) ut whnich I
sh'all speak pre sently. it is intended that theire will be two
general levels foDr recruit&gt; eont * to1-thei F-. urth Division,-). These,
-vill be at eleme-, ntary a-nd itro: testandaLrd eductiL'onral
level. idith-in the: Secoind, Third and Fo'-urthq Divisions of the
Service appointiments will now be poJssible, not only to)
specific positionms within a Divisio-n, but a-lso generally
withiin a. Division. 
0664 3.
Tho bnsin roquira: mnts O~ r npp~ intncnt to tho
Coi--:ñ., nwoalt'a Sorvics undir tho existing Act ara. thiat tAhie
applicant isz
a 3ritish subject;
rmudically hias n. ado a~ nd subscribed an Oath or Affir~ wati ; n
They arc retained in the now lo jisltion.
Additionally it is nocossary to ] aoa it clear * chit the
Board may roject a candidnto who bacauso if cL: racter,
including police record, etc., or for ' othier josd re:' soui is
not considered to be suitable for ndnissijn to the Public
Service. The Woard, in ti1o past, hias boon ; Torting on the
assumption thiat it hias the ordinary rilits of an amployer to
decide whiethAor a candidate for : vpp.) int1Lent mow; ts the
standard of cheractor and into ' rity w; hich is clearly
assential. But thiarc is soma doubt nbout this and thiewefore
there is included in Clause 11 if the Bill Section 34~( c) of
the now A. ct, a privision to anable the Woard to be satisfied
that a candidate for ippaintiuent is n fit and proper person to
be an officer of thecimnw; t. Service.
Th2-G: v -= nment has adopted the .3ywr Comittoe
re c-z-iie-, ndation that the heaving Crtificate standvr? stould
be the firm minimum roq'oirorlcnt for entry to the Third
Division if the Public Sarvica. This is a most inportant
roco-Trendati~ n. Entry to the Third Division in this context
includos Leaving Certificate entry, appointment of sxservicemen
whao uere provl ously oligible for app:. int~ oont at
about Intarmediate Cetificate ! o. val, and also transfers from--
the Fourth to thc Third Division, which is Sons by internal
exanima tion. it wu'uld be difficult to bring dmlo,., islation
owing to the need to take 2c count if tHe variation in
educational standards as oKt-reen ths States, Hence tho
Government fools that it wrould be preferable fir the Public
Service Board to give effect t this reciomriation by
administrative action. The lasisl~ ti rn thox-fore loaves it
to the Woard to ' i. terino the standards of ontry, but it is
the clear intention that anf ' cxamination at the love! and
standard of the Now Si; uth qales Leaving Crtificate will be
the firD!:~ nPu7 standard fo) r entry to the Third Division of
the Service, with equivalent examinations in other States
for example, the Senior Vublic in quoonslanG.
This t-iinir. un standard will apply both on first
appointment to the Third Division and on transfor from the
Fo. urth to the Third Division, alth ) u: h the latter " ay need to
be put into affact woe a period.
Gj'adute recuim-pnt:
The Wor C'miit a as Palo recommendations which
are designed to facilitcto; recruitment ' of univoysity
Iraduztos Moh have had w~ rk experience outside the ? ublic
Service as well as gradua Les fresh fro the universities.
The Connittee has also reco ~ nisad the need for parsons, 
4.
whther they o. re ; r-adutts nt, with part! cular qualificatins
and oxpcrionco to : ioo spcial loods both in
individual pujsitions and spocialisocd e-plDyient catogories.
Tho Govriient supports these objectives and provision is
doe in the le?; islati-) n to ;: ive effect to thai::,
Entry at university , raduate level will be freely
used for recruitmeant Df professi) nal : or technical officers,
but the existing ten per cot liit will be retained fr
recruitent of graduate,. s to -) ther pests in the Second and
Third Divisions if the servicQ
It is prpsesd to : o tain the-pir ovisions of the
Principal Act which per-i-it the icard to r. ake app-intme-Onts
free. outside the Co: 1jE: nweolt[ Service, subject to certain
sfeguards and to the istablished selection proceduro; s
: 1owefvr, the now Section 38, rhich re-enacts the eld Section
47, will be lii-ited in the future to the appoint--Int of
persons of exceptinal bility and experience.
A now -30ction 37 will be used fr-m'st of the
appo) intmeionts o) f persons with professio) nal and spcialist
qualificatins. Under bothl these Sections the rights of
officers , ill be Drotocted.
Criteria for] 2ro-.-Ltion:
The 3ayor Commnittee rc-co1.: : e-nded that seniority as a
criterion f-r promoT.-,. tion should be droDpped entirely froji, the
Public Service ct and [, egulatic. ons,
I wo) uld like) t m-ake it plain that we are on corir'. on
rcund with the Comittee that seniority should nut be the
solo, or even tho principal, basis for prom'iotiojn in
ad, inistrative and senior clerical pests within the-
Commi. onwecalth Public So*-vico. The Public Service A: ct
proscribes that the criterion for roYjtion in the Second and
Third Divisions of the Service is kfficiency It is only in
a case of equality of me* rit that snio) rity is app. iod.
In -xami, n in-this suggeost-ion, the Governme. ont was
ir; prossdl withi the fact that the 3oyor C-1ittee s
recOIujendations i-; ul ci extend net only to th-e Second an,-d Third
Divisions of the Servic, but lso to the Fourth Division,
which com; prises appro) ximately 66,000 o) fficers, and wurhich
covers a groat variety of i. ployi~ nt including, skilled,
sem-. i-skilled and unskilled . oerati-ons, typing staff, eerlaZ
ffice assistnts, m-. inor clerical workrs, nd so on. The
application of a pure efficiency test thughout the Fourth
Divi-kn would present very i ald pori-ILyp6 JArslporablo,
difficulties. The Gove: n.ñ eL-,. nt is not convinced thaL thoi ; re) is
a need to depart from the existing, pro., visions and pr-ceduros.
In the G-, vci-.,: nt's view tlceoroj ust be a continuing
quest fo&gt; r oerffaitceire ncy and the m! ost efficient officers
should-be prferred fir promiot ion. The 3ill providos, in
Clause 13, for an extensin nd a mre flexible application
of the principle thlat in considering o) fficers fo) r prormlotion
uC certain positi ons, re-ard is be had to qualifica-tions
and aptitude to) pf.:. rm . iuties ) f igher positions.
Em -l'oymonft mridwome! in and! Dh-Lsically had gc. p Rcipeso
Thero arc tw-o i:: prtanb rin&gt; onclatins ) f the
Boyor Co:-xit teeo on whiich the Gov: ni'. nt ihas not yet rcheild
decisions. These re the em,, ployme: nt of Korried women and the
iicl standards for ; ntry ) f ) Iysic-11ly haicapped prs ns. 
The Public Service _ ct at present requires women
members of the permanent Service to retire on marri. ge The
Boyer Committee has recommended the repeal of this provision
and an interdepartmental comm Uee is examining the
implications of the proposal,, The Government will consider
the problem carefully as soon as this Sork is completed.
As to the proposed relaxation of medical standards
for the . ppointment of physically handicapped persons, it
should be remembered that the Government and the Public Servicc
Board are mindful of their resp! onsf. bilities in the employment
of the physically handicapped nd 0a eat deal is being done
to provide employment in the Cnnion'Death Service for such
people including those who are no longer physically fit to
carry out their previous dutie's,
fhile the problemis of thr -nh-) rficl 1 hrandicapped
merit and do receive the Govurnment'S sympathetic consid ration
there are difficult prob ems of definition as well as the need
to maintain , n overall standard of medical fitness in a
career Service. The Public Scrvice 3o_ rd has established a
separate committee, including imedical authorities, to examine
this question and the conclusions of this group will be
considored by the Government
ppointment of Permanent Heads:
œ he Committoo has recomrinnded that Section 54 of the
Public Sorvice ct be ca. mended so that the Public Service i3oard
would be required to make a recomrnondaton to the Governor-
General on all appointments as Permanent Head of a Department,
and so that if the Governor-General appoints a person other
than the person recommonded by thle 3oerd, the roasons for the
rejection of the Board's recommndation should be reported to
the Parliamnent. It has been mPy consistent practi. ce as Prime
iinistor, as I understand i was the pri ctice of my
predecessor, iir. Chifloy, Lc consult with the Chairman of the
Public Service Board rhen appointments to positions of
Permanent Hoad are required. This I regard as a most desirable
practice, and one which I would therefore hope will be
continued by all future Governments. The Government has not,
however, thought it desirable to mnd the present section of
the Act in the way recommnded by the Boyer Committoo.
nRo-shapjitnhn e Second Division:
The Second Division of the Soevice includes officors
who are required to .: eorcise oxocutive : nd professional
functions in the more important positions. The iBoyor
Committo&amp; rocommends that the definition of this Division
should be amonded to road " administrative or executive functiors
and officers in training to exLrcise such functions". The
object of the recommrondation is to improve the efficiency of
the service by a clearer definition of the " administrative
career", which. the Committoo belioves can be achieved with the
least dislocation by a : odification of the Second Division.
3asically, the Soya:: Comittco sccks a distinction
betwoen those positions which have an i-porant policy advising
element and those whic-have not; and therefore positions of
a purely managerial or professional character, containing no
policy advising clamoeat; s, would renmain in the Third Division.
The Second Division vould include al' positions with an
important policy-advising elor: nttogethur with intermodiate
positions that night õ orm part of an administrative career,
and below theom a trairing grad. with positions suitablo for
administrative torainiag.
C 
6.
The 3oyor Committoee was concerned that snior
officers in the Service . are too immersed in routine work and
do not got " time for thinking" and in making its recommondation
it had the very laudable objective of attracting and making
the best use of officers with creative ability, and of
encouraging self-improv) eront.
The Government supports the objective of the Boyer
Cormittoe. It fooeels, however, that the methods by which the
Boyor Committoo sought to 3chieve this objective, namely the
creation of an administrative civil service along the lines of
the United Kingdom, would not be suitable in the present
circumstances of the australian civil service. Th3 Government
feeools that the future requirements in staffing the Second
Division of the Service can be achieved by more flexible
recruitment provisions and the continuance of advanced
training programmes, assistance to officers taking university
courses, use of external training facilities such : s the
iustralian . dministrztive Stff Collogo, use of the A'ustralian
universities and overseas institutions for advanced specialist
study, and other r. methods. This is the present approach by the
Public Service Board and it will be intensified from time to
time as the demands of the public Service increase.
It will be clear to honourable members that the
availability of an adequate number of people, trained and
expert in functions of policy advising and policy adieinistration,
is so important that recruitnunt methods, including
the composition of the Second and Third Divisions of the
Service should be kept constantly under revie. i and the Public
eorvice Board has beeon asked to ensure that this is done.
Preference to Ex-servicomon:
Since the First orld Tar, ox-servicron have
enjoyed the following concessions:-
Proforonco in appointnment over other candidates
Eligibility for appointment up to ag 51 yoars.
Lower medical standards where the mdical condition
results from war service
Reduced oducational standards in particular, the
acceptance of a qualification of Intermediate
oxamination standard for appointnont to the Third
Division.
In the view of the Boyer Con. iittec, the efficiency
of the Service will be imiproved if rmininmur aducational
standards for appointment are fixed and appliod evenly at the
various levels of recruitr. ent. The legislation provides
therefore that ex-scrvicunin will continue to receive
preference in appointment as against other candidates Aiho are
not ex-servicwen only whor-c thor. is equality in qualificatiors
They will retain ] i gibility for appointmeont up to
age 51 and receive tlhe sime concessions as to medical
standards as exist at present. Howver, they will be
required in other respects to qualify for appointreient at the
same standard c. nd und,' r u
candidatos. Clause 35 of the Bill makos an exception in
favour of ex-serviceeaon who have attained the minimum.
qualifications for appointnent which have pruviously appli. ed
and who a-. re applicants for ii. mppeoOindtniaen-t oly before the
date on which the new provisions of Division 4 of Part Three
come into opertiln. nich wwxi-l-l s. rcrivmiacienm ne ligible
for appointwyni by virtue of their existing qualifications.
Opportunity Las bien taken to include other 
7.
amendments whichhave boon found to be necessary for the
effective administration of the Public Service. One such
amendment gives the Board authority to determine conditions of
service for the increasingly complex section of the Public
Service on duty overseas, where conditions vary from post to
post. I conclude my remarks by saying that in Australia we
are fortunate to have a Public Service of great integrity,
which is efficient and dedicated to its task of facilitating
good government. It is certainly no reflection on the
Service that the objective of the Bill before the House is to
provide machinery for attracting more good recruits to the
Service. I pointed out at the beginning of my speech that the
establishment of proper standards of recruitment to the
Service is essential to the development of a Public Service
of the highest quality and integrity and is a first essential
of good government. I conclud6 on this note and I conim ond
the Bill to the House.
1 1. A 



A/ SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTS2R THE RT. HON.
R. G. iMENZIES T THE OPENING F THE ATOMIC
ENERGY COMMISSION BUILDING, LUCAS HEIGHTS,
ON F1RIDAYq 18TH NOVEMB, 3ER__ 1360
Mr. Chairman, Parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen:
I didn't make a specific reference to Senator
Spooner because he, in these parts of the world, is an abiding
presence. If he gives you as much trouble as he gives me
about this place, then he is active on both fronts.
I don't know why they invite a miserable politician
to open a place, the work of which he doesn't understand,
unless it is on the cynical principle that politicians are
always dealing with things that they don't understand, and
this is good enough practice anyhow.
But when I heard the ominous words about some
presentation, I remembered at once that two and a half years
ago, I think, I went through the motions of opening the Reactor
which is now known, I gather, familiarly as " Hifar",
O though wthat " Hifar" means I have yet to understand.
And in order that I might have a souvenir of this
event they presented me with a beautiful little model of
" Hifar", and I keep it in my study at The Lodge. So each time
I w. ant a change from meeting, and encountering the
eccentricities of Her Majesty's Opposition I go up and I have
a look at the model of " Hifar". And I look at it, north,
south, east and est, and at the end of that looking, I say to
myself: " Menzies, how ignorant you arc" which I believe is
very good for the soul and on the whole very good for the
Atomic Energy Commission. ( Laughter)
Because on the old principle which the Latins
described as ' Omne ignotum pro magnifico' this mystery, this
insoluble mystery, as it is to me induces in my mind such a
respect for the work of the scientists, that Spooner gets
another half million out of us before we know what has
happened. ( Laughter)
Still there may be something in common between
these scientific people , nd the politicians. Because just
before I came in I was being told by a very distinguished
scientist, not far from me, that one of the jobs in the
metallurgical section of this building, which I am opening
this afternoon, is to try to discover how, when you have an
assemblage of matter it falls apart; and how to discover the
ways and means of preventing it from falling apart, and making
it last for a couple of years.
This is precisely the full-time duty of a Prime
Minister dealing with a Cabinet. ( Laughter)
I mention that fact to you because it shows that I
and my colleagues here are engaged in, really, a scientific
undertaking' A few years ago, not so many years ago, a very
distinguished Australian scientist offered a sentiment in
public, which was of course, published, that he looked forward
to the time when every member of a Common. wealth Government
would have a Science Degree. I thought, . that a terrible
prospect that would be". I think that the scientists ought to
be very thankful to the Federal Government for not including
scientists. One or two we might get by with; but twenty
scientists, sitting around a CCbinet Table, jach of them
knowing full Tell that he knew far more about it than these 
homely, and lowly bodies who conduct these actual operations,
this would be the very definition, I think, of disaster.
i think that we arrive at a very happy compromise
when as in the case of this Commission, we find assembled
together a remarkable team of scientific and technical peo'ple
who are so persuasive, th-ough their spokesman, Professor
Baxter, and through my benighted colleague, Sc' . tor Spooner,
that they can induce ignorant politicians to do the right
thing by them, and to encourage the scientific-work that they
are engaged in.
Now about that work I just want to say one thing. I
may not say it in just two or three words, but one thing.
It is not so many years ago that wo were accustomed
to reading about the work being done, for example, by
Rutherford. These great men who were then piercing the
mysteries of nature and those were the days, in my ow. n time
as a student, when the idea of splitting the atom . ras regarded
as a rather rhetorical idea on which a couple of rather
amiable people, or many moro, wore engaged.
Cynical people, unacquainted with science, and
unendowed with imagination would say, " Viell, what is the point
of it? Suppose they do split the atom? iJhat then? How will
that affect my standard of living? How will that affect my
life? ! ill that grow me more vegetables? iWill that do this
or that for a not uncormmon attitude of mind.
And then our attention, the attention of laymen at
least having been distracted from this matter, all of a sudden
towards the end of the last war came the nuclear bomb; and
all this projection into the public mind was a projection of
horror. This was the great, ultimate instrument of
destruction. I'm afraid, Sir, that even now, too many people
think of research in nuclear physics and all its allied
activities, as h-ving something to do with increasing the
cap.: city of man to destroy man. Just as in the earlier days
of the war, ; hen we discovered that a thing called " Radar" had
been devised, it was thought of, and thought of for years, as
an instrument aptly fitted for use in wiar. It is only since
the war that re have discovered tz-. enormous variety of civil
and useful purposes to which it can be put.
So I just want to say to you that I think that while
war quickens things, while war induces an enormous
concentration of resources that may move forward the boundaries
of scientific knowledge most dramatically, we are not to think
of those things that have been moved forward, primarily in
terms of war, 4e can't forget that aspect of it; but today
the work that has to be done in this field is overwhelmingly
directed to the betterment of human life and the strengthening
of the human future.
When scientists and their helpers in this wonderful
enterprise, which has developed so magnificently, and has been
so splendidly conducted, are working here, they are
concentrating their minds, not so much on how to produce
something that might be used to destroy somebody, as they are
to fashioning an instrument which will give industrial power to
places that now no longer have adequate supplies of material
for industrial power. They are concentrating on something
that may revolutionise the -holo industrial history of the
country. 
3.
Jho knows? The by-products of these -r':' rprises,
in the field of medicine, and engineering, and agriculture,
lay reach points of revolutionary effect to compare with the
trem. endous work of the bio-chemists in the course of this
century. It is one of the odd things about us in our
generation, that we have fed full on revolutions. There have
been more revolutions in our time than perhaps in any other
period in history; and some of then revolutions of blood and
Iisery. But there have boon other revolutions in hum an life
which we yet perhaps don't fully appreciate. I remain a little
cynical, myself, about satellites in the sky just a little,
I know I'm wrong. I ought to be fascinated by them; but I
confess that I am very much more fascinated with the
constructive work of the scientists, the enormous revolutions
that have occurred in medicine, and engineering, and transport,
and in the production of power, and the increase of resources
in the world. For these things the scientists, the devoted
scientists, working principally in the dark, so far as the
public are concerned, anonymously, relatively unknown, with no
hcadlines, these are the people who constantly lay us under a
debt of gratitude that it does us good to remember from time
to tiine. It isn't very long since this site, where we are,
was just a vacant hill-top. It was selected for what I know
we thought in the political field, was a rather bold and
rather speculative enterprise, to establish an experiiental
re-actor at Lucas Meights.
1Jll, w. hat did this involve? What was it for? And
I once more want to say that this Commission owes a great deal
to my colleague Senator Spooner who has literally never lot up
on this matter. Finally we became interested, Then finally
w. e said: " Right, this seems a good thing to do". And oven
two or three years ago it was a me: re frqction of what it is
today. I believe that the development here, with over 700
people engaged in their work in this area, is one of the most
significant things in recent Austr.: lian history. It w; ill not
only give us a place in the field of research in these
iatters, a respuctable position in the world, but it wTill also
do and continue to do what has already been happening. It
will lead to exchanges of highly trained people, to
contributions of knowledge, outward and inward, to a growing
association with the Universities, and growing facilities for
the ultimate post-graduate and research activities-at'
Universities,. his will become a nucleus of advancement in
physical science, the limits of which I believe no one can
sue, And if anybody supposes that all that kind of
progress is not practical what dividends does it pay? I
make two replies: It will in fact, in the most vulgar sense
of the word, pay dividends, because it is going to produce
immenso practical results in Australia. But if it produced no
practical dividends in that sense at all, it would produce an
addition to knowledge in this country, and in the world as a
whole which would do great honour to this country, and be a
source of strength to it in the scientific councils of the
nations. 
I am vory happy to say, boforc I finish, that this
Cormission, tho Cxacutivo iraanber of -rhich has boon r: forior
humible obedient sorvc. Int, M'r. A'lan Xcnigh, has boon
conipliraontcud on its work through this thing, that Mr. McKnigh~ t
roos off next year to be thu Chiairman of the Inti. rnational
A'tomic Energy authority sitting in Vionna a compliment to
Mr. McKni, 7ht ; ihich ha -Toll do) scrvos. But a vory gro at cor-plimont
to th-o Atorafc iEnorgy Commission of AustlraliaL, and to the
onormous constructiva contribution that it is making to this
bracfh noiladoand to theo Solution of thais gro at . iod,) rn,
problem in tha world.
Sir, I n~ ay to--ll you that I was ,) aven a lot of no-' os
for a speoch this aftu rnoon, and following my usual habit of
obedience to thosD -who advise ime, I ruad tho notos: if didn't
understand thorn, and thorofore Ilve just givan you a bit of
r., y own. Ihave vary ;, ruact ploasuro indeed, in declaring
the building open. ( Applauso) 



SPEECH BY THE PhIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. HENZIES AT THE OPENING OF THE McCAUGHEY
INSTITUTE, C6REE, on SATURDAY, 19TH NOVEMBER,
Sir, and ladies and gentlemen:
This platform has been placed with the most
diabolical cunning. ( Laughter) The speaker can talk to you,
and not one of you can look him in the eye" And this gives us,
I think, a most unfair advantage.
But, at the same time, I am very grateful to my old
friend, Sir Hen-Manning, for what he said about my wife and
myself, and I don't propose to make you look me in the eye for
any longer than I need to, because Sir Henry Manning has
really " done me" in the eye today,
Last night at Coonong I said to him, with that boyish
innocence that characterises me ( Laughter) " Harry, what" I
call him " Harry"; I've known him for about a hundred years
( Laughter) " Harry, tell me about this business. Jhat really
should I be saying tomorrow?". And he told me all that last
night. ( Laughter) Then, unblushingly, he gets up and tells it
all to you; and leaves me without a feather to fly with.
( Laughter) So, I can perhaps summarise what I want to say to
explain the genuine pleasure that I have in being here, on
what I regard as a most historic occasion. I don't regard this
as some local event, though 1-cal events are very important.
This is a national event occurring this afternoon.
Because this tremendous enterprise is not only, and
we all remember it with respect, a memorial to two brave men,
it goes further than that as the years go by. It is a
memorial to the generous and intelligent interest of a famous
family; it is a memorial to all the people who have worked to
create it, because most of it has been created over a period of
years; it is a memorial to the profound instinct that we have
in Australia, an instinct not easily dislodged, the instinct to
realise that our strength is still in the soil, and our
national woalth is still to be found in its products.
This place sooms to me to be strategically, as one
might say, magnificently placed, because wiork is going to be
done in management, in fodder conservation, in breeding, in
irrigation, in dry farming. 1.11 these various aspects of
rural production will have concentrated upon them in this place
not only the work of the theorists, but the practical
application of the people who take up the works evolved in
terms of theory. And it is strategically placed because, I
venture to say, that within shooting distance of it, it will
encounter practically all those types of farming, and all
those types of problems.
Younger men who are here today, of course, are
familiar with the growing interest in research for the
improvement of the products of the land. I'm old enough to
remember at a place not so far from here, as the crow flies,
up in the north-west of Victoria, up on the fringes of the
Malleo when I was a si'all boy about the age of one of these
handsome creatures down here I remember the agricultural
expert coming up, it was a wheat farming area, and having a
meeting out on a farm, of a number of the local farmers, and
talking to them about using superJ
It seems hard to believe that now. But there it was,
when I was ten, or something like that, I heard this man talking
about Supgrhposphates. I had to enquire afterwards, what on
earth that mtanta 
K 2.
He mot a very sceptical audience. " Oh, this is a
new fangled thing." " I've never done this before". " The old
man didn't do it before". And they had to be persuaded. The
better farmers in the district decided that they wiould make a
compromise: they wouldn't put a hundredweight on that seemed
grossly extravagant but they would try half a hundredweight.
And they found, when the next season came in, that they wore
two or three bushels up on the average of their particular
area. So, it grew by practice and experience.
That seems very elementary to us now. But the truth
is that it is only in the lifetime of people like myself that
wo have wakened up to the significance of genuinely
scientific research. That, of course, is one of the great
things that is going to ensure the future of Australia.
If we were stagnant in production, if we were
stagnant in quality, this country just couldn't receive
additional population, as it does today. It wouldn't know what
to do with them. It couldn't sustain great secondary
industries as it does today; it couldn't maintain its volume
of exports, and therefore look after our balance of payments
if it were not for this constant drive for increased production
and improved quality.
This was seen with clear vision by those who created
this Institute in their generosity of heart and in their
generosity of mind, which is not less important. They saw
these things. And the result is what we see about us today,
and what we can, with the eye of imagination, I think, see in
the future. I seem to be becoming a little research-minded myself,
because yesterday morning I was opening a metallurgical
engineering building at Lucas Heights, which is the nuclear
power research station, conducted by the Commnonwealth, with a
very distinguished band of scientific people.
I ventured to say to them I thought it was a risky
thing to say, but I get a bit of pleasure out of saying risky
things that I wasn't too sold myself on space research. I
don't mind other people doing it, I think that is all right, I
don't mind the Russians firing up Sputniks and following them
by other things with other names, and going " beep beep" in the
midnight air I've no intrinsic objection to that. And I'm
assured by competent people that much good may come of it,
some day. But we, as a country of ten million people, have
limited resources, and I believe that we must concentrate our
resources, so far as they are available for research on the
most useful, practical ends for developing this country and
the lives of the people who live in it. Other great and rich
countries can afford these other rather luxurious adventures.
But we, in Australia, ought to be spending more, and more, and
more money on research. It increases, I'm happy to say, year
by year. But I want to see it, myself, primarily directed to
satisfying human needs because it seemed to me a poor thing if
we were to subtract a great deal of the national revenue in
order to be able to say, " i4ell we've put up a satellite" 5 when
in point of fact we have so many unsolved problems in
Australia. If we are -oing to solve these problems we won't
solve them just by money because although money is an essential
commodity, money itself doesn't do the work. eJmo ust attract 
more and more people into the scientific service of th-,
country, not all, with great respect, nuclear physicists
chemists, bio-chemists, biologists. All the people who can
achieve so much in the future as indeed they have achieved so
much in the past.
I hope nobody here will ever forget that although my
distinguished friend, Mr. Khrushchev, may claim that his
country sent up the first satellite, and was the first to
administer a rude blow to the moon, it is the countries of the
western world who have been responsible for the bio-chemical
improvements, for the anti-biotic drugs, for the prolongation
of life, for actively combating disease, for doing all these
things that have meant so much to men and women and children all
over the world. ( Applause)
As I said once, there are millions of people in the
world who looked out and saw Sputnik going across the sky, who
wouldn't have been alive to see Sputnik if it hadn't been for
the superb scientific work of JWestern scientists. ( Applause)
So let us remember that; let us understand as you
do, so well, without being told by me in a hot sun let us
remember all the time that we are not here looking at
something that is hi-falutin' or theoretical or irrelevant.
This research institute will take its place in Australia as one
of the great constructive efforts to solve our national
problems. ( Applauso) Every man connected with it, every
woman connected with it, is entitled to our respect. They
certainly have mine, They arc entitled to our gratitude. They
certainly have mine.
So, far from thinking that I confer a favour on
anybody by coming down here today, Irogard it as a very great
privilege to have been asked to come down here, becauseo as I
end now by saying, what I said at the beginning, this is an
event of first class national importance.
Therefore, Sir, I suppose retrospectively, because it
seems to have boon going for a little while, I declare the
Institute open, and I will now unveil a plaque which I haven't
seen; I don't know how to unveil it, but I'll. do my best,
( Applause) 



SECOND READING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( MR. MENZIES)
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
STATES GRANTS ( UNIVERSITIES BILL), I960
I. INTRODUCTORY
In April 1958, I had the privilege of presenting to the House
a Bill to give effect to the proposals of the Committee on Australian
Universities, which met in 1957 with Sir Keith Murray as Chairman.
This Bill sought Parliamentary approval for the proposals of the Murray
Committee for the triennium 1958/ 60.
Once again it is my pleasant lot to introduce a Bill on universities,
this time to give effect to the proposals of the Australian
Universities Commission for the coming triennium, 1961/ 63.
The Commission is the permanent successor to the Murray Committee.
Honourable Members will recall that the Murray Committee recommended that the
Commonwealth Government should have available to it continuous advice on
the financial requirements of the universities if the universities are to
develop rationally and coherently, and urged the appointment of a
permanent Commission for this purpose. Parliament agreed to the
establishment of the Universities Commission in 1959. The Commission
consists of persons of eminence in university and business circles, and
since its establishment last year it has exhaustively studied the problems
of our universities and has brought forward recommendations on a wide range
of matters. It has done this after taking into consideration all possible
courses of action and after the fullest consultation with Commonwealth and
State authorities and with all universities. The first report of the
Commission, which presents the recommendations and the comments of the
Commission upon present and future university problems, was tabled in
the House on Thursday 
0 2.
It is relevant in considering the report and the Bill to recall
the functions of the Commission as defined in the Universities Commission
Act of 1959. Under Clause 13 the Commission is to furnish information
and advice on grants by the Commonwealth of financial assistance to
universities established by the Commonwealth, and of financial assistance
to the States in relation to universities, together with information and
advice that is relevant to the need for financial assistance, the conditions
upon which any financial assistance should be granted, and the amount
and the allocation of financial assistance.
These functions are important, providdng as they do for a financial
future for our universities that has a great measure of stability. However,
the next section, Section 14, of the Act places an obligation upon the
Commission that is to my mind of even greater importance. The section
states: The Commission shall perform its functions with a view to
promoting the balanced development of universities so that
their resources can be used to the greatest possible
advantage of Australia.
( ii) For the purpose of the performance of its functions, the
Commission shall consult with universities and with the States
upon the matter on which it is empowered to furnish
information and advice.
The Commission has, therefore, addressed itself in its report
not only to the financial problems involved but also to the present state
and the future role to be played by the institutions of this country
providing services at the tertiary level of our educational system.
II. SOME MAJOR POINTS IN THE COMMISSION'S REPORT
Honourable Members have had the opportunity of studying the
Commission's report. Of the many important questions raised, there are
five which would seem to lay claim to special comment.
First, there is the influence of demographic factors.
Chapter 2 of the Commission's report presents estimates
of the likely increase in student enrolments at universities.
In 1958 some 42,000 students were enrolled
at universities, and universities now predict that by 1966 
0 3.
the number will have risen to 95,000. These figures are
considerably in excess of the estimates made by the Murray
Committee on the evidence then available to it. If this
estimate is realised, the ratio of students enrolled at
universities to the total population will be approaching
one in a hundred. This, of course, has enormous consequences
in terms of the pressure on facilities, demands for staff
and the need for more universities and university-type
institutions.
As a result of these demographic changes leading to a great
bulge in the relevant age groups, there is obviously a quite explosive
development taking place in universities. The achievement in
recent years has been a very remarkable one, but the Commission
has had to report that the changing age structure of our
population and other factors have meant that, in spite of the
greatly increased governmental assistance since the recommendations
of the Murray Committee were accepted, many of our university facilities
are still below a satisfactory standard.
After a review of the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme, the
Commission supports the need for an increase in the number of
scholarships from 3,000 to 4,000 a year.
( ii) Pressure on Staff and Facilities. Chapter 111 of the report
deals with. staff. * In spite of very considerabie staff'tecruitment
in recent years, the number of students in relation to the number
of staff is increasing and the position in Australia compares
unfavourably with that in the United Kingdom. The Commission
estimates that by 1966 the number of staff will need to be more
than doubled to keep pace with the increased number of students.
As to facilities, the Commission in Chapter 6 points out that if
the enrolment demand is to be met in terms of the existing
university pattern the Australian community must create in every
two years the equivalent of at least one new university of 8,000
students.
The Commission has pointed out that there will not only be this
tremendously increased demand for suitable academic staff but that
we will have to rely largely upon our own resources to meet this
demand. 
It will become increasingly difficult to tap resources in
overseas countries, since they themselves will be under pressure
for reasons very much the same as those affecting the Australian
situation. The Commission suggests some of the questions which
must be considered and says " The issues raised in these questions
are of great concern to Australian universities, faced as they are
with staffing problems not likely to be solved unless far-reaching
changes in the form of university education and teaching methods
can be achieved."
( iii) I turn now to the financial recommendations contained in the report,
and to which the Bill before the House gives effect. The Commission
recommends that a total of œ 103m should be made available to State
universities in the coming three years. This compares with a total
expenditure of some œ 55m in the last three years. The Commission
is satisfied that financial provision of this order is necessary
for the balanced development of Australian universities in this period.
The Commission's report indicates that the sharp increase in expenditure
required over the coming triennium is the result of several factors,
notably the large increase in the number of students. The report
also shows that a great deal of the increased expenditure is due
to the establishment of Monash University, the extension of the
universities in New South Wales and the establishment of colleges
at Wollongong and Townsville. By contrast the Universities
Commission proposes that the development of the well-established
universities should be limited in order to keep their size within
reasonable bounds and suggests for them a programme which is in
effect a normal projection on previous expenditure. Taking into
account the increased student population and the need for providing
new facilities, it is clear, therefore, that the large upsurge in
suggested expenditure is due principally to new university development
of a kind which has been foreseen and recognised as inevitable
for some time.
( iv) The Basis of the Proposed Financial Arrangements:
The Commission's proposals rest on the principle that the existing
ratio of approximately œ 1.85 ( State) to œ 1 ( Commonwealth) for
recurrent expenditure should be maintained and that the basis of
œ 1 for œ 1 on capital expenditure should be applied uniformly as
between States and as between universities. However, having in
mind its obligations for influencing the balanced development of
Australian universities, the Commission has examined separately the 
factors which are determining the growth of each university.
The University of New South Wales, the University of Queensland
and the University of Western Australia are expected to
experience a more rapid growth of student population than other
universities. The Commission's proposals are therefore adjusted
to meet the individual needs of universities in the light of the
pressures upon each of them.
Another consideration in the Commission's assessment of the future
situation is its belief that any university should not exceed
a certain size if it is to function effectively.
The Commission has drawn particular attention to its proposals
to bring the treatment of the University of New South Wales and
the University of New England into line with that accorded to
other universities. The ways in which its proposals differ from
the pattern of previous arrangements are described in the report.
The Commission also refers at various places in its report to the
desirability of a greater flexibility than has previously applied
in the distribution of Commonwealth financial assistance for capital
projects, including expenditure on capital equipment and on
residential colleges and halls of residence. I shall refer in
particular to some of these matters later on when I turn to an
examination of the Bill in more detail.
The Problems of Universities and the Pattern of Development
of Tertiary Education:
The University Commission has shown at various places in its
report a full awareness of the problems of university development.
In dealing with staff recruitment in Chapter 3, the Commission
has expressed itself as doubtful that any answer could be found
in traditional terms, and in Chapter 6 it ranges over a number of
possible changes that need to be considered by Governments and
universities. The Commission proposes to make a special
examination in the period immediately ahead into these matters
and has suggested that it may seek to establish an advisory
committee to assist it in its enquiries. 
6.
111. IMPLICATIONS OF THE UNIVERSITIES COMMISSION'S
PROPOSALS FOR GOVERNMENT. S AND UNIVERSITIES
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT
The. Commonwealth Government has examined the report and is
prepared to accept its recommendationts in general. The Bill now before
the House indicates its acceptance of the many financial recommendations
for State Universities.
This is not to say that the Commonwealth accepts every statement
in the report, some of which will no doubt also be discussed inside and
outside this Parliament. But by and large the Government feels that the
Commission's analysis of the situation and its proposals are receiving
a large degree of acceptance in Commonwealth and State Government circles,
among the universities and by the community in general. The Bill for
increased expenditure is, of course, a very large one, and meeting it,
having in mind also what lies ahead after this triennium, raises many
problems in our minds.
After carefully studying the report of the Commission, the
Government has taken the viewwhich it believes the Commission holds also,
that unless there is early and substantial modification of the university
pattern, away from the traditional 19th century model on which it is now
based, it may not be practicable for Australian Governments to meet all
the needs for university education in Australia, and at the same time to
achieve the best use of resources in the national interest. We think,
therefore, that the development of alternative kinds of tertiary education
is likely to be of the greatest importance. In view, also, of the
difficulties which may be encountered in finding sufficient staff for
tertiary educational needs and for developing the facilities in time. the
situation may well call for extensive re-organisation within the universities.
The Commission' s report has referred to some of the possible
ways of doing this. As the Commission points out, other countries are
facing similar problems and are finding that new and unusual methods for
solving them are becoming necessary. In the period ahead thought may well
have to be given to re-arrangement of the university working year, re-arrangements
to produce a greater use of existing facilities within the university, to
standards of teaching staff and the most effective employment of our
university teaching resources. Building programmes of universities will
need to be kept under very close scrutiny in order to ensure that they
are sufficiently restrained as to economy and directly related to need.
The Government therefore welcomes the proposal of the Commission 
to undertake an early examination of these matters and has informed the
Commission that it regards this examination as a task of the most vital
importance during the next 12 to 18 months. . To assist the Commission
directly in its task the Government has agreed with the suggestion of the
Commission that it might establish an advisory committee. No doubt the
Commission will pursue its investigation in close co-operation with Governmental
authorities both State and Commonwealth and with universities, and
I have informed the States that the Commission will be looking to them for
co-operation and assistance.
STATES I have sent copies * of the report to the Premiers, and informed
them of the Commonwealth views on it.
Of course we fully recognise and respect the prime responsibility
which the States have for determining the rate of development of their
universities. As we see the role of the Universities Commission, it.~ is a
so urce of advice and of advice only to Commonwealth and State Governments
and to universities. Its authority lies not in coercion but in persuasion.
Under the Commission's proposals it is the States who determine what the
level of expenditure should be on both capital and recurrent sides. On
the capital side the basis proposed is a œ 1l for and on the recurrent
side it is perhaps worth noting that the proposed first level grants are no
greater than the level of actual expenditure upon recurrent needs in 1960
and the States should hot therefore encounter any difficulty in attracting
the maximum first level Commonwealth grant, as they will get it by merely
continuing to support universities as they did in 1960.
It is of course quite open to the States and the universities
to hold opinions differing from those of the Universities Commission on the
rate of development which is desirable and practicable.
( iii ) UNIVERSITIES The achievement in university development, especially since the
acceptance of the recommendations of the Murray Committee has been
spectacular, but the problems which lie ahead are obviously even greater.
We feel that they cannot simply be solved by providing money and that univer-'
sities must critically examine their procedures and problems in order
to ensure that the funds which are provided are used as effectively and
as economically as possible. Quite apart fz'om the question of developing
alternative institutions there are many matters which lie within the province
of universities. I have already mentioned a number of these building
programmes, recruitment of staff and possible forms of internal re-organisation.
We recognise the great problems which universities face in coping with the
large increase in student numbers. Nevertheless universities must cotitinue 
I to set as their aims the improvement in teaching and student achievement;
better training for research workers, significant research contributions
in widening fields of study, and intellectual leadership in the community.
( iv) THE COMMUNITY AS A WHOLE
The Commission's report points out that the Australian community
has always regarded higher education as a right open to all young people of
ability, rather than as a privilege of wealth or class. In this connection,
the Commission raises a very real problem Ahether the community of itself
realises the magnitude of its educational responsibilities if this aspiration
is to be achieved. It is a regrettable feature of the present times that universities
like many other institutions must depend most heavily upon the Governments
for their finances. This, no doubt, is an inevitable trend arising to a great
extent from the very high costs of tertiary education to-day. Nevertheless,
private benefactions will, I hope, always be a feature of our universities, and
in recent years there have been some notable contributions in this direction:-
more is needed. IV. OTHER MATTERS
In accepting-the recommendations of the Commission-in general the
Government has agreed to proposals which do not need to be embodied in the
Bill now before the House. These include the recommendation of the
Commiission on Commonwealth scholarships.
In the case of the Australian National University the financial
responsibility. of course, rests entirely upon the Commonwealth. The rate of
development of the Australian National University must be related in some
degree to the development of Canberra. The Government has accepted in
principle the recommendations of the Commission as to the but the
proposals will need to be the subject of further careful investigation, especially
on timing, before they are put into effect. Meanwhile, it is proposed to
take immediate action to begin the construction of the Chemistry School
building for the School of General Studies at the A. N. U. 
9.
MAIN PROVISIONS OF THE BILL
In the main, the Bill before the House establishes Commonwealth-
State financial machinery whereby the recommendations of the Commission
may be put into effect. The Bill contains a number of features not
present in its predecessor, the 1958 Act. There is, for instance, no
provision in this Bill for emergency grants, since those in effect have
been absorbed into the general grants for recurrent expenditure which the
Bill makes provision for in a number of schedules.
The Bill adds a new concept to the existing definition of university
purposes. In order that the Commission may be able to provide for the
staff at a new university, such as Monash, the Bill makes possible payment
of recurrent grants to a university which may of necessity appoint its
staff for planning purposes, but which is not in effect offering a teaching
or research service.
The Bill goes on to establish machinery provisions and at
Section 6 gives the basis on which the salary element in recurrent grants
has been calculated for the purposes of Commonwealth financial assistance.
It states that the schedules have been based on a basic professorial salary
at the rate of œ 4,000 per annum, which was the salary applying in a majority
of Australian universities on the date the Commission reported. The Bill
goes on to provide that the Minister may by an instrument under his hand
approve an increased rate of professorial salary for the purpose of Commonwealth
assistance. A copy of any such instrument will be sent to the
Premier of each State affected by the instrument and will be laid before
this House. The Bill provides that if a University pays basic professorial
salaries in excess of this level the Commonwealth shall not be responsible
for the increased costs involved. I must stress at this point that the
Commonwealth has neither the desire nor an intention to fix professorial
salaries. Any State Government is completely free to support whatever
salaries it deems appropriate in the Universities of that State.
As far as grants for the purposes of capital works within the
universities are concerned, the Bill in general carries on the arrangements
which have proved so successful in the last triennium. There is, however,
f 
a departure in Section 8 of the Bill, which puts into effect the recommendations
of the Universities Commission as they relate to special grants for
equipment. In summary form the Commonwealth will make available œ 250,000
on a pound for pound basis with the States for the purchase of special
equipment, and is prepared to see this sum disbursed in the proportions given
in the Third Schedule to the Act. Under this Bill the Commonwealth will
make available a further œ 250,000 on a pound for pound basis which will be
disbursed on the advice of the Commission and therefore not necessarily
in the same proportions as the first œ 250,000. The purpose is to allow
flexibility so that the Commission may, with the co-operation of the States,
assist with the purchase of special equipment for research and other
purposes. The Bill provides grants to affiliated residential colleges under
two headings. It incorporates a formula which will enable assistance to
be given to residential colleges for recurrent expenditure, including tutorial
assistance, in accordance with the number of students receiving services
such as these from the college. It also provides that buildings for residential
college purposes may be assisted on a pound for pound basis. It is the
hope of the Commission and the hope of the Government that these forms of
assistance will give the present residential colleges and those to come a
greater opportunity for giving a service to the students within the universities.
Assistance is also proposed in the Bill for halls of residence
administered by the universities. VI. CONCLUSIONS
The Bill before the House carries on and develops the work which
the 1958 Act initiated. It is based on the firm belief that the development
of our intellectual power and knowledge is vital to our future. We are a
small nation of ten million people and we cannot escape meeting the rest of
the world in competition. I am not willing to sit back and see Australia
lag behind by omission. We must match the world in scholarship, in
technology and trade. Our efforts are not without great merit. If it were
not for the financial backing which we and the States have provided there
would not be a Monash University or a University of New South Wales, and
other university institutions would be in a deplorable condition. The
programme is a large one. The expenditure involved is largely inescapable.
However, it is not merely money involved but a question of national responsibility.
Because of this the whole situation calls for continuing and
special examination by all Governments and all universities and by the
community in general.
Canberra, 22nd November, 1960. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. KONo R. I NZIES
AT THE ALL NATIONS CLUB ON FRIDAY, 25TH NOV4EMER, 1960.
Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to compliment my old friend, the President, o)
his obviously continuing studies in ambiguity. ( Laughter) I've
never heard a more masterly exhibition of ambiguity than the one
he gave us tonight, since the last time I read one of his
judgments. ( Laughter)
I also want to say at once, a propos of the last
remark, about Sir Richard Boyer's rock-and-roll session, that on
one occasion this may seem to some of you to be rcriarkr. le I
was up at the A. B. C. Studios doing a television recording this
is a remarkable event and on the way out it turned out that the
Rock-and -Roll Session was on.
For some reason that is concealed from the wis and
prudent and revealed only unto babes, the gentleman in charge of
the Rock-and-Roll Session, who was a young Australian, spoke in
a rich Texas accent. ( Laughter) This apparently is de riguour.
Here were all these young gentlemen, and these young
women, curiously garbed, they were flourishing around there. I
was fascinated to see this because I'm an old follow, T wanted
to know what these frightful performances that excite people's
minds might be. I've never seen a collection of people so
utterly bored! ( Laughter) So miserably unhappy. But at any
rate, as one of the people with me said, it's good exerciseo
( Laughter) Now, that is all I know about Rock-and-Roll; that '. s
the only time I ever saw it. I never want to see it again until
the final shadows are gathering around me, when I might feel that
it induced the necessary atmosphere. Now that is all I have to
say about that. I'm not allowed to be political; I'm not allowed to
have an argument with the Chairman of the Broadcasting Commission
I have plenty, but we conduct them in private, with a smile on
our faces and clenched teeth. ( Laughter)
Nor, Sir, am I surprised to be told that this is a nonpolitical
occasion. If it hadn't been I don't think I would have
been here I have enough of that as it is, in other places. But
I well remember Sir Robert Garran talking to no about the idea of
this Club; and I well remember telling him that I thought it was
a magnificent idea. I think it is.
I'm very glad to realise looking around, seeing what
goes on, seeing what we are given o eat, seeing what we are
given to drink, that you have been able to enlist the aid of a
few tycoons like Dave Blacklock ( Laughter). This is a very,
very useful thing, Dave.
But of course it is non-political, The whole this
matter as it was put to me originally by the grand old man
himself was that some place ought to be established and
Sydney was the obvious place in which to commence it, since
Sydney is always in need of civilizing influences. ( Laughter)
When a man says publicly, in effect, that he is no
longer in need of civilising influences, then he is beyond
redemption. That is all I want to say to you. ( Laughter)
Anyhow that was the idea. I felt at once that this was
a splendid idea because in some way or other we had becone 
accustomed, and perhaps we still in Australia, to talking
about " new" Australians and " old" Australians.
I suppose the phrase " new Australian" was a handy,
compendious sort of thing; though I do remember reading an
advertisement one day in one of the newspapers by two nativeborn
Australians who in some mysterious fashion were about to have
a child the wife was anyhow. ( Laughter) And they advertised
to see whether they could have an apartment and they said, " Two
Australians, old, together with one Australian, new, would like to
rent an apartment or flat", or something.
But these distinctions, though t!. ey come trippingly to
the tongue, these broad descriptions, have in them the seed of
something unsound. This Club, I believe, was established so that
all of the people who came here might come here and feel that
whatever their derivation might be, they were all Australians
citizens of one place, of one country, people whose common
interests far outweighed any differences of background or of
circumstances. And that is the whole justification for a Club of this
kind. We are neither new nor old, but we hope to be good; we
hope to be useful; we hope to be powerful contributors in our
own fashion to this country.
All I want to do is to elaborate that idea just a
little because there are a few aspects of it they're commonplace,
they're platitudinous, but thea as everybody knows who reads
about me, I'm a master of the platitudes. ( Laughter) They are
commonplace. But like most commonplace truths, they are
occasionally neglected.
Now first of all, politically. Let me make a nonpolitical
remark, a non-Party remark about the broad political
problem. One of the important things about Australia is that
and this is a matter to which my friend, Mr. Calwell, who began
it, and my own Government which continued it, can share some
credit: I never regard this as a Party matter this country has
for years and years now, since the war, had a great volume of
immigration. I can assure you, speaking as one who long before the
war was engaged in political affairs, that the migration we have
seen into Australia, the movement of populations into Australia,
in the last fifteen years, would have been utterly impossible
between 1925 and 1939. Utterly impossible
There would have been objections of all kinds. There
would have been grumbles. It would have been said that there
are people coming in here to take the bread out of our mouths.
You know, all these orthodox, rather silly, arguments were
current and they were prevalent in the fifteen years before the
war. In the fifteen years since the war, with a remarkable
degree of what night almost be regarded as unanimity, the people
of Australia, employers, employees, great companies, great
unions, ordinary citizens like you and nc, have all said, " T. is
is the thing". The result is that we have had an increase in the
population of Australia in the last fifteen years, apart
altogether from natural increase of the population, which is
developing this country so fast, in terms of humian beings that I
doubt whether there is any other country in the world that can
clain, pro rata, a similar history in that field. ( Applause) 
0 3.
I remember on one occasion speaking to Congress in
Washington, and pointing out that we had a good deal in common,
altering the historic period a little. Because when I was a
small boy at the turn of the century everybody talked about the
vast movements of people into the United States. Superior people
said, " Oh, it's only a melting pot". As if there was something
wrong with a molting pot? You wouldn't get too far without it.
But there was the idea; that was the phrase. And the
picture was of immense hoards of people moving into the United
States, from some time after the Civil War until a little after
the turn of the century.
Our rate of intake compared to our base of population
has been greater than the rate of intake of the United States
over that period. Therefore the first thing to remember is that this is
a very remarkable thing: that by common consent of what I will
call the " indigenous inhabitants" of the country, there has been
this great movement of people from European countries, from
Great Britain. There is a danger in all that, only one. It is a
danger that we have to avoid; and a danger which this Club
partly exists to counteracti And that is that we should become
or you should become, those of you who derived from other
Nations members of a colony with some " separatists" element
about it. So that politicians, whoever they may be, will be
coming along at election time and saying, " Now we must play for
the Italian vote; we must play for the Belgian vote; we must
play for the French vote; we must play for the German vote".
That kind of thing would be terrible. It would be
terrible because it would indicate that people, having come here,
had not becone merbers of this cormmunity, but were separate
bodies, floating around, or even fixed, but not coalesced in any
way with the community.
I deplore the possibility of that kind of thing. I
don't want, myself, as a politician, to have to talk to people
and say to myself " Well theoe are ( Italian, German, whatever
they may be) I must remember that; I must speak to them in
that sense". I'm the Prime Minister of Australia and I want,
whenever I talk, to talk to Australians.
And if they have come from other countries, then I must
say that they bear a striking resemblance to my own ancestors.
It's always worth remembering that: the only indigenous
inhabitants of this country were the aborigines.
People like myself you take myself my grandparents
on my father's side were Scots and came out from Scotland a
very honorable exercise and, of course, a great enrichbint of
the country. ( Laughter3 I speak with all the modesty and
absence of bigotry of a Scotsman. ( Laughter) And my mother's
family came from Cornwall. And there you are: the free booters
of the north, and the smugglers of Cornwall. ( Laughter) ( No
wonder they regard me as a harsh tas'. master).
When I married my wife I thorht she was of practically
pure Scots derivation. I discovered too late that she is
practically Irish to the back teeth. ( Laughter)
Well, there we aro, you see. These things are all a
mixture. And when you talk about an Englishman ( Interjection: 
" That's the best of the part.) Would yer mind saying that with
a bit of a brogue? ( Laughtor)
Then if you go back a little futher: who are the
English? You know, you have to go back and back the Angles,
and the Saxons and the Picts and the Scots and the Normans who
conquered them. Oh, dear me. The Danes, who half-civilised
them. ( Laughter) Are you a Dane, Dick? Oh
The truth of the matter is that all the great races
and great nations in the world have been built up upon aggregating
a variety of people, and acquiring from each variety a quality
which matters. This has been a great, great thing in the
history of Australia.
I hope that we will all resist as this Club exists to
resist any idea that we should be put out into separate
fractions and pretend that we are just fractions, and that we are
not really parts of the whole.
Now that is the only political observation I make to
you. Industrially I want vou to remember what has happened
in Australia. We've had the most enormous industrial developmentthat
is elementary. Everybody knows about it. Without it we
could not have sustained an immigration programme; and without
the immigration programme we could not have sustained the
industrial development.
I go around a good deal, as you might suppose. And
every now and then I find that I have to visit some big factory
or establishment conducting some operation which I know to be of
enormous importance to my country. Each time I say to the
manager, " How many to use this phrase that I don't much care
for " how many new Australians do you have in this factory?"
The answer is always 40%, 50%, 60%. So that at the end of a
year you are increasingly saying to yourself: " How would we go
for these great industries, if we hadn't had this movement of
population into the country?".
I want you to remember that. This is an occasion of
great pride. I would like all of you to say to anybody who has
come to Australia recently, and who works in these great
enterprises, how much it has meant to this country. Even in
the most basic industries we have, expansion would have stopped
like that, but for the increase in population. Therefore,
industrially, this has been a magnificent thing.
Then, of course, socially I think the impact is going
to be remarkable. I don't want to doscend to the sordid details
of the kitchen but really, what has been done to us in the last
ten years has, I think, been quite magnificent. The good old
simple ideas have been varied. Many thousands of Australians
have begun to understand that there is more in life, more at the
table, than roast mutton and potatoes.
When I was a small boy, and even when I was a young man,
if I could remember back as far as this, there were two kinds of
cheese available in Australia one was old cheddar, and one was
young cheddar. ( Laughter) And now we live in the greatest
variety in the world.
But these are mere gastronomic affairs. The fact is
that in art, in music, in writing, in all the things that touch
the human spirit, and furnish the human mind, I believe that the
contribution of riches to the Australian community in the last
tenyears is not yet. canrt et be fully understood, but will
ultiatel tentdo crnsfo'm he continent. 
These are marvellous things, and they will be all the
more marvellous if we can constantly say to ourselves in the old
song on which so many of us wore brought up: " the more we are
together, the happier we'll be" l.
The less we dwell on our differences, the better. But
if we must dwell on them, let us understand them, let us understand
why they exist, and let us, perhaps transmute them
ultimately into occasions not of difference, but of unity, the
new amalgamiation of ideas, a new fusing~ of literature, of
background, of to use a word that I don't care for very much
culture in all its forms.
Now, Sir, all those rather wandering remarks presented
themselves to my mind as I thought about the origin of this Club,
about Sir Robert Garran, who was, himself, a groat scholar, and
a thinker, and a statesman.
I just add one thing to them before I conclude.
The world grovs closer together. You may take th-
" wings" in the morning and fly into the uttermost parts of the
sea in an hour or two today. You can, thanks to the international
dateline and I've experienced this quite a lot
arrive in San Francisco before you leave Sydney. I know; I've
proved it! It's no use the scientists confounding me. The last
time I went I left at 5 o'clock from Sydney on Thursday afternoon
and arrived in San Francisco at twentyfive to five on Thursday.
In one sense all this has been astonishing. In
another sonse it becomes almost frightening; we become so close
to other countries that we feel, occasionally, that we are
vulnerable to them.
But in spite of this tremendous acceleration of physical
neighbourhood in point of time and place in the world, more and
more one sees tendencies to have a sort of isolationism, a
nationalism carried too far, a feeling that, " Well, -: it the rest
of the world look after itself; we'll look after ourselves".
One of the great beauties of what has been happening in
.! Iustralia is that the thousands, and now becoming hundreds of
thousands, and growing into millions, of people who have come
here from overseas, they are not isolationists, they are not
I'm not talking about it in a military sense isolationists in
the sense that they are not interested in the rest of the world.
On the contrary, they come here, knowing by all their
background and experience, that we become more and more part of
the world, part of the world of thought, part of the world of
literature, part cf the world of music, part of the world of
painting and of sculpture. And all this will tend, in 1ustralia,
to make us a m~ ore internationally miinded community.
Sir, all these things I believe are good. And it is
because I believe them to be g ood, because I know them to be
good, and because I want then to continue, that I availed myself
of your invitation to come here tonight and just say a few words
about them. ( Applause) 
6.
Question: Does the Prime Minister consider that the United Nations
has a greater chance of survival than the League of Nnations?
Prime Minister: Well, if you all heard that question, did you?, tDo I
believe that the United Nations has a groater chance of survival
than the League of Nations?' I think m., y answer to that is " Yes,
I do". 14 Because I think that the world has learned a good deal
from the errors that occurred in relation to the League of
Nations. There was a great disposition between the two wars to
think that the covenant of the Peacy Treaty, the covenant of the
League of Nations, the existence of the League of Nations in
itself provided protection for peace-loving people against
aggression. And that just wasn't true because it was a som~ ewhat
vague body: it had no strength it was a debating authority
it had no particular strength.
And I believe my self that people leaned on it so much,
particularly between 1 934 and 1939 that they misled themselves
into thinking that they were save, when they were not. I saw
that very clearly in Great Britain in 1936 and in. 1938.
I think we have learned something from this. It is a
slow and painful process; but at any rate on two or three occasions
now the United Naions has actually taken some step in
relation to a matter which has had some significant effectup
in Korea; across in the Congo a very unsolved problem yet,
but a very mauch less difficult problem than it would have been
if the United Nations had stood by.
!. nd then of course in the second place, never forget
that the League of Nations always tried to fly on one wing
because the United States of Amnerica didn't belong to it. But
the United Nations has, apart from the position of China an
almost universal membership. And it certainly contains the
United States, which the League of Nations didn't.
Therefore I think, on the whole, while one mustn't be
over optimistic because there is much to be done yet, I would
give the United Nations a greater chance of success, than I would
have given the Leag; ue of Nations. ( Applause)
Question: What is the Prime Minister's view as to the
establishment of a Pacific Comm~ on Market?
Prime Minister: Well, Sir, if I knew what a Pacific Commu~ on Market was I
might have a better idea of answering it.
If this is something that is designed to balance the
European Comm-on Market then I think I ought to say to you that
the European Common Market scheme was based on the idea of the
Western European powers that if they could get together and
establish some kind of aconomic union with, ultimately an even
Customs barrier which was the same all around them, anA with
internal free trade between them, then they might develop their
economic strength. And I havo always thoufght that was rig ht. Because it
leads to flexibility, to m.' ovement of expert people from one
country in Europe to another, to access to rawq materials from 
France, for e.: ample, which could be effoctively used in Gorraany,
and from raw riatorials in Germany which might be effectively used
in France. I think that this thing is well calculated to
reduce costs of production, to prove the overall economic
strength of Western Europe. And that, I think, is a very good
thing for the world.
We have a few aspects of it ourselves that attract our
interest. But I needn't discuss those tonight. But by and
large the European Common Market was a good conception. fand the
Messina Powers are to be congratulated on it.
But you can't take a scheme like that and transfer it
to the Pacific. I find it very difficult to understand how you
could have Australia and New Zealand and Malaya and India and
East Pakistan and the Philippines, al) with one Customs barrier
around them, one covering the lot, and internal free trade.
Because quite frankly, if you will allow me to make a thoroughly
selfish remark, -f I were to propound a scheme of that kind, I
wouldn't be beaten at the next election I'd be beaten before it
ever arrived. ( Applause, laughter)
Question: Does the Prime Minister think th; at mankind will
survive the rapid growth of world population?
Prime Minister: Well, Sir, I think that that is a most ambiguous
question. I suppose it is quite true in theory, that we can eat
ourselves out of house and home in the world, but I think that
the pessimists on this matter overlook two things.
One is that the rate of increase in the population by
natural increase doesn't necessarily maintain itself as
standards of living rise. On the contrary' The rate of
reproduction rather tends to fall as the standard of living
rises. That I believe is what is now called one of the great
" demographic truths".
But in the second place and this is the other side of
the picture how do we know how much food the world can
produce? There are too many people in the world who
pronounce themselves on certain matters without having considered
other factors in the world picture, which are rapidly changing.
We could go to a place six or seven hundred miles from
here where, only relatively few years ago sheep couldn't
flourish: they would dwindle, peak and pine, to use Shakespearet
expression. At the end of a couple of years, ' No, the pasture
was no good; they couldn't flourish on it; they couldn't
fatten; they just died off'. And there wore hundreds of
thousands of acres of it,
Then the raeoallurgists one doesn't think of
metallurgists as agriculturalists, but they are went into it
and they discovered that there were certain trace elements in
the soil, or that wore not in the soil, that were lacking. And
whatever it was on that occasion copper or cobalt, or somethingthey
said " That's the deficiency", the land is put into
cultivation, a certain amount of this deficient mineral -Irilled
in and now they carry two or three sheep to the acre. 
Now that is just a trifling example. I don't believe
we yet know how ruch : 2ood the world will produce; or how many
animals the world will nourish. We don't know yet because
science is only at the beginning of solving these problems.
Does anybody know, in the case of Australia, whether
from the Great Salt Lakes of the interior: we won't some day on
a proper and efficient basis derive fresh water and irrigate
the country? I don't know. But I believe it will be done.
And so before one becomes pessimistic and envisages
a future world with doubling and re-doubling populations, with so
many of them dying of starvation, one should be very thankful
to realise that while the Almighty gave us problems to solve,
He also -tve us human minds with an almost infinite capacity for
solving then. ( Applause)
Question: Can the Prime Minister foresee the election of a " new"
Australian, other than British, as a member of Federal Parliament,
and possibly, as a Minister?
Prime Minister: In the good homely Australian phrase, Sir, my answer to
that is " Too right". ( Laughter, applause)
Question: Could world peace be improved by better understanding and
friendly atmosphere between the world loaders at Summit mec; ings
by each speaking the other's language?
Prime Minister: Did you hear that? The suggestion is that we would all
get on very well together if we spoke each other's language,
I'm not at all sure that agree with it. I'm sorry
to disappoint those who are advocates of some form of
international language, but I'm not at all sure that I agree with
it. I have known a few . people and I have had a few
responsible tasks in my life; I've had a few follows that I
think I might have got to an -"-derstanding with if I hadn't
understood what they were saying. ( Laughter)
And as a corollary to that, let me tell you that there
is a great virtue in talking, if I may select an example at
random, to a Russian. And i have no Russian. There is some
advantage in being able to meditate about the matter while the
interpreter gives you the translation. There is a good deal to
be said for that.
I don't belong to the yak-a-ty yak school
of negotiation you know what I mean? You see a lot of these
people: one has hardly shut his mouth when they are talking the
same language, before the other follow is sr-ing, " Yes, yes but
look, so and so and so and so" o And then the second cuts the
first off in mid-air. No, NoJ When I speak I like to be
understood. But when the other fellow speaks I'm not too sure
that I do. ( Laughter., applause) 
Quetin: What impact will the election of Senator Kennedy to the
Presidency of the United States have upon world affairs?
Prime Minister: There is a very honest answer to be made to that
don't know". I don't know because I have met Senator Kennedy and
that is all. I know Nixon pretty well. Therefore everything I
would have would be mere hearsay.
But I think that we want to act on this assumption which
I think is well-founded, that the incoming President, Senator
Kennedy, is a man of parts. He has, though he is young, a
pretty active experience. I have every reason to believe that he
is a man of courage, of resolution and of breadth of mind. And
that is not d bad equipment with which to start in discharging
the greatest office in the free world. ( Applause)
Question: What is considered by the Prime Minister as the best
contribution Australia can make to world stability?
Prime Minister: Well if I may say this, I think that the first
contribution that any country can make to stability is to be
stable itself. No unstable country can make a true contribution
to stability in the world.
And if we are to be stable in xustralia, then I don't
mean that we are to be stagnant in Australia. Of course we
won't be. But as we go along, if we can be stable, sensible,
sane, developing, never be afraid to express our own views to
the other nations of the world but never fall into the error
of thinking that we are one of the greatest powers in the world
an error that people occasionally do fall into that is our
contribution. Good sense, wisdom, a spirit of adventure. But a
sense of balance underneath it all.
And one of the great tasks, internationally, o~ f any
Australian leader, whether it is myself or my successor, or
whoever it n-ay be, is on that basis of s to talk with
modesty, but with firmness, and with frienuiness in th~ e Councils
of the world. And it is surprising how, in spite of our numbers,
almaost, or relatively insignificant numbers, we are listened to
in the Councils of the world. I think that is a good thing.
We want to go on. ( Interjection: " Don't you think that is
because of you rather than of Aiustralia?") Certainly not.' It's
in spite of me. ( Laughter)
Question: Speaking of cricket, in the Prime Minister's opinio~
do Meckiff and Rourke really " 1chuck" and would batsmen do better
if they refrained from doing so?
Prime Minister: Sir, I don't know. The umpires have a habit of
deciding those matters and they are in the best position to
judge. 
BcL I just want to renind you I saw this story
attributed the other day to my friend Jack Hobbs but it
originally began in relation to Victor Trumper. He was in
batting many years ago with a distinguished colleague of his, a
fanous cricketer, and they were ' doing very nicely, thank you'
and Vic's partner came donm the pitch for one of those nid-wicket
consultations like going behind the Speaker's chair at Canberra-
( Laughter) and he said " Vic, this fellow's throwing". And Vic
said, " Shut up; right take hin off!" ( Laughter)
, uestion: Would the Prime Minister care to say :. wat he tainks of
Mr. Khrushchev?
Prime Minister: Now there is a time limit on these things and therefore
I can't really profess to answer this question without talking
for half an hour.( Laughter) And I am not going to do that.
Put I had a most interesting, and quite long, personal
discussion with hin. He of course is an exhibitionist, beating
the shoe on the desk I was there; I saw all this and slapping
with the hand. All this is a forn of showmanship. He is an
earthy character, He is not without humour. I found that
rather disturbing. ( Laughter) I ventured to describe it on some
occasion after Igot bac: hone as what might be called " farm yard"
hunour, if you follow me.
Andthere he is. I don't think that he wants a global
war, a nuclear war. I think he means to nake all the ".' vance he
can in the world short of waging nuclear war. I don't think t-t,
he is very sensitive to what I will call the " western mind"; I
don't think ho really understands it.
I think he still believes that we are perhaps more
easily frightened by bluster than we are. Because we are not
really a bit frightened by bluster. But he hones that some of
the new countries, particularly in Africa, may take hin ' au pied
de la lettro' and say, " This is it. Je nust behave. We can't
quarrel with that nan; he's fornidable; he's strong; he's
threatening". That was his object. I don't think it succeeded. In
sone ways I think that he is a man with a rough, robust
intelligence that is not to be overlooked at all, that is
fornidable. But whether he clearly sees the ultimate direction
in which he is travelling, or whether he clearly understands the
nature of the people that he is dealing with, that is an entirely
different matter. A lot of these people who are dic '". ors are accustomed
to believe that people are numbers, they're statistics, they are
people to be moved around. In our kind of world we believe that
the most indestructible element is the spirit of man that is
the indestructible thing. And it is because we look at men and
women as individual human beings who have a spirit which is
indestructible, that we never regard them as mere statistics, or
people to be ordered around. That is the great distinction.
I think I can understand his point of view; I would
doubt very much whether he understands mine, ( Applause) 



V 1. 1
0 SPEECH BY THE PRIME M-* NISTE., THE RT. HON. R.
G. MENZIES AT THE OPENING OF ALTU'ijNIUM FOILS
( AUST.) PTY. LTD. AT GRANVILLE ON FhIDAYI
NOVEMBEa 1i96o.
I am constantly reminded by the highest authorities
that I don't know much about anything. But I could certainly
tell you all I knewi about aluminium quite briefly.
I know, for example, that vie call it " aluminium" and
that in the United States and in Canada, they call it
" aluminium". But ith that happy instinct for compromise which
characterises us, they go one step further back in the process
of manufacture, and they have all agreed that one is " alumina".
I also know that aluminium is a subject about w. hich
my colleague, Senator Spooner, constantly talks to me. If I
were to meet him at midnight on some remote airport, he would
say to me " I'd like a few words with you about aluminium".
( Laughter 3 So by a happy association of ideas, when I was
invited to come to open this factory I said, " Yes, I'll come;
I'll convert this from the iorld of theory into the w-iorld of
practice: I'll have a look at it".
Then I read, by kind courtesy of those who have
already spoken to you, a rough idea of what they were going to
say. I read that little bit about using this foil for
wrapping up the joint. Do you remember it? I mean the joint
you eat. ( Laughter) I've seen other joints wrapped up in it,
but they tell me that that was some '. nsulating purpose. But
any rate the good old roast beef can be urapped up in this
commodity, and we've been told that it will preserve the flavor,
and that it will keep the pan clean. I don't understand that.
I thought you had to put things on beef in the process of
cooking it. What I really uant to know, in pursuance of my quest
for knowledge, is this: Do you wrap it up tightly, and when the
meat is cooked, do you eat the aluminium with it? ( Laughter)
Because this would open up a new universe to me edible
aluminium. I wouldn't be surprised; they'll ome to that.
They will find that there is some strange medicinal
quality about aluminium taken orally. And no doubt some
ingenious fallow will invent ways and means of giving it a
flavour, ( Laughter) which, of course, wvould greatly add to the
results of unsatisfactory roast beef.
But all that is a mere by the -uay. The fact is that
this is really a splendid event and a splendid venture. I'm
a great believer I think we all are in the development in
Australia of industries, more and more industries, of greater
and greater quality in their production, because we know that
we have a destiny in the world which won't be determined by the
events of this year or next year, but which will steadily grow,
and expand over the course of the decades, and, indeed, I hope,
over the course of the centuries.
Many of you will recall some of our vicissitu(', s of
the past: the great depression of 1929, 1309 ' 31, ' 32 hit
Australia it wasn't peculiar to Australia although some
people thought it was. It happened in the United States of
America; it happened, indeed, all round the world. But in the
case of Australia we uero hit by two things.
One was the export prices for our export 
2.
commodities, notably wool and wheat, which went down to such
fantastic depths that they amounted to wiping out a considerable
section of our export income.
At the same time, and perhaps because of that, and
because of the impact of the depression all round the world,
our capacity to raise money outside Australia dried up. The
loan markets closed against us, and at that time, in
consequence, we had an experience in Australia which produced
at its peak, I remind you, something over 30% of unemployment.
That is not going to happen again. Having regard to
our developments it can't happen again. At that time
Australian manufacturing was, although substantial, small
compared with That it is today. It was, indeed, after that,
that you had the major accelerations in manufacturing. Since
the second world war, we have seen miracles of development in
the manufacturing field. lie are looking at one of the latest
of them here today.
The result is that we now, economically speaking,
stand not just on one foot, but on two. Kie are not exposed to
anything like the same degree, to the wind and the weather of
world markets, as we woere then because we have a vastly
developing population largely engaged in this enormous
development ofManufacture, and in supplying the needs of our
own country. So I haven't the faintest doubt that economically we
are infinitely stronger, infinitely more capable of resisting
what I! ve just called the " wind and the weather".
There is another aspect of that matter that i just
want to say a word about.
Jo, from4dme to time, have tremendous arguments in
Australia I've evcn heard one or two of them myself of late
about economic problems. QJe are constantly reminded of the
profound, and inescapable truth that all economists who advise
governments are incompetent; and that all economists who
advise newspapers are invariably correct. ( Laughter) This is
one of the great facts of life and I don't mind it, not at
all. But do let me say this to you, just as a matter of
pure commonsense. We will always have a tendency to balance of
payment problems. These problems will tend to recur as your
balances go up, and as they come down, if we depend almost
essentially on primary production for our export income.
If our expo. rt income is primarily made up of great
staples like wool, and wheat and meat, and so on, then,
inevitably, as their prices fluctuate, our overseas income will
fluctuate, with all the repurcussions that it has, and would
havo if there were no government at all, on the intornal
credit structure. These are, as I say, the elements of the problem.
Therefore I believe, and my colleagues believe, that the
ultimate insurance against these fluctuations having these
rather severe results, is to introduce more and more into our
export earnings manufactured and processed commodities.
Because, more and more, to the extent to which we can do that,
we will, externally be standing on two feet, as we do now
stand, internally, domestically, on two feet.
Now how you arc going to develop export, how you are
going to improve your balance of payment problem, is a matter
which again lends itself to two considera -q 
One of them is, what commodities are there that you
are importing into Australia, that you are paying for out of
your earnings, that you could make here, effectively,
economically? And if you can discover some of those, then you
will reduce your demand for imports in that field, and satisfy
the requirement at home. 3y saving œ 5 million on some item of
that kind, we are, in terms of our balances of payments, just
as well off as if we had increased our export income by
million. That is why I am very attracted, Sir, by the figures
that you gave about what the importation has been in your own
field. And therefore to the extent to which you replace that
by a commodity which has such quality that nobody can deny its
presence, or its right to be present on the market, then, if
you do that, you are, in effect, adding to our export position
by reducing the volume of our imports.
Of course, on the other hand, we would be poor
Australians, we would have a very, very small confidence in
ourselves if we didn't believe that with this growing
population of ours, growing at an enormous rate, growing at a
percentage rate greater than that of Japan at the present time,
if we didn't believe that with this greatly increased
population with the vision that we have of more millions of
people in the future, , rith ou:: usual and proper confidence in
our own capacity to do things in Australia our sil, our
resourcefulness, our free-mindodness we would have very little
faith in ourselves if we didn't believe that this country is
going to be a ve:: y substantial exporter of the products of its
factories. I have been discussing this matter only in the last
few days with representatives of industry. The problem is a
complex one. It has to be approached not with a collection of
old fashioned or conservative ideas that is not for a
government to do, or that is for a government to do.. how can we
break into the markets in such and such a place because we have
a relatively high cost structure.
If woe are going to achieve entry into new markets,
strategically placed, as we are in this corner of the world,
if we are going to expand the markets that we already have,
then we will have to do two things,.
First, in co-operation between industry and government
we must seek out every pos'ible means of increasing export,
rthodox or unorthodox. Some matters may have to be done
overseas; some matters may have to be attended to inside
Australia. But unless we have a go at this, unless wo can
get out of the old idea that our costs of manufacture are so
great that we can't possibly sell to the rest of the world,
unless we get away from that, then I just want to say to you
that we will go on essentially depending upon a large export
earning, because we essentially depend, and so does manufacturing
industry, to a large extent, on largo imports of materials,
and plant and skills from the rest of the world.
But if we are t have all those things, these
hundreds and hundreds of millions of pounds worth of things
that come in across our exports, our imports, for the use and
benefit of manufacturing, must be paid for.
And if we are g'ing to pay for them, and pay f'-r
them steadily and increasingly, then our export income nust be
steady and increasing. 3ecause if it isn't, and it
fluctuates wildly, according to whether wool is 70d. or
then we will inevitably have problems of balances of pay! ments,
problems of imports, problems of international finance which
we could all well acfford to be vithout. 
96 V to So, I am all for the development of those industries
in Australia which I am certain will find beforu they are very
much older, that they have markets open to them, not necessarily
in Canada or the United States, if one talks about your own
commoi-dity, but in South-East Asia.
There are other countries around the world. Don't
let us forget that one of the purposes of the Colombo Plan
under which great aid has been given, and is being given, to
South and South-East Asian countries, is to lift the standard
of living. There is no quicker way of lifting the standard of
living in those countries than by giving them some industrial
development; and as they develop in that way, so their demands
will grow. The more industrialised Australia has become, the
more we have imported; and that is going to be their experience
in due course. The result will be that particularly if we keep
our sights up, and our quality high, there will be a very
remarkable prospect and a growing prospect of doing export
business. olea re working very hard on this; the work has been
done for years, or for some years now, in the Department of
Trade with great energy, as I think everybody will concede. Wo
are intensifying our search for these ways and means of
increasing our exports, because it is in these two aspects of
saving imports, and of increasing overseas earnings that the
future of Australia is so intimately wrapped up , with the future
of Australian manufacturing production.
That is a rather long-uinded kind of serm. in. But
seeing that I am in the presence of the usual collection of
highly responsible business men all of whom, occasionally, have
reason to doubt whether I ever think about anything, I thought
I would just offer you these few observations for your
assistance and for mine.
But before I conclude I want to say one personal thing
I ias delighted when I read, and today when I heard, that my old
friend Tim Clapp was to be here. I see he's over there,
( Applause) I think I am right in saying, Tim, that in may first
manifestation as a Prime Minister you and I had something to do
with buying some aluminium in the United States of America during
the early year or two of the war.
But that is not his greatest claim, although he is a
great citizen. I want to tell you that in my earlier Land more
reputable days when I ras Attorney-General and I came over to
Sydney and was so unimportant that no pressman wanted to interview
me at the railway station, or on the airport, if there had
been one, iir. Clapp used to take me out on the harbour, heavily
disguised as a yachtsman ( Laughter) and my functions were very
simple. i'hen we got into a quiet stretch of the harbour, with
no obvious obstructions to traffic in sight, he allowed me to
take the helm, telling me precisely how I should just steer about
half a point off the wind wonderful political training it was
for me. Then he went down below and he always produced, ultimately,
for lunch you don't mind me going into these intimate
details do you steamed sausages for which I've always had a
great and sneaking regard ever since, surrounded by some kind of
spaghetti. But the whole point was this: before that
happened his hand would come up through the hatchway, not holding
a sword like Excalibur but holding a large glass of some
exotic liquid which really set me up for the day. ( Laughter)
Ladies and : entlemenc now that I have mentioned that
to you, your mind wilt be. in t run so much on those liquid refreshrents
that were delicatoly_ hinted at by the last speaker,
that I'll conclude. But beforo i concludo I'll doclare this
factory Open e. nd wish it the greatest success. ( Applause) 



SPEECH 13Y THE PRIh: MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT HOR. SHAM, ON MON{ DY, 28TH NOVEMBEa,
_ 1960
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Rylah, Parliamentary colleagues and ladies
and gentlemen: It must be a considerable time since I : ias on this
platform last. I remember it very well. It was a very good
meeting. As I told some of you this afternoon we had a bit of
good spirited heckling, and some very lively questions. So I
remember the meeting with considerable affection.
But I also remember the place, though not this actual
hall which was thenrmt built, because in its predecessor my late
father spoke many times when he uas the Member for Lowran in the
State Parliament. By that time we lived in Melbourne, and when my
father disappeared, with a great flurry, to go to Horsham it
was almost as if a man had been called before the Judgnent Seat
to caifront his Masters.
Because, usually it had happened that he had cast a
vote that Horsham didn't like, or that Horsham was arguing
about; and so, following his usual attitude, he came up to
argue with Horsham about it. In the long run, af courselost
his seat. ( Laughter) But it is a very good example to follow.
Now, I just want to say something to you tonight, not
all as a matter of history certainly not ancient history.
But when I look back on what we have achieved in this Party I
like to remember a few things, and I would wvish you to rumember
them also. In 1943, speaking about the Federal Parliament, we
who wore then in Opposition, had the most complete thrashing,
politically, at an election that uie have ever had. In fact
somebody rang me up afterwards to ask for a comment, and I
said, " It's very difficult to make a comment when you've been
run over by a traction engine". And that was about where we
were. We looked around I was not then Leader of the
Opposition for a variety of reasons and I was asked by the
survivors, whether I would once more lead them. I said I
would; but there was one great condition to be attached to it
and that was that we . rre to get together in Australia and
become, as far as possible, one body.
At that time, the end of 1943there were no less
than 14 different organisations in Australia all professing,
broadly, the same point of view. But all different.
Fourteen' So from the office of the Leader of the Opposition at
Canberra I . convened a meeting, at C3nberra, of representatives
of all 14. They came, together with other interested persons.
' e had a very spirited session, and we passed a resolution
declaring that we would form one body and that that one body
was to be the Liberal Party of Australia.
Six months later we mot at Albury and at Albury we
had a Constitution, and a Platform and we became fully embodied.
Now that was 1944. In 1946, at the next Federal
election and you will understand it if I speak primarily in 
0 2.
those terms-in 194+ 6 we won a fow seats, but we were still
hopelessly outnumbered. In 194+? we had a tremendous victory.
Now I'll say a little neror about that in a moment,
but pausing there, let me tell y~ u this, out of my own long
political axperience.
There are two periods danger in tho lifetime of a
political movement: one is when it appears to be hopelessly
outnumbered, and gives up the gho-st; the other is when it has
boen in office so long that pcoplc say, " Wlperhaps it's
time for a change; we've nothing gainst the Government; we're
doing very well, but perhaps it's t. ime for a change" l.
These are the two periods of danger.
Going back to that first oie, let me remind you that
when we first organised ourselves in-, o one body in the Federal
Parliament, there were 17 in a House of 74+ talking about the
house of Representatives 17. Numoerically a contemptible
Opposition. In point of fact, I wi-l say with all humility,
it was the greatest Opposition that v; as over seen in the
Federal Parliament. Because it had Life, and imagination and
ideas. It knew the business. It nev Parliamentary procedure.
Although it was always dooned to be outnumbered, it
did, in the course of less than five years after being
constructed, achieve the greatest vic-tory that had been seen up
to that time in Federal politics.
Then we were outnumbered of course, still, for old
reasons, in the Senate. We took a Doi. ble Dissolution in 1951,
another election in 154f, another *. election at the end of 1
when there were economic problems of great complexity; and
another one at the end of 1958. Every one of those Electiona
we have won, with fluctuating majorities the last one bythe
biggest majority we have ever had in the Federal Parliament.
I think it is worthwhile recalling those matters.
Of course I occasionally meet those candid friends who are the
curse of humanity you know what I moan who say, " Well, old
man, yes, congratulations! You've done vory well to win these
Elections. But of course you know you had the advantage of
having so-and-so on the other side". It's always somebody else
who has done it; it's never ourselves.
All I want to say is that I have no reason to doubt
that ' v~ hovor had led the Opposition in the Federal Parliament,
we would have won the elections; and we would have won them
because we have constantly maintained a positive approacil, and
a positive contribution to the solving of the Nation's problems.
There are people, of course, who sit on the side
lines, who always know all the answers they know nothing
about these problems for the most part; they have never had
to handle them. 11e have.
The result has been, or rather the history has been,
looking internally, looking at our Australian problems,
domestically, that in the course of these eleven years, we
have had the most complex variety of economic problems. ' Ve
have had booms; we have had recessions; we have had an
,_; normous expansion in the price of wool and dramatic falls in
the price of wool. Jo have had some little unemployment
not very much at any time. We have had tremendous over-full
employment, and an unsatisfied demand for labor. Our overseas
balances have fluctuated quite violently at times; and they
have fluctuated for the most elementary reasons. 
0 3.
4hen at the time of the Korean Jar the boom in wool
came on, it reached absurd and embarrassing heights. That
wasn't the fault of anybody in Australia. That was the fault
of some extraordinary, incompetent mass wool buying elsewhere
in the world. But the fact was that our overseas balances rose to
an enormous height; inflation grew at a tremendous speed in
Australia, and we had to do some pretty unpopular things. But
we did them, and those who attacked theon when they were done
and I could understand them attacking them; they were very
disagreeable subsequently came to realise that they had been
right, that they had produced the right results.
Do you know that after the famous Budget of 1952
when we were supposed to be absolutely certain to be destroyed,
the Gallup Poll recorded us, I think, as having a percentage
of about 37 the all-time low. And the vreaker brethen would
come around and say, " It's hopeless; we're g6neol The people
are against us". I used to have to say, " Look by the time the
next election comes around, we will win you see' This is
going to work out well". It did uork out well, and we won the
next election; and the one after that by a bigger majority, and
so on down the line.
I have an infinite belief in the people. I think
that the people of Australia are sensible, honest people. If
I didn't believe that, aill politics would be a mere masquerade,
a worthless occupation. You can only carry this occupation on
if you believe in the honesty, and decency and fundamental
commonsenso of your own people. That belief has been
vindicated, I venture to say, over these years so far as our
party and our representatives, and our policies have been
concerned. Somebody said, of late, having regard to certain
changes that we have made, somebody coined a phrase you know
it's a great thing to coin a phrase and the phrase nou is
that this is a " stop and go" Government. Jfell, of course,
they have always said that about us. The extraordinary
thing is that Australia hasn't stopped. It has gone steadily,
steadily growing until oven the Leader of the Opposition has to
admit that of course Australia is a prosperous country. Of
course it is! So apparently these alleged fluctuations of
policy haven't brought the country to a standstill. But let us
see what they mean. I wrant you to understand this kind of
thing. Our policy has been constant, just as the strategy
of a General may be constant, his overall strategic
conception. ut just as he changes his tactics according to
the dispositions of his enemy, and the circumstances of the
time, so we, without altering our policies, of course adjust
our detailed application to the circumstances of the moment.
Jo wrould be incompetent fools if we didn't.
I gave an illustration one night about the Central
Bank, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Bank which sits in the
middle of the entire credit structure of Australia, and upon
the capacity and honesty of which people in Australia depend
to a very largo extent.
Jhat does a Central Bank do anywhere in the iorld?
Does it say, once a year, " This is our policy for the ycr
this is what we are going to do for the year, and we will leave
it at that, and whatever happens we won't change ftr 12 months".
ihy the country would be in a state of chaos if a Central Bank
did that. 
It is the duty of a Central Bank to say, " What is ourpolicy?
Our broad policy is to maintain, as far as we can,
stability, economic stability in the community. ~ Je don't want
too much credit in the i rong direction, or too little credit
in the direction in which it ought to 3o. Ie want to have a
reasonable degree of liquidity in the Trading Banks so that
they maintain an oven process of business'..
Therefore a Central Bank will sell securities this
month and buy then next month. It will release money to the
trading banks out of their special reserves this month, and
call it up in two months. Those things must occur in the
course of the conduct of a Reserve Bank. They put out, they
take in. Every Reserve Bank in the world has to do it. If it
didn't do it, that would be a calamity to the country in which
it was operating. The weather isn't the same every day, or every week.
Circumstances change. You may have a sudden rise in the price
of wool or a sudden collapse. Export sales of some other
commodity may also be affected because of drought or some other
unpredictable reason. And in two or three months the whole
of your circumstances in relation to your overseas balances
can be affected. Therefore there must be a watchful eye.
And just as the Reserve Bank is not to be afraid to
do its duty, so we are not to be afraid to change our course
to meet the new circumstances. The objective will rumain the
same. But as the Chancellor of the iEchequer in the United
Kingdom said the other day, " It is necessary very frequently,
while maintaining your course to the port of destination, to
make many movements of the wheel, this way or that, according
to the jind and the weather."
That is what you are entitled to expect. If this
country had suffered from people who, in a wooden-headed
fashion, ' ihen the Budget had been pronounced said, " Jell now
that's the whole of our financial activity for the year, and
whatever comes or goes for the next 12 months, we stand by
that document and we do nothing to meet the new circumstances"
if the country had been cursed by such stupidity, then I
would be very sorry for it and it wouldn't be the country that
it is now. That is a broad aspect of this matter, ladies and
gentlemen, that I do want to emphasise to you.
My colleague, the Treasurer, has been making some
magnificent statements on this matter. They won't satisfy a
lot of these people -ho are described as " economists" in the
newspapers. Because, you know, it's just one of the bad luck
things about political life we have economists in the
Government service; and the newspapers have economists which
are their own people. But the irony of it is, that although
the Government goes to the greatest possible pains to
assemble the ablest possible men, it turns out that Governumnt
economists are always wrong, and that newspaper economists are
always right. This is one of the strange laws of life. I h-. ve
sometimes thought that it . night not be a bad idea to take them
all over, or make a swap. ( Laughter) We would be in a
position of powerful advantage then.
Ui, cñ u juaun asiac, zne whole essence of what
we do from time to time as a Liberal administration is to aim
at stability, at development, at reconciling the highest
possible degree of national growth with the highest maximum
attainable degree of stability of the currency, to avoid
unemploynent, to preserve our international credit, to
preserve our international reserves and, so help us, to
finance the development of Australia.
Now those are groat tasks. I can honestly claim
that we have, to a substantial extent, performed them; and
are proposing to continue to perform them.
Now my opponents, your opponents, the Labour Party,
what their economic policy is I have yet to discover and so
have you. In terms of the economy of Australia they have not
condescended to tell us.
But one thing they have let drop which is very
important, and which I want you all to remember. Every time
they have a chance they complain about foreign capital coming
into Australia. It was their annual exercise, and I suppose
will continue to beo, to complain loudly and bitterly in
Parliament about profits earned by foreign companies operating
in Australia. If that complaint means anything, then I can only
assume that they don't want foreign capital in Australia; but
if it comes in, it must be, of course decent enough to make
no profits. Because their great complaint is that those
companies want to send some of their profits out of the
country. It is quite true that they spend most of theo in
Australia in developing their enterprise, but the very fact
that they want to send a few millions out of the country by
way of dividends, excites horror in the apostles of Socialism.
Now, what are the facts? This is one of the vital
facts of recent years.
Jo are a country of enormous import demand. Our
standard of living is so conspicuously high in the world that
our capacity to buy things from overseas is enormous. By and
large you can reckon, year by year, that Australia wants to
spend œ 1,000 million, œ 1,100 million, œ 1,200 million every
year on imports. These are enormous sums of money; and in
order to bring in imports we must, of course, pay for them.
I hope nobody suffers from the illusion that paying
for goods brought from overseas is a mere matter of signing a
cheque and trusting to providence. It isn't. If we haven't
got the capacity to find œ 1,000 million overseas we can't pay
œ 1,000 million overseas. It is as simple as that.
As, year by yoer, you are earning money overseas,
and you are spending money overseas, you always need to have in
reserve, to pay for things you are buying, a few hundred
million pounds. The broad principle of this thing is quite simple:
aibntlee rntoa tipoanya, l absroolavde, n cyfo rf orth eA uthstirnaglsia thdaept eknwde s guotp ont heurs e. being
Now we have a high demand for imports, very high.
But our export income fluctuates, and principally witk h ñ C
price of the products of the land. In the last years,
ladies and gentlemen, we have been kept ih-sly solvent 
S 
0 6.
overseas, not simply because of our export income, but
because we have attracted fron overseas scores of nillions of
pounds of private investment. And of course money that cones
in like that is equivalent, for this purpose, to export
income. I was able to stand on a platform about three years
ago and say that for some time, under our administration, and
with the confidence that we have been able to create overseas
in hard-headed circles, that we were receiving into Australia,
on private investment account, œ 100 million each year, œ 100
million. Tremendous! All over Australia. And, as has been
pointed out, in particular in the State of Victoria you will
se vast enterprises that have been established, and which
maintain enormous employment with money that cane in from the
United States and the United Kingdom rather more from the
United Kingdom than from the United States you wvill be
interested to know.
There it is. To cut it off would at once present a
problem on our overseas reserves, and our overseas balances,
of the most acute kind. But we have goneonn, whatever they
may say, or some people may say here.
The people in the world who have noncy to invest
the hard-headed people of Great Britain and the United States,
they look at us in Australia, they say, " There is a stable
country; that country appears to have the right ideas; that
country is developing; that is a cuuntry in which we are not
at danger of being nationalised or taken over. put our
money there". Last year it wasn't œ 100 million it was œ 200
million. œ 200 million sent into this country for investment
in our present and our future, in our fertility and in our
character. If there is one thing that we stand for in this
movement it is character, it is the honesty of administration.
These things count with the rest of the world,
I can remember that when we caeo in, in 1949, the
end of 1949, I don't think the reputation of Australia had
improved nuch abroad over the previous few years. The then
Governnment had had a rather untidy wrangle with the United
States of Aeorica, and had said, " Wo don't want you to
establish a base on Manus Island". The then Minister for
External Affairs had made a great point at all international
conferences of attacking, or criticising, or in the homely
phrase, " cocking a snoop" at the United States, and at the
United Kingdon because this seemed to be a rather clever thing
for us to do. Our reputation today with the United States, and
with the United Kingdon, is, I believe, higher than it has ever
been before. And that is tremendously important to us.
When we cane back into office here was Australia,
remote in the world; there was China, Communist, aggressive;
China that had become Cormunist with all the pressure going on
in South East Asia, tremendous pressure it is on at this
moment in Vietnam; it is on at this moment in Laos.
We can sit hero and talk and I can stand here and
speak, but at this very moment there are all sorts of things
going on in these countries every one of them related to
Communist pressure, to the Communist attack, to the Con-. iunist
ambition to control, if it can, every country that sits
between us and the free world, 
These are treiuendously important affairs. And we
said, " Well, we must do something about it. It's no use just
having pious speeches about wanting to be friendly wJith the
United States, or friendly with the United Kingdom. T'* hat are
we to do, placed as we are down in this corner of the Pacific?
What can we do that is practical and positive?".
After all, you know, the two reat achievements in
foreign policy have been that we did get a three-cornered
treaty with the United States of America and Now Zealand in
what is called the ANZUS Pact; and we also were one of the
proroters of the South-East Asian Treaty which embraces in one
defensive organisation not only Pakistan, and Thailand and the
Philippines, and Australia and New Zealand, but also the United
States of America, Great Britain and France.
These two arc rorarkable achievements, though I
describe them in those terns myself. They have revolutionised
the position of Australia, In the old days before the war
America didn't make engagements of this kind. There was an
attitude, " No we make no cormitmnts; we don't get tied up
with obligations outside our country". It is one of the great
things that since the War, America has engaged herself with
other countries. She has behaved, I venture to say,
magnificently. Here, in our corner of the world, she stands as our
ally and associate in those two treaties, an achievement which
would have been thought, and I dare say would have boon, in
fact, impossible 20 years ago.
So far as Great Britain is concerned, Sir, I hope
that it won't be necessary for : e to justify our relations
with Great Britain. I am perfectly certain that at Whitehall,
whatever Party may be in Office at Whitehall, we are rogarded
as true, trusted and respected friends. And indeed we ought
to be, because we are of the same blood. ( Applause)
Wo had an illustration I think I ought to say a
few words to you direct it's boon discussed a good deal of
the kind of problem that arises for Australia at the United
Nations at this last Assembly, where I had the great privilege
of listening to Mr. Khrushchev, and watching his g; rnastic
exercises, even with the shoo. And it was a very interesting
experience. He cane across, I think it's always difficult to
know what a dictator is thinking because democratic leaders
like myself occasionally have to expose to the people what
they are thinking and be judged by them; but a dictator, he
hasn't to worry about that, so you don't know whether he is
saying one thing and thinking another but I rather think
that he went across with this in his mind: that he would like
to weaken, and perhaps ultinately, destroy, the United Nations.
You may say, " Well why should he do that?". Well
the answer is, I think, clear enough. The Soviet Union first
of all set out to render the Security Council which is the
only executive body in the United Nations, to render it futile,
by exercising the Veto. Every time a decision of any moment
occurred they would say, " JWe vote And then, under the
rules of the United Nations, that was the end of it. They
might be out-numberod by 11 to 1, but it doesn't mattoer they
arc one of the pernanont members and when they say the
answer is " No".
And so they have rendered this, a rather unsatisfactory
I al-ost said a rather futile body. 
And then they switch into the General Assebly.
And the General Assoebly this is just a comnittoc meeting
compared to the General asscmbly. Ninetyeight nations, I
think, or there nay be 99 at the moment, but call it 100 just
in round figures, each one of then with half a dozen doleo: ates
and half a dozen advisers and you can imagine it's an amy
of people, in a huge theatre.
Australia, by the luck of the draw, sat in the back
seat, looking down the slope. It's not a bad position to be
in because you could see quite a lot. When I wanted to speak
I had to get up and do a route narch down the aisle. It
seemed to ne to be about 200 yards; I daresay it wasn't any
nore than about 80 or 90 yards. But it is an enormous place.
In the result, of course, no debates occur at all.
Speeches are nado, which is a rather different matter. Long
speeches. Two hours appears to be the rule. The day before I
arrived Fidel Castro had spoken for hours the first
minutes on his hotel accommodation and the next 2 hours and a
half on the story of his life. ( Laughter) Now you wouldn't
read about it. It's trneendous. I know that because I read
the translation the day I arrived.
But this is the sort of thing that goes on.
Khrushchev was out to do two things in that Assembly:
one was to attack the Secrotary-General, who has a difficult
enough task in all conscience. But he thought that if he
could attack him and bring hin down then he would weaken the
whole executive position of the United Nations. The other
object, of course, was to beguile, or threaten, or actually
frighten, new nations, of whom there are plenty.
About fifteen new nations from Africa arrived this
year. They are inexperienced in self-government. They haven't
yet, for the iost part, found their feet. They uay, perhaps,
be a little more disturbed by threats than we are.
And he said to hiniself, " This is it. I will make
these people feel that I am somebody to be afraid of; and
that the Suviet Union is a power to be obeyed".
, oll, I an happy to say I think he failed to
achieve that result because he didn't understand that now
nations, like old ones, have a dignity of their own. These
people don't cone to self-governnont, they don't come to
independence, they don't celebrate their Independence Day,
without feeling proud that they are now a free nation. And as
he doesn't understand free nations, never having set one free,
having only conquered then, he doesn't understand the dignity
of freedom. That is why I thought that he failed on that side
of his tactics. But one way or another, I think that he will not
rest until ho has nade the ultimate attempt to persuade people
to do sonothing that will weaken the United Nations and that
will then draw into his own orbit as nany nations as possible.
And this is a grin thing for the world.
The vorld stands outside global war today because the
free world possesses the power to destroy the ajgrussor just as
indeed the aggressor has the power to destroy nuch of what they
have thensolves. Here is the deadlock of power, of toe. riblo
pjwuutr. But he fooeels that if ho could wean away, persuade, or 
9.
threaton, or infiltrate to got another ton, fifteen, twenty,
twentyfive, nations into his own orbit, then he could develop
what he would represent as such a moral body of opinion in the
world, as would weaken the will of the people of the United
States and of Great Britain, and of Australia.
Because thero are plenty of people willing to
weaken our will if they can. And this is the thing of which
we ust beware. We nust retain the initiative; we nust retain
the moral initiative; in all matters that affect the rorld's
peace we nust be united and positive inwhatevor , we are
proposing should be done.
Above all things we should know where our friends
are. What a silly lot of nonsense it is to say to somebody
like myself, " You should prefe-to get the vote of a neutral
country, when you nove something in the United Nations, to the
votes of Groat Britain, the United States and France" who are
the three most powerful allies we have in the world.
Did you ever hear such nonsense? If everybody in
Australia got into his mind that that was ny kind of " surrenderism"
to coin a word that that was ny understanding of
what the great interests of Australia needed, then I would
expect to be swept out. But before I was swept out I would
know that the Liberal movement would have swept no out and got
another loader, another S-pokesnan.
Je, Liberals', we stand for these things. io stand
for friendship witt our great friends overseas. Wo know that
it is only by.,. hving sonm security for our Nation based upon
magnificent-active friendships around the world that we can
hope to set ourselves to the great tasks that we have not to
put everybody under government control, but to put every
individual citizen, so far as we can, into a position of
developing his own life.
Liberalisn, based upon individual human freedom,
individual hunan dignity these are the things that stand in
our lives; these are the things that have no existence in
Communist countries, or among Communists in Australia itself,
or anong their dupes.
Australia is a friend of the United States. We are
of course, intimate, family people with the United Kingdom.
But when we , go to an international conference we have our own
mind. We are capable, around the corner, of having
discussions with our friends.
When I was in the United States on this recent
visit I was honourod by being askod by the President to go up
to Washington to confer with him at the 1White House with Mr.
Harold MaCmillan. I thought this no insult to Australia, that
the three of us should be sitting there, in private, discussing
these urgent current matters. But does anybody suppose we just
sat down and somebody beat time and we all said the same thing
not a bit. I think that for the first hour they probably
heartily disagreed with what I was saying: and I disagreed
with one or two other things that wore said.
We thrashed then out. W4 are grown-up people. We
have minds of our own, and duties of our own, and conceptions
of ourown. But in the end, we agreed.
But, in the United Nations Assembly, where you had
the Soviet Union, and the satellite countries, as they are
pleased to call them, or as we are you know countries like
Rumania and Czechoslovakia and Poland and so on there they
are. 
When Khrushchev decided that sormething ought to be
applauded, ho always startcd applauding up here like a fellow
in a boxing ring you know always started up thero; they
all looked around from wherever they sat in this great hall
and there they were.
If on the other hand he was going to thump the
table, like that, he raised his fist high, or his shoo as the
case Day be, and they all looked around, nodded, and then
( L. ughter) Of course he had shoes and he could hit the table
with then; I didn't inspect the satellite countries closely
enough to know whether they had any. But at any rate they
thumped the table.
Now you see the difference between the complete
subjugation of these people not a man there from Poland, or
Czechoslovakia, or as the case n:' ay be, not a nan there who
would dare to have a mind of his ovm, who would dare to ar gue
with the head of the Soviet Union.
These are the things that we have to m.~ aintain. We
won't always agree with each other. I an happy to say that we
can have discussions in Cabinet and discussions in the Party
Room that reveal a wide variety of ideas. In fact I have
never seen an idea put forward yet that I hadn't first heard
in the Cabinet Room, or in the Party Room. \ Ie are not such
inexperienced people as all that, and we thrash thoe out.
A1nd when we thrash then out we arrive at a conclusion which is
part of the substance and spirit of what Liberalism stands for.
When we do, we go forward with it, as you would
expect us to not apologetically, but with some0 courage and
determination, and belief, in what the result will be.
Now, as I said to you at the beginning, it was a
dangerous time back in 1944-, 14 because we were a remnant,
and remnants are inclined to be disposed of at a rumnant sale..
But we weren't a remnant in that sense, and we arrived.
tWo are now getting towards the end of our 11th year.
The very prosperity of Australia detaches th~ e minds ofa lot of
people from political affairs: they think that they can
safely leave these things alone. This is a point, therofore,
of danger for any Government, and any movement.
I am addressing one or two mootins for the prime
purpose of saying to our own people, " You believe in the
things we stand for; you have your pride in what is going~ on
in Australia; you are maintaining your interest in the
political affairs of Australia; you are not going to allow
the citadel to be captured by inadvertence, or idleness. Go
out and persuade as many thousands of people, Liberals, as you
can find, that that is their duty also".
I haven't the slightest doubt in ny mind that with
awareness of our political issues Liberalismn is destined to
serve this country in Governrient for many years to come.
( Applause) 



SPEECH BY T1HE PRIME A~ INISñ' EA, THE AT. HION. R. G.
nEN4E,_ AT BETEGON THE 1st DECEMBR16
Ladies and gentlemen:
This seems to me like a real old fashioned political
meeting. I am particularly delighted with it because this is
a by-election, and, as you have been reminded, at this byelection,
as indeed at all elections, you have to choose
between the Gove: nnent and the Opposition.
You've heard the Government here; you've heard the
" opposition" there; ( Laughter, applause) and on Saturday week
you will decide what side you are on. is it difficult?
( Laughter, applause)
Now I've noticed that there are three types of
interjections. One says rubbish; and is rubbish. ( Laughter)
One, of cours, is my time-honoured and most honourable title,
" Pig-iron Bob" ( Applause) ( If I hadn't been made of some
material of that kind I don't suppose I would be around today.)
( Laughter, applause) And the third interjection ( Interjection:
" How did you get the name " Pig-iron Bob?")
Oh, would you like to hear the story? ( Interjections)
Now if you are prepared to remain silent IYll tell you how I
got the name. Because as you know, I was given the name by
the Communists, and I'll tell you, if you would like to know,
how I got it.
You see the Communist-led waterside workers at Port
Kembla were reusing to load a ship for Japan at a time when
we Yere at peace with that country. They undertook to take
charge of the foreign policy of this country.
Qe being the Government ( Interjections) Now,
wait a moment. Are you afraid of the story? ( Interjection:
" No" l) ., ell listen to it then. ( Interjections) There is
one thing you must always say about the Coins they're
cowardly. ( Applause)
The issue at that time uas, ' Who ran the foreign
policy of Hustralia?' the lawfully elected Government, or a
handful of waterside workers lod by the Communist, Roach, at
Port Kembla. So I went down to them at Port Kembla I
didn't talk to them on the long distance telephone I wont
down and met them on the spot, and told them that they wrere
going back to work because we were in charge of the Government
of the country. And they went back to work. ( nar' e. d
Since then I have honourably borne this title and
seen it chalked on railway bridges. Each time I see it, I
say " How well they trwat me; this is the finest unsolicited
publicity that I could possibly have". ( Applause)
But the third matter that has been thrown up a good
deal tonight during two very interesting speeches, is the
matter of the Crimos Act. I just think that perhaps to
dispose of this largely bogus argumnent, I might say a word
about it. ( There's a young gentleman over here who w'anted
to invoke the name of the Presbyterian Church. I don't know
whether he is a Presbyterian, is he? Are you, Sir? No.
Well, I am) ( Applause) So perhaps as a membor of the
Presbyterian Church I can say this to you ( Interjection:
" Does that moan the Church is wrong? The fact that 1% m not a
ruembcr, does that prove the Church is wrong?) Ohl It proves
nothing. ( Interjection: " Jell why did you mention it then"?)
I mentioned it because I thought I might like to establish 
0 2,
that if it comes to discussing the views of the Presbyterian
Church I might be more qualified than you were. ( Laughter,
applause) I say, without hesitation, that the Presbyterian
Assembly was misled on this matter. My distinguished
colleague, the Attorney-General, who has devoted infinite time
and patience, and skill to this matter has written to the
Presbyterian Assembly pointing out where the errors have been
made. ( Interjection: " And they still disapprove,; i")
Uell, I don't know. The Presbyterian Assembly has
not met since they received this letter. So who are you to
say that they disapprove. ( Applause) You want to brush
yourself up on the procedures of the Presbyterian Church, I
can see that. The whole point about it is this or rather there
are two points about it. The first is this and I put
this question to you, quite se: ciously, quite coldly. Does
anybody in this hall believe that we ought not to have a
Commonwealth Law against treason? Or against sabotage? Or
against sedition? Does anybody believe that? Of course not,
The Labour Party in the Federal Parliament was so
little prepared to oppose the creation of laws in respect of
these matters, that it did not oppose the Second Reading of
the Bill. Now remember that. The Crimes Bill wont to its
Second Rleading, and the Labour Party confined its attack to a
series of particular points. ( Interjections)
I may remind you that this Bill was brought down in
Parliament, the second reading speech was made, and it : Ts a
couple of months before it came on for discussion in the
House. For the whole of that time it was available to anybody
who cared to read it.
I wonder how many people who are making noises about
it tonight, have read the Crimes Bill. I wonder if the very
young man there has read the Crimes Bill. I wonder. I wonder
how many of them have read the speech made by the Attorney-
General explaining the Crimes Bill. I wonder how many of you
know that the campaign against the Crimes Bill started after
the delivery of the Governor-Ganeral's speech at the opening
of Parliament. It was started by the Communist Party in its
newspapers. They have spent thousands of pounds on it; and
their campaign was months old before the Bill was ever
introduced, and before they knew one word of what was in it.
That is a very interesting fact. Then, of course,
people are easily misled on these matters. And so, " A Crimes
Bill' This must be terrible!"
UJell what was the great argument? I'll just deal
with one central point of this. They said, " Oh, this is a
shocking thing. Now this offence : f sabotage, you don't have
to prove anything except the man's character". That was said,
Lnd said almost in terms, by somebody in the Presbyterian
Assembly. It was utterly wrrong. It has been said, repeatedly,
by people who haven't read the Bill, and who know nothing
about the substance of it, that here is a law, which would
enable the Government to grab a man up, and to have him
convicted before a jury only on evidence of his known
cha-racter and threfore this is a monstrous political weapon.
Now the fact is that you cannot prove before the 
0 3.
jury the offence of sabotage, without proving the act that was
performed and that must be proved to the satisfaction of the
jury and then in addition to that, if you want to prove the
purpose for which the act was done, then you are at liberty,
if the Judge regards it as material, and fair, to prove the
known character of the accused. Now let me give you an
example. Here is a simple example of what I moan and ll11
leave it to the good sense, the enduring good sense of the
Australian people.
( Interjection: " You'll find out on the
December". Well I'll find out, no doubt. I've been told that,
you know, in 1949, in 1951, in 1954 and in 1958. And you
will be yelling it out to me at the next General Election.
( Applause) But you'll still be wrong.
Now let us take a case, because this is an
important matter. It is very important that we should not
have unjust, or unfair laws on the ' tatute Book. Now let us
take this example. A man is engaged in technical work, or work of a
technical kind in a research establishmeont having rjlation to
the defence of the country, and some extraordinary,
complicated, difficult, new type of mechanism has been
evolved. This is of tremendous importance, let us say, to
the defence of the country; and this man, at a suitable
occasion, when it is nearing it's tests, and has had many,
many thousands of pounds spent on it, drops something into it
and smashes it.
He is seen. He drops a great lump of metal, or a
spanner or whatever it may be well, pig. iron if you like
( Laughter) he drops it in. He is at once grabbed. He has,
on all superficial appecrances, committed an act of sabotage
and a very serious one. It is simple to prove what happened.
Then he says, " Well I'm terribly sorry, but my hands were a
bit greasy and it slipped out of my hand, and I didn't mean it.
I was the most surprised man in the place".
Now let me put this to you my friends. Suppose the
prosecution could establish that that man was a card carrying
top-line Communist who had found his way into that works,
and was there in a position to do damage in line with the
Communist ideas. I put this to you, as a jury yourself; Do
you think that that fact ought not to be available to the
jury? Do you think that that fact ought to be concealed? And
a man go free of an :. ct of that kind, perhaps at the very time
when the country stands in its greatest danger? Of course not.
Yet we were told by a variety of people, and
unfortunately the Presbyterian Guneral i'ssembly of my own
Church was persuaded to believe it, that you didn't have to
prove the act; all you had to do was to prove the character.
Now I've established to you I hope quite plainly
that you must prove the act, the very act that was done. It
must be established beyond -ll reasonable doubt to the jury.
And if you do that, and if the Judge, being told what the
other evidence is, says, " Yes, it is material; it is not
unfair that this should go in" then you can prove the other
things that rel!-te to the purpose with which the act was done.
Now ladies and gentleoen, I want to go back to
where I really intended to start. 
4.
References have been made here tonight to Frank
Timison. I want to toll you that I regard his death as a very
great loss to the Parliament. That is the common view, lot mo
hasten to say, of members on both sides of the House.
( Applause) Because he was an irmmensely popular man greatly
respected, greatly trusted by friends and by foe. It is a
very sad thing that he should have gone.
But, there it is, these things happen. Therefore we
have a by-election and we are, I think, speaking as head of
the Government, extraordinarily fortunate that we have a
candidate of the obvious calibre Mr. Chipp. ( Applause)
Because in Parliament at any rate, people are judged, not by
the amount of noise they can utter, but by the processus of
their minds, by how much they can think, how much they can
expound, how much they can judge the circumstances of the
times. Therefore this is a great opportunity, once norc, to
put into the Federal Parliaennt a uan of training and
intelligence and experience who is capable of doing all those
three rather difficult thing. Because chinking, and speech,
and judgment are all difficult. And he can do themn
Now what has been going on since Frank Tinson first
wont into Parliament 11 years ago? have had quite a lot of
elections. The elections nay be . reat fun to some people who
just have to attend then. But from the point of view of the
fellow who slogs through then all over Australia, they are
very hard work. We have had now, in ' 49! and ' 51 and 54 and
and ' 58, five elections in which I myself have been all
over Australia. There have boon denunciations made of the
Government. : Je have been told, even by ny genial and
admirable friend, . rthur Calwell, that we are on the vergo of
ruin. voery time ruin and desolation have been prophesied:
mass unemployment, all sorts of things. Yet the interesting
thing is that on each of these five occasions, as you all saw
the issue has been up. People in Australia are not so stupid
as not to know their own circumstances.
Uhat I object to about some of my opponents is that
they think the people are so silly. I have a great respect
for the wisdom of the people. And the people, exercising
their wisdom, and knowing their own circumstances bettor than
any politician could, has five tires in succession, returned
us to office. That is worth rmoembering. ( Applause)
And the ALP Candid . te, rhoever he nay be I don't
know in this electorate, has a heavy task. ( Interjections)
But, ladies and gentlemen, just glance over the
events, the policies of these years. Ask yourselves why it is
that you have voted for us so steadfastly If you look back
over the 11 years you can answer that question quite simply.
You look outside Australia; look at our relations with the
rest of the world. They are a great deal better, aren't they,
than they were 11 years ago? ( Inturjctlons)
Really that's a brave remark for anybody to say " No",
because I venture to say that 11 years ago, 12 years : go, our
relations with the United States of A.: erica, to c. n
extent, our relations with Great Britain, were lower than they
had been for a long, long time,
So we sot out reoairing this position. I want to 
remind the audience of this. If they want to know what the
test is to take, for an example, of our rel. tions with the
United States a very important relationship. Because let
me remind them, the United States is not a neutral country.
The United States is the greatest power in the free world, and
a great friend and assistant of other countries in the free
world. Make no mistake about that. There is no question of
neutrality today about the United States, any more than there
is about Great Britain.
Therefore just lot us consider what has happened
during our term of office.
I don't think the United States of America had
except in the case of the North Atlantic freaty, the NAT6
Organisation, comi-ittd itself in military, or semi-military
terms, to other countries, because of Constitutional
difficulties, because of the position of the President and the
restrictions on his power.
iJe have, during our term of office, secured and been
largely instrumental in securing two agreements by wray of
treaty with the United States of America. One is the ANZUS
Pact, United States, ustralia, Now Zealand, a Pact of the
most enormous importance to us, an arrangement under which, at
revular intervals, there are consultations on the political and
the military level, between these three countries.
Later on came the South East Asian Treaty, in which
the partners are Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines, the
United States, the United Kingdom, France, Now Zealand and
Australia. Now here you have another form of organisation,
rather similar, in some ways, to the NATO Organisation in the
Atlantic. Let me remind you that but for the existence of
NATO, but for the close co-operation that exists between the
United States and Canada, and Great Britain, and France, and
4. est Germany, but for that, and the defensive forces which are
deployed in r. stern Europe, who knows whether we wouldn't have
been in war years ago. These are enormously important
considerations. ( Interjection: " It's not to your credit")
rlol, I hope you will allow me to take a little
credit for the fact that it was my Governent ( Applause) which
obtained ANZUS and GEATO-on neither occsion, with any
particular approval by the Labour Party. As to the other
fellows, not Labour, not Liberal one hesitates to name them
what their attitude wvas, I wouldn't know.
But I do know this, that the security of this
country has been strengthened and strengthened to an extent
that concerns everybody in this hall tonight, and everybody in
Australia, during the last ten years. ( Applause)
Now, Sir, just lot ro for a few minutes consider the
internal, the domestic side of this matter.
I wonder if everybody realises that in these years,
in these last few years, 10 years, 12 years, whatever it may
be it all began under Mr. Calwell : hose work in relation to
Imigration I think was adirablo: ( I've never denied that)
we have received substantially over a million new people into
this country. Our population has risen year by year, partly
by migration, partly by natural increase, at a percentage rate
rather higher than Japan. That is worth thinking about. 
6.
Do you remember how , we always used to be told that
of course the tooming millions wont on teoiing? Our
percontage increase has boon quite remarkable.
Now this is not easily done. You can't bring as
many people as that into a country without putting enornous
strains on the oconomy of the country. You have, and very
properly, great demands on the one side for houses and schools
and roads and facilities. You can't have 10% of the
population brand now, like that, without having all these
additional demands.
Of course on the other hand you add to your labor
force hundreds of thousands of people who are accustoiled to
working hard, who Jo into factories, who have taken on great
responsibilities, in heavy industries particulaly. So you try
to get some balance out of all these things.
But there must have been quite a few people who
thought that this large nigrition programmeo was foolish because
it would throw Australians out of rwork. Don't you think it
has been a pretty good achieov-nt over these ten years to take
in, and absorb, these hundreds of thousands, this million and
iore of people, without any unemployment at all? ( Applause)
Then take another thing, take another aspect of this.
You can't increase the population of the country at this rate
without setting out to develop the resources of the country.
Because if you didn't have the development of new resources,
you couldn't carry additional population.
Therefore we have had the most truemndous tas. in
front of us of developing Australia, not solely that we should
do it: the State Governmonts have had it; local authorities
have it. But Australia, as a N.. tion has had this treeondous
task of national development.
I don't think " nybody on either side of the House
would deny that the economic development in Australia in ten
years has been almost fabulous. Even my distinguished opponent
the Leader of the Opposition, had to say the other day. " I
adrh-it" as if it were a matter of reluctance " that the
country is very prosperous".
fell there it is. ( Interjectins) My dear fellow
the fact that you are alive doesn't disprove my case.
( Laughter) ift., r all, that kind of odd thing must occur in
the best regulated countries. ( Laughter) The fact is that it
is a very prosperous country.
1What is much more important, perhaps, than individual
prosperity, is the fact that the whole basis of future
development in Australia is being laid strongly and well. You
can see it in all asp. cts of our life.
In spite of L-bour doctrines to the contrary, it is
not possible to develop Australia, a country of ten million
people, merely by the savings of ten million people. Ton
million can save a good deal we do in .' ustralia but if we
are going to develop the cuuntry and take on these enormous
undertakings, like the Snowy Mountains Schone a œ 450 million
job if we are going to take on a lot of these other tasks
and perform them, then Te must be able to attract into
Australia capital from) overseas.
Now I just want to say something about this before
I finish capital from . verscas. ( Interjections) 
0 7.
I know that my friends opposite by opposite I mean
not there, but up at Canberra that my friends opposite are a
bit cold on sotting capital in fron overseas. They think, you
know, Mr. Chairman, that there is somothing wrong dout
allowing Americans, or Englishmon, or even Scotsmen, to come
into the country and invest their capital, and take somn
profits out of the country. This they regard in sono strange
way, as an evil thing.
Ladies and gentlemen, I wonder if they realise that
our net capital ' ain, not Government borrowing, but private
investment, genuine productive private investment, our capital
gain fron overseas in the last eight years has avera. od at
least œ 100 million a year; and last year it reached its peak
at œ 200 million. But for the movement into Australia of these groat
sums of refreshing money, this irrigation of Australian
enterprise, this creation of work and factories and i: iploynent,
the rate of progress in Australia would have been slowed down,
and we could not have accomnodated the flow of migrants that
we have received. That is just one of the simple facts of the economic
life of the nation. I-mention it to you because although you
will encounter people who will argue about all sorts of things
that touch them personally, or that are toeporary, your real
task now, and when the next General Election comes along, will
be to say to yourselves, quite simply: " Do we think that this
state of affairs will continue under the other Government?".
And of course it won't, of course it won't. eocause
people abroad are not fools on these matters. They are not
going to invest their money, and put their enterprise and skill
to work in a country if they think that it is an unstable
country if they think that it is run by people who are
ignorant, or incompetent. ( Interjections)
My dear boy one of these days you should sit down
and road a little history; it will greatly improve your mind.
You will find that your ideas about what happened then just
won't bear the slightest exanination.
( Interjection: " Now go on Bob, tell us about
inflation and r und it off. heard you') ( Laughter)
Stand up, stand up and let's Lave a look you. I
wish you would stand up because I reckon-( Interjections)
I wish you would have stood up, because at a glanco, in the
distance, I wouldn't think I needed to tell you anything
about inflation at all. ( Laughter, pplause)
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I have confined m: y renarks
to a couple of ratters which I think are of considerable
importance. I just repcat to you that you have a choice to
make on this matter. All I do is to urge you to make your
choice, with thought. I know that there is always somebody
wsho will say, " Ah, the Government is going to get it in the
neck". Iell, only the other day, metaphorically, we had a
by-election in Bendigo and I was told the same thing, ,. nd what
happened in Bondigo? The Government candidate got more votes
than before. The Labour majority was lower than it was before.
I thought it was pretty g: od.
. e had a by-election in Calare. The Government
majority increased. 
There arc all sorts of calariity hu-21rs, profe ssio. nal
nioaners, and those who cnt, rtain this strango oantastic,
juvenile idea that thero is something clever about kicking the
Govorriont ais long,-as you don't 17ick it Out,
You know that is a protty poor perfrmance isn't it?
They say, '" Iell it's a by-el ction, , iye them-a k: ick0 I t
won't put therm out':. Of course you would neverL dreami uf
voting theni out at a General Eliction, " Buit lot's Jve thorm
a kick". W~ ell I have hnad a fair fe's kicks in may tj-. ime, elnd I
won't loso cany sloep over it, ono a of-theoh' B3Ut I
think you will, unless this election -ces T believe ujill.
( Applause)
Question: I would like to know why does the Goernncont
consistently contest sea-ts in the country, as Liberals, against
the Country Party?
Pririe Ministcr: -dll, Sir, I Ui-sor., ry to,. disappoint but you) L i. my
not be aware of the fact that theru are t'io m-. aterial facts
here. One is that at Canberra r.-y Party and the Co: untry party
work to,, thor in Govornncnt in thei neist comr~ plete am-ity and
have done so for a record period of timeo.
The scecond is this, that if you would cast your eye
over the list of memorbers sittin-7 in thei House of Rop.-csontativizs
you would find that there are more country memlbers bolanr~ into
the) Libral Party than the(-rj are to any otheri Party, ( Apluse)
Question: I would like to direct a-questi. an, thmhyo-u
Chairman, to the Honuurablo the Prime 111inister.-4hy, a fter
spe aking for so long he did no) t me,, ntion Mr, Holt' s ' hoirro2"
budget? ( LauEghter)
Primo Minister: Sir, the : mIswer that is qui; Uc. siimp-lci 3&amp;-cLuse it
is not c, h-orror" budot it is a perifectly sensible set of vory
mioderate proposals. And before we, go muchn longer in AIustralia
people will re alise h-ow it s. Don't forgot that people
like you were screaming blue m-ur-der: backl ir 1952. about the
*-reat i3udget that was called the " Horror 31jd But by the
time. i it had done its wo-rrk, the -oa., sJ ror o-elocted by
the people of Australia. ( 1tippiaus,.) 
Question: Are you prOparod to ; ive us Neti-nal Insurance in this
c") untry?
Prime Minister: Sir, I venture to say that the Australian system of
Social Services has no sup-rior in the world. The fact is
that the answor to your complaint, if it is uno, is that there
have boon many, many thousands, hundreds of thousands of
people come out here to .' ustralia knowing what our Social
Services are. ~ nd I haven't hoard that they go back.
The fact is that you can never compare one set of
Social Services in ono country with another set in another
country, because they have different foundations and they
cover different itues. But the Social Service systom in
Australia is I venture to say we can always argue about
details in it in the broad, and in the substance, has no
supcri', r in the world. ( Applause)
Question: Will the Prime Ministor undertake soue rovision of our
education policy throughout r. ustralia so that we have
diplomats trained in sian languages, ministers trained in
observation and history of . Asian affairs and in general a
better educated Cabinet?
Prine Minister: I understand you perfectly Sir. I an very happy to
answer this question because I am surprised that you have not
realised that if any l-rii: ne iinister in the history of this
country can feel sor. pride about what has been done for
University education in Australia, I'm the fellow.
( Interjection: " You haven't done mnything")
Oh! Haven't we? : Jcll then, Sir, I will tell you
that my Govern. ient was the first Goverrnuont to establish
grants to the States for the State Universities. After
running tholn for a couple of yoirs, and establishing the
Coli-uonwealth scholarships
( Interjection: " 4f, 000 of theon")
There were 3,000. Joll don't you like to hear an
answer? You nay have learned Asian languages, but you badly
need to learn a little courtesy. ( Applause) I'll continuo
with my answoer to this somewhat jvasive inturjector of nine.
After running a systole of rants I ustablished the
Murray Convitteeoo. The i'urray Covinittej came out and
invostigated the " ustralian Universitios. They brought donm
reconreondations which involved what scoiod to us to be enorious
Coli: ronwealth oxpenditures on University education iwhich was
not, tochnically, our rcsponsibility.
adopted overy rucoiieondtion. And, in cunsoquence,
over the three years that have just finished, the C-;: innwelth
itself has fund over œ 20 million towards the Universities of
Australia c sui of money without which nuJt one of then: could
have expanded and half of then would have ) no broke. 
Then we appointed a Universities Coumission they
nay of course, be inconpotont people. Ithink they are a group
of the most distinguishod people in Australia under the
Chairmanship of Sir Leslie , Mrtin.
The Connission investigated the Universities. It
brought down its recommendations only the other day for the
second three years. Those recolmendations involved an increase
in the Commonwealth payments f-om 20 mili. ons in throe years
to œ 39 millions in the next three years, ihat is a total in
six years of œ 59 million. Every recolmnendation they made has
been accepted. And then I live long enouh to hcar some
fellow get up and say, " It's time we took a bit of interest in
Universities". ( Applause
Question: I ask the Prime Minister; :' Is it a fact that since
1949 prices have a little more than doubled? It is also a
fact that your Government has given only increase in child
endowment for one child only. Now wouldn't it logically
follow that the value of that child endow) ont is about half of
what it was originally? Do you think this is a good record?
Prime Ministor: Ladies and gentlemen, this question is a perfect
example of how people can got matters confused, The fact is
that I don't need to be put in the dock about child endowment.
My own Government introduced it. Nor do I need to be put in
the dock about the extension of child endowment for the first
child; because it was my Govcrnment that did it. So we have
a little positive entry on u: r books of child endowment. Your
Party has none.
If you are going to understand the significance of
Child Endowment then I want you to have a look at this.
Child Endowront was introduced at a time when the
Arbitration Court, as it then was, was greatly concerned to
know how it could do something better for the family wagoearner.
It was because of that exanination that child
endowment came into the picture.
Later on the . rbitr,' tion Court, and the Arbitration
Commission nor, and more developed the idea that the basic wage
ought to be the highest wage that industry can bear. So that
it is no longer just a matter of counting up what a family
needs though that may have some impact on it. The real
thing is to sy, " What is the highest wage that industry can
pay?". ' Wa3os in real terms have gone up since the first
introduction of child endoweont very much indeed.
If the gentleman putting the question will study a
little the ; raph of the cost-of-living figures, the series
Index, or whatever other Index figure he may care to look at,
and also look at the rises in the basic waoge to say nothing of
the competitive wages that are built up on top of it, he will
find that there has been a very substantial increase in real
wages at a time when the child endowvont payment has stood
still. One adds itself to the othor; and the result has been
a pretty prosperous co-munity. 



MESSAL~ 1GU2E TO rPARIPMnE Mii1ILNISTER, MR. hENZIES
FROM PRESIDENT-ELECT, SENATOR JOHN F. IENNEDY
The President-Elect of the United States, Senator
John F. Kennedy, has sent the following message to the Prime
riinister, Mr. Menzies
Many thanks for the generous message of good will
upon my election to the Presidency of the United States.
I warmly welcome the expression of cooperation from you
and your colleagues of the Government of Australia.
Our two nations share many common tasks, both in
our domestic affairs, and in our world responsibilities.
I knowr that the association among our peoples will become
even firmer in the years ahead.
' Jith every good wish, John F. Kennedy"
The message was delivered in Canberra today by the
United States Ambassador, Mr. 1William J. Sebald.
The Prime Minister sent the following message to the
President-Elect after the recent Presidential Elections:
My colleagues and I send you our congratulations
on your election to the great office of President.
In the discharge of your immense international
responsibilities you may be assured of Australian
co-operation and goodwill."
CAN3ERRA, 2nd December, 1960 



FOPXRS SDHEPEA RTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA
FELEA SED ONLY IN CANBERRA PR 131 gtQ
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister
for External Affairs.
The Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Menzies,
made the ftll1mwing statement on international affairs by leave in the
House of Representatives tnday
I do not propose in this statement to endeavour to deal with the
whole field of foreign affairs. Time would not pemit of such an oxercise.
But I think it might be useful to say something about certain of the key
points and to isolate, for purposes of discussion, some of the points of
danger. There is really not very much new to be said about the relations
between the Soviet Union and the Western World though I will take the
opp-ortunity of setting down something about the great problem of disarmamcnt.
I think that it has been the general view of Honourable M embers that some
good and perhaps much good might come of a Summit Meeting. As we know,
this failed to materialise in M4ay, since when there havo been allegations
and counter-allegations for the reascn of the failure. I remain optimistic
about the chances of securing a Summit Meeting. It will be remembered that
when I moved in that direction at the recent General kssembly, I was
supported by threo of the four nuclear powers United States, Great
Britain and France and not opposed the fourth the Soviet Union.
After these events, Mr. Khrushchev told me personally that he
favoured a Summit Meeting and indicated that he thought that first and
foremost disarmament and then other matters such as the Berlin problem,
the position of Germany, and nuclear tests could isefully be discussed. 
Page 2.
Not one of us will suppose that a Siunmit Meeting could solve all
the outstanding problems; but we would hope that it could make a
start and in that way begin to melt the ice which clogs up
international relations so much.
Meanwhile, within the Communist world itself, there are
clear signs of strain between tho Soviet Union and Communist China.
It seems clear that they do not entirely agree on broad communist
policy. The Soviet Union has adopted the policy of peaceful coexistence,
meaning by this, to be perfectly plain about it, that it
does not desire to resort to war as the direct instrument for
forwarding the Communist cause, but that it prefers the weapons
of propaganda, tied economic aid, and internal subversion. It appears
that Communist China on the other hand is disposed to reject the
idea of pdaceful co-existence and to pursue the classical Communist
belief that in the struggle against capitalism, violence remains
the vital instrument.
Mr. Uren. Who said that?
Mr. Menzies. I said it just now. When I make a reference
to the Communists there are always one or two honourable members whom
I do not expect to agree with me. Most people will, however.
A Meeting of Communist Parties was recently held in Moscow
at which we assume, and indeed have reason to believe, that an
attempt was made to resolve these disagreements. Tho official
communique of course says nothind of disagrooeements, but such in( icA-ti', n:
as we have suggest that the Sino-Soviet differences may not have bacn
resolved. Having said this, I simply indicate that in thc course cf
my present statement I will say something about developments in Afric.;,
with particular reference to Nigeria, the Congo, and South Africa;
something about the two immediate trouble spots in South-East Asias
Laos and South Vietnam; and something about the position of West
Now Guinea where potentially dangerous incidents appear to be cithtr
threatened or actually occurring. 
Page 3.
NEW AFRICAN~ COUNTRIES
There hasp in the course of this year, been a remarkable
development of new independent nations in Africa, most of whom have
already been admitted to the membership of the United Nations. We
genuinely welcome these new nations and look -forwarf. to devc-lop-ing
and maintaining with them happy and helpful relations. With many of
them, of course, we have had only the slightest of contact; hut our
knowledge of them will grow either through the United Nations or
ly
direct/ as the years go on. We have, of course, High Commissioners
in Ghana and Nigeria, the two Commonwealth countries. We have also
* veen represented at Independence Celebiations in such countries as
Qameroun, Togo, Somalia, the Congo Republic, Mauritania and Malagasy.
The newest Commonwealth country, Nigeria, seems to me to
afford a splendid examplo of how self-government should be achieved.
It is a large country, the most populous of the African nations.
It has the advantage of being led by men of uncommon training and
distinction. It is noteworthy that already a Nigerian, the Economic
Minister, has been chosen as Chairman of the United Nations Reconciliation
Commission to go to the Congo. Nigeria has been moving by stages
towards complete self-government over a period of years and has therefore
developed an efficient administrative ma-chine. I believe that it
will serve as a groat stabilising influence in a continent which is
as yet unhappilyv7dxed ' by some internal conflict. I have in mind, of
course, the tragic events which have occurred in the Congo to which I
shall direct some specific attention a little later. But before doing
so I would like to offer one or two, perhaps trite, remarks about
most of the new African nations.
They have gained political independence which is a proud
and dignified state of life. But some of them at least are not yet
economically independent. This presents the world with a problem,, the
solution of which will call for wise and generous statesmanship. 
Page 4.
True political independence must be built on sound economic
foundations; otherwise the nation may incur the risk of social discontent
and disorder and perhaps invite unwelcome and undesirable
intervention from outside. Such countries will need substantial
economic and technical help to develop their economies and to
strengthen their administrative system. lid of this kind should
be available " without strings". It would be offensive to these new
nations to treat them as pawns in an international contest or as
destined to pass into one orbit or another. Their independence must
be genuine and the judgments they form on international relations or
on association with other countries must be their own. So far the
Australian Government is making some contribution through the United
Nations Technical Assistance Programmes which are being substantially
increased, through other existing international programmes, and through
the International Dank. In addition, we have already offered a
number of fellowships and scholarships to African countries. A
special course of foreign service training has been in progress during
the past year in which young men from Ghana, Sierra Leone, Malaya
and the West Indies have taken part. Commonwealth Finance Ministers
decided in September to establish a specil Commonwealth schome for
help to Commonwealth countries. Naturally the details of this scheme
are not yct fully worked out.
Time will not pernit me to speculate about future develcpnorts
of nationhood in Africa though it is, of course, well known th'. t
political independence is not far off for Sierra Leone, Tanganyika,
Uganda and Kenya. I have learned today that the oon etitubicnal rcvio, 4
conference of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland has just
opened in London under the chairmanship of Mr. Macmillan. This
conference will have the advantage of tho patient and far-reaching,
examination recently conducted by the Monckton Commission. 
G. Page
I now turn to the Congo. The situation in the Congo is still
confused, difficult and dangerous. In his Annual Report to the United Nations,
the Secretary-General said that the United Nations had a duty by " preventive
diplomacy" that is his phrase to localise conflicts and to establish its
presence in areas where there was a " power vacuum" also his phrase and
where attempts by East or West to establish their influence would risk conflict.
By July such a situation arose in the Congo where the Belgian
transfer of power was fillowed by violent disorders. The Congolese Government
asked the United Nations to intervene to assure order, to supervise the
withdrawal of the Belgians and to give material aid.
The Security Council on July 14 called on the Government of
Belgium to withdraw its forces and gave a mandate to the Secretary-General
to provide the Congo with military assistance until the National Security
Forces might be able fully to meet their tasks. Later the Council unanimously
paid tribute to the work of the Secretary-General. On August 9, it confirmed
his authority while re-affirming that the United Nations force in the Congo
would not be a party to any internal conflict, constitutional or otherwise.
In the result, the United Nations has in fact been acting as a
stabilising f&amp; rco. As Honourable Mimbers will recall, this was
not to Ar Khrushchev's liking. By mid-September he habegun bitter
attacks -n United Nations operations in the Congo. In spite of this
a Special Session of the General Assembly by a vote of 70 to nil, with
only the Soviet Bloc abstaining, fully supported the mandate given by
the Security Council. ' In spite of this overwhelming vote, the Soviet
Union has continued to attack the Secretary-General and has refused to
pay its proper share of the cost cf the operations. The real reason for this
Soviet attitude is not that the Secretary-General has acted under Western
influence he has been notably independent but that the United
Nations has shown in the Congo that it can bring together an effective
force. 
1' agea 6
By preventing chaos it has been a serious obstacle to Communist
ambitions. The United Nations is, of course., not the only means of
solving domestic disorder which a State itself cannot settle.
There may be occasions when a State may prefer to invoke the help
of its neighbours or look to more distant friends for help in
dealing with internal problems just as it is entitled to request
support in its exercise of its inherent right of self-defence.
But in the Congo, memories of colonial status are recent
and neighbouring countries find themselves called upon to devote
most of their resources to their own urgent development. If therefore
in the case of the Congo we are to avoid a contest between
opposing groups for influence through aid programmes, clearly all
aid should be channelled through the United Nations.
The political and constitutional situation within the
Congo is still most unsettled. I will just mention one or two
striking aspects of it.
First, there is the position of Mr. Lumuinba who was
Prime Minister when the Congo received its independence, but was
subsequently dismissed by President Kasavubu. As Honourable Members
are aware, the position of Mr. Kasavubu has been recognised by the
seating of his delegation in the General Assembly by 53 votes,
including our own, to 24. The persunaj. fate of Mr. Lumumba, who is
now under arrest, appears to be at present a matter of great uncertainty
techrnicallY at rmy ratethough
he is still a Deputy in the Congolese Parliament.
Second, the rmy Chief of Staff, Colonel Mobutu) proclaimed
that is his wcrd
the temporary " neutralisation" pf the Congolese Parliament and its
political leaders and the establishment by him of a College of
Commissioners to administer the country pending the restoration of
more normal government.
Third, there is the position of Mr. Tshombe, Prime Minister
of Kabanga Province, who does not accept -the authority of Leopoldville
but who, we hope, would co-operate in a United Congo, which badly
needs the economic strength and resources of 1ataaga if it is to become
self supporting. There have been similar tendencies in Kasai 
Pare 7.
also
province which i' a relatively rich area.
There are hopes that the position may begin to clear.
The General Assembly has appealed to the Congo to seek a speedy
solution. A Reconciliation Commission has been established,
consisting of a majority of the African and Asian members of the
Secretary-General's Advisory Committee. In addition to this,
President Kasavubu himself has said that he envisages a " roundtable
conference" of Congolese political leaders.
The economic and administrative aspects of the problem
are, of course, tremendously important. The United Nations military
forces and technical task force have been hampered by the absence
either of a suitable ministry or of the elements of a proper system
of administration. The General Assembly has appealed for voluntary contributions
to a fund for the Congo for these purposes. Australia has great
sympathy for this troubled country. We have already made a modest
response to calls for specific practical help through medical teams
and otherwise. We shall be prepared to meet our share of the cost
of maintatihneiyn ga rtehe United Nations forces which are in the Congo;
at present/ of the order of 20,000 drawn from 14 different countries.
The costs of this force will be hirh. We have decided to mako 2
contribution of 750,000 dollars to tho United Nations Conilc Fund.
The great canger still is that this territory may become
the centre of international rivalries. The Soviet Union and other
moddlers have in their own hands the means of avoiding such a
disaster. 
lage 8.
COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS I turn now to Commonwealth 4ffairs
There have been important developments affecting the
Commonwealth. Nigeria is now a Commonwealth country and we have appointed
a High Commissioner to Lagos.
Cyrpus has become an independent republic and may ask to
become a member of the Commonwealth.
South Africa, at the recent referendum, decided to adopt a
republican constitution. This has given rise to discussion about the
effect of this step on South Africa ' s continuing membership of the
Commonwealth. In the past, the fact that a Commonwealth country has
become a republic has not led to its exclusion from the Commonwealth.
But feelings in many places run high about South Africa and it is
therefore desirable that the relationship between a Republic of
South Africa and the Commonwealth should be considered quietly and
carefully. Our own view is that it should be the subject of joint
deliberation among the Governments of the Commonwealth before
individual government decisions are publicly stated. There will be
a favourable opportunity for such consultation at the next Prime
Ministers' Conference. No doubt the position of Cyprus might be
considered at the same time.
The whole question of the future constitution of the
Commonwealth is clearly important and not without difficulty since
we may expect over a relatively short period of years to have more
British countries, now colonies, achieving independence and seeking
admission to the Commonwealth. The questions involved received
some attention at the last Prime Ministers' Conference when an
official committee was set up to study them. We will no doubt have
further thought given to the matter in March. 
tage 9,.
IOS I turn now to Lacs.
The preservation of Laotian independence is important
both for its own -4ake and because the loss of Laos to communism
would expose other South-East Asian countries to serious threat.
With a population of probably not more than 2-million and with
long and -ulnerable frontiers, Laos has struged to maintain its
integrity against constant pressures from Communist China and
Communist North Vietnam and against internal Pathet Lao insurgency.
We believe that any government of Laos which desires to retain
genuine independence has two tasks.
The first is that, while maintaining a determination not
to submit to Commuiism, Laos should avoid givig its powerful
Communist neighbours even the flimsiest excuse for interference.
This is why neutrality as distinct from military alliances has
seemed the only practical course for the country.
The second task is that of settling the internal troubles.
Some fighting between the forces of the government and of General
Phoumi have already taken place. While the Government of Souvanna
Phouma controls the administrative capital, Vientiane, anti-government
but non-communist supporters of General Phoumi control the Royal
capital of Luang Prabang. This is a tragic situation. The
Communists alone, working through the i'athct Lao profit from the
division and fighting between the non-communists.
The imperative need inside Laos is for unity among, non-
Communists so that the real onomies of Laos and Laotian neutrality
the Communists can be isolated and resisted.
We have a deep interest in these matters. The . minton-anc
of Laotian independence will be a symbol of a nation's resistance t;.
Communism in Asia. And aggressive communism in Asia and pressinL
out to the borders of the asian continent reoresents a mcnaco to us.
Nobody would doubt that the result in Laos will be important to the
security of countries like Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand, whose
safety is one of the aims of the South-East Asian Treaty. 
Page
VIETNAM There are many current criticisms of the policy of the
government of South Vietnam on the ground that it is too authoritarian,
too highly centralised, and that it is not undertaking necessary
reforms. But I point out that reftorms aire not easy to introduce in
the face of heavy Communist pressure.
President Diem is beyond question a man of courage and
resource. His Government is not only subject constantly to hostile
propaganda from Hanoi but is also faced by greatly increased communist
insurgency throughout the countryside.
Recently the President survived an armed revolt from a
small group from within the army. It is, I think, important that
we should have a sympathetic and intelligent interest in the
difficulties which this country has struggled with since 1954. In
order to maintain resistance and development, the Republic has been
obliged to maintain large armed forces. its policy, to an externt which
has been criticised,~ 0li it necessary to curtail the political
liberties enjoyed in more fortunate countries. It has had,-to battle
against rebels who are masters of guerilla warfare. It has had to
do all these things in a difficult terrain with large areas of swamp
and jungle and with long and exposed frontiers.
I am sure that the resolution which the Vietnamese people
have shown in these lost six years, the increasing political experience
of their leaders and continued Western aid and encouragement can carry
the Republic through its present difficulties. 
. ge 1
WEST NEW GUINEA The House has previously debated the Australian attitude
towards the future of West New Guinea. The policy of the Government
is well known and needs no re-statement. There are, however, two
recent developments which should be recorded.
The first is that the P~ rime Minister of Malaya; in a series
of conversations in various countries, has been putting forward
proposals with respect to the future of West New Guinea. He was good
enough to convey to me the kind of thing he had in mind and I promptly
conveyed to him the attitude of the Australian Government. Since the
Prime Minister has not, so far as I know, published his proposals I
am not at liberty to disclose them. But I can say, and I should say,
that I have made it clear that we adhere strongly to the principle that
the future of the Territory should be one satisfying its ihhabitants
and determined in accordance with their freely expressed wishes.
This principle is, of course, the basis of our own policy
in lcapua and New Guinea. Clearly it is also the basis of the Nether-lands
Government's declared policy in its territory and of recent constitutional
developments in both countries. In addition, I have made it clear
that whatever discussions might in future occur between the Netherlands
and Indonesia these should not be influenced by threats of force.
It is interesting to note that while abroad, the Prime
Minister of Malaya had discussions at the Hague with Dr. de Q~ uay,
the Prime Minister of the Netherlands. They issued a communique in
" Talks were of an exploratory nature and were held in a very
friendly atmosphere. The Netherlands Government greatly
appreciates the activities and constructive interest in this
matter on the part of Tunku Abdul Rahman. The Prime Minister
of the Federation of Malaya noted with satisfaction that the
Netherlands Government are willing to subject their policies
in Netherlands New Guinea to the scrutiny and judgment of the
United Nations. It w~ as agreed that the Prime Minister of the 
Page ' 12.
Federation of Malaya, who has already held similar talks
on this issue with other Governments as well as with the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, would in the
light of the outcome of these various talks consider
whether at a later stage further talks might be useful.
In such an event, he will inform the Netherlands
Government accordingly." These wer, th. terms of the ccimmuniquc,
It is not to be taken from this communique that the
Netherlands Government is offering to submit the question of
sovereignty to the United Nations. It has made it quite clear that
it is not doing so. Honourable Members will recall that the
Indonesian claim to sovereignty of West New Guinea has not been based
primarily upon legal considerations. For this reason Indonesia has
consistently declined to submit its claim to the International Court.
some
The second development is the recent landing of/ Indonesians
in West New Guinea.
On 21st November the Netherlands Ministry of Home Affairs
announced that a small armed group of Indonesians landed on the
South-west coast of Dutch New Guinea in mid November and some were
apprehended. On 29th November the sa. me Ministry announccd that the
Dutch Navy had interccpted and apprehcnded in waters aro. nd Dutch ' nv
Guinea an Indonesian vessel which wis intended be supply an earlier
Cgrcup of infiltrators. There have been several r,_-orts of Indonesian public
statements on these infiltrations, the mcst recent of which was by
few
an official spokesman of the Indonesian Navy who on 2nd Docembur/ said:
" so far as I know the Indonesian armed forces have never ; cnductod
infiltrations into" Netherlands New Guinea. 
iage 13.
At the same time there have been several references by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dr. Subandrio whom many honourable
members will recall as a distinguished visitor to Australia last year
to the possibility of an armed clash with the Netherlands in the. future
over West New Guinea. I have, of course, studied what Dr. Subandria
said. I hope that his remarks do not repudiate previous assurances
given by both i1resident Sukarno and Dr. Subandric regarding the intentions
of the Indonesian Government not to use force to obtain a solution of
the dispute over West New Guinea. Indeed, Sir, I think I am right in
saying that since I wrote those words earlier in the week there has been
word confirming that he repeats that attitude.
On 4th December, in discussing these and related matters with
the Australian Ambassador, Lr. Subandrio said that his comments to the
Ambassador on recent events did not mean any change in the Indonesian
policy of pursuing their claim by peaceful means.
There have been, of course, Sir, various Indonesian suggestions
that the Dutch, by making some small reinforcement of their defences in
West New Guinea, have acted provocatively. One has only to point out
that the forces available to the Netherlands in West New Guinea are a
tiny fraction of those actually under arms in Indonesia to show how
unreal these allegations are.
We certainly have no evidence in fact or any reason to support
the strange notion that the Netherlands propose to launch an attack on
Indonesia. Suggestions so fanciful do not help the understanding of the
real nature of the problem.
Finally, Sir, I turn to the problem of disarmament. Australians
share the almost universal concern at the continued increase in armaments,
including nuclear armaments. There is a sort of psychological control
present when nuclear weapons are, as at present, confined to four nations.
But there will no doubt be a constant pressure so long as the threat of
war exists to have such weapons made available to other nations.
We believe that if the number of countries possessing such
weapons were substantially increased or if they fell into irresponsible
hands, the world would live in a state of great dred.* 
iPage 14.
The throat to use them could indeed become a weapon of blackmail
in pursuit of territorial or other gains* As I have frequently sai. d,
myself, armaments are much more the result than the cause of international
tension. I should like to remind Honourable Members that one of the
groat causes of tension in the Western World is the continued
enslavement of the once free powers of Middle Europe by the Soviet
Union. It would, I think, be idle to suppose that the making of
some agreement, leading even to a substantial reduction in armaments,
can bring genuine peace to Europe or reconcile the enslaved nations
to their slavery. Disarmament is therefore a matter to be approached not as an
exercise in rhetoric or as a piece of detached idealism but as a hard
practical matter. We have ourselves emphasised that disarmament in the
nuclear field alone would not and the threat of war but might very well
increase it since the Communist Powers have such predominance in
conventional weapons and forces. Disarmament must occur in all fields
and as it proceeds be accompanied at all stages by full inspection and
control. It is, of course, impossible to discevcr what is the real aim.
of a dictatorship since it is subject to no probing or questions of
public opinion and does not havo to engage in democratic debate.* We ar
therefore without the means of answering confidently any question about
what is in Khruschev's mind. It is pernmissible to believe that his
stated desire for disarmament may be to a point genuine. He is eng. a0CC
in some raising of the standard of living of his own people; in certain
branches of science and technology his country has made great strides.
The more these results are achieved, the more criticism will begin tc
evolve inside the Soviet Union and the more resentment there may be at
the vast size of the burden of armaments and the enormous concentrati , n
of what, after all, must be limited scientific resources on war-like
affairs. 
Page
On the other hand, Khruschev can see great advantages
for his own country in its struggle for power if he can divide his
opponents, persuade their people that ' the Soviet Union genuinely
desires disarmament and so create in them an unwillingness to
all very confusing.
sustain the necessary burdens. I't is, sir, to put it quite shortly,!
One reason I have for believing that there is more
propaganda than substanco in the Soviet view is that at the last
Assembly, Khruschev himself, having previously ordered his
representatives out from the Ten-Power Disarmament Committee in
June, came along to the General Assembly to advocate that there
should be a negotiation on disarmament in the General Assembly.
This, I think, threu a murky light on his tactics. Nobody with a
genuine desire for concrete negotiations on disarmament could think
the General Assembly with its 100 delegations ( mann not less thrcn
1000 delegates and alternates) an appropriate meeting ground for
genuine negotiation. This great problem requires deliberation,
reflection, honest exchange., It can be negotiated only in a
body of limited numbers.
That what I will call the Western Powers desire disarmament
quite
is/ clear. The whole Western social, political and economic system
depends for its success on peace. Its free institutions and the
free spirit of its people are not well suited to having a sustained
" Cold war".* Yet we cannot disarm unilaterally, nor can we be directly
or indirectly parties to any disarmament agreement unless we know
that it contains sufficiently strong meansof inspection and control
as to. make us not entirely dependent on Soviet good faith. The
Western Powers will insist that while they are disarming they must
be able to see that others are also doing so. This means not only
being able to see how many weapons are being destroyed but also how
many remain behind. Because of the secrecy surrounding Communist
military capacity and intentions, and because of the Lack of
confidence now existing, the West has always insisted on proper
supervision to be ready to operate when disarmament begins and to
apply as it proceeds. 
Page 16.
This, Sir, is " disarmament with controls" not, as the Communist profcsrcs
to believe, " controls without disarmament".
Attempts tc negotiate disarmament agreements have now been
in progress for over a decade in the United Nations. Recently they
have been conducted in a 10-Powor Committee whose composition was
agreed upon to meet Russian demands. The Communist delegates, as I
have said, walked out at the very time when they knew Western proposals
of a positive kind were about to be submitted. We think that the
Committee of ten should resume its activities; for what is wanted if
there is to be any measure of disarmament is not speeches at a large
public meeting but honest negotiations at close quarters.
The Western proposals are based on the following fundamental
principles: I state them quite briefly
1. Disarmament should be carried out in stages during which
nuclear and conventional disarmament should be so balanced
that no country or group of countries obtain at any stage a
significant military advantage.
2. Compliance with disarmament obligations will be effectively
verified both as to quantities, destroyed and quantities remaining.
3. ircvisions for such insp. ction, vorification : 2nd control must
form an integral part cf any aOrrecr:: nt on disrmancnt,
4. Transition from stage to stage shall bc dependent Cn assuranco
that the measures in the precoding sta. ge have boon satisfactorily
implemented. The Wast in Juno presented a detailed plan based on the abov,
principles. With the concurrence of honourable members, I incorporate tlij2r
informative document in " Hansard"-I have taken this subject last in
chronological order, but it is, of course, of obvious and overwholming
importance to the world. The plan is as follows 
I-Age 17.
" The ultimate goal is a secure and peaceful world of
free and open societies in which there shall be general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control and agreed procedures for the settlement of
disputes in accordance with the principles of the United
Nations Charter.
General and complete disarmament in a secure, free
and peaceful world requires
1. The disbanding, through progressive stages, of all
armed forces of all States and the prohibition of
their re-establishment in any form whatsoeveic,
except for thlose contingents of agreed size required
for the purpose of maintaining internal order and
ensuring the personal security of citizens and for
agreed contin-. ents for the international peace force.
2. The cessation of the production of all kinds of
armaments, including all means for delivering
weapons of mass destruction, and their complete
elimination from national arsenals, through
progressive stages, except for those armaments agreed
upon for use by an international peace force and
agreed remaining national contingents.
3. Strict and effective international control, from
beginning to end, of the carrying out of all
disarmament measures, to ensure that there are no
violations. The establishmnent of effective means for enforcement
of international agreements and for the maintenance
of peace.
Controlling principles:
1. Disarmament under effective international control
shall be carried out in such a manner that at no time
shall any State, whether or not a party to a Treaty,
obtain military advantage over other States as a
result of the progress of disarmament.
2. General and complete disarmament shall proceed through
three stages containing balanced, phased and safeguarded
measures with each measure being carried out
in an agreed and strictly defined period of time,
under the supervision of an International
Disarmament Control Organization, within the framework
of the United Nations.
3. Each measure within each stage shall be initiated
simultaneously by all participa ting States upon
completion of the necessary preparatory studies
and upon establishmeint of the arrangements and
procedures necessary for the International Disarmament
Control Organization to verify the measures on
an initial and continuing basis. 
Page 18.
0 4. Transition from one stage to the next shall be
initiated when the Security Council of the United
Nations agrees that all measures in the preceding
stage have been fully implemented and effective
verification is continuing, and that any additional
verification arrangements and procedures required for
measures in the next stage have been established and
are ready to operate effectively.
The Treaties shall remain in force indefinitely subject
to the inherent right of a Party to withdraw and
be relieved of obligations thereunder if the
provisions of the Treaty, including those providing
for the timely installation and effective operation of
the control system, are not being fulfilled and
observed.
6. The International Disarmament Control Organization
shall comprise all participating States whose
representatives shall meet as a conference periodically
as required. There shall in addition be a control
commission and a Director General. The specific
responsibility and authority of the conference,
control commission and the Director General, the
staffing arrangements and criteria, the responsibilities
of participating States to the Organization, and
provisions for any necessary preparatory or interim
group to aid in the establishment of the Organization
shall be specified in the Treaty.
7. The specific arrangements, procedures and means
required for effective initial and continuing
verification of satisfactory performance of each
measure by the International Disarmament Control
Organization shall be specified in the Treaties.
These shall provide for all necessary means required
for effective verification of compliance with each
step of each measure. Verification of each agreed
disarmament measure shall be accomplished in such a
manner as to be capable of disclosing, to the
satisfaction of all participating States, any evasion
of the agreement. Specifically, from the initiation
of implementation of each agreed disarmament measure,
there shall be effective verification by the
International Disarmament Control Organization;
verification shall be in no way dependent upon
declarations by States for its effectiveness;
verification shall include the capability to ascertain
that not only do reductions of armed forces and
armaments in agreed amounts take place, but also that
retained armed forces and armaments do not exceed
agreed levels at . ny stage.
TASK OF THE TEN NATION COMMITTEE ON DISARMAMENT
The task of the Ton Nation Committee on Disarmament
is to work out a Treaty for general and complete
disarmament under effective international control governed
by the foregoing controlling principles as follows
1. Negotiate and agree upon a Treaty, to be acceded to
in the first instance by the States represented on the
Ten Nation Disarmament Committee, embodying the first
stage of the programme. This stage shall consist of
those initial and controllable measures which can and
shall be undertaken without delay by the States
participating in the Committee to preclude the
expansion of their armed forces; to bring to a halt
the growth of their weapons stockpiles; to reduce
the levels of their armed forces and armaments to the 
S 0 
Ta I-.
extant possible wiithouat jeopardy to their security;
and to provide measurs for protection against
surprise attack.
2. In the course of no~ otiatin such a Treaty, arrangfor
and conduct the necessary technical studies to
work out effective control arrangements for 1iasuros
to be carried out in the prograrm. Thcse studies
shall provide an agreed basis for proceeding with
impleme. iontation of the measure studied in the
appropriate Stage. Among the narly studies shall be
a technical examination of the measures necessary to
verify control ov-r, reduction and elimination of
agreed categories of nuclea-r delivery system" is,
including m issil.. z aircraft, surface ships,
suoiarincs , and eartillary.
3. After reaching areeent on a ' fraty on the first
stage of the programne, prepare for submission to a
world disarm-, ament confornce aLn agreed draft Treaty
on the second and third stages of the programme-. io as
set forth below, in accordance with the foregoing
controlling principles.
4. Thereupon, arrange for a wiorld-wide conference of all
States, to be held at thie earliest possible tine, for
thc following purposes:
Accession to the Treaty covering stage one by
Status which have not already done so;
Accession to the iTraty covering stages two and
three by all States
S TAGE ONE:
1. An International Disarm.-iament Control Organization
shall be established within the framework of the
United Nations, and expanded as required by the
pr o rssjv ie; l ir of eannde raclom : pletedisamaiient.
2. Thu placing into orbit or 3tationing in outer space
of veh icle) s Lcarryin ; l-n. pons expble of mass
destruction shall b, -oroiibited.
3. To 1yve~ r~ te ), rotctior noa inst surprise attack,
prier notification to the; Intenational
Disarvilaient Control Organization of all proposed
launchings of spacc vehicles ard r. iissiles and their
planned track s; the s ; ablishmnt of a zone of
aerial and ground inspection in a. 3r3eed -areas including
the and US. SR.; exchange of observers on a
ru-procal basis at -grr; d rilitary b ses, domstic
zad foreign.
4. Dclra.) tion of and insti1tution of on-site inspection
at umuta-lly agreecd operLtional air bas. s, iiissile
launchin*' Y pads, submsarine and naval bases in orde. r te
. stablish ai basis for controls ovcri nuclear delivcry
systms in subsquent sta. ses.
Initial -force level coilins shall be established a. s
follows-2.5 million for the U. S. and the . S. S. R.
and ag-reed appropriate force levels for certain othKej:
Sta tos. Aftjir t!-e accession to the Traty of other
Limilitarily si;, nifi cant Sttes , ifter these initical
force lcvels ha~ z bean vrified, force levels of 2.1
illion shall be established for th and L. S. B.
c d ag. r cod Opropriate; force 1erelcs shall be
c t Il A ,1 , r t i Cca I-Ste 
Page
6. Agreed types and quantities of armaments in agreed
relation to the established force levels shall be
placed in storage depots by participating States
within their own territories, under supervision by
the International Disarmament Control Organization
pending their final destruction or conversion to
peaceful uses.
7. The production of fissionable materials for use in
weapons shall be stopped upon installation and
effective operation of the control system found
necessary to verify this step by prior technical
study and agreed quantities of fissionable materials
from past production shall be transferred to nonweapons
uses, including stockpiling for peaceful
purposes, conditioned upon satisfactory progress in
the field of conventional disarmament.
8. The submission by the various States to the
International Disarmament Control Organization of
data relating to: the operation of their financial
system as it affects military expenditures, the
amount of their military expenditures, and the
percentage of their gross national produot earmarked
for military expenditures. The data to be submitted
will be dram up in accordance with predetermined and
mutually agreed criteria.
STAGE TJO:
1. Force levels shall be further reduced to 1,7
million for the U. S. and U. S. S. R. and to agreed
appropriate levels for other States.
2. Quantities of all kinds of armaments of each State,
including nuclear, chemical, biological and other
weapons of mass destruction in existence and all
means for their delivery, shall be reduced to agreed
levels and the resulting excesses shall be
destroyed or converted to peaceful uses. Agreed
categories of missiles, aircraft, surface ships,
submarines and artillery designed to deliver nuclear
and other weapons of mass destruction shall be
included in this measure.
3. Expenditures for military purposes shall be reduced
in amounts bearing a relation to the agreed
reductions in armed forces and armaments.
4. An international peace force, within the United
Nations, shall be progressively established and
maintained with agreed personnel strength and
armaments sufficient to preserve world peace when
general and complete disarmament is achieved.
STAGE THREE:
1. Forces and military establishments of all States
shall be finally reduced to those levels required
for the purpose of maintaining internal order and
ensuring the personal security of citizens and of
providing agreed contingents of forces to the
international peace force.
2. The international peace force and remaining agreed
contingents of national armed forces shall be
armed only with agreed types and quantities of
armaments. All other remaining armaments, including
weapons of mass destruction and vehicles for their
delivery and conventional armamonts shall be
destroyed or converted to peaceful uses. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT THE ANNUAL MEETIN4 ROYAL PRINCE ALFRED
HOSPITAL. SYDNEY. ON THE 9TH DACEMBER. 1960.
Sir, and Sir Charles, and ladies and gentlemen:
I'm in a very low state today, having been out of my
bed last night until 4+ o'clock helping to make a mess of
Parliamentary proceedings. And I am therefore liable, I warn
you, at any tick of the clock, to go to sleep, even before you
do. ( Laughter) But at any rate I have been fascinated this
afternoon by a variety of matters. One in particular is that a
mystery has been solved. I knew that my distinguished
colleague, Dr. Cameron, was an old Royal Prince Alfred man he
never ceases to let us undorstand that; it seems to be almost
a point of pride.
I also knew that, like his predecessor in the office
of Minister for Health, he has an almost diabolical faculty for
getting a few more millions out of us evcry year, than in the
year before; and occasionally, as he knows I will take him on
one side in a fatherly way, and rebuku him lor this
extravagance. , Today the mystery is solved he was trained under
this chap. ( Laughter)( Applause) I realise now that whenever
Don Cameron is having a civilised and cautious moment, this man
gets hold of him, and addresses him, and throws in a few
humorous and disarming remarks and gets away with the booty.
( Laughter) Well, Sir, I hope you will continue to get away with
the booty. I was very delighted to have the chance of coming
here for two or throe ruasons, with all the details of which I
won't weary you.
But I did observe that this Hospital began as a
University School of Medicine. I put it in a very approximate
way. That has not been the uniform pattern in Australia, not
the normal line of development in Australia.
It does mean that it has had, and continues to have
a close communion with the University in point of ideas, and in
point of space. The; r-,' ore it-stands as a great instrument of
healing and a great ins trument of instruction. I can~ t imagine
a more remarkable and romantic history, than this Hospital has
had. But until I came out here this afternoon I had no
idea that it was far more than what I think of as a hospital
you know, a hospital, a good modern hospital, with superb
accommiodation for the patients, and even more superb acconmmodation
for the nurses, which I think is a splendid idea,
You see these tall buildings standing up into the
sky? This, Sir Herbert describes in a rare flash of modesty,
as a village it struck me as being a city! This enormous
jurisdiction of his is so great that really he should have been
made Lord Mayor ( Laughter) of Royal Prince Alfred. I will
convey that suggestion to my distinguished colleague from the
State Government. But it really is a fantastic thiing. You are used to
it; Itm not. All this car-e to Lie with the charm of novelty 
0 2.
that you should have, not only what you can recognise as HQspital
buildings, nurses' homes and so on these are orthodox. and
identifiable._-but you go along the. . streetl
I have been taken up. to. a centre-just-up the street
which I found quite fabulous, in which rehabilitation is going
on, in which people are being given all the psychological
stimulus of being able to work, and produce things and feel that
they are doing something for themselves and doing it side by
side with other people who are handicapped; and being, in the
case of the last building I went into, managed by two people who
are themselves, not without physical handicaps.
This is, I think, a tremendous, exciting sort of
thing. I em sure that if I had time to go around all the
streets in this hospital city I would find not only some tumbledown
looking houses which I haven't failed to observe but I
would find studded here and there, some new manifestation of an
activity of a hospital which I venture to say nobody, when I was
a boy, ever thought of.
That, to me, is the remarkable thing. What was
orthodox, years ago, still remains orthodox in a sense; but it
has had added to it as the imagination of men and women has
laid hold of subjects and problems an almost infinite variety
of activities designed to restore the body, and the mind and
the spirit. Now those things happen in the world; they are among
the great evidences of civilisation in a century which has not
been conspicuous for civilisation. But here you have great
evidences of the essence of humanity.
I have had a good deal of experience in another field,
as you know, and I long since learned that the ancient
philosopher was right when he said: " I seek a man, I seek a man".
There's hardly a problem that I have over had to look at which
was intrinsically difficult of solution by an intellectual
process, but which could not really be solved in practice unless
you could put your hand on the right man to take responsibility
for it, to direct it, to imagine it, to see it through.
We are so much disposed, ourselves to attend to our
own affairs in life that we occasionally fail to identify the
true leaders of community effort. But every now and then you
will come across one. You have one, today, in the chair.
( Applause) I can't imagine that what has gone on in this great
Hospital could have gone on as far or as fast if it were not for
this cheerful, dynamic, driving personality of Sir Herbert
Schlink. Therefore, we ought to praise famous men and I would
like, on your behalf, to praise him today. Bcauso this is a
grea life work.
There is another thing that I would like to say just a
word or two about. Reference was made both by Sir Herbert and
Sir Charles about the teaching hospitals, which of course,
brings us at once to the broad, educational field.
I, of course, discard this rather hilarious
epigrammatic remark made by the Chairman, that he would sooner
be healthy than educated. He can afford to say that because
he is both. ( Laughter) Therefore I twit him with having made
the most purely academic observation this afternoon, that I ever
heard him make. 
The truth of the matter is and this is how I have
approached this problem myself that thG teaching hospitals in
their teaching aspects are part of the educational structure,
and ought to be looked at as part of the university structure
of the country. You can't just detach them and say that one has
no relation to the other.
That is why, when the now Universities Cormission was
appointed, it took early steps to establish a committee of
advice on this very matter, I having stated to them that I
thought that this was properly to be considered as part of the
overall university problem of the country.
I see here this aftornoon representatives of the
residential colleges. There again is an evidence that you
can't look at the problem of university education, except in the
most comprehensive fashion; you can't cut it down to a few
narrow ideas. It is ten years now since I was told by one or two
members of the first Committee which I established on this
problem that residential colleges in universities were luxuries
and that they really ought to look after themselves.
I reject that idea. I reject it because I am a great
believer in education, a great believer, if I may make so
unpopular a remark, in scholarship, and, if you like, in pure
scholarship at that.
Because here is one of the great humanising things,
the great civilising things in the mind of can. To set a
university up, and say, " Well residential colleges arc a luxury,
they are to get nothing; the rest of it is to get something
teaching universities, they are nothing to do with the
university; they are something that hospitals attend to,
therefore they are out of the picture", is a false division.
I know that whenever I talk like this, and set up a
Cozmittee, or a Commission, I have to conceal myself for some
time thereafter from the stony glances of my colleagues and
friends in the Treasury. Mr. Shehan is nt the only man who
prays every morning to have strongth to deal with the
Treasury. ( Laughter)
But Treasuries are not so uncivilisod as people
suppos. I think when we began as a Commonwealth Goverrnment to
deal with the university problem as such, and to rake Grants
back in 1950, the Grants were of modest proportion. I haven't
the figures by me, but they would probably fall short of a
million pounds in the year. But it was a beginning.
It was a beginning in a field in which the Commonwealth
itself did not have a direct or primary responsibility. It was
a beginning in what is, broadly, a State field.
But in the State field the burden of education, year
by year, has grown. I think myself that there has been an
enormously enterprising approach to it on the part of State
Governments. In the State of New South Wales the growth in
expenditure on education affairs has, I think been remarkable.
And the sane goes for other States that I could refer to.
But the Universities teaching at that level, living
education at that level, were in a financial condition in which
the choice would very soon have been between positively
bankrupting State Budgets, or bankrupting universities or
forcing them into charging such fees that the universities,
instead of being, as they are now, the most democratic of all 
comr. unities, right have become what an old political opponent of
mine once described as the ' bare gardens of the idle rich'.
Therefore we had to go on the Murray Cor. mission,
the present Cormmission.
Just so that you will see that Governments are not
unaware of this problem let me tell you that in the three years
covered by the Murray Committee's Report, which positively
rocked us, financially, with its magnitude, the Comonwealth
Government provided something of the order of œ 20 to œ 21
million. And, under the first Report of the new Universities
Commission, which contains increased provisions for
universities increased provisions -for residential colleges, and
so on, the œ 20O to œ 21 million rises to œ 39 to 40 million. Now
these, for anybody except Sir Herbert Schlink, are big sums of
money. ( Laughter) That is not the end of it. But there is one word of
warning I would like to utter on this matter. It isn't really
everybody who can benefit by university training. I know there
is a great theory that everybody can and will.
But when I open the newspapers, and when you open the
newspapers, and see the appalling failure rates in first year,
you begin to say to yourself, " Shouldn't the whole of this
conception be revised a little? Are we necessarily right in
continuing to have universities developed in the future on the
classical 19th century model?" Or, should we try to get more
variation into this some people going to a university in the
sense that we understand it, because they have the talent to
produce brilliant results; and others, perhaps to other types
of technological institutes, or whatever it may be?
This is a broad problem, and the Universities
Commission is going into it right away. And for the very good
reason that so great, and of course so healthy, is the demand
for university training today, that the undergraduate population
will become fantastic before we are 20 years older.
I think I an right in saying that at the end of
years, 25 years, certainly no more, there would be a demand,
provided the thing went as it does now, for 100,000 undergraduates
in Australian universities.
That would mean an expansion which would be equivalent
to establishing, in every period of about five years, a couple
of new universities in Australia.
These are troemendous tasks, and we must all look at
them with a good deal of caution, with a good deal of sympathy,
with a good deal of interest. They are going to provide
problems for my successors, and for your successors. No doubt
they will grapple with them. But they will grapple with then
all the better if the public continually understands that there
is a price to be paid for admiralty, even in the area of the
mind. Now the only other matter that I want to say a word
about is this. I an the least of all God's creatures when it
comes to knowing about hospitals rmy wife is by way of being a
species of expert becauso she had a great deal to do with them
in the city of Melbourne. But I was always impressed, from the
very beginning, with the astonishing work done by auxilliaries,
not merely because of the intrinsic product, but because of the
ihuane spirit that they helped to contribute to the hospital
itsel 
a I have been disturbed as many of you have by the
tendency, particularly in recent years, to say, " Well we pay
high taxes let the Government attend to it. It is the
Government's business to run it to pay for it". " I pay my
taxes", says somebody as if that wore an act of virtue instead
of being one of compulsion. ( Laughter) " I pay my taxes, let
the Government look after it".
There was never a truer observation made than the
observation addressed to men, this was, it doesn't need to be
addressed to women that every nan in the course of his life
ought to perform some unpaid duty to his follow men; preferably
he ought to do it at a loss. This is the essence of the spirit
of service. You think of all the nen who have served the conmunity
handsomely, in Church or State, you won't think of too nany who
have done it because there was a profit in it.
This spirit of sacrifice, of contribution is vital to
a healty commnnunity. And I hope that we won't get to a stage
when auxilliaries are a thing of history when voluntary donations
will dry up because " I pay my taxes and there's nothing more to
be done". Because if that were to happen and this applies
also to this phenomenal record of honorary services in the
hospital itself if that were to happen, if we all said
S" Leave it to the Government, I've paid my taxes, I'n going to
the races, or I'm going to do something else", then I believe
that though medicine might be efficient, and hospitals might be
clean, and the food night be admirable, and the nursing skilful,
something would have gone out of the place.
Don't forget this: we've got a lot of Governnent
Departments sone people think too many, though, as a rule,
they come along to ask for nore when some problem arises but
there is no Government Department in Cornmonwealth or State that
provides for the people the milk of human kindness. That is a
D personal perquisite, that is a personal responsibility, that is,
in its ultimate expression, the great proof of the Divine in
man. I hope it never disappears.
I was delighted to hear what Sir Charles Bickerton
Blackburn had to say about honorary staff. As he said it, I
thought " How cynical people become ' Oh, he's an honorary at
the hospitali I wonder what the game is. I , render what
advantage he's aftur. I wonder whether he is making himself
good with so and so, and so and I get so tired of this.
Cynicism can destroy a nation more quickly than any
other thing. But a spirit, a social spirit, a community
spirit will make that nation healthy, whatever may cone or go.
So, Sir, I an delighted to be here and to have the
opportunity of joining with you on a very remarkable occasion.
( Applause) 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G*
MENZIES AT CRANIBROOK SCHOOL 6N SATURDAY,
DECEMBER. 1960
I call this a " softening up" process. I stand up here.
shaking hands for a long time, handing out prizes, with all the
gusto of a politician giving things away ( Laughter) and when
they have just about reduced me to a state of weakness, then a
man who used to be my friend, Sir Kenneth Street, gets up quite
blithely and says, " Now, make a speech". ( Laughter)
As a matter of fact before I begin to make a very
sh~ ort speech I think I ought to tell you that I formed the
highest admiration for the Headmaster. He took a risk today
that I wouldn't have dreamed of taking after 30 odd years in
politics. He said " If anybody can't hear Lie, will ho hold up
his hand". ( Laughter) The last politician who was rreen enough.
to do that had a man hold up his hand whereupon a fellow in the
front seat, you remember? turned around and said " I'll change
places with you willingly". ( Laughter, applause3
I was also of course, delighted to find that in a
progressive school ol this kind, which, judg. ing by the books
that I've been handing out, embraces judo among its
accomplishments, I was delighted to find that there was to be a
course in " Elementary Russian".
Now, as a matter of fact, if you want any assistance,
on a voluntary basis, on that matter I'm prepared to offer it.
I am a master of elem~ entary Russian ? Laughter, applause) You
see, not for the first time the audience is ahead of me,
because what I was gping to say was I am a ritor of elementary
Russian punctuatiin it is done w ith the sole of your shoe.
( Laughter, applause) I hand on that secret to you.
Now, for anybody who has himself been talked into
making aspeech at a school Speech Day, there is always a rather
grim choice to be resolved. Should I talk to the parents? In
which case the boys, if they have any sense, will be bored
stiff. Or, should I talk to the boys whose minds are more
receptive than those of most audiences I speak to, ( Laughter)
and leave the parents alone?
VJell I'm going to say just a few words to the boys on
the principle, the well-established principle, that except for
a few shining exceptions, who will identify themselves without
difficulty, the parents here today are practically beyond
redemption. Their minds are made up about all sorts of
things; but the boys well they asIiagehtligt
entertain an idea or two., asIaybewligt
I have always sympathised with boys at a School Speech
Day. Just toward the end I gave some learned fellow, whose name
I now regret to say I don't recall, the prize for Latin and
French, and I would have you know I'll say this to the
parents, some of whom may have a disregard for my intell ' ectual
capacities that was the last prize I got at School too,
( Laughter) Latin and Fronch I still retain a few b) roken
shards of each of these languages one dead, and now deaderthe
other alive, but strangely pronounced in its own countryl
But my deepest sym. pathy ! ns always -bo-en for-thec poor
chaps who have to sit thcrc, as wec all did I'm talking about
the mean today in our time, when some ponderous old
platitudinous politician came along and made a speech and said, 
" Boys, these are the happiest days of your life. You must make
the mott of your school days because when they are over, and you
come out into the hard cold world you will have to forget all
this-stuff you have been learning at school, and learn the hard
facts of life". ( Laughter)
Well I used to listen to these chaps for a few
minutes and then yawn, and then go to sleep. And it shows,-Sir,
how the habits of youth can persist when I tell you that that is
exactly what I do in Parliament at the end of the Session.
( Laughter, applause)
But could I just offer an obsorvation to ry friends
over here on two or throG, or perhaps four matters not one of
which will take me long, because I see the stumps arc up and
light is shining brightly.
What are the -reat things, the great virtues that we
ought to achieve when we are at school? Because if we don't
achieve then then, our prospect of achieving them thereafter are
not as good as they might be.
I think one of the virtues is what I will call
" Pride". I know, Headmaster pride is supposed to be one of the
deadly sins. But pride in the sense of a proper self-respect,
a determination to do your own work, and to play your own play,
and to stand on your own feet this is one of the great
qualities in mankind. Nobody knows it better than a man who has
been engaged, fairly responsibly most of the time, in public
affairs. So many people in the world don't start with their
self-respect, or their self-help, but make their first port of
call the Government, which is only another way of saying that
they want other people, through the Government, to do their
work for them. This is a great point with me. It is a great quality
to be independent, for a man to have a proper pride, and to say
" If I can do this myself I'm going to do it myself. And it is
only if I can't do it myself that I must call on other people,
if I have a chance, to help me to do it".
Pride is not to be confused with vanity. There is
nothing sillier than vanity; and vanity brings about its own
downfall every day of the week, or, as we say, every tick of the
clock. But pride, in the true sense is a great virtue. I say
get it; and stick to it.
Then of course you most of you I would have hoped
all of you have read J. M. Barrie's famous rectorial address at
St. Andrew's University a remarkable speech which ought to be
read by every thoughtful person at least once a year.
The theme of Barrie's address was courage. I had the
great privilege, years afterwards, of walking up and down in a
garden in the west of England for an hour with J. M. Barrie
discussing this speech, and how he had gone about making it.
His theme was courage, the lovely virtue, as he called
it, the virtue without which other virtues can be broken into
the dust. Now we can think about courage in many ways. The
rarest form ofcourage, I think, in the world, is moral courage.
The courage that a man has when he is prepared to form his view
of the truth and to pursue it, when he is not running around
the corner every five minutes to say, " Is this going to be 
3.
popular?" Not like the traditional old politician of fiction
who said, " Find out what the people want, and that is my
policy". Cmurage is very im~ portant, all important. But of
course it is no use becoming addicted to sticking to your own
view unless you have taken all the preliminary steps to do your
best to see that it is the right view. Courage without work,
courage without thought, courage without judgment will not be
worth so much. It might ultimately am~ ount to mere obstinacy.
But properly considered and properly set, it is one of the great
virtues. There arc two things could talk about a dozen
which perhaps are not very much respected now-a-days. They are
at the other end of the scale, I grant you.
One is to have good manners, courtesy. One becomes
dejected occasionally at the-decline in glood manners. Why is it
thought by so many people that to be strong, you must be rude?
That to demonstrate that you have a mind of your own you must
engage in the most ' Drutal discourtesy to other people? ' Manners
maketh man' is one of the oldest of the old school mottos. And
although, of course, it g ' oes deep into the character of the
boy, and of the man, it also has its superficial aspect, the
courtesy which human beings owe, one to the other.
Life becomes a rugh, tough thing; public life is a
rough, tough life. There are many aspects in the world which
appear superficially to be rough and tough, in which victory
goes to the strongest, and the most enduring. No man was ever
less strong, no man was ever less tough by treating with
courtesy what other people think or say, or do.
Since everybody has been here now for some tine I just
want to mention my fourth which you will think quite absurd, I'm
sure. Because this is not one of the great virtues at all.
This is something that I think is , ravely misunderstood, I'm
all in favour of boys wrhen they are at school learning to speak
their own language with respect and with justice.
I'm staggered, ladies and gentlemen, at the numbher of
times I can listen to a man talking, not getting up and making
a speech, but just talking, conversationally, turns out to have
two or three deg. rees but no degree at all in the English
languagell Speaking in a shoddy, snufflinga fashion, murdering
the King's . kiglish or the Queen's Enlgish as I suppose it is
now. This is no good. This is not a sign of intelligence. It
is a sign of quite the opposite.
I don' t know enough about Cranbrook to know to what
extent you are an exception to a deplorable rule but It m bound
to tell you quite frankly that in my experience Lhe average
Girls' School is more concerned at speech than the average
Boys' school. It is very easy, you know, when you are a boy at school
to disregard that because if a boy at school finds himself the
exception in a liltle gr,, oup, and has been in the habit of
speaking his language with precision and correctness, and
pleasantly, somebody may say that he's a bit " sissy"; somebody
imitates him, you know.
I say don't worry about that. This English languaige
of ours I speak with the valor of partial igniorance is one
of the -reatest and most flexible tongues that God ever put
into the mind and mouth of man to speak. It's a marvellous
languago. ( Applause) 
0 4.
It has produced more poetry, I venture to say, of the
highest order than any other language in the history of man. It
is a beautiful adjustable, flexible language with, contained
inside itself, all the subtleties in the world. And, like all
other great languages, those who know it best, will speak it
most simply. Don't fall into the error of thinking that it is a
proof of education to use long words with Latin endings.
( Laughter) The people I have known who loved long words most,
who were polysyllabic marvels, were those who undorstood the
language least. The great object of knowing your own language is to
speak it with justice and weight and simplicity. You read a
speech by Winston Churchill, you go back and read a speech by
the younger Pitt 100 years before, and you will find the lovely
simplicity of language.
Because after all, it is only a man who is a master of
his language who can eliminate these rather foolish long words
and settle for that simple, direct speech which is the ultimate
proof of scholarship and of knowledge of the language.
Now I say that to the boys because I think this is
tremendously important, that we should have in our owm country
don't worry about people's arguments over whether so-and-so has
an accent of the home counties or whether he's got an English or
Somerset accent, or Victorian accent which of course is very
good ( Laughter) or a Sydney accent, which has its moments.
( Laughter) Don't worry about that.
What we ought to worry about is the quality, the
justice, the conciseness, the effect of the words you use.
Now, Sir, I've given you a mixed grill really: two
very great virtues at the beginning, a third, a considerable
virtue; and the fourth you may not think a virtue at all. But
since speech is the universal means of communication, and since
in these days no man can lead in anything unless he can
communicate his ideas to other people, never neglect speech.
In the long run it is one of the groat instruments that you will
have to use all your life.
Now that is all I want to say. There have been
people standing up around the back, including I say with regret,
as a Presbyterian, the Dean of Sydney. Normally I don't mind a
Church of England fellow standing up and listening to me. But
I do feel that I've made it a little bit hot this afternoon,
both literally and otherwise.
I'm delighted to be here. On the last two occasions
I couldn't be here for reasons that were beyond my control. On
this occasion I made up my mind that I must be here whatever
came or went. It only just happened because Paiiar.. ent sat a
week longer than anybody supposed, and it sat up till 4 o'clock
on Friday morning. But this being Saturday, I've arrived, I
have spoken, I apologise but I'm delighted. ( Applause) 



P. M. No. 41/ 196o
HIGINBOTHAM LY-ELECTION
Statement bythe Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The vote is naturally disappointing, but I cannot
say it is entirely unexpected. ' i. e knelt quite well that, in
thie short run at least, our recently announced policies -ould
be unpopular. That fact alone, added to the high personal
popularity of the late Mr. Timson, made it practically
certain that there would be a substantial reduction in the
Liberal majority. In the last week of the campaign, the
events in the Senate undoubtedly contributed to a further
reduction. The whole matter is reminiscent of the Flinders
by-election of 1952.
Mr. Calwell's statement about the convening of the
meeting of the Liberal and Country Party members for February
7, is rather curious. The obvious fact is that at the
beginning of an election year it is most desirable for the
Leader of the Government to have a substantial mecting , with
Government members. As I have to be in London for the Prime
Ministers' Conference the day before the Australian Parliament
meets, an earlier date for a party meJting became inevitable.
12th December, 1960. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT KING'S SCHOOL, SYDNEY, ON WEDNESDAY
14+ TH DECEMBER. 1960
This kind of speech is much the hardest kind of
speech to make. Do you realise that, all of you who suffer from
speeches and don't make them? ( Laughter) It's much the hardest
of the lot. When I arrived I looked around. I had no idea how
many political characters I knew masquerading today as Old Boys
of the King's School. This in itself is a most embarrassing
affair. Some of them, no doubt, have every right to be here.
( Laughter) Then the place is fall of parents who regard a Speech
Day as their annual penance and celebrate their penance for the
next three d. ays as Christmas virtue.
Then there are the poor unhappy boys of the School who
have to sit around, as I used to in my time, and listen to some
ponde. rous old politician make a boring speech, saying to themselves,
as some of them are already, " I wish he'd cut it down
and make it short". ( Laughter)
But there are just one or two things that I really
ought to say by way of self-excuse at the beginning.
The Headmaster, I thought, went to some pains to
demonstrate that John Pascoe Fawkner wasn't it John Pascoe?
Batman? Oh, well, both good Melbourne fellows ( Laughter) But
when he pointed out that Batman started here, and I gathered,
from what he said, steadily went down in life ( Laughter) by
going to Tasmania, and then establishing Victoria, he made me
feel that I was really sp caking as a representative of a quite
parvenu city. ( Laughter)
But I retort to him that I am not here speaking for the
parvenu city, but I am here as Prime Minister of Parramatta.
( Laughter, applause)
Then when I was looking through the book of the words
because you boys ought to realise that before somebody like
myself is asked to come to make a speech, the school authorities
give him the book of the words, containing all sorts of strange
information about the school I realised, with that eagle eye
that characterises a politician that the Headmaster and I became
Head masters ourselves in the same year. He became Headmaster
of King's;. and I became Headmaster of Australia -in the same
year, in 1939. But what gives him that almost unconscious air of
authority as he speaks to us today derives from the fact that
he's never been found out, and his term of service has been
continuous. ( Laughter)
Sir, I just want to take off one thing that you have
said which has been very mauch in my own mind.
It isn't easy for a school that has history, for a
school that has Old boys who think back to the Old School, and
the old school buildings, to make a departure and to move to some
other area. You mentioned Scotch College in Melbourne) cramped
in to about half a city block with a cricket ground two milbs
away. It was an adventure when it was finally decided to move
it out into a big expanding site.
I remember at another school in Melbourne gping along
to lay a foundation stone, which I do occasionally, but not too 
frequently, And I said, because I knew-this school very well,
" I have never undorstood why you have a cricket ground and a
half hero, in this place. Did you over own more land?"~. The
answer was, " O0h, yes! W! o owned all1 the land for about two
blocks. But some prudent Council at som~ e stage where there was
a littic difficulty, said that we night as well " cash in"' on
the extra land". The result was that they cramped, and almost
crippled, the School that they wore supposed to govern.
There are plenty of examples of this and I think that
one of the reasons for this kind of thing wias that although our
forefathers were great men, and laid profound foundations in
Australia, there was a disposition perhaps it's net entirely
gone yet to have wide geographical horizons in Australia, but
somewhat narrow mental ones. This is something that we must
beware of. If somebody today in a city like Canberra, for example,
says, " WellI obviously this is going to be a University city,
we must have plenty of space for buildings of the future" somebody
is bound to say that this is extravagant.
I don't believe that any provision of land for a great
school or a great university was ever extravagant.
Here I must say that I feel, as you do, tremendously
excited to think that this most ancient of public schools in
Australia should have taken this decision to move out where it
will have elbow room, where it will have everything in the long
run that goes with a groat school, not forgetting beauty and
setting and illimitable prospects for the future. This I
think, is a notable event, though I'm perfectly certain 1hat if
I were an old King's School man I would have felt a little pang
about the prospect; but I am sure that this has been a great
thing. It is a very interesting matter to remember that just
as the war was ending and taxation was very high much higher
than it is now-but just at the end of the war when taxation was,
really still on the war time level, I used to become troubled
about the future of what we called the Great Public Schools, the
great Church Schools, here and in my own State, and olsewhtere,
because I believe in thenmost passionately.
I believe that they contribute something which is the
very reverse of snobbery which some of their critics like us to
believe they contribute a superb spirit of humility, of
understanding, of some of the relations between God and man.
These great Church schools have a part to play in Australia that
nothing else can play.
And I thought, " Well, it's not going to be easy for
people to send their sons to their own old schools, or to send
the son to one of these foundations, because of the high level of
taxation". Of course taxation has never g,' ne back to anything
remotely resembling pro-war conditions. Yet the fact is that in
these last 10 or 15 years we have seen the greatest era of
development in schools of this kind that Australia ever saw.
This proves what? I think that it proves that more and
more we have people in Australia who see the value of this, and
who are determined that their children are g-oing to secure some
benefit from it.
I think it is not for nothing that this property owns a
Scots name. This argues a decent ambition on the part of the
Church of England which I am3 happy to record. ( Laughter) Here
is a Scots name, even though I learned, with regret, that the
Captain of the School was called Dalzidl, when obviously he was
" De-ell". ( Laughter) 
May I say something about the Scots? You will permit
reoa little bilotry. uronl't you on this rrz--GQ cots
always had a groat notion of 1) tiL They had a great .11,
that each generation in a family, however humble should have
some opportunity that the previous generation didn't have. So
that the son of the ploughman went to a secondary school and got
a little better educated, and learned a little bit of Latin in
those good days when people had to learn Latin and the grandson
went to Edinburgh and took a degree.
This was a passionate belief in education. And I'm as
proud as Lucifer to think that in this post-war period which
could have been, in some ways has been, materialist, we have
seen this passion for education grow in Australia in the most
remarkable fashion. What we are doing today is to celebrate one
manifestation of it.
Now I wonder if, with your kind permission I might
address a few brief words to my fellow students. The rest of you
are under no obligation to listen to this; though I regret that,
because if this were a political meeting 90% of you wouldn't be
here. ( Laughter) The Headmaster has said some good and memorable things
to all of us about courage, the groat virtue. Courage which is
not only the courage of the hand, but the courage of the heart
and the courage of the mind. It is very easy to agree with
everybody else, it is very easy to have your thinking done at
second hand so that you wait until somebody writes what his
thoughts may be and then you say, " There you are, those are my
thoughts". Thinking is frightfully hard work. But it is the most
rewarding work in the world. Thinking with all the hard work that
goes with it, preceding it, preceding the point of judgment, to
narrow the facts, to be prepared to look them in the eye, not to
be led away by some cheap argument on the sidb but to hammer it
out for youself. This is one of the great qualities of man.
I strongly recommend it to myself as well as to my follow student.
My old school in Melbourne had a motto, " Dare to be
wise" and when I was a boy I thought, " What an odd proverb that
is". I've come to know how true it is. Because to be wise, that
is to say to be able to form a judgment, and stand to it, requires
courage. It requires daring though many people perhaps
don't always appreciate it.
The second thing I want to say to you is this. We are
very clever nowadays it's a very clever generation. People
fire things off into the air, and one of them is credibly
reported to have hit the moon though what the moon ever did to
deserve this, I've never been able, quite, to discover. But it's
a very clever period of life, and we must be a little careful
that we don't become overwhelmed by our own cleverness. Because
wisdom is more than cleverness.
One of the troubles about this clever period of life
is that we have a tendency all of us, to think that we know so
much better than anybody else, and we are the cleverest generation
over to live in Australia though I don't think we are, but
we occasionally think we are that we fall into error, we become
a little brash, we brush aside other people's views. We fall
into bad manners, to put it simply.
I'm not at all sure that the standard of manners, of
courtesy, has improved so much in the last twenty years as the
standard of objective knowledge. 
Therefore, I want to say that no man was ever an inferior man
bccause he had good manners because he had the courtesy which
recognises that there are o~ her people in the world and that
those other people may have other views.
That doesn't mean that you are not to fight hard to
convince then. That doesn't mean that you are to avoid conflict
about ideas. You can't avoid conf'lict unless you run away.
Therefore right through your lives you may be engaged in the
clash of ideas, in the clash of personalities. But above all
things, let us have that deg-ree of tolerance which is eribodied in
the idea of courtesy and 200od rnanners. It will be a very much
happier world if we can all corie up to that.
In the third place I would just like to say this. I
said it somewhere else the other day but Dean Pitt has given me
express permission to repeat it.
Good speech, clear speech, speech which pays a just
attention to the meaning, of words is tremendously important.
There are men here this afternoon I've seen a few if them who
run, or have run vast concerns in Australia. They know
perfectly well that if they didn't have the faculty of conveying
their ideas justly, and clearly to those who work under them,
they could not be effuctive in Lheir positions.
In the modern period of life some of the very greatest
Generals and Cormmanders have become groat Generals and
Commanders, not only because they had a certain genius for the
military art, but because they were advocates, theyod explain
ideas and do them clearly with economy and Aith justice.
Therefore, nothing annoys me more than to hear people
who ought to know bettor I'm now still talking to the boys
say, " Well, you know what I mean, you know what I mean", when
I really don't know what they mean.
In quarters not frightfully far removed from me I have
had occasionally to say, " I'm sorry I've not had the advantage of
studying Hottentot, would you mind speaking ordinary English".
Now, Sir, I think the Girls' Schools : live us an
example on this matter, because I do think, so far as I have
been able to see, that they pay some attention to it.
What I want to' say to the boys is this. This is a
wonderful language of ours. There is no language in the world
that has such flexibility, that has such -, reat literary stores
in it, the greatest language of poetry that man has ever known,
the great language of proseo. It raay lack some of the kick of
French prose, but it is a marvellous language. It has contained
some of the greatest writing, and somie of the greatest speech
in history. Let us respectthis languag-e. Don't let us have it
broken down by all sorts of cheap importations there are bound
to be one or two. Let us respect this langua 7e. Because, I
tell you that as you go through life, whether you are a lawyer,
or a chemist, or a doctor, or a soldier, or whatever it may be,
som~ e element of your success, some aspect of your capacity to
give expression to what you know, will depend upon your respect
for the English lang3uage and your quiet cor. u. mand over it. Not
long words long words are pretty silly: they are used as a
rule only by people who don't understand them.
Aima at simple, clear speech, and if you aim at that
and achieve it, you will find that this will make a very great
difference right through your lives. 
Now Sir, it's quite clear, as is already obvious, that
I an talking too long and I an therefore * ping to bring this
lanentablo lucubration long wrords boys ( Laughter) to an end.
But I do want to say that I wias delighted to be given the
opportunity of coning here. I know what a jreat event this is
in the history of this fanous school, and it is a very great
honour to have been allowed to share it. ( Applause) 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTEn,', THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES AT KNOX COLLEGE, SYDNEY ON THURSDAY?
DECEMBER? l9 O
I think I ought to begin by making two apologies, one
is for the absence of my wife, who would have reoatly enjoyed
being here, but who, in a sudden onrush of what I can only
describe as eccentricity decided to have her four Melbourne
grandchildren to stay with her at the Lodge, ranging from 9 to
3J, and all of them with a considerable element of old Adam and
old Eve. ( Laughter) Therefore she wished me to make her
apologies to you.
In the second place, whether it is because I have been
away from her, I am not in the best of form tonight you may say
that I seldom am. ( Laughter) The last couple of nights I have
not been able to sleep. I don't know what it is. The only
explanation that will occur to some of you is that conscience has
at last caught up with me. ( Laughter) Well whether that is so,
or not, I don't know; Itll leave it to you.
I have a variety of reasons for being glad to be here
and one of them, outstandingly, is that the Chairman tonight is
a very old friend of mine4
I referred just now to my wife. At a time when the
Rev., P. J. Murdoch was preaching in Trinity Church Camberwell in
the State of Victoria he had two fine looking lads in the Church
one was Ullan Murdoch, and one was myself ( Laughter) and an
uncommonly good looking girl who was a boarder at the Church
School nearby. WIell in that contest I won ( Laughter) because she
married me. Not, Allan, that I think you did too badl~ y yourself.
( Laughter) Now there is one thing that I like very much about the
programmeo tonight. I've always maintained that we Scots
Presbyterians have a very practical outlook. Toni,'' ht it has
been brilliantly arranged. I've been to a few Speech Nights and
they always tell you to hand out the prizes first and speak
afterwards. tVell, it's very hard on the boys they've collected
their loot ( Laughter), their interest in the proceedings is
completely terminated, and therefore they say, " Who's this old
fellow ( Laughter) spouting away?"
But tonight I have them., in the hollow of rmy hand. If
they count me out inside the next ten minutes then all I can
say is, " Counting, out, no prizes". And judging by the look of
the table there must be a m~ ost brilliant collection of school
boys in this place that I've ever heard of. ( Laughter)
You may think that gping, to a Speech Nig ht from the
point of view of a political old hand like myself is a rather
dull business. Do you know it is very stimulating? The other
day I handed out to a boy, who struck mie as being very
intelligent to look at, the Senior prize in Latin and French.
You know that did so much _, ood to my morale this was
a very intelligent looking boy and I was able to tell him that
was the last prize I won at School myself. Of course the
standards may have fallen in the meantime. ( Laughter)
But this does all of us good, to come along and revisit
the glimpses of the moon and recollect the time when we
were intelligent. ( Laughter) It is about that time that I
want to say a few words to the boys tonight.
When you senior b.) ys -o out into the affairs of life
you will find any number of people who will say to " Now
all that stuff that you have learned at school forget about
that; that's all old fashio-ned. Now you have to face the real
facts of getting a living and dealing with people". 
I've hoard so many ' f them talk like that, the truth
of the matter being that those men who talk like that have never
learned anything since they left school. They caze out of
school with a little stock of things that they had learned, and
normally, with that little stock of things that they had learned,
provided the intelligence and the character and the decent
ambition, they c , uld ; o on learning and learning for years until
the very end of their lives.
Any man who has the benefit of an education, who isn't
a student at the age of 80, has wasted his time. I sometimes
think about people of that kind that they really think that
school is something to be got through.
Now what is it that we acquire at school? It is quite
true that you don't do a Law course, like me you do that after
you leave school; you don't study Medicine you may do some
Biology, or Chemistry, but you don't study medicine.
It is quite true that what you are doing is, in a
sense, though it doesn't always look it, elementary compared to
what will be attacked later on.
3ut the whole point about it is that this is a superb
discipline for the rLind. It really teaches us when we are at
school, to have some standards, to have things by which we can
measure other things good manners courtesy, intelligence, the
team spirit a willingness to subordinate personal interests to
the interests of the side, to the interests of the school.
These are all wonderful things. They are not childish.
They are never more needed than in the grown-up world.
You take the question of standards. We are living in
an ago of immense scientific research, particularly
technological research. Our friends in the Soviet Union fire off
satellites into the air they've even come to blows with the
moon so we're told. All this is supposed to be tremendous, and
a lot of people, in this country, and in other countries in the
free world say, " Well, you know, that shows they are getting ahead
of us". It would be very odd if they didn't get ahead of us in
something. But I want to say to everybody: Remember there ought
to be standards. Everything must be judged on some comparative
basis. A friend of mine who is in the diplomatic world and
from another country said to me one night in Canberra, " You know,
the moral effect on the people of various Asian countries, of
seeing these satellites passing across the sky, the moral effect
politically, will be tremendous". 3ut I said, " My friend, you
are forgetting that but for the work of the microbiologists the
medical scientists of the Wostern world, a lot of them wouldn't
be alive to see the satellite". You see, you must always have
some comparative standard in your mind.
Right around the world we see and it's not now,
though I think perhaps it's more acute than it was that one
of the great standards appears to be ' How much money does he
earn? How much money does he laboriously accumulate?' I would
like to say to my t:, oys lown there, I hope they don't succumb to
that silly idea. Judging by some of the people I've seen who
have made a lot of money, I don't think it can be too difficult.
( Laughter) I've seen other people who made immense fortunes by
tremendous constructive work for the country, and I admire them
not because they have made a fortune, but because of their
constructive work for the country. 
3.
3ut don't worry about that kind of thing. Make up your
minds that right through your life you are going to know
something if possible better than the man next to you. You are
going to continue to be a student. You are not going to be
laughed out of it by being told that now you are a man you must
put away childish things. This is the most terrible of all
fallacies. Above all, don't succumb to the national pastime of
being cynical about other people's motives. You remember that
J. M. Jarrie made a magnificent speech years ago at the rectorial
address, it was, at St. Andrew's. I've always kept it near me
and I read it ab,-ut once a year, perhaps not with all the benefit
that I should take from it, but I read it once a year. land I
once had the , reat honour of talking with 3arrie about it for a
couple of hours in a country house in England.
But one of the flashing sentences in that speech was,
' Never ascribe to your opponent motives lower than your own'.
When I hear in the political world people eagerly alleging that
somebody has been personally corrupt, I suspect very deeply
whether he isn't. Never ascribe to an opponent, motives lower
than your own.
You may have to fight your opponent; you may have to
denounce him from time to time that's all in the game of life
and you must be courageous and have a good spirit.
Jut the silly cynicism which disfigures so many
people's minds, the kind of cynicism which produces the statement
" Oh, well, yes, I know he's supposed to be doing it for nothing,
but there must be something that he's after". You hear it said
about municipal councillors, poor chaps. I always thought that
they gave an immense amount of service to their locality, and
did it for free, as they say. J3ut, " Oh, no, you can't tell me;
there must be something".
Now the follow who says that has never done a hand's
turn for the country in his life.
Don't belong to that group of people. Go through your
lives, firmly persuaded that people can, and do perform unselfish
acts just as you have seen your school fellows perform them for
year after year in the school. Go through your life still
believing that. 3ocause if you do, the whole of your life will be
sweetened, and the life of Australia will be sweetened, because
our standards will have risen. We will have come more and more
firmly to have certain things that we passionately believe in,
and that we won't run away from. This is the essence of having
standards. Now, I think if you don't mind, I'll leave it at
that and get on with the part of the proceedings which always
appeals to me in my dual capacity I'm , iving away things that
other people have paid for ( Laughter) and in my dual capacity
as a Presbyterian and as a politician, I appreciate both.
( Laughter, applause) 



INTENSIFIED EXPORT DEVELOPMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister.
In relation to the economic measures announced last
November, the Commonwealth Government made it plain that it would
continue to give attention to the need to increase export
income. To give still sharper focus to its activities in this
field, the Government recently established a special Committee
of Ministers, wader the chairmanship of thc Prime Minister, to
carry through a comprehensive and continuous examination of
possible measures to develop exports and to improve our overseas
exchange position. The Committee consists of Mr. Menzies, Mr. McEwen,
Mr. Holt, Senator Spooner, Mr. McMahon and Mr. Adermann.
The Government welcomes the increasing public
awareness of the need for a continuing and progressive stepping'
up of the level of Australian export earnings if Australia is
to maintain both a satisfactory rate ' of de velopment and a rising
standard of living.
Throughout recent years there has been evidence on
many sides of a lively cntcrprise on the part of many in
developing ncw kinds of exports, in opening up ncw markets and
in raising thc level of cxport trade.
For its part, the Government has, over the years,
introduced a wide range of measures which have enhanced the
opportunities of Australian producers to gain profitable export
outlets. They include the negotiation of trade agreements with
p most of our major trading partners; the very substantial
strengthening of the Trade Commissioner Service; the
organisation of special trade missions; considerable Government
assistance in financing export publicity and promotion in the
United Kingdom and ether important markets; the establishment
of the Ex'nort Paymnents Insurance Corporation; taxation concessions
to encourage primary production and mining; research aimed
at increasing productivity in primary industries; and many
others. These efforts by industry, commerce and Government
have contributed to a substantial rise in the volume of experts
during the 19501s. Comparing 1959/ 60 with the average of the
la-st three years of the 1940' s, for examplo, the volume of
exports increased by 39 Per cent. Minerals, metals and metal
manufactures went up by no less than 154 per cent. Exports of 
b 2.
wool and sheepskins, our biggest export item were up by 35 per
cent; lead and zinc by 37 per cent; and exports of coal rose
from 57,000 tons to 1,100,000 tons.
Similarly, great increases have been achieved in the
value of exports to particular markets. Australian exports to
Japan increased from œ 11 million to œ 135 million; exports to
New Zealand, which include a wide and growing range of
manufactured products, were up from œ 18 million to œ 54 million.
Among the smaller markets, the development of new trade is
reflected in the growth of exports to South Africa ( from œ 3.6
million to œ 8.1 million); to the Philippines million to
œ 4.9 million) and to Mexico million to œ 3.2 million).
Those are very real achievements for a country which is only at
D the beginning of its trading history with many of these markets.
They have done much to offset the difficulties cf holding our
position in some of our traditional markets.
p Running counter to these fine performances in
export production and the expansion of markets, there has booeen a
persistent decline over some years in the average prices we have
obtained for our exports. There has been no such decline indeed
there has beeoon an increase in the prices we have had to pay
for imports. This has meant that, despite our efforts to
produce more goods for sale overseas and find outlets for
them, we tend continually to fall short of earning enough
b abroad to pay for the increasing amnount of imports our growing
economy requires. Since prices of both exports and imports are
almost entirely beyond our control there is practically
D nothing we can do to remedy this aspect of the position. Our
only resource is to produce still more for export and sell it
wherever we can. We must produce, on competitive terms, mere
of our established lines of exports and more of such now
commodities as we find to be saleable overseas; and we must
search out openings for the sale of these products wherever
they can be found.
The Government is convinced that much more can be
done by Government and industry alike, and particularly
by co-operation between Government and industry to attain the
necessary rate of export expansion. That there are many
obstacles has to be recognised. For many rural exports, market
opportunities and prices are influenced by the practices of
overseas Governments and by international price fluctuations 
rather than by the competitive ability of Australian producers.
Breaking into new markets often involves heavy establishment
costs which are all the more onerous for Australian exporters
because of their geographical distance from main markets and
the rather thin spread of their products over many markets.
But we must try to overcome these and other difficulties.
We should not place too much reliance on an upturn in export price
levels. A major factor in export capacity and performance
generally is, of course, the state of the internal economy
not only through the effct-s on comparative cost levels but
also through the impact w. hich internal demand makes, directly
or indirectly, upon ihe volume of goods available for export.
The measures which the Government has put in train recently
demonstrate its determination to help the competitive -position
of Australian experts.
The special Committee of Ministers is closely
examining particular indus-tries or sections of industry.
The Special Position of Steoel
In the last ten years the steel industry has roughly
doubled its output. But this has been insufficient to keep up
with the growing Australian demand.
During the period we have achieved some exports, at
times on a significant scale, but at times there have also been
very he~ avy imports of the kinds of steel made in Australia. The
net cost in foreign exchange of all iron and steel imports,
after allowing for exportlus, has exceeded œ 220 million in the
last ten years, A considerablo contribution to the bridging of the
gap in our ba-lance of payments could flow from taking fuller
advantage of the favourable competitive position we have in the
production of steel. Our resources of iron ore and coal can
certainly support a further substantial development of the steel
industry. We have high grade coal available on an internationally
competitive basis. The potential of our steel industry to bring
about a r: * duc-t'ion in import outlays and an increase in exports
cannot therefore be ignored.
The Government receg-nises that there are difficulties
in the way of vcry rapid expansion of steel production but it
will enter into discussions with th.; industry with a view to
examining how Australia might become a major and continuing
net exporter of steel. 
4.
Iron Ore The possibilities of more fully exploiting our
resources of minerals are being closely examined. As announced
by the Minister for National Development on 2nd Dccember,. the
Gcvernnmnt has decided to pernit the export of iron ore under
certain conditions which will ensure that the interests of
Australian industry arc fully safeguarded. This decision is
expected to proc-ote intensified oxploration for iron ore
reserves and to produce important new exports.
Export Facilities The Connitteo is studying a number of possible ways,
not confined to traditional or orthodox :. easurcs, of helping
Australian exporters overcooe thuir very real disadvantages of
distances fron markets, low export lack of export
experience and so on. Along with other possibilities, the
Cocnittee is examining whether increased expert business could
be obtained by Gcvernnont co-operation or assistance in such
natters as increased trade publicity and advertising abroad;
market surveys; help in tendering for overseas contracts; and
possible ways and Lceans of warehousing Australian goods in
important overseas rmarkets to enable thoe to be offered for
sale from stock. In assessing the worth and practicability of
measures of this kind, Ministers are calling on the conmmrcial
judgaont and the expert advice available to then fron industry
and comnnrcc. They expect that the success of any measurcs
would depend heavily on enthusiastic support from industry and
conmerce. In respct cf a numbor of proposals of this kind
and many other aspects of export, the Expert Developnont
Council and the Manufacturing Industries Advis'ory Council have
done a groat deal of constructive work since their establishmont
two years ago. The Goverrnnnt's current endeavours have boon
discussed with the Chairman of those two bodies, and the
G-vernnent is confident of their continuing help and co-operation.
Taxation iiuch has been said about taxation in relation to
exports. The Governnent will carefully examinc proposals for
anonding sono aspects of taxation if they can be shown to offer
real prospects of putting Australian industries into a better
position to earn substantially increased export income or to
develop new lines of export, and if they can be accomolished 
within manageable limnits. It will be necessary, of course, to
ensure that such proposals do not conflict with our international
obligations. A proposal relating to taxation, put forward by the
Export Developnment Council, is now being studied at the
Departmental level.
Export Franchises Ministers have also noted the extent to which
restrictive export franchises limit or preclude Australian
exoorts. In view of our need to earn more foreign exchange,
many restrictive export franchises are clearly not in the
O national interest.
S The Government expects that responsible management
of overseas concerns will recognise that it is in their own
interests, as well as in the interest of the Australian
S econo: Iy as a whole, that Australian enterprises be permitted
and assisted to compete freely in export markets. Manufacturing
industry would thereby be helped towards making a contribution
by way of export earnings that is more comensurate with its
own very large requirements of imports of plant and materials,
Tourism International tourism has rapidly emerged as one of
the great foreign exchange earners for many countries.
S Ministers arc satisfied that tourism could make a greater
contribution to Australia's earnings of foreign exchange,
The Government has therefore decided to take a more
I active role in overseas promotion of tourist travel to
Australia. It will work closely with the State Governments
which have important interests in this field.
The Government will continue its support of the
Australian National Travel Association which it has asked to
submit ideas for the development of this trade. It has
approved an immediate additional grant to A. N. T. A. to enable
it to accelerate some of its existing plans. It will also
ensure that full benefits to tourist promotion are obtained
from trade and general publicity overseas and from the
facilities available in Government offices abroad.
Insurance of Export Payments
A numiber of organisations concerned with exports
have supported a proposal to provide export payments insurance 
6.
cover for sone transactions which are considered to be in the
national interest, but would be beyond the present scope of the
Export Payncnts Insurance Corporation. Similar facilities are
available to exporters in a nunibor of countries, including the
United Kingdon and Canada.
The Govern. ient has decided to introduce legislation
in the next sittings of Parliarent to a-iond the Export
Payments Insurance Corporation Act to provide means for the
Connonwcalth Govcrnent to underwrite certain types of
transaction through the Export Paynents Insurance Corporation
in cases where the Govern. nt is satisfied that this would be
in the national interest.
The Cornnittco of Ministers does not envisage
spectacular short-tern results. Prinary products pastoral,
agricultural and mineral will continue to provide the bulk
Sof our export incone for nany years ahead. But we have strong
hopes that manufacturing industry will be able to do ruch nore
to increase exports. In fields appropriate to Government action,
the Governnent, apart fron all it has done in the past, is now
making a thorough-going investigation of the neans by
which our external trading position might be improved. What
is required is a constructive effort to find measures which will
:. ako a real and lasting contribution. The Government is
confident that, with the assistance and co-operation of private
enterprise, nuch more could be achieved in this direction.
Canberra. 3rd January, 1961. 



Embargo NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE MIDNIGHT WEDNESDAY
JANUARY 2 th 1961.
DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE'S VISIT.
Staternnt by the Priro Minister. The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.
The Prine Minister and Minister for External Affairs
announced today that the Duke of Devonshire who is Parliamentary
Under Secretary of State, Cor nonwealth Relations Office, London,
will briefly visit Australia fron the 1st to the 5th March as part
of a journey to New Delhi where he will lead the United Kingdon
Delegation at an ECAFE Conference.
The Duke will be in Canberra on Thursday 2nd, and
Friday 3rd February, to nake contact with Ministers and senior
SGovernnent officials*
@ nberra. January 25, 196I. 



FOR PRESS USTRLIAN KEDICAL TEAMS FOR THE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. P. G. Mnjmios
The Prime Minister announced to-day that he had
approved a grant of œ 4,000 tc the Australian Red Cross
Society for work in the Congo.
IThe grant would enable the Red Cross to recruit
two Australian iedical teams to serve for the period
SFebruary/ June 1961.
This is in addition to the grant of œ 15,000
made to the Red Cross in August last year to help the-Society.
send medical assistance to the Congo for a period of about
six months.
CANBERRA
January 26, 1961 P. M. 



WOOL MARKEING COMlITTEE OF ENQUIRY
Statement by the Prime Minister Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.
Late last year I announced that in view of the
importance of the wool industry the Government had agreed to the
request of all the federal wool growing organisations that an enquiry
be arranged into Australian wool marketing methods.
After mature consideration the Government has decided
to appoint an independent Committee of Enquiry comprising a Chairman
and two members. The Chairman will be Sir Roslyn Philp, Justice
of the Supreme Court of Queensland and the members will be Mr. A. M. C.
Butfield, who recently retired from the position of General Manager
of the Australian Mutual Provident Society, Sydney and Mr. D. H. Merry,
B. Com., Chief Economist of the Australia and Now Zealand Bank,
Melbourne. The organisations all requested that the Chairman
should be a member of the Judiciary.
The Government will be guided by the Committee itself
as to whether it may perhaps be necessary or desirable at some stage
to formally retain consultants to assist the Committee in the conduct
of the enquiry. The terms of reference of the Committee of Efnquipy will
be to enquire into the present systems of marketing and
of promoting the sale of the Australian wool clip and
matters relating thereto, and to report upon the
efficacy of these systems;
to report upon the merits of any other systems or of
modifications of the present systems which may be
advocated to the com. mittee of enquiry or which the
conu--ittee itself considers would be of long-term
benefit to the woolgrowing industry and in the best
interests of the nation.
The Government considers that the terms of reference
of the Committee are sufficiently broad to provide for a full scale
enquiry into the problems of disposing of the Australian wool clip
to the best advantage. If it should transpire however that they
do not fully cover all matters of importance the Government will be
prepared to look at them again.
It is expected that the Cormmittee of Enquiry will have
its first meeting early in February to consider the general arrangements
for the conduct of the enquiry and the procedures to be adopted,
including the taking of evidence.
In view of the great national importance of this enquiry,
having regard to the key role of wool in jur economy, I appeal to all
organisatins and others concerned w4ith the outcome of the enquiry to
co-operate fully with the Committee in the complex and arduous task
ahead of it.
2 P 



FOR PRESS: 2C
NATIONACPL DAY OF INDIA
MESSAGE BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. THON. . JIENZIES
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, has sent the
following message to Mr. Nehru on the occasion of India's
National Day, January 26. The message states-
" On the occasion of tis Tenth Anniversary of India's
Republic Day, may I extend to you an~ d to the people of
India the sincere good wishes of the Australian Government
and people.
" The presence of Her Majesty, the Queen and Prince Philip
in India at this time add. 3s to the significance of the
occasion and as fellow membors of the great Commonwealth,
we in Australia share all the more cordially in your
rej oicing.
" I wish you every success in the ventures you are planning
and am confident that the friendly ties which exist between
our two countries will in the years to come be still
further strengthened."
CANBERRA January 26, 1961 



FOR PRESS AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
BY THE PflIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
To-day, on our 175rd birthday, we can look back with
pride and thankfulness on the vision, energy, and ability
of those who have gone before us. They helped to make
Australia the wonderful country in which we live. It is
our task to carry on their good work in the march to fullest
nationhood. The name Australia is one in which wu should have an
overwhelming pride. Whfien we mention it we should think of the
benefits our country has conferred upon us and our duties to
it, and not be like the few who continuously thirk in terms
of self-interest.
We who live in Australia derive not from the weak, but
from the strong. Our forbears were adventurous people and
their determination carved out the structure which is the
base of our efforts for the future.
In the years ahead we will certainly have problems,
but what nation has not had its problems? We have surmounted
them in the past and we will overcome them in the future.
Growing achievement will require energy and skill, but never
yet has there been an A-ustralian, worthyof the name, who lacked
either of these great qualities.
So, on this our birthday, I ask hundreds of thousands
of newcomers from overseas who are working sidu by side with
us, to share in this heritage of which w4 are so proud.
With the Australian flcS at the masthead, each and everyone
of us should celebrate this great day in a fitting manner.
We should not regard it as just another holiday. It is in
fact a day of joy, but it is above all a day cf dedication.
CANBERRA
January 26, 1961. 



PRIME MINISTER'S XI v. WEST INDIES
Canberra, 18th February, 1961
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) today announced
the names of the players from whom he will select his Prime
Minister's XI to play against the West Indies at Manuka
Oval, Canberra, on Saturday, February 18th.
Those who have accepted invitations to play are
R. Lindwall ( Qld) Captain
R. Benaud ( NSW)
N. Harvey ( NSW)
W. Grout ( Qld)
N. O'Neill ( NSW)
C. McDonald ( Vie)
A. Connolly ( Vie)
W. Lawry ( Vic)
M. Holten, MP( Vic)
J. Cope ( Canberra)
G. Goonesena( Canberra)
B. James ( Yass)
In announcing his team, Mr. Menzios said:
" I am very grateful to the players in making
themselves available at the end of an arduous season. I know,
however, that the match will give great pleasure to the people
of the A. C. T. and surrounding districts and that it will
provide a material benefit to Canberra Legacy".
CANBERRA, 2nd February, 1961. 



9 MESSAGE TO HER EXCELLENCY VISCOUNTESS DUNROSSIL
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, today sent the
following message to Her Excellency Viscountess Dunrossil
" I have learned with profound grief of the sudden
death of your illustrious husband the Governor-General of
the Commonwealth of Australia.
Lord Dunrossil has served the Crown and the people of
this Commonwealth with distinction and was held in high
esteem by all who knew him. I rocall too his long and
valued service to the Parliament and people of the United
Kingdom. Please accept sincere sympathy from myself and my
colleagues".
0 CANBERRA, 3rd February, 1961. 



FOR PRESS. Statement by the Prime Minister.
SEARINING-IN OF ADMrIISTRATOR.
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) announced this evening
that His Excellency General Sir Dallas Brooks, Governor of
Victoria, who holds a dormant Commission from Her Majesty the
Queen, will be sworn in as Administrator of the Government of the
Commonwealth of Australia at Parliament House, Ganberra, tomorrow
Saturday, th February, 1961, at p. m. The prescribed
oaths will be administered by the Chief Justice of the High Court
of Australia The Rt. Hon. Sir Owen Dixon.
CANBERRA. 3rd February, 1961. A 



FUNERAL OF VISCOUNT DUNROSSIL
The following arrangements for the State Funeral and
interment of the late Viscount Dunrossil were announced
officially today. The funeral will take place in Canberra in
the morning of Tuesday, 7th February.
It is the wish of Lady Dunrossil that the services be
conducted jointly by the Church of England and the Presbyterian
Church. His Grace the Most Reverend H. R. Gough, Primato of
Australia smdl Archbishop of Sydney, and the Right Reverend
Dr Alan C. Watson, Moderator-General of the Presbyterian Church
of Australia will conduct the services. They will be
assisted by Archdeacon Hill, Rector of St John the Baptist
Church, and the Reverend Edenborough of St Andrew's Church.
Following a service which will commence at 10.30 a. m. in
St Andrew's Presbyterian Church, Forrest, the body of
Viscount Dunrossil will be borne by gun carriage with full
military honours from St Andrew's Church to the graveyard
of the Parish Church of St John the Baptist in Roid where
burial will take place. The cortege will pass Parliament
House. It is expected that many people will wish to pay
their last respects along the route.
Twenty-one guns will be fired at the time of interment,
Flags will be flown at half-mast on Commonwealth Buildings,
both in Australia and at overseas posts, until sunset on the
day of the funeral, except that on February 6, which is the
annivorsary of the accession of Hor Majesty The Queen, flags
will be flown at the masthead.
Canberra Feb. 4. I96I. 



P. M. No. 1/ 1961
MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies has
received the following message from President Kennedy:
" Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
May I express to you and to the other members of the
Government of Australia my gratitude for your kind
message of good wishes on the occasion of my inauguration.
I am fully confident that we shall be able to strengthen
even further the ties between our two nations and to press
forward toward a world dedicated to freedom and peace.
Sincerely, John F. Kennedy"
CANBERRA, 7th February, 1961. I 



P. M. No. 2/ 1961
CONTRIBUTION-TO WORLD-HEALTH ORGANISATION
Statement by the Prime Minister and Minister for External
Affairs, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
In 1955 the 4orld Health Organisation launched a
world-wide campaign to eliminate malaria, a disease which
threatens a third of the world's people. The campaign is
being financed in large part by voluntary subscription to a
Special Account for Malaria Eradication. In response to an
urgent request from the Director-General of the World Health
Organisation, the Australian Government has this year
contributed œ C20,000 to the Fund.
This year's contribution is larger than previous
contributions, and is a token of Australiats support for the
campaign and of the Government's appreciation of its
objectives. The Australian mainland is virtually free from
malaria, but in the Territory of Papua and New Guinea the
eradication of malaria rjmains a major problem. In that
Territory Australia has undertaken a fourteen year eradication
programme, estimated to cost ovter two and three quarter million
pounds. The success of that programme, on which last year
the Administration of the Territory spent over f-200,000, will
be of benefit not only to the Territory, but to the world-wide
campaign which the World Health Organization is directing.
CANBERRA, 7th February, 1961. 



0AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTIVITY COUNCIL
MELBOURNE
8th February, 1961
Speech by the prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Sir and ladies and gentlemen:
I was very interested in your reference to the
presence here of the Leader of the Opposition, and of myself.
le conceals, publicly, his personal regard for me ( Laughter); and
I reciprocate in kind. ( Laughter)
As a matter of fact I want to toll you this, hoping
that it will go no further that he and I are both rather
lovers of Dickens. I am at present directing my studies to
Bleak House, and he is reading, avidly, GJeat Expectations!
( Laughter, applause)
I always like to have two preliminary remarks and
perhaps, therefore, I ought to make another. This isn't the
first time that I have spoken in this Lecture Theatre. I once
was one of the adjudicators, many years ago, in a debate between
the Oxford Debaters and the Mclbourne University Debaters the
Oxford Debaters being witty, but inaccurate; and the Melbourne
Debaters being dull, but, on the , ahole, rig! 2t.
On another occasion I committed myself to making a
political speech in here great fun: I was counted out, not
once but many times! Of course, tonight, the audience is of a
different quality. But I am bound to say that it is the first time that
I have been sitting on this most costly looking dais. In the
old days there was a sort of counter that ran along. Ono
looked around to see where the Bunsen Burners wore. ( Laughter)
But this is now, of course, completely scientific. I haven't
had time to study it I should have been given a chance. There
are switches here; all sorts of gadgets here. It is like
making a speech after dinner in America whore there are buttons,
and if you press one inadvertently you are electrocuted, much to
the relief of the audience ( Laughter); and if you press the
other one, inadvertently, and you are leaning forward at the
time, you have your neck broken. ( Laughter) None of these
adventitious aids to good cheer on the part of the audience seem
to be available tonight.
I really don't quite know what I ought to be saying to
you. I was told first of all, in a disarming way, that the
Managers would like me to make a speech, of sorts, on
productivity and the standard of living. And then, after a
discreet interval, they told me that my friend, Mr. Calwoll,
would be speaking on the same subject. Now * that should have
happened of course w. as that we should have got together on
this matter. But perhaps by the time we finish tonight we will
find that we iave a :, reat deal in common. Bec: 2use I am sure,
and you are sure, that it requires only a few minutes thought to
establish the proposition that productivity is at the very basis
of all national and individual material development in our
country. And I myself was delighted when the Productivity
Council was established. It may still be regarded, and perhaps
is, as a little tentative, a little speculative. There may be
those in the community who feel a little cautious about
associating themselves with it. But all I need to do is to
remind you that in Eiany countries in the world, great countries, 7 
2.
countries with irmmense problems, productivity councils are
becoming a commonplace.
It has been realised, for example in Great Britain,
with remarkable success, that to have a productivity council in
which a great variety of experiences, and of personalities, can
cone together, is of the essence. The tine has gone by when we
can just sit down and wait for the wind to change, wait for
something to turn up.
Now, if we are going to talk about productivity and
the standard of living, I suppose the first thing to do is to
say to ourselves, " What is the standard of living?". Because
that deserves thought.
We have been, on the whole, rather accustomed to
thinking of the standard of living in terms of something like
the Series Index; as something which is measured in
relation to a certain number of cornodities, in relation to
house rent; in relation to this, that, and the other. This is
a narrow conception of the standard of livii. Because the true
standard of living in our country is the level at which we ha ve,
and enjoy, at least three groups of things, sone of which are
occasionally overlooked.
The first group is the iroup that we instinctively
think of the level at which we have and e ' joy a hone, modern
labour-saving amenities in a home, good and doquate food, good
and adequate clothing. These are things, tangible, easily
understood, and they are perhaps the first things that we think
about when we think of the standard of living.
But there is another group coming into the standard
of living: good schools, good Universities, good technological
institutions, good organisations which bear on the creation of
skill and the encouragement of the mind. Proper leisure: this
too has some relation to the standard of living. Not perhaps so
much as some people occasionally think it depends on the use
of leisure. But proper leisure and recreation, and adequate
transport, all these things still speaking within that broad
compass are part of the standard of living.
But if we are to be judged by the mind of history some
day, as perhaps we shall be, then we cannot omit the third
group, because this also relates to the standard of living the
level at which we have a sense of community, a consciousness of
mutual interests, a developed sense and a developing sense of
social duty and a spiritual and intellectual existence.
We might, by some means or another, turn out to be the
best fed and the best housed, and the best clothed persons in
the world, and yet we might, in the eye of history be barbarians.
All these things form part of the standard of living,
and I refer to thema not just to state the obvious, or to dwell
in the abstract, but to remind you of this: that behind all
of these things we have a problem of productivity. tt may seem
odd, nay it not, to talk about the problem of productivity in
relation to these rather general intellectual and spiritual
conceptions. But of course there is a problem of productivity,
if we agree, as I am going to suggest to you we should, that
the whole problem of productivity has been too long looked at in
a narrow, compartnented sense, and has not been adequately seen
as requiring an entire joint connunity effort.
Now to achieve the things that I have been talking
about, particularly in the earlier brackets, we need, -f
course, national development. National development produced 
3.
itself by increasing population this is one of the great
phenomena of our time. And it is a phenomenon honourably
associated with the name of r. y friend and opponent who began this
great irmigration movement, postwar, into Australia.
We need increasing population, and we need the
exploitation of resources. Indeed I should have said, " We need
the discovery of resources", and than their oxploitation and
their developont. I hope that there are fewer people now who suffer from
the illusion that I suffered from as a school boy that there was
a certain amount of fertile country around the eastern and
southern seaboard of Australia and that all beyond that was a
wilderness. I hope that conception has gone.
If we are to have national development then we must
have full employment because we cannot afford to waste the
resources ofnanpower that we have, or that we attract. We nust
have savings to produce capital, so far as we can cvrsalvcs and
we nust attract capital fron people who have confideonc: us.
We nust have encouragement to enterprise. I don't say in
sone partisan political sense. Jhat we need to do is to oncJurage
in the ninds of people the enterprising s . irit, the willingness
to take a risk. This has nothing to do with politics.
But it has everything to do wit;' huan beings. We must have
enterprise because enterprise, vigorous an.. imaginative, is one
of the great productive agents in our world. And we rust have
imaginative leadership which doesn't morely nean in the field of
politics. Yes, we must have it on both sides in Parliament.
But we must have it in anagenmnt; we must have it in the trade
unions; we ust have it in all of those organisations which
have a part to play in the development of Australian production.
Now all I an getting at when I say these things is
that national productivity does not depend upon any one of these
thin6s. It depends on all of these things. And the great
beauty of having a Council representing widely groups of
competent and-interested people, is that it gives emphasis to
the fact that weo cannot afford just to think about one element.
We nust think about all, because this is our great coumunity tae.
Now, Sir, once we see that productivity is the whole
condition of national growth and inproved individual living we
will see that it has a challenge for all of us. The totality of
our individual efforts I repeat that the totality of our
individual efforts, not only those who are here tonight, but all
of those around Australia, will determine our national
productivity; and, of course, will determine, not only the
volume of production, but what we take out. When you have
discovered what we put in, then you may begin to talk about what
we take out. Now what are the various elements in this mattor? I
know that there are sooe old-fashioned people who, when they talk
about productivity, think instantly of the man who is working at
the bench, for exanmle. " Now, if he did more our problem would
bo solved" they say. And perhaps, on occasions, he ought to do
more. But he is only one element in this rattor. The plant
will, in many cases, deterine how much he does, how much he can
do. The availability of power and we have gone through
periods of a shocking shortage of power is a real factor.
Fortunately, in every State and in the Conmonwealth, tremendous
efforts have been put forward to increase the supply of power at
the elbow of the man who works. Buildings, naterials, the skill
of management these too, are factors. I a-very glad to see
here tonight one or two representatives of the Institute of
Management, because ranageomnt has an enormous part to play if we 
0 i4.
are to reach, and ultimately surpass, the visible maximum of
production. The skill of the nanagement, the skill of the
operative, are complementary.
I don't like the idea of thinking of a nan, for
exanple, who works in a factory, as being the nere servant of
his machine because we, in Australia, happen to belong to a race
of people who have innense resourcefulness and ingenity. And
many contributions have been nade by ordinary operatives at a
bench for the inprovement of procedures, and the improvement of
machines. Their skill is something tremendously to be
required. And above all, , f course, we must have in all
productive activity a mutual desire for success, a mutual desire.
It is a very great pity that in the bad old days and most of
them were, looking at then justly, bad old days there was so
much division of mind between the nan who managod, the ran who
employed, the nan who owned, and the ran who worked in some
enterprise as an employee as if there were hostility between
them. All too frequently there was.
We will never achieve national production on the g-rnd
scale until we all gain mutual confidence, pr.. ctise mutual fair
play, bend every effort to understanding, until we learn that
the interests of everybody from the Chairnan of Directors right
through the processes of nan~ e1. ent, to the nost newly joined
boy, in a factory, are common and those interests are that their
enterprise should succeed and should sustain then all.
And of course if we are to have that, then the other
thing that has to be put in to any productivity drive is
inagination yes, of course and pride.
I constantly wonder at the misuse of language that
occurs. Pride is a grand word, too frequently interpreted as if
it neant vanity or conceit or something cheap and silly. Why
are we here tonight? Why are you, ladies and gentlemen,
concerned in the affairs of this productivity council, so
interested in it, so willing to contribute your minds to it? It
is because you have a pride in this country and an even greater
pride in the kind of country it is going to be by the time your
grandchildren have lived in it.
And therefore all of these things that I have
mentioned are theelements. I may have omitted half a dozen.
It doesn't matter, for this purpose. But every one of them is
an essential constituent. And when I recite these things it is
perfectly clear that there is a common nature in this task a
cormon nature which requires that a Productivity Council should
be all-embracing in membership and in interests.
I hope I say this with great respect and with no
desire to be nisunderstood that the Trade Union movement will
more and more identify itself with your work as it has in
Great Britain. It won't if it feels that what Joes on is a
series of discussions to discover how much more work you can get
out of Bill Snith. Bill Smith is not unwilling to work we
cannot have much complaint about that in our country, We have
only to look around and see what has happened in this country
over the last 40 or 50 years to be vastly proud of the fact that
somebody, some thousands, some millions of people have been
doing a great deal of work. But the worker does not want to be
told that he is the one element. Let it be made clear to him
that he is one of a dozen elements, all of which have to be
brought totgther in the cormon interest. Once that is understood,
I venture to say, subject to correction that he will
cone. Because he will see that this is a reat national task. 
Now, Sir, I just go on fron that to say this.
Domestically in Australia, we know that the standard of living
as I have endeavoured to describe it cannot be raised by the
noro force of an Act of Parliament. If all you had to do was to
pass an Act of Parliament to say the standard of living is
raised 25% I think that is a natter on which both parties Iight
be at one at an election. And in order to be different one
would have tj nove an amend&amp; ont to make it 50% and not 25. But
of course you cannot do it by putting down some words on a piece
of paper and calling it an Act of Parliament and getting
Parliament to vote for it.
Governments can, of course, facilitate expansion. Some
people have been rude unough to say that Governments can
facilitate recessions and falls. But have it your own way. A
Governnont can do that. A Government can directly, or indirectly,
affect the supply of roney; it can directly or indirectly,
chiefly directly, affect the tax structure and the tariff
structure. These are all, of course, ir. iensely controversial
elements in the work of governmont. But the government th
country cannot in any real sense spend money of value wh: i i. the
people have not earned and paid to it. Or, as I once said, :-nd
I still stick to it, governments, contrary to the public
impression, have no money of their own. This is something to be
remembered at all times.
A Governr nt can make laws about goods and services.
But they will be goods and services which the people have
laboured to produce. A Government cannot, to take a current
example, solve the recurring problem of the balance of payments
except by stinulating the productivity, including the export
productivity of the nation, or doing something artificial
about the volume of imports into the country.
But whatever the views may be on these things, the
point is that everything the Government does directs itself to
the products of individual and corporate effort in the country.
Now what I have just said about the balance of
payments particularly applies to Australia. Would you mind if
I sort of made a prolonged interjection to myself by saying
something about that? Because once nore we know but little of
our own country and its problems.
Australia happens to be intrinsically not relatively
but intrinsically a great trading nation. Not per capita, but
in total terms this is a great trading nation one of the first
eight or nine in the world and has been for a long time. We
have a volume of export trade in Australia which represents a
greater proportion of our total trading than does the external
trade of Japan or of the United States. This, of course,
presents great problens to us. We may say, if we are foolish,
" Well the right way to get rid of all those problems is to
insulate your economy from the rest of the world". I don't
believe that anybody, sensibly, believes that. Because you can't
insulate our economy, if you think about it for ten minutes,
from the rest of the world and at the same time have great
national growth and developnent.
Why do we have balance of payrents problems? Why do
we have them coming with almost monotonous and painful
regularity? And the answer, if you think about it is simple
enough. The croat bulk of our export trade is in the products of
the soil, or of the pasture wool, meat and the rest of our
primary exports with manufacturing as yet a small fraction,
though a growing one, of our exports. fAnd because our exports 
4 6.
are in this primary field they are subject to all the chances
of wind and weather in the world. If the price of wool falls
there is not much we can do to prevent it. If the price of
meat falls there is not much we can do to prevent it. We may
go on increasing our actual production in these fields as
indeed Australia has but in the long run the cheque for the
export income will fluctuate violently from year to year. More
Sol I venture to say, than in the case of any other major
country. Now, how arc we going to deal with this? Because the
price of wool may fall, because there may be a drought that
reduces the quantity of wheat available to be sold, prices rise
and fall in the world's markets. But at home, provided we have
a state of affairs in which people are employed and well paid
and willing to spend money, then our demand on the rest of the
world for imports will achieve an almost appalling stability at
the very moment when our export income, year by year, is, in
the homely phrase, going up and down like a ye ye.
Now what is the answer to all that? I don't wnnt to
trench on these matters, but I have heard it said that the
answer is to cut your imports appropriately. Now I ask xci
just to think about that. Here you have an export incom-l-,
which may vary by a hundred or two hundred millions as bct-, t; , cn
two years. Are you to follow it up and down by a series of
fluctuating controls, physical controls over your imports? It
is very difficult, I would think, vastly frustrating I would
think. I myself don't believe tflat there is much hope in the
long run along those lines. On the contrary I believe that what
we. must aim at in Australia is to dov,; lop the character and
quality of our export income. Because when it is so varied and
depends on so many particular commodities and circumstances that..
it assumes a higher degree of stability from year to year than
it has now, then we may find and I bolieve we would find that
our balance of payments problem, so peculiarly acute in the case
of Australia, will tend to settle itsolf, the curve will become
a little flatter. And how are we to do that? That brings me back to
where I began. d~ e are to do that by doing everything we can to
ensure that a much groater proportion of our export business is
done in commodities and in fields in which the fluctuation of
the world market does not produce such violent results. In
other words we are to reduce the fluctuation in our export
income so far as we can and this is not to be done overnight
by developing new markets, by expanding old markets, and by
selling in those miarkets not only the products of the field, but
the manufactured commodities of Australia. Is this hopeless?
Does anybody want to tell me that in Australia, with our native
wit and our native skill, with the rising levels of competence
in management, with the development of plant, with the
increasing use of power and of miodern machinery we cannot
compete in a whole lot of markets in the world? I don't
believe it. This to me is defeatism. But it will involve in
Australia a conception of production, a devotion to the idea of
productivity which so far we have not reached. But if we do
reach it we will find that markets that now seemi to be quite
closed to us are open to us, just as much as they are to other
industrialised nations in the world.
Therefore it all comes back, whatever we talk about,
whatever we think about, to production. It is no use getting-a
market overseas if you have no production to back it. It is no
use starting off in a market overseas and doing frightfully well
with the first orders unless all the production is coming up
behind it to supply it that is the right way to lose a market,
not to rain it. 
141 7.
And so the accent all the tine is on production, on
productivity both externally and domestically. We know, do we
not, that domestically if we had none of those complications of
overseas balances to think about at all, the right way to
stabilise the value of money would be to increase the production
that we achieve in Australia, matching it, and more than matching
it with the growing demand of an increasing population. And
externally, without a great conception of production we will
have a chronic balance of payments problem which will load to
widely varying applications of policy from time to time, intense
irritation, and a good deal of avoidable loss.
So Sir in this great task we must all take a hand
because we are all in it. ' hether it has something to do with a
spiritual excitement, whether it has something to do with an
intellectual contribution to the growth of civilisation in
Australia, whether it is producing nuts and bolts in a factory,
whether it is managing something here or there, wherever it r. iay
be, whether it is teaching in a school, or teaching in a
university we are all in this task. Because this tasi-of
productivity is, I believe, the greatest task that conf:-': . tq the
nation. If we realise that it is a task for all of us, rt to be
pushed off on to somebody else, a responsibility not to be
dodged by any individual so that somebody else will carry more
than his share of the burden, if we can realise that, then I
believe that we will achieve, not only the most temondous
national growth, in Australia, our c. untry, our heritage, but we
will achieve a community spirit which will be infinitely more
important than half the things we talk about. 



FOR PRESS: IT WAS OFN: CIALLY All7jOTITDT-7 CANBERRA TODAY THAT
GETFRAL H7RB71PT B. POWJELL, COM~ fU-, O TF'RAT OP THE UNITED
STATES CONJTINENTAL ARITY COMUA-lTD ILT, AUSTRALIJ. A IN MAY
FOR THIS Y7EAR'S CORAL SEZA CE2RTIIS
GENERAL POl.* LT, WILL BE ACCOW--:' AT'IED BY HIS WIFES
THE VISIT IS EyPTCOT7D TO : OTR ABOUT TVTO I ' rK PO
26TH OR 27TH APRIL.
Prime Minister's Department,
CANBERRA2. A. C. T.
12th February-.-j-Tl1
I. 0 
9 P BIOGRAPHICAL BACKGROUND.
GET1RAL HERBTRT B. PO1' ELL.
General Herbert 3. Powell is Commanding General, United
States Continental Army Command, Port Monroe, Virginia.
Prior to cofmanding the Third U. S. Army at Fort McPherson,
Georgia, from March 5, 1960, through September, General Powell was
Deputy Commanding General for Reserve Porces at USCONARC headquarters.
He held this post from April 1958 to March 1960 and distinguished
himself in promoting the One Army concept throughout Reserve
components of the command.
He previously was commandant of the United States Army
Infantry School at Fort Benning, Georgia; commanding general of the
Infantry Division ot Schofield Barracks, Hawaii; and for a time
Commanding General, United States Armr Pacific in Hawaii. During the
conflict in Korea, he commanded the famous 17th Infantry Regiment
when it was the only United States unit to reach the Yalu River on
the Manchurian border. In World Var II he was chief of staff of the
Infantry Division during three campaigns in Europe. He is a
graduate of the National War College, ashington, DC, and has served
on the Department of the Army General Staff.
General Powell was born in Monmouth, Oregon, on July 13,
1903. He descended from a colonial Virginia family. His grandfather
and grandmother followed the Oregon trail in a covered wagon and
founded his hometown in 1850.
He enlisted in the Oregon NTational Guard in 1919 and rose
to the grade of sergeant. He was corm-issioned a second lieutenant of
Infantry in the Regular Army by competitive examination upon graduation
from the University of Oregon in 1926.
He was married to Beryl Kinr; of Portland, Oregon, in 1928.
They have no children.
General Powell has been decorated with the Distinguished
Service Cross, the Legion of Merit with Oak Leaf. Cluster, the Bronze
Star Medal with two Oak Leaf Clusters, the Air Medal, the Commendation
Ribbon with Metal Pendant, the Purple Heart and the Combat Infantryman
Badge as well as several decorations by allied governments.
He is a rated Army aviator. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY
AT WAYVILLE
MONDAY, 13TH FE13RUARY. 1961
Speech by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.
Sir Mr. Premier, parliamentary colleagues and ladies and
genllemen: I think I must indulge myself in the luxury of making
just one reference to what has just fallen from the lips of the
Premier. He says that with one exception, not myself, the
Prime Ministers with whom he has dealt have been very tough. All
I can say to you is they needed to be! ( Laughter, applause)
But although we have been as tough as we could I
think we have been just, as might be demonstrated without much
difficulty if we were discussing that kind of thing.
Now I want to tell you that I regard this as the most
astonishing meeting I have ever seen. When they told me that we
would have a rally in this Hall, I thought that this was the
triumph of hope over experience to get thousands of people
into one place, and particularly to got them into one place at
one time. Therefore I find this a very, very inspiriting
occasion. And I think it is an occasion, as a rally of our
Party, to state, as compactly as I can, what our faith is and
what we are doing about it-and to explain to you some of the
things in recent times that may seem to be a little mysterious.
I want to do that because it is said and said repeatedly, that
we have a changing policy I think I remember the expression
" stop and go" that we change our minds very frequently. I
mention this to you because there is also a school of thought to
the effect that we don't know up at Canberra what is going on;
and that we are insulated from public opinion. Don't you
believe it we hear quite a lot of it. And one of the things
we hear is that the Governrent doesn't know its own mind: it
introduces a Budget; it introduces, a few months latert some
supplementary measures. This, of course, couldn't happen in a
well-governed country; and doesn't happen, presumably, in other
countries. The fact that in Great Britain the mothar country of
our race, with enormous financial and economic problems, the
Bank rate, which is their controlling mechanism for the economy
goes up, goes down again two months later, goes up three months
later, comes down six weeks later appears to escape the notice
of people. Now why is it that changes havo to be made? I think I
am going to demonstrate to you tonight that we, on your behalf,
as Liberals of this country, have had and retain a constant
policy; but that we have enough intelligence to know that a
constant policy must be applied to changing circumnstances and
must not pretend that the circumstances have not changed, In
ether words a constant policy with variable applications to
changing circumstances. Of course there were simpler days. I think I was
reminding a fine audienco at lunch time that back at a period
not remembered by half the population of Australia, or two
thirds, at a period 30 years ago, when we had a great depression
in Australia and whlere genuine distress on a great scale swept
ever the country, we had, early in 1933, 30% of unemployment in
Australia. Think of it 3016. Then it canie down to 
And the Lyons Goverrmeont cane in. It introduced a sense of
Atability, a senso of belief and confidence in the country-and
it remained thaere for a long time. But by the time the Lyons
Government itself came to an end we still had 10% of the work
force of Australia unemployed. And this was regarded as
something so remarkable compared with what had happened th4t the
people of Australia accepted it.
Now, of course if you live in a comunity which is
prepared to accept 10 or 9 or 8 or 7 or 6% of unemployment as a
commonplace, as they do in the United States, as indeed they do
a good deal of the time in Canada then the business of
Government becomes easy. But justice to the community becomes
inadequate. AInd we stand for justice to the community.
Therefore we have set as our goal theo maintenance of an
extraordinarily high level of employmient in Australia. ( Applause)
If we had not done that, if we were living in the prewar
period as I gather some of our critics think we are we
would. not be worried about 2 or 3 or of unemployment, because
this would be something that the community would accept. But
today, this nation stands committed to a policy of full
employment not over-full employment with its rising costs and
its excessive overtime and its rapid labour turnover; nor
material unemployment with its social injustice and its human
bitterness. We stand for a policy which requires a fine balance.
Now I emphasise that to you. This requires a fine balance to
have your people employed; not to have the relative economic
disaster of unfilled jobs so that work doesn't go on adequately;
not to have the social disaster of unfilled stomachs in decent
homes, Now whatever the so-called experts may say, when you
hpaovlei cya wphoilcichy iwsh itcheh mroesqtu irdeisf fiac uflitn e thbianlga ncien, thteh enw oyrolud thoa vem aiantain.
Figuratively speaking if one wanted to go across Niagara Falls in
the old days when there was plenty of room for manoeuvre and
somiebody built a nice wide bridge, it would be quite easy.' You
could wander from side to side of the bridge, you had plenty of
room. But a finely balanced policy requires that you should walk
the tight-rope like Blondin. And Blondin, I am credibly
informed, though he wasn't one of my intimate friends, managed to
maintain himself on a tight rope by a vast series of moves to
right and left to preserve the balance.
Now that is a metaphorical expression, but I think it
will convey to you what I have in my mind. Because if the idea
is full employment, full employment in the presence of enormous
national developm~ ent, of a vast immigration programme of all
the problems that are associated with a rising population, it is
not a policy that can be maintained by stupid people who, having
said in August, " That's our policy for the next 12 months",
leave it alone. The circumstances change; something happens.
So far as I am concerned, I will always regard myself as your
leader and as your Prime Minister, not only at liberty, but
compelled to make whatever changes from time to time may be
necessary in order to maintain the central policy that we stand
for. ( Applause) Now, Sir, let mie remind everybody here of what our
po'licy is, this constant policy. Because I emphasise that the
policy is constant.
. At home we have for 11 years by the time of the next
election 12 years continuously stood for national development
to the limit of our physical resources. If anybody cares to
look around lustralia and com-pare it with what it was 11 years
ago, it must be admnitted that the development in this country has
been fabulous. ( Applause) 
You know it is the old story. If we see people every
day we don't seo much change in them. Some people see me
occasionally having seen me almost every day, and they say,
" By jove, old nan you're looking well". But evary now and then
I run across a fellow who hasn't seen me for ten years and he has
quite a different story. You see he sees the changes after' an
interval of a decade; whereas other people whi-are on the mat,
so to speak, constantly, do not.
But I occasionally speak to people from overseas,
people with great affairs -to consider and to conduct and without
exception they say to no, " I wouldn't have believed that I could
see such a change in a country in ten years". Well of courses
I didn't do it; you didn't do it. But somebody did~ it. The
people of Australia did it. And the people of Australia would
not have thought fit to do it unless Government had been
sufficiently sensible and sufficiently encouraging to develop
the climate in which this great growthi would occur. This has
been the most remarkable decade of developmient in the history of
Australia. A" nd if, after the next election, for some reason or
other, the people of Australia decide that they want to entrust
their fortunes to the Calwells and the Wards and the Cairnses
and so on, all right! That will be their choice. I donft think
they will make it. But at any rate, so far as I am concerned I
will look back with pride on what has occurred. ( Applause)
Now behind national development we believe in large
immigration as an aid to national development. There again
people can simplify things. They can say, " But of course, that's
elementary". It isn't elementary. Every time you have a little
flurry of unemployment in one place or another, you will hear
somebody say " tWe must cut down on immigration". We have
believed, ana. believe, that the flow of good people, with a
variety of cultures and experiences, and backgrounds into this
country is giving to us a strength, a vigour, a-variety of minds
which we would never otherwise have acquired. We believe that
a large movement of immigration into Australia is of the essence
of national development.
I know there are some people I think there are some
sitting'on the other side of the House who think that what we
ought to do in Australia is to wrap our garments about us and
live in a state of splendid isolation, keeping all imports out,
isolating ourselves from the affairs of the world, not letting
all these strange people come in. What sort of a notion is
this, of a great nation?
Why, before the war I think I have said this to you
before we wore told by exports that e would never have a
population of more than 7j million in Australia; and that it
would take until 1975 to reach that point; and that in the
meantime we would be Lgetting older and older. Of course I
would, you would this is the law of life. But what they told
us was that the percentage of old people would grow; and the
percentage of young earning, contributing people would fall.
Now that was the doia of 1938 23 years ago.
And today, are we looking forward to having 7j million
in 1975? On the contrary! We have 10-2k millions already. And
what we will have in 1975 I leave to your imagination. So far
from having a structure of society in which more and more old
people will be supported by less and less young people the
period from 1960 to 1970 is -, oing to be a decade in which the
avrae age of the community will fall, in whiich more and rmore
young people will be available as a percentage of the community,
to build to construct, to support. That means that the decad6
from 1966 to 1970 will alimOst inevitably be a greater periodof
development in A1ustralia than the decade from 1950 to 1960. I 
0 4.
find this a stimulating idea.
" Bliss was it in that dawrn to bc alive,
But to be young was very heaven! 1
This is a period of time in which you and I tonight
merely pause in this developmeont, to recapture a decent
satisfaction with the last ton years; and to kindle our
imagination about the next ten years.
tie have had in this tine, as part of our policy,
increased production, industrial peace, which, in spite of a few
sporadic outbursts, has never boon , Yreater than it has been in
the last ten years.
But all these things national development, the
demand for capital, the demand for great public works, necessary
public works, the growth of the population the search for
increased production plus full , mploymenl have to be achieved,
if we are to do our best, without creating an inflationary boom.
You can have them all without trouble if you don't mind
inflation. But they all put a pressure on human and financial
and economic resources which will of course produce an
inflationary boom unless every now and then a Government has the
elementary courage to take a ' Lew stops to restrain it.
Our policy has meant adequate social services; it has
mecant adequate modern defence; it has meant, in spite of
cynical onlookers, a considerable restraint upon the level of
taxation. But it has, of course, included in all these things
in this modern and complicated world, credit and currency
controls to achieve growth with stability and to do justice to
the demands for capital for public undertakings and capital for
private business and industrial expansion.
I want to pause to say a word about that. One of our
troubles is that when we look at these difficult matters we
occasionally like to draw a hard line of distinction between one
thing or another that's black, or that's white; that's right
or * that's wrong. find the result is that you will hear people
say quite earnestly that the great conflict in the demand for
capital for development is a conflict between the Government and
private business. I want to say to you it is nothing of the kind
You consider what the public works are; you look at
your own State and see the works that have been carried out.
Take, by way of example, one that I know something about
because the Commonwealth found the money for it: that is the
railway line through Leigh Creek to Maree. Without this line,
without the developments that occur in those circumastances the
use of coal in South Australia, its own coal, would have been
restricted; it would have been i:,, ore difficult to produce power.
And without power how would the private business expansion in
the States get on? It is a single, simple example.
I can hardly think of a solitary public work conducted
by either Commonwealth or State and between us we conduct a
public works programme which runs up to the better part of
œ 400 million a year I can hardly imagine one element in it
which does not provide the essential foundation for private
business expansion. How can any man expand a factory? How can any man
go in for some great new enterprise unless he has power at his
elbow, water supply, transport, housing schools? All these
things represent the great public works programme of the State
and of the Commonwealth. 
The two things are completely complementary. And I beg
of you to put out of your mind this idea that there is some
conflict between them. Because I believe that you must add the
two of them together to find out how the country goes on.
On top of all that we have as our constant polloy the
expansion and the diversification of our exports; and I will say
a word to you about this. Unless wo can export more, unless we
can find new markets in the world, unless we can add to the export
of wool and meat and wheat, the export of the products of our
factories, then we :-re going to have trouble about our balances of
payments, probably for the rest of my life. Not constant but
fluctuating sometimes better, sometimes worse.
I said somcthing about this today to an audience of
business men. It is vital that we should all bond our energies to
developing exports from this country, because the plain truth is
that every now and then and this year is one of them we find
ourselves spending more money overseas than we are earning. And
therefore we are drawing on our accumulated capital overseas to
pay our current debts. That is bad business, and the Liberal
Party stands not for bad business, but for good sounmd national
business. Therefore if w~ e are to solve thiis problem in the long
run we must earn more.
Those many of you who remember the events of the
will agree with me that we took thte whole shock of the world
depression flat in the face because our principal means and
almost our only means of survival lay in the products el the
farms and pastures of the country. When wool went down to what
was it? 6d. or 7d. a lb., some fantastic pric3; and when wheat
was down to 1/ 9d. a bushel just think of it of course we were
almost defenceless against this blow. We had to shorten sail;
we had to cut everybody down; we had to reduce pensions in
Australia; and reduce pay; and ride the storm out. As a
nation Australia learned something from thiat, and we developed
more and more our manufactures.
When I first used to discuss this State with Sir Thomas
Playford, which was very early in my history but quite late in
his, because he has been Premier for a long, long timae ( Applause)
I remember saying to him, " If South Australia is ever to cease to
be a ' claimant' State we must do something to develop its economic
balance". In other words we raust get secondary industries into
it. Under my own first Government we put munitions establishmients
into this State which were thie nucleus -around which one of the
most remarkable industrial developments in Australia has
developed. The result is that South Australia is not a ' claimant'
State any longer; it is a balanced community.
That is a mere microcosm of the fact that in Australia
we have become a balanced cormmunity. W'e are now a highly
industrialised nation. Wie still get a shock when thea price of
wool falls, of course. But it is not so fatal ' a shock as it
would be if we did not have all this vast area of industrial
employment and activity to fall back on. If we are going to
maintain that position we must take every conceivable step, not
only to increase our markets for the normal things that we grow,
but to create great new markets for those things that we
manufacture in our factories; things that we can make with no
less skill than the people of the United States or the people of
the United Kingdom.
Now, internally, those represent, broadly, our constant
policies. I would not mind being cross-examined about them
before the Bar of history, because I th[, ink that over thiis decade
we ca-n demonstrate a remarkable degree of success in the
carrying out of those policies. 
But there is also the problem abroad. Just let me say
a few words about it. What is our policy, our Liberal policy
in relation to the world? Well, first of all it is a policy of
the maintenance and cultivation of friendship. That sounds very
simple, doesn't it? The maintenance and cultivation of
friendship in aid of peace and in aid of our own national
security. It is very easy to quarrel with othor nations. When
we came back into office at the ond of ). 949 Australia had
succeeded in having some quarrels with the United States of
America and with the United Kingdom. We.-have resolved all
those things. The fact is that this country enjoys a quality of
friendship with the United States, with all the countries of the
Commonwealth, never previously surpassed in our history. We
believe that we must, as a nation, jointly with other people,
resist aggressive communism whother it is European or Asian.
Well we haven't just talked about it. Ve have made a
powerful contribution to the strcangthoning of Commonwealth
relations, British Commocnwealth relations. We ours-elves were
the creators of the Colorabo Plan which has brought enormous help
and satisfaction to many Asian countries. We were I think I
should say, properly, the chief proponents of the tINZUS Pact
with the United States and with Now Zealand. Wo are a foundation
member and an active member of the South East Asia Treaty
Organisation. When somebody says to y,. u " Have you a policy on
foreign affairs?" pray, remind themi Lat these things have been
done by us not one of them had been dreamed of before,
Of course if you are to live in t'ie world with
satisfaction, with honour, with credit in an economic sense then
you must not only add to your exports as and when you can, but
you must restrain inflation at home. Nobody wants to invest
his mioney in an economy which is falling away. You must?
therefore, maintain conditions which will attract imports of
productive capital.
Now don't think that this is a dry matter, please.
Whatever may have been said about previous Labour Governments,
the present Labour Opposition at Canberra is violently opposed
to the investment of foreign capital in Australia. It loses no
opportunity of complaining about it. And when I say " foreign
capital" I m. ean for this purpose not my words capital from
the United Kingdom which represents, so far, the bulk of these
investments, and capital from the United States of America.
Now this is worth thinking about. I undertake to say that
there are a few " crocodile" tears being shed in Labour circles
today about people who are being paid off unhappily, from
certain car manufacturing industries. Bu I remind you that ffthu
Labour view about not importing capital from overseas had
prevailed, the factories would not be there in most case8 and
there wouldn't be any people employed to be paid off. It is
just as well to remem~ ber that. They are against it.
I rem,. ember with some satisfaction that about six or
seven years ago it was possible to stand on a platform in
Adelaide or in Melbourne or somewhere else and say that our
stability, our policies, our repute, our credit, were such that
about : COO million a year was being invested in Australia for
productive enterprises by private people not by Governmaent
and that this maeant everything to us in employment and in
growth. Last year it was over œ C200 million. I wonder what
would happen to us if a Goverrnmeint camo in which did not enjoy
this credit and repute abroad. It is worth thinking about. 
Indeed while I ani on that topic it nighIt not be a bad
idea if I suggested to you that occasionally the onlooker sees
a good deal of the gane. We are pretty close to it. If we have
look at Governmient policy as private citizens we naturally tend
to look at it as it affects us at this myom~ ent. And that is
hum~ an nature; that is inevitable. Governm~ ents have to accept
that as a fact, but not to be unduly swayed by it because they
have a general responsib) ility to the whole nation.
But people outside, looking at us, occasionally see
sonething and say something worth recording. Now in the city
of New York I am going to weary you with one passage there
is a very great financial body knowrn as the Enpire Trust
Company. Many business non hero will be quite familiar with
its name. And the D7pire Trust Company publishes, periodically,
a circular which goes around the city of New York and into all
the great financial hcjuses. A number of ny friends in New
York who are by no neans small mon in the financial world
hastened to send no a print of this last circular published in
January. Could I road you a little bit? It is a first class
sui-nary of what our policy has been in the financial world,
It says " Because of the swiftly rising level of business
activity which began in 1959 the Coomronwoolth authorities"
that is the Australian Coiamonwedth-
" undertook a mu~ lti-pronged attack on inflation ( You will
renenber these measures) relaxa~ tion of inport restrictions,
intervention in the February, 1960 Basic Wage hearing which
resulted in the refusal of the Airbitration Commission to
grant increases, and tightened credit by the Reserve Bank.
This programme was supplemented by provision for a small cash
surplus in the 1960/ 61 Budget wherein Commonwealth taxes
were raised a total of Q37 millions, a major contribution to
which was a rise in the corporation tax rate from 37e, to
Despite these moves the Australian economy continued
to expand so vigorously in 1960 that further anti-inflationary
measures were found necessary. The Commonwealth Treasurer"
that is my much abused colleague, Harold Holt, who, after all,
speaks for all of us
" announced on November 15th last new and particularly
courageoussteps"
just think of it: this is what they say in New York-
" which in the main consist of the following: still tighter
Bank credit restrictions, with particular emphasis on
curbing loans for speculative purposes, the limitation of
interest deductions for income tax up to the amount claimed
last year, interest on new issues of convertible notes will
not be deductible for income tax purposes, the maximum bank
lending rate raised from 6 to and the Sales Tax on motor
vehicles from 30 to
Then they go on
" Recent indications suggest that the financial spiral in
Australia has begyun to abate, paving the way for continued
strong growth under somewhat steadier conditions. The
vigour and despatch with which the Australian authorities
attacked the problem has not gone unnoticed in ovorsoas
financial centres". ( Applause) 
Now, Sir, I read that passage to you with a certain
satisfaction. In all these policies I think we have had a
considerable success. And interestingly enough the poople of
Australia have thought so. They thought so in 149and in ' 51,
and in 154' and in ' 55 and in ' 58. In fact they thought so
more in ' 56 than they did in 14+ 9 bocause we had a record
majt. lie have had all these rises in development, 7 in
overseas investment. The growth in production which is, of
course, of primary importance in Australia has been phenomenal.
I haven't tine to give you a lot of examples of this but I
suppose there will be some of you, at least, who will remember
that back twelve years ago we were greatly troubled about coal
we weren't getting production. In m.-any industrial centres they
had blackouts, power was cut off. We udero told that of course
' you couldn't do any good in the coal world because theo coal
miner was a difficult fellow'. The production of black coal
during the time of my Government has risen, in actual terms,
from 14+ million tons a year to 21 million tons a year. The
production of steel in Australia and the production of power has
gone up almost thrkue times in the course of this period. Of
course we didn't do all this with our own fair hands. But we
set out to do our best to create an atmosphere of freedom, and
of growth, and of enterprise in Australia which would bring
these things about. And they have happened.
Now, Sir, I turn away from that to put one question to
you. I think that if the people of Australia had been asked
twelve months ago let us go back twelve m~ onths to the time
when I couldn't walk down the street without people saying ' Good
on you' whether they could have done as well in A" ustralia-I
an talking now of Coraonwealth matters under the Evatts
Calwells, W-ards, Cairnses, they would have said MNoll Well what
has happened? Do they now believe that in the last few months,
after years of what I venture to describe as succossfuliganity,
we have suddenly gone mad?
Don't take your view from a few extravagantly critical
publications because they have said all these things before
today; and we have happened to survive them., Just look at the
facts and work the facts out for yourself.
Now what happened after the policy that we announced
at the beginning of 1960? What happened after that as it was
described " four-pronged" policy of February of last year which
I venture to say had the warm approval of sensible people all
over Australia. Well things did not come out exactly as we
expected themi, or hoped them to do. In the first place the
price of wool fell away still further. Now that is a major
element in our economy. In the second place bank advances which
were expected to increase by the merest small fraction increased
between then and November by about œ-150 million. I don't say
that critically of the Banks; but they increased because of this
enormious demand for imiports proceeding from an almost record
possession of purchasing power in the home corriunity a
purchasing power which, not being satisfied by internal
production, reached out and sought for im~ ports, The result was
that by last November our reserves overseas were running down
and runnini down at a very fast rate. Bank advancus were up;
bank liquidity, looking to the futuro, found itself with a
problem in front of it. WUhat were we to do? We had announced
that we would budget for a surplus; we did. We did all these
other things that have been referred to about the Basic Wage
enquiry. But in spite of all those things up went bank
advances; and there was an enormous increase in expenditure.
An analysis of-it showed that there were certain fields in which 
that process bad roached its culminating point.
Now I an a great boliever in the motor car industry in
Australia and so are yoiu, in South. Australia. And well you
night be. It has been a great and valuable industry to
Australia. But if you are having an inflationary boon in your
owm country you just can't turn your eyes away from the places
that are helping to produce the boom, places where some
restraint, for a time, may be necessary.
By October of last year registration of new cars, new
rioter vehicles rather, in Australia, had reached the level
mest of you won't believe it of 1,000 per working day! I can
go back to a tine when there were no motor cars manufactured in
Australia. There were some riotor bodies, built here, and some in
Melbourne but there were no motor cars built. We were told you
could. not have a m~ otor manufacturing industry in Australia,
because the volume of demand would not be great enough. And here
we were with a thousand cars a day coning on to the registry.
Our imports into Australia and it is imports that
eat up our overseas balances which the previous year had been
œ C150 million had risen to œ-200 rmillion at a time at which our
wool cheque had fallen by rathor a greater amount than that.
You see these are the sort of facts that have to be
looked at by a Government. You do not want a Liberal
Government to look facts in the eye and then run away from them.
Therefore we concluded that if we were going to restrain this
inflationary pressure which pushes up the price level, which
does injustice to people on fixed incomes, then we must look at
what the sources of the pressure were and do something about the.
Take another instance the demand for capital. You
know ladies and gentlemen there is one odd thing about public
works you have to pay for them! These wretched fellows who
are contractors on big works, they like being paid; and they
like being paid in hard cash. Therefore you must get the hard
cash. Now in the good old days a Loan Council net, it decided
to borrow œ 20 or œ F30 million, whatever it might, and it borrowed
it. The Commonwealth got a little share of it in those days;
and the rest went round.
Since I cane back into office we have had no share, as
a Com~ onwealth, in the loan market. Nor can the loan market
find all the money that is needed for public works. The fact is
that we have had to carry not because we like it, but because
we thought it had to be done a substantial percentage of the
cost of public works on the Commonwealth budget. That doesn't
make us very popular, you know. Over the last nine years 1+ 01
of State works programmeis have been financed from the Commonwealth
Budget. If you add our own works programe 601, of all
the Government I mean Corimnonwalh and State works in
Australia have been found, in terms of cash, out of the
Commf~ onweal th Budget. I don't omuplain about it. I think it was
right. I think that without that, this country could not have
developed. But I want to remind you that if we had decided to
be a little stiff, a little academic on these matters and had
said, " No, we are not going to spend revenue on works; we'll
just confine ourselves to the loan money that the p) eople will let
us have", we could have reduced taxation of course; we could
have been incredibly popular, of course; and AuMstralia would
have stood stock still for the last ton years.
I think that there is just one further aspect of that
matter that I might refer to. That is that one of the reasons
why Commonwealth loans, which we raise on behalf of the States
and ourselves under the Financial Agreement have not been able 
to absorb as much m.-oney as we needed has been the competition in
Aiustr-ali-a-between -Government borrowings and private borrowings
at fancy-rates of interest you are familiar with it. Open a
newspaper any day and you will m. arvel to see how many people are
yearning to collect your money at ten per cent or nine per cent
or eight per cent interest for three months, 7 or six months, or
twelve months or two years. This is , ood; that is what they
call mney for jam~. But you only have to have enough scores of
millions, or hundreds of millions, finding their way into that
kind of investment, to find that the Government Loan Account is
getting dry. And if the Government Loan Account is getting dry,
then you must knock off the works, which nobody proposes to do
because that is knocking off national growth, or you must getth
money in the first instance out of the taxpayer's pocket.
Therefore, on this occasion -I have no doubt to the
great dissatisfaction of some people we have done something
about the fancy rates of interest. We have provided in a
temporary measure, that it is no longer going to be taken that if
you pay 10j% on a short term borrowing, you are going to be
allowed the whole 10% as an income tax deduction that lovely
day has to come to an end.
And we asked ourselves " Can we any longer accept the
proposition that an enterprise can raise money by what it is
pleased to call " convertible notes" which are really another
form of capital " and deduct, before income tax is calculated,
the whole cost of the interest on the convertible notes?". These
are technical matters. But business men in this audience tinight
will understand, and I am sure that they will agree, that no
Government seeking to correct this imbalance between public works
and public enterprise the essential of national development
could stand by and allow these other factors to stand in the way
of serving the interests of the public, and of protecting the
position of the taxpayer. '-do are all taxpayers, and what the
other man dodges, we pay. That is worth thinking about.
Novi, Sir, I know that what I have said to you is, in
many cases, dry, no doubt. What I have really been trying to say
to you is: When you look at all these things, think first of
what our ;-reat national policies are. As Liberals, be proud of
those policies and be proud of what they have done for Australia.
When you look at the application of these policies, I hope that
you will always have in mind that you expect from Liberal
leaders in politics, intelligence, flexibility of mind a
willingness to do unpopular things occasionally, a pref'erence in
their own minds, as I have in mine, for the respect of the
people rather than for easy applause and popularity. I venture
to say that when it is well understood what oes on, that when
the result of this medicine begins to appear, and people realise
that the balances of payments are improving, that the run-down is
coming to an end, that we are getting back once more into a state
of stability. they may still retrospectively have a few harsh
things to say about harsh things that were done to them but thor
will respect the Government. And no Government that is respected
is beaten. Therefore I say to you all Thank you very much. It is
a marvellous thing to see so many of you; it is a wonderful
thing for people like myself, looking at these matters constantly,
anxiously, day by day, to know that there are thousands of people
outside who, though occasionally they are mystified by what you
do, have deep down in them the belief that our political faith
of Liberalism is one of utter integrity and honesty, and of
imagination. And that those who lead us are fit to be trusted by
us with the carrying out of this naL~ nificent adventure in the
growth of A1ustralia. ( Applauso) 



kdr. Presidegnt, ladies and jsntle
It is no moe form of words for me to say that I am
delighted to be here,, because this is a very exciting oaasiozi
It is a wry exciting act of raith and of ina.; inution.
We ure accustomed, In Australia,, to think or ourselves as
lukiing an almost painfully now country. I daresay that some of
As here today have thought what a contwast there would be between
this bohoolt so far ans It has gpoet and . Vsminmter School In
London. Juif we have enough imagination to tiarn our eyos backc
Into history we will roeulise thatpafter all that Zciool had a
3egmS9g wAn Westminster itself had a bekning, It in one of
t~ ie things that I like thinking about when I's in ; London, that at
V-A very tim when . iotmixistor 14ll was beind built, the Ureat
.[ al of Auflana Rufus* there were fields and furm -iun~ d it.
aid when the Abbey sprang Into existence, the vhi4 shining Aauay,
as it was at that time, thero were fields ja4 frm~ s around it.
mdc need every now and then to have an act of faith in
order to lift ourselves above the ordinary comam round. I don't
know whether any of you, or many of you, have had the opportunity
of seeing the great EUl Cathedral In the esstern provinces of
Sagland a nagnificent cathedral rising out of a villip, built
at a time when there were a fey v; ljaes and a feow farms scattered
around. What a tremondous act of inazination ind faith.
Therefore I as delightedo not only to be here, on such an
occasion, but I an particularly Interested in the name that hasn
aeon chosen. 4ec aum 1 am a poeut believor in the contirnuity of
good traditionst a sense of continuity , a sense that we are not
hera today and gone tomorrow, a sense Ufat we are part of' an
izmotal procession of huna'i beings. This is the Me~ At : ning, i
iellove, in the national character.
And there at Jestuinster, whose fn you have taken what
doe ones, I even today? The at~ hall of iluliam Rufus built In
the -% velfth oentury, still sta g, q rimed with smake an two
occasions in its history, stll thor. the ! al in which Clarles
i was tried; the UIll outside whichoday looki;-.&amp; Into
Parllaaent Place,, stands tine atuo of 0liver Cromwell; h Hall
out of which opened the doors into little, rooms in which the whole
of the Suglish Comoon Law was developed,, the agat uiediaeval
Oourts of the tLing's iJench and of the Common kleas and of the
444hequor, This Is, of all plaoes In our omunity of n&amp; ationsO the
most fascin~ iting and the most historic. And just over tin road,
sao to speak, the coeat Abey with all that It contains of Jt'itish
~ Ii story. How this 1L think Is something that I. hope every boy
who ames here viM aw to understand. I would li1e to think that
the full. significance or what has happened and is ! zppening, in
Jestainater becaine known. We are so acmastaned today to having
0,, rlianents. 3a people think that we have too many. I
oocauionially share that fae, p but only in a momentary way. The
rirst Parliament that ever atq sat in Iestminster " all, The model
PAirliament sat in iesttiinstor lall. And today, If You wish to &amp; V
In or ambers wish to 4o in to the '" Ouse of Commons one of their
main avenues of approach is Viraigh eaistr ; a1l. it at Il
remains the great source of all our parliament.-Ary Instituztions,,
and of all the Or~ t institutions of Vie Comoi Uiv, Vlwru in no
Ar" Of -ff : TIE IjIM13= 8 rw las 
place to compare with it* And thwrerores, Oa I Wa to the boys,
there is no name to vapare vith it. Ths s it m.&amp; nificent and
i &amp; inative decision.
air, one other thing that iL vuuld like to say is this.
It Is no easy matter to create a School; it is no easy matter to
say, " Well, we must start; we viii jet our first b ilding.
Jomeday we will. jst our seoondand our third and our fbifth. And
in due course the jrounds of the school will Wo developed and we
will have all those thins. that So with a ; twat ~ co1" It must
rather try the patience for people who are no longer jromgto be
able to postpone to their childrtsn the satist ct o hat te
would have loved to have had themselves In seeing th, thing
ecupleted. And yet, what I want to remind them of is this: that
this In not just creating scow gounds, or creating saw buildings.
Zhis Is creating a sc~ ool which, so t-at it is properly understood
and properly aapported, will be tort for hundreds of yamrs, and
wi1l itself boooe the spiritual 2uther of oths.-scaiools in other
places. There have been very great cluanges in the world of
education. If we p back to the middle apss when higher education
was scholastic# vas conducted against a basis almost entirelyof
rellion, whten It was considered t~ w , erqiisite of ticue who
were destined Zor the Churoh, when It involved almo3t monasntic
excl-aliau frus the world when it dealt entirely with classical
knoledp, we find one ; Mn of * ducation, a-d one : or X'iich I have
myself a protbubd respect. jkat nov the wheel has t Lraed, Today
higher eduo~ tion is taking place not In the upe of nediaeval
scholastiim but in the age of science and tachnology, in which
man Is actully beginning to burst fromtbe surface of th. earth in
Is exploration and aroh for krnoidedjs9
sIo the whole matter has changed. It seems to As to have
somthinig of ugency rather than omethinj of reflection. It is a
search for something new, rat&amp; eWr thian the study of something old*
Sat the choice Is not quite so gim. as thiat, bocause it
still remains tnie that there is no higher education -wort.-the
namne unless It embraces not only the knowledge of physical
science but the knowledge of mankind# the knowled,; e, of the
huiltest a broad sweep of education, a broad and balanced
training. And that Is somthing that we aivays have to keep In
mind so that we won1t be, tempted as so mmmy people are, to adopt
as our p~ al fr education a Ozpa~ an conception of physical
knvowledeo Nov t ~ st is a Church School. This in one of those,
schoo~ ls standing vividly and ondwringly for that most Important
ooneeption ofeducation over the whole field a belief not only
that we stould have humane letters as well as science but that we
should have chmracter as well as knowledge. A the ! un* 4ticn of
this school is to producoe character, not a lot of clever son with
destructive mind with no conception of tawir obligations to
tVair ,, O* Uow men, and no conception of their duty to ! aod but
people of character, of a high morality, trained with a tackpgounl
of reliioni able to understand right through their lives t-At
It Is a Q0 thing to be intell1jent, it is a jood thing L ' beb
successful It is a pyod thing to be able to do thi~ s, or this, or
this. 8, but thatIt is a better thin&amp; to be u ine man# abetter
rilh time those e ternal t~ uths whicoh make all the dif ference
between a great man and a little ons. 
And so, ; ir, I am delighted to be here. i an so'z'
that I am not as young as I use to be boouase if I yoie as young
as I smostiaws tool wbfl I am under &amp; titok, I would tool confident
of cocing baak here in 4O yers' tin* to have &amp; L look over it,
. Ut I don thlflk t at I can) look " orward to t: mat. Mh0so boys
will look forwar'd to it* And I would like then to ta 14isselwes
trig pioneers of this school, the tirt bqys who will over boome
txo ' old boys" of Oestainster. I would like tb= to feel that
they are helping to start a truditioc in one sense but in
another sense to * ry an the Jmat tradition whiA is eaplified
in the Church schools of this aountty, and in partioular, to feel
proud of the fact that their shool has a nuse which associates
It in the mind, and in the heart with the areat entre of all
those things ian Parliament to the Iay which have marked our
race and whioh have been among our rat oontributions to
man In'd" ow, -Ar-having said that I exprese my ploasu'e and
Vie pleasure of my wif at beinj here and I shall now, I think,
if I have understood my instuctions aoetzatey, step smartly
the President told ae " stop wartly three cricket pitt lengths
to the left and 1 h! je that in the course of doine, so I won't
pull a musole. ( Applause) 



SPEECH BY TIE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES, -AT THE C012, ONtWE LTH CLUB,
ADELAIDE, onI3TH FEBRUARY, 1961
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier and ladies and gentlemen:
That last remark ' You are just as welcome as you were
27 years ago' is one of the greatest masterpieces that I have
ever listened to. Because, you seel 27 years ago it didn't
matter what I did, so far as you were concerned I was acting
Premier of Victoria. ( Laughter) The Chairman conceals the
intervening period except for the time when I came as Leader
of the Opposition. But there are one or two other preliminary
remarks that I would like to make.
First of all, when I was standing out in the lobby
seeing the " great" go by I was delighted to encounter Stanley
Skipper. ( Applause) He looked to me to be almost exactly as he
was whon I first knew him a mere matter of 32 or 33 years ago.
And he said to me " I have been practising at the Bar for
years." ' Jell if he had been a politician I would have said,
" You're a liar!( Laughter) But you don't talk like that to
distinguished lawyers. However I am delighted to know that he
is hereoand fascinated to think that this Club, now so we-. ll
known ail over Australia, was established by him what
years ago? It seems almost unbelievable.
Now you said, Sir, that I must have forgotten what it
was like to be Leader of the Opposition. On the contrary I
remember it very well. And I remember some of the rules for
getting out of Opposition and getting into Government. But I
am keeping them to myself. ( Laughter) Why should I egg on my
friend Mr. Walsh? ( Laughter) Vhy should I give the priceless
secrets of the art of Opposition to my friend, Mr. Calwoll?
Certainly not! Some day I will write a chapter in a book about
it. That will be, I think, rather helpful to whoever is leading
the Opposition then. And who knows who that will be?
Now I know that this is not a political gathering in a
Party sense and I don't propose to make any Party observations.
But I would like to say a little to you about one of our
domestic problems, our national domestic problems, which has an
international flav~ ur; and something about the international
problem itself. Perhaps I might say something about the second first,
because I was reminded of it when the Chairman was introducing
various people and we were applauding then. I have the bad old
habit, if my loft hand is otherwise engaged, of smacking the
table by way of applause. I had to go to the General Assembly
of the United Nations to discover that that is not done any
longer. Because the first time at the General Assembly that
somebody made a speech that I agreed with and that didn't
happen for a couple of days ( Laughter) I beat on the table in
front of me, only to find myself checked by my colleagues who
said, " No, no; no, no. When you smack the table, that's
disapproval. Look at K. and his colleagues along there."
( Laughter) And of course when your disapproval is exceptionally
violent the drill is to take your shoe off and hit the table
with your shoe. ( Laughter)
But I couldn't help thinking at that Assembly what a
strange world it is that we live in twelve or thirteen new
members of the United Nations last year, most of them from
Africa in particular. New nations, the very names of some of
which most of us had never heard. And they are members of the
United Nations. In round figures now a hundred nations in the
United Nations; and people making a play for their support, Ai 
particularly our distinguished friend Mr. Khrushchev. Everything
directed to propaganda; to either terrorising people or
persuading people or demonstrating the weakness of the effete
Western powers. It means that we have entered into a phase of
international affairs that is almost infinitely difficult.
We are a little bit inclined ourselves, aren't we
most of us I think are to assume that when a country wins
independence, all you have to do is to say to it, " Very well
now, you just have a Parliament, and elect a Parliament, and
get a Government and everything in the garden is lovely?". It
is quite untrue. Most of the now nations will go through
periods of practical dictatorship before they ever achieve
what we would understand to be a systen of self-government.
You can take the whole of the African countries, with the
possible exception of Nigeria, which has been brought to selfgovernment
by splendid decrees by the British authorities and
which has, incidentally, a magnificent Prime Minister but
with that exception you may take then right across ana you will
find that almost inevitably the head of the Government will do
things that no head of a Government in Australia would dream of
doing except perhaps the Premier of South Australia.
( Laughter) ( Applause)
True, there is a Parliament. But as I said to one of
my distinguished friends from one of these countries only last
year, " Tell re, is your Opposition Leader still in gaol?"
( Laughter) And the answer was, " Yes".
Well these things are slightly different from the
circumstances that we understand. And they mean that there are
a great number of these new countries, particularly in the
north of Africa and the centre of Africa whose constitutional
future, if I may put it in that way, remains uncertain or, at
any rate, experimental. Now this throws a great responsibility
on the rest of us: not to be in too much of a hurry to think
that our system of government is necessarily the right one for
then, but to develop an attitude of sympathy and helpfulness.
I know there are some people who say that " charity
begins at hone" and who have some reluctance about the
substantial suns of money that Australia finds under the
Colombo Plan under various aids of an international kind. I
want to say to you that what has been done before must be vastly
increased in all the Jestern world in the future if we are not
to permit such economic disorder to arise in these countries as
will make them readily responsive to the Communist pressure.
Not long ago the Communists of the Soviet Union and
the Communists of China had a great Conference in Moscow. It
must have been a pretty lively one judging by the echoes that
have reached my own ears, because there are material
differences between them. But in the long run what they appear
to have emerged with was this: " We are not going to seek to
achieve our aim by overt military action because that involves
too great a risk of destruction. But we still will seek to
achieve our aims of Communist propaganda by means of
persuasion, pressure, threat and economic penetration."
You nay take it, that as I talk here today the
economic penetration goes on in all these new countries in
Africa and in all the countries of South-East Asia which stand
between Conrmunist China and ourselves, the pressure goes on.
If this is to be met it will be met not merely by military
means, because the other side exist on internal lines of
cormmunication and are, in a military sense, much more compact
than the . lestorn world can be, but must be net by encouraging 
0 3.
nutual understanding, by extending oconorlic and technical
assistance to the very limit of our capacity. If we don't if
we say " What has that got to do with us?" then we will, some
day, we or our sons and daughters, have a very rude awakening.
It used to be said about us in Australia and not so
long ago that we didn't care a hoot about international
affairs; they didn't concern us. There was a certain amount of
truth in that charge. I think we take a vastly greater
anount of interest today in international affairs than we did.
And I hope that is true, because disaster for us won't be the
product of internal events; it could be the product of events
engendered in countries outside Australia altogether.
Therefore we must play our part;
It is one of the tragedies, I think, of modern
thinking that the United States of Aerica which has done out
of its wealth so much to help new countries, so much to help
underdeveloped countries, should have received not many thanks,
a good deal of abuse a good deal of nisunderstanding. And I
warn you, as I warned the General Assembly when I spoke there,
that the great stroke of propaganda that is being engaged in is
an attempt to persuade ordinary men and wonen, particularly in
the uncommitted countries, that the whole argument in the world
is an arguent between . American capitalism and Soviet communism,
with all the rest of us, presumably, just onlookers. This is a
ruinous alternative. It isn't a case of the United States
against the Soviet Union. It is a case of free countries, with
free institutions, against countries with slave institutions
not lAerica versus the Soviet Union, but Communism against all
the rest of us.
I turn away from that subject although those things
cane prominently into mind in looking at the representatives of
99 different nations at the United Nations last November.
Now I want to say something about one of our own
problems which has an international flavour. Every now and
then some Govermnent it happens to be mine at present sets
out to do something about our balance of payments, about the
state of our overseas reserves. And a lot of people very
naturally, I don't blame then at all say " But why couldn't
these things have been fixed up once a year, or once in two
years; why don't we have some steady consistent, unchanging
approach to these matters?". I want to say a word about that.
Why do we have balance of payments problems in
Australia? Why is it that the balance ofpayments problem for
Australia is probably rore acute, more changeable, more subject
to violent fluctuations than is the case in any other country
that I know of? We need to start by understanding this. You
see the great bulk of our exports to the world consists of
primary products wool and wheat and meat and butter and so
on. And the price that we get for these things varies very
sharply. If there is a rise in the price of wool our export
income is up œ 80 million, a œ 100 nillion; everybody is happy.
If the price of wool declines by œ 80 or œ 100 million then
exactly the opposite state of mind is produced. And apart
altogether from the state of mind, you can see the export
income of Australia going up and down, year by year, like a
yo-yo. This is one of the remarkable things that applies to
our export earnings.
But while our export inco. e rises and falls very
sharply our demand for imports doesn't fall very sharply because
the demand for imports depends so much on the internal
purchasing power that we have in the country. And as we have 
been going through a quite remarkable boor in Australia the
local purchasing power is high, and so the do-and for imports
is high. In spite of all recent neasures the import bill in
January was considerably higher than the import bill in
December or November or October. ed have an alost insatiable
appetite for imports. When we have bought all that we can buy
here we buy imports. And the result is that you tend to have a
high line on the import side, and a fluctuating line on the
export side. And therefore your reserves go up and down, and
measures have to be taken from tine to time to arrest the fall
lest the fall should become inveterate and involve you in
serious international troubles. In other words most of the
time, internationally speaking, we live beyond our means we
use capital, as a nation, to pay for our purchases on current
account. No business man would do that and no Government
ought to do it. Therefore, constantly Governments I don't
care what Government it may be find themselves compelled to do
something about this marked fluctuation in our balances of
trade. You may say to me, " Well, why doesn't that trouble
other countries?". Let me point out to you that in actual
total figures, not per capit t. Australia is one of the eight
great traing nations of the Wrild. In the first eight! It is
a remarkable thing for a little country of ten million people
in the first eight trading nations in the world. And so
constituted is our economy that our international trade is a
far greater proportion of our total trade than is the case in
the United States of America, or even in the case of Japan
though we think of Japan, don't we, as a formidable and
aggressive international trader. A greater proportion of our
business crosses the seas than is the case in either of these
very great trading nations. And so we are more vulnerable.
If somebody could come along and say, " Well here's a
beautiful notion, the world is going to stabilize the price that
it will pay us for our wool", it would be a marvellous episode
as long as it was stabilized on the right level. If these
things happened, so that our export earnings moved very little
in one direction or the other our position in relation to the
whole of our international trade policy would be much easier,
and our balances of payments would present much smaller
problems. But it happens that in the last seven years the terns
of trade have moved steadily against Australia. If you took the
terms of trade at a sort of parity of 100 in 1953, they are now
The terms of trade have moved more sharply against
Australia than they have against any other country whose figures
are recorded. Now that is not the fault of Australia. It
merely means that our exports are not connranding the same price
and that our imports do comrand a high level of price.
Therefore, translating it into the terms of trade we are in an
adverse position. How this matter ought to be solved in the long run is,
of course, a problem for all of us. How it can be dealt with
in the short run is a problem for all of us.
Talking about the short run first we speak, very
properly, about increasing our exports. That is right. But all
the matters that have been discussed about increasing our
exports are in essential terms long range matters. You don't
suddenly increase your export of manufactured goods over night;
you don't suddenly over night increase the export of beef from
the North; you don't attend to any of these things just like
that, hastily they are long range remedies. But in the short 
run any Govornment may have to .10 som-) e very difficult things
because, for the reasons that I have rmeintioned to you you can
begin a year with overseas reserves standing at a hanasorlo
figure like œ C500 millions, and end the financial year with them
standing at œ C250I. This is an enormous fluctuation. This
doesn't occur in a country like Great Britain where the oxpozrts
are manufactured commodities and there is, thereforo, a gr'eater
stability of price and production and sale.
Because this fluctuation there are those who say
and I respect their view very much " Well in order to meet
that, in order to keep your reserves at a stable level, since
you can't control the price of your exports, you can't control
that variable line, you must have a variable line of imports by
having a fluctuating series of physical import restrictions".
Now I wonder what the business community in Australia would
think of that, if you had a system of import controls which
varied roughly with the line of our export income so that it was
here today and gone tomorrow, up next month and down a few
months later. I don't think, you know, that that is practical
politics. You may impose restrictions on imports to give you a
sort of average result for a reasonable period of time but you
really can't have your import level, by Government action,
fluctuating with the same degree of rapidity up and down, as
your export earnin,: s.
This, the~ refore, presents a problem which is not to
be solved over a dining table or between two club arm chairs.
It doesn't possess the noble simplicity that so many of us think
it does. The fact is that doing what we can in Australia to
deal with these abnormal short term variations, we miust
increasingly look for the long term solution. ' Ind the long term
solution is that this country should become an exporter not
only of wool and these , great commodities that we have lived on
internationally, but of manufactured commodities. Aind why we
shouldn't I don't know. It won't happen overnight. I have an
infinite belief in the skill and resourcefulness of
Australians, whether they are employees in a factory or
managers or whatever they may be. And I don't think that we
ought to despair, with all this , reat new A1sian world opening
around us of being able to match the United States of America
or m:-atch the United Kingdom in the production of goods for
expert. The great point about it is this. Many of us here
today remember the depression of the early 30' s. That
depression arose from a variety of circumstances, most of which
were entirely outside Australia. But one of the circuastances
was that the price of our export comm-xodities fell to the
gutter almost overnight. The price of wool you remember it?
It seems fantastic to look back on wool at 6d. or 7d. The
price of wheat dear me, nobody would believe it if they
didn't know about it, and you just told then. as a fable that at
that time the price of wheat was getting down to under a
bushel. The result was that with our export income drying up
we becamie no longer an interesting subject for ovarseas
investment; the capital market dried up and we found ourselves
confronting a tremaendous economic crisis. So tremuendous that,
although we now get a little disturbed if unemployment rises
to three quarters of 1% of the work force, by 1939 as I well
r~ juember we were rather content because unemploynent had been
reduced to 10% not three quarters of These days ought
to be remembered for those reasons. 
But the great reason for all this was that
economically we stood on one foot at that time. If our export
income fell down, we didn't have the internal economic
structure of manufacturing, primary, secondary and tertiary
industries to enable us to absorb the shock. That kind of
thing couldn't happen to us today because this is now a
powerful industrial country.
You look back to South Australia before the time
when the Premier and I put our heads tog~ ether to move munitions
establishm-ents into this State and begin a great era of
industrialisation. Why if you go back to 1930-31 in South
AIustralia here was a State dependent entirely on primary
production and therefore liable to all the unprotected shocks
of changes in the world market. But today it is a great
industrial State. Australia is a -rge at industrial country.
And therefore we are able to balance ourselves. What I am
saying to you is that in the long run if we are going to avoid
in future having too frequent changes in the application of
monetary and financial policy we must strive to be in a
position where riot only in dom. estic term:, s we stand on two feetprimary,
secondary but in export terms we stand on two feetprimary
and secondary. When we do there will still be some
fluctuations in our export eairnings, there will still be some
movements in our balance of paynents, of course. But they
will be much miore radual when they are composed of a variety
of elements instead of lipending entirely on one.
Now, Sir, I " cm sorry-I told you, you told me that
I was to finish at five to two and at present I am in that
chastened mood in which I am everybody's humble and obedient
servant. 



PRIME MINISTER'S OVERSEAS VISIT
I TINERARY
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, will
leave Sydney by Qantas on ' Tuesday evening February 21, for the
U~ nited States on his way to attend a meeting of Prime lMinititers
of Commonwealth countries in London early in March. He will be
accompanied by Dame Pattie Menzies and will be away from
Australia for about five weeks.
Mr. Menzies will arrive in Wash-ington, on
February 22 and at the invitation of Prosident Kennedy will have
discussions with him at the White House on matters of mutual
interest on February 24+.
The Prime Minister will fly from New York on February
26 to Geneva, where he will be for about a week. For part of
the time he will preside in his capacity as Minister for External
Affairs over a meeting of heads of Australian diplomatic
missions in Western Europe and adjacent regions. Apart from
that the Prime Minister and Dame Pattie will be on a private
visit of a few days to their daughter and son-in-law, Mr. and
Mrs, Peter Henderson, and their grandchildren.
From Geneva the Prime Minister will proceed to London
on Monday, March 6, for the opening of the Prime Ministers'
Conference on March 8. Mr. Menzies will leave London on March
for Bangkok where ho will represent Australia at the Meeting
of the South East Asia Treaty Organisation which will take
place from March 27 to 30 inclusive. He will return to
Australia immediately after that meeting.
Other members of the Prime Minister's party will be
the Secretary of the Prime Minister's Department, Mr. E. J.
Bunting, the Prime Minister's Private Secretary, Miss Hazel
Craig, and Mr. R. C. Maley whio will act as Press Secretary.
The Secretary of the Departmont of External Affairs,
Sir Arthur Tango, who will leave Australia a few days in
advance of the Prime Minister, will join the delegation for the
meetings which are to take place.
CAN BERRA
17th February, 1961. 



P. M. No./ 16
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies,
announced today that during his absence overseas Mr. J,
McEwen, Leader of' the Country Party and Minister for Trade
would act as Prime Minister and Sir Garfield Barwick,
Attorney-General, would act as Minister for External Affairs.
The Minister for the Navy, Senator Gorton, who
has been assisting the Prime Minister with the External
Affairs portfolio will continue to assist the acting Minister
during Mr. Menzies' absence.
Mr. Menzies will leave today by Qantas for the
United States on his way to the Commonwealth Prime Ministerst
Conference in London and will be away from Australia for
about five weeks. He will also preside over a meeting of'
Heads of Australian Diplomatic Missions in Western Europe
and adjacent areas to be held in Geneva next month and will
represent Australia at a South East Asia Treaty Organisation
Meeting in Bangkok from Mvarch 27 to
CANBERRA, 21st February, 1961, 



P. M. No. 8/ 1961
ECONOMIC POLICY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
We have been closely examining, in Cabinet and
Committee, the effects, so far, of our Economic policy
measures. We have also given much attention to the drive for
exports, some general aspects of which I announced at the
beginning of January.
We see no reason to alter the substance of our
policy which we knew would be, in the short run, unpopular
with many people but which we believed, and believe, is in the
best interests of the nation. Credit was too easy, and an
inflationary boom was under way. Credit therefore had to be
restricted so that stability might be restored. The effects
of the boom included an increased demand for imports, while
our export income, so dependent on primary products, remained
somewhat depressed. This, I should point out, is not because
primary production has fallen; on the contrary, it has
increased. But the " terms of trade" have moved against
Australia very significantly since 1953. By that I mean that
the prices of imports, as contrasted with the prices of
experts, have not fallen, so that the imports we can buy for a
given quantity of exports have been reduced. If our terms of
trade are taken as an index figure of 100 in 1953, ( itself a
relatively normal year) the figure today is 65. This, which
is beyond our control, since we cannot fix the price paid by
the world for our exports, is at the root of our present
problem. The terms of trade have moved against us more than
against almost any other country in the world. In the
result, our overseas roserves, vital to our activities as a
great international trading nation were ( and are) falling at
too rapid a rate. WIe have been living beyond our means
internationally, with the result that reserves are being drawn
upon to meet current business payments. This is not good
business, as every business man knows.
Another element was the increasing resort to high
interest borrowing outside the banking system, for hire
purchase and ether financial transactions. This growth
( which has mushroomed in the last year or two) had two
undesirable by-products.
First, it increased the burden on the taxpayers,
because these high interest payments were treated as business
expenses; which meant that up to 40G% of the interest was
being met by the Treasury, i. e. by other taxpayers.
Second, it attracted m--oney away from Savings Banks
and public loans by outbidding in interest rates. This has
meant that we have not been able to got from the loan market
all the funds vitally necessary for national development in
power, water supply, transport, scliools, housing, and the
like, with resultant burdens upon taxpayers ( who are, broadly,
the adult population of Australial In this current financial
year, no less than 65% ef the cost of capital works, both
Federal and State, is being met cut of Commonwealth taxation
revenue!~ We tackled this matter by some variations in bank
interest rates, and by measures to prevent these high outside
interest payments from being fully deductible for Income Tax
purposes, We know that there has been much criticism of, and
some uncertainty about, our particular measures. At an early 
2.
date we will resolve this uncertainty by substituting for what
we announced as a toemporary and somewhat arbitrary measure,
new law on deductibility. I have reasoin to believe that the
new proposals, which the Treasurer will announce in~ due course,
will go a long way towards meeting reasonable and constructive
criticism, while not conflicting with the Government's policy.
objectives. In order to assist the loan raising which
governments must have if the nation is to grow, and if'private
enterprise is to have proper foundations on which to build, we
announced policies in relation to Life Assurance Societies,
Superannuation funds, and the like, ( which enjoy great taxation
benefits), requiring them to subscribe to Governrment and semi-
Government Loans 30% of their funds. Since our announcement
useful discussions have occurred and certain modifications 01
our proposal have been worked out. These will be announced by
the Treasurer. They will, I believe, be widely acceptable.
In all these and allied matters, it is necessary to
make it clear that while we have adopted policies of some
severity, we are maintaining a close watch upon results,
particularly in the field of employment. That there should be
some falling off in employment in the meter car industry, a
falling off from a very high peak in 1960, is inevitable; for
one of our designs was to reduce inflationary pressure in that
section. This must involve some changes in employment, but is
not designed, over all, to produce unem-ploymient, which it will
be our constant care to resist.
To sum up on tiiese matters, we are conscious of the
harm that can be done by the existence of uncertainties in the
business world in relation to deductibility of interest and the
investment policies of life assurance and superannuation
schemes. These uncertainties will be resolved by the Treasurers
statements which I have foreshadowed.
There are four other matters of considerable
importance to which I will now refer.
1. The impact of crodit restrictions upon the miotor and
allied industries, and the financial bodies associated with
them, is already considerable. We 0 imposed additional Sales
Tax on motor vehicles as a supplementary mecans of securing an
effect which would help to reduce the run down in our overseas
funds. Close examination has satisfied us that the present
psychological effect of an increased sales tax which many
possible buyers believe not likely to endure beyond the next
Budget is a bad one. It serves to induce a postponemient of
demand which aggravates the effect of credit measures and
therefore tends to hit the miotor industry more than we would
desire. We are satisfied, on the evidence, that our other
measures will achieve nationally satisfactory results. Wie did
not impose the extra sales tax for revenue purposes, but as a
deterrent. As our own judgaent satisfied us that this added
deterrent is now unnecessary and probably producos undesirable
results, we have decided to repeal the added sales tax,
effective as of the comimencement of business tomorrow 22nd
February. Aiiending leg-islation will be submitted to parliament
at the first opportunity after Parliament resumes, to reduce
the Sales Tax on motor vehicles to the rates payable prior to
the increases announced on 15th November, 1960.
2. There is a good deal of speculation about a possible
re-introduction of import licensing, and some speculation
about a devaluation by changing the exchange rate.
It is therefore necessary to state that we have no 
intention whatever to restore the import licensing which was
abandoned, or to alter the exchange rate.
3. We have been working on practical measures to increase
our export income. This is especially important in the field of
exports of manufactured goods. We have had the great advantage
of consultation with representative business men on the
irfiensely difficult question of tax incentives. We arc to
receive from them, in a few days, further material which will
assist us to make decisions.
We have also devised specific proposals for
increasing our overseas sales by new promotional means,
particularly in the Middle East and South America, in which
areas we see very worthwhile opportunities. Our proposals
relate to Trade Commissioner services, sales campaigns, and
adequate shipping arrangements. They will be stated in detail
by my colleague, theMinister for Trade. We have expectations of
solid success. The promotion of the tourist trade is also essential,
and holds promise of increased earnings from overseas. In
January we made increased grants to the Australian National
Travel Association, and asked it to submit a programme designed
to ensure that tourist earnings are expanded as quickly as
possible. The Association estimates that Australia earned
œ l2 m. in overseas exchange from this source in 1959, and that
substantial increase is possible by 1963.
The financial measures to be adopted by us will be
decided when the recorendations of the A. N. T. A. are received
and considered.
4. Our economic measures were not lightly adopted, and
must, in their substance, be maintained until an adequate
impact is made upon the twin problems of internal inflation and
an excessive drain upon our overseas funds. This clearly
involves the conclusion that we cannot, during 1961, provide
large additional amounts from the Commonwealth Treasury, i. e.
out of tax revenues, for public works additional to the great
works now in progress. ut this does not mean that, in a period
when we are aiming at a rustoration of stability, we are losing
sight of the continuing need for further national development.
As the history of the unhalting national progress ofhe list
years has shown, national growth and development are our
grand objective. We hope, therefore, that 1962, will see
further steps forward. We have had under particular and
sympathetic consideration such large enterprises as
Road development in the North, including North and West
Queensland, the Northern Territory, and the North of
Western Australia.
Improved port and loading facilities for the development
of the Coal Export trade.
Standard Railway gauge work from Broken Hill to Port
Pirie including a modified interim proposal recently
advanced by South Australia for diesel locomotion as a
first step.
The Western Australian Scheme for Railway gauge work in
aid of the establishment in collaboration with the B. H. P.
of an iron and stol industry in that State.
Ways and means of further stimulating the search for oil,
and riinerals oenorally. 
I 4.
There are other productive schemes; but those I have
mentioned are at present prominent in our minds. The carrying
out of any one of them, in most cases by the State concerned,
will require consultation and co-operation by us with State
Governnents and, where necessary, the devising of financial
arrangements fair to both parties.
So that, when circumstances permit, there may be no
avoidable delay, we now say that w _ re prepared to do what we
can to facilitate prompt detailed planning of the works I have
feicated, so that rture performance can be assisted. To this
end we wil put ourselves into touch with the relevant State
Governments at an early date.
CANBERRA, 21st February, 1961. 



. AEBAGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 6.30 p. m. on
Sunday, 26th February. 1961..
MAJOR PROJECTS TO ASSIST THE EXPORT TRADE
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister ( Mr. McEwven).
The Acting Prime Minister today said that the decision
by the Commonwealth to discuss with State Governments the plannil
of largo-scale developmental vorks, was an important stop in a
programme designed to assist in the expansion of Australia's
export trade. He vas referring to the announcement by the Prime
Minister that the Gove-nment had under particular and
sympathetic consideration large ontcrpriscs such as road
development in the North; improved port and loading facilities
to assist the coal export trade; standardization of the rail
links in South Australia and . cstcrn , ustralia; and proposals to
stimulate the discovery of oil and minerals generally.
Mr. McEwen-rrcallcd the twin objectives of the
Government in its current policies-were to put. abhrake on
inflation and, at the same time, place a new sense of urgncy-on---
policies aimed at the substantial expansion of export earnings.
^ s one important step towards avoiding recurring
balance of payments difficulties, it is the Government's aim to
give the national development effort a pronounced bent towards
the expansion of our export trade.
Against this background the Government has considered
certain problems associated with the expansion of exports of
beef, minerals, coal and steel, all of which are important
commodities in any long-range plan to increase total exports.
Large-scale developments will be needed to exploit the full
-export potential of these industries in which the investment of
the private capital needed to increase production for export is
dependent to a very important degree on the provision of largescale
public works.
In this field the Commonwealth is prepared, where
necessary, to devise special financial arrangements to encourage
projects on rhich export expansion depends, especially when the
projects are of such size as to place them beyond the resources
of a single State.
The Prime Minister announced that the Government would
discuss road development in the North with the appropriate
Governments. The Commonwealth has had the benefit of surveys and
advice on this particular issue. These suggest that road
developments in this area could trigger-off an expansion of
private investment in the beef industry and give an important
stimulus to the beef exports. Additional exports of œ 15m./œ 20m.
are in prospect from this industry and the first results could
be-obtained within. very--few-years
There were very good prospects that coal exports -could
earn upwards of œ 10m. a year by 1965 if the inadequacy of coal-
2.
loading and berthing facilities in the jor export ports is
remedied. We were competing for business in Japan against
countries which had highly mechanized and extremely modern loadirg
facilities on berths which could accommodate the very large ore
carriers which Japanese buyers plan to use for coal transportation.
State Governments and the industry are giving
attention to this problem. The Commonwealth proposes to discuss
rith the State Authority whether some assistance from the
Commonwealth may be necessary to enable these installations,
which are so vital to the future of the coal export field, to be
completed in time to enable the industry to renew the long-term
contracts on which its export trade depends.
In the Prime Minister's statement on thd 3rd January,
he indicated that attention would be given to the special
position of steel as an export carncr. Discussions had already
taken place with the steelmakers and, at this stage, there
appear excellent prospects of the steel industry making further
very sizeable contributions to import savings and to export
earnings within very few years. To do so, the industry will need
to expand its production considerably and an integral part of its
overall expansion plans is the development of an additional
steelmaking centre in WJestern Australia. The industry has
stated that the development of a steelmaking plant at Krinana is
dependent on the standnrdization of the rail link between
Kalgoorlie and the Coast.
The Government has been asked to provide special
assistance for the construction of this standard gauge line from
Kalgoorlie and is considering this request, particularly in
light of the benefits which this might bring to the expansion of
steel and mineral exports.
In addition to undertaking discussions with the Western
Australian Government on the Kalgoorlic-Fremantle rail link, the
Commonwealth is considering a request to assist in the
standardization ( including the provision of modern rolling stock)
of the Broken Hill/ Port Pirie rail link. Mr. McEven said that
the freight economies which would be expected to flow from the
standardization and dieselization of this line could assist the
Broken Hill producers to compete more effectively on
increasingly competitive world markets.
The Prime Minister had stated that the Commonwealth
will proceed with discussions with State Governments on the
planning of such selected projects. Although no substantial
funds can be provided from the Treasury in the near future, the
Government is nevertheless convinced that some projects of
economic development, especially those vhich will make an
important contribution to our export capabilities, should proceed
as soon as the economic situation permits.
By planning now, the way should be clear in 1962 for
such projects to proceed as would substantially assist to expand
our export earnings. 
Mr. clc67v sid tht these importarnt decisions yore
further steps in the Goverrnnt's progrnmc to cnsure a
substartial and a continuous increase ir J-ustria's export
earnings. Works of the types rcferred to wr o n csscrtial prerequisite
to the large private ir. vcstmcnt viaich the Govcernont
is ccrfidient 17ill floG, as a result, into these important
industries and rhich will contribute substantially to the desired
increase in our expnort ear: iings.
oTB1BRRI 26th Februry, 1961. 



OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Australian News and Information Bureau, Australia House,
Strand, London, W. C. 2 Telephone: TEMple Bar 2435
PRI1 MINISTER'S A1ZRIVAL AT LONDON AIRPORT.
MOINDAY, IvQ! RCH 6. 1961. INTERVIEW, B. B. C.,
I. T. V. AITD PRESS. 3.30 P. M. APPROXIMATELY.
CESTION:, Sir, you are a very senior member of the Commonwealth. Do
you think that the Commonwealth can keep its present
character if South Africa continues to be in the Commonwealth
with her racial discrimination?
ANSWER: You are now inviting me to say something in public about a
matter which will be discussed in private by the Prime Ministers.
I have nothing to say in public.
QUESTION: Well, youtve recently been seeing Mr. Kennedy, the President of
America, Mr. Prime Minister.
ANSWER: I have indeed.
QUESTION: Did you come to any conclusion with him about the major problems
of disarmament, peaceful co-existence, and so on?
ANSWER: No.
QUESTION: Can you give any impression of Mr. Kennedy?
ANSWER: I was very impressed by him. I thought that I'd never met
him before, except once, rather informally and so I was very
anxious to find out what he was like, if that was not an
impertinance, and I must say that, in the course of two hours
0or more with him, I was very impressed. I think he has a
lively mind, and I think we can look for active, positive
0policies from him.
QUESTION: Can you say, Sir, what you think will be the most important
* question that will come up at the Conference?
ANSWER: I would expect that we would have major discussions on disarmament
and on the future of the United Nations. I mean by that that
there is twice as many nations now belonging to the United
Nations as there were, and arguments are going on as to whether
the Security Council ought to have its structure altered, because
you have so many more countries in. There have been these
arguments that have gone on about the Secretariat, largely
promoted by Mr. of course, at the last Assembly, and broadly,
I think that it is an appropriate time for Prime Ministers to
discuss the relations between the Commonwealth and the United
Nations, they being two utterly different bodies, but their
members having a good deal of relationship with the others.
Those, I think, are two great things the important question
of the future of the Commonwealth, of course, is there South
Africa, of course, is one point that has been tremendously
canvassed in public, but there are other questions about the
Commonwealth, its future we have more colonies that will
achieve independence. Are they automatically to be members
of the Commonwealth? Are there to be any rules about this
matter? This problem has engaged a good deal of thought, both
here and in my own country.
QUESTION: Would you like to see some sort of Bill of Rights drawn up among
the Commonwealth countries? 
ASER: You icnow, I've a very great respect for the Bil]. of Rights of
this country, largely because it passed its way into the, what
I regard as the common law inheritance of Australia. I don't
go nap on new Bills of Rights I think if the people run their
Parliaments, they'll see that their rights are protected.
QUESTION:, W~ at da you think, Sir, what' s your attitude towards Britain,
supposing we join the Common Market?
ANSWER: Now, look, I'm not going to make a kerbstone statement on that,
because, the other day, some views were attributed to Mr. Heath
on the question of the relationship between, if not the Seven
and Six, at any rate, the United Kingdom and the Six, and they
seem to me to be, possibly, very important. But I want to
know far more about them than I know now no doubt, I'll have
an opportunity in London to find out what the directions are,
whit the possible developments in contemplation are, but
Australia will need to know all about them and have proper time
to consider them, before we offer a view, but none here.
QUESTION: What will be your attitude if the question of decimal coinage
comes up at the Conference?
ANSWER: But will it?
REAK There seems a possibility.
What a horrible thoughti We've just had a Decimal Currency
Committee in Australia making a report, and we're still, you
know, grappling with it. I hope you're not going to ask me
to grapple with theirs, too. Are they?
QUESTION:. Changing the subject, Mr. Menzies) what do you think of
Australia's chances in the nexct Series?
ANSWER: Now, that question can be answered only in the light of
patriotism, not in the light of knowledge, because I don't know
what your young ones are like.* All I know is that we've had
to go for our lives this year against the West Indies, who
played magnificent cricket,! and the result of the Series was in
the balance two or three times.
QUESTION: You don't think you're going to spin out this Gonference
sufficiently long to see a bit of it here, Mr. Monzies?
ANSWIER: I think that's one thing about which I can be positive. I
will not be here for the Test matches.
REKU K: RPEMiRtKy: l Thank you very much indeed. 



61/ 006
P. M. No. 9/ 1961
SOUTH AFRICA AND THE COMMOMW1I J TH
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzies
The following is the full text of the Statement
made by the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, in London, on the
South African situation
" This is a very unhappy day for those who
attach value to the Commonwealth as an association of
0independent nations each managing its own affairs in
its own way, but all co-operating for common purposes.
The criticisms which we all had to make of South African
policies were plainly expressed in the Conference in a
debate which took place with the complete concurrence
of Dr. Verwoerd. The debate was of a frankness and
intimacy which, in my experience, is possible only in a
meeting of Prime Ministers. It is, I think, deplorable
that it can never be conducted in such a forum and
atmosphore again. What the implications for the future
nature of the Commonwealth may be we do not as yet know.
For myself, I an deeply troubled."
CANBERRA,
16th March, 1961. 



P. M. No. 10/ 1961
FOR YOUR INFORMATION: COMMUNIQUE FROM LANCASTER~ HOUSE
The following is the text of the communique
issued from Lancaster House
" At their meetings this week, the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers have discussed questions affecting
South Africa. On 13th March, the Prime Minister of
South Africa informed the meeting that, following
the plebiscite in October, 1960, the appropriate
constitutional steps were now being taken to
introduce a Republican form of constitution in the
Union, and that it was the desire of the Union
Government that South Africa should remain in the
Commonwealth as a Republic. In connection with this
application the meeting also discussed with the
consent of the Prime Minister of South Africa the
racial policy followed by the Union Government.
The Prime Minister ofSouth Africa informed
the other Prime Ministers this evening that in the
light of the views expressed on behalf of other
member governments, and the indications of their
future intentions regarding the racial policy of the
Union Government he had decided to withdraw his
application for south A~ frica's continuing membership
of the Commonwealth as a republic."
CANBERRA,
16th March, 1961. 



r/
. PR T INISTERS' CONFERNCE CMNIQUE
STh follow-ing is the text of the final communique:-
The meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers was con llded
' today. Pais-tan,, Ghana and Cyprus were represented by their
Prs-iderO74/ 4 The other Commonwealth countries were represented
by tbheJ-r Prime Ministers.
2. It had been agreed that on this occasion the Prime
Ministers would concentrate the-itjainoattention on a limited
number of specific problems which are'currently-of-fcommon concern
to them all namely, disarmament, the structure of the United
Nations and certain-onstitutional Problems affecting the Commonweal-
thr-t-tclf.-At the outset of the meeting, however, the
Prime Ministers held a general review of the international
~-situation as a whole, in order to sot these particular problems
in the perspective of current world events. They also considered,
in the course of their meeting, recent.. dovelopments in the Congo
aand in South East Asia.
3. The Prime Ministers re-affirmed the support of their
Governments for the efforts of the United Nations to restore
order in the Congo and to secure the independonce and integrity
of the Republic. They deplored outside intervontion in the
Congo and recognisod that many of the problems which had arisen
were due to such inturvention. They considered that the
United Nations forces in the Congo should be strengthened and
that the Security Council resolution of the 21st February
should be fully implernonted.
The Prime Ministers noted with concern the situation
which had developed in Laos. They-ox. pressed the hope that the
part us would be able to reconcile their differunces, that intcrvent
on from outsid would cease, and that Laos would be , nablcd.
to etjoy an independent, noutral and peaceful oxistonc,.
The Prime Ministers held a full discussion on the
problem of disarmament. They recognisod that this was the most
important question facing the world today and considered that
a favourable opportunity was now at hand for a fresh initiative
towards a settloment Df it. They agroed that the aim should be
to achieve general and complet disarmament, subject to effective
inspection and control, on the general lines indicated in the
statement in Annex 1 of this communique. They rocall. jd the
resolution on gonoral and c:) mplote disarmament, which was adopted
unanimously at the 14th session of the General Assombly. They
agreed that every offort should be made to implement this
resoluti-n. by agroeement betwooeen the major powers, and that
further nogotiati. ons fo-r this purpose were necessary. Certain
pr posals d6signd to promot such negotiations have booeen put
by various c-untrios before the United Nations.
6, The Prime Ministors expressed their h'pe that the
negotiations on the cessation of nuclear weapons tests which
were due to re-opon atGav.-on--21st March, would lead to the
early conclusi-n _ f an agreoment-n . this subject. Such an
agreement apart fr': m its imrortance in itself would providc i
powerful impetus towards agreement on disarmament generally.
7. The Prime Ministers c-nsiderod the various proposals
which have recently booeen put forward for changes in the structure
of its Councils, the position the Sacr ; tary-G. noral and the
ganisati. n -f the Secretariat. They recognised that such
changes could Dnly be made with general consent. They agroo 
-2-
that whatever adjustments night be made it remained vitally
important t) uphild thc purp) scs and principles f the United
Nti-ns Charter and to prcsrve the internatienal and independet
character -f the Secretariat. They furthcr agreed that members
-f the C. r-mmnw-alth sharOd with all nati-ns a fundamental
coL -M interest in naintaining the integrity ) f the United Natiens
as a fcrco fer -? rderly p:-litical ecn-ic and secial -pr-grcss
thr-ughut the werld.
8. The Prime Ministers alse discussed certain cnstitutional
questiens relating te Ci~ n wicalth membership. The
c nclusi-ns reached were annnunced in cnauniques issued -, n
13th, 15th and 16th March relating respectively to Cyprus, S-uth
Affica and Sierra Leene. The text ef these ceriDruniquos is
repreduced in Annex 11.
CANBERRA 18th March, 1961 
ANNEX I DISARM4ENT
Aim
1. The air must be t-aciivc ttal wrid-wido disarmaiont-,
subject to effective ins,, ction and contr.) l.
2, In viOw of the slaughter anc! dcstructi-n experinccd
in so-called " convcntion~ al" wars and f the difficulty of
preventing a conventi-nal war, once strtd,--rm.. ovcJ~ Opin
into) a nuclear war, * ur ain must be " t-hing less than the
complete aholiti-' n the means of waginig war Df any kind.
Princiolcs
3. An agreement for this purpose should bc ncgotiated as
soon as possible, on the basis _ f the fDllowing principles:-
All national arrmed forces an, 1, anrmovamnts must be reduced
to the levels agreed to nocess-ry f-, r internal security.
Once started, the lprcess of c'isar' : a;, oent should be continued
without intorruDtion until it is comipleted,
subject to verification at each stage that all parties
are duly carrying -ut their undertakings.
The clininati-n of nulcar anc conventi-nal arma: ments
must be so phasoed that at no stage will any country
or grup of countries obtain a significant military
advantage. In respect of each phasc, there should bu established,
by agreement, off ctive nmac', inery inspection, which
shuld coe int-opc rati-n simuiltaneously with the
phase of di. sarmamnt to which it relates.
Disarm-i-ament sh-, uld', b. carrkd ut a s rapidly as Possible
in progressive staces, within s-ccifiod peri-ds -f timc.
At the a" ppropriat stage, a substantial and alequately
ar-ed military force should be establishod, to keep
the peace and enforce observance-f the 2isarmnal~ ent
agreement, and an international autW'rity sho. ulcl be
created, in associaticn with the United Natins, tcontrl
this f-, rce and to 3nsure that it is not used
for any purose inconsistunt with the charter.
4. On the basis -f the above princi: ples, it shulc be
pssiblc, given goo: dwill on both sides, to reconcile the prcsent
differences approach betweeOn the dl-ifforcnt . plans jut--forward.
Nc7otiati ns
The Drincipal ilitary p-Dwers should resume direct
neo tiati--) ns with-ut delay in cl-se-c-ontact with the Unitec!
Ncati-ns, which is respor nsible fcr disp7rmamint under the Chaarter.
Since -' eace is the concern of the whov-le wo: rld, o. t her natio'. ns
shuld. also be associated with the disnrmament ne-: tiati-ns
either directly -r through sme social macaincry to be set u-)
by the United Nati-. ns, : r by both means.
6. Silde by silde with the; po-litical nc--Dti lti-ns, ex,,' rts
sh-uld start w: rkinr uut the details -f thc insccti-n systems
requirod for th_ measures of aa: ilsiacrambaleen t each
stage, in acc-rdance with the pIractice adoptced at ithe Geneva 
-2
Nucle-ar Tests Cenfcrence.
7. ~ Evcry off 7, rt shuld be mac-Ic to Secure rapid, agreement
tho Dormanent banning ngiclcar weap ns by all nati', ns and to
arran,, crants f or vorifying the , bsorvancc -if the agrcencnt. Such
an agrieeme'lnt is urgent, since -t[-irwisc further c-mintrics may
s'Don boc7mc nuclear which w-Duld increase the Clanger of
war and further cemplicate the pr--blon : f disarmament. Moreover,
an agreeme nt nuclear tests, apart from its direct advantages,
weDuld -) rovide a -owe rful sych-i-l-,.; ical im,. etus to agreement
a ver the wider fiel-1 ef dlisarmameint.
8. D is!, arr. irant with-ut ins,' mcti-' n would be as unaccep) table
as ins'-ct-m wit'hout eisamrr. amnt. Disarmament in1 ins--ection
arc intcgral p arts f tlhe sane questia-n an' niust be negotiated
to-, T~ ctaor, and both mst be niacl Is capeeand effective, as
is humanly ssiblo. It rust, hewever, be rec-gniscd that
no safegu-ards can p,-rovicde on hun-lroc ' oc. r cent. Pr-. octie: n
against error o r treachery. NevrtheLless the risks involved
in the -ar-. cess f disarrveeont r.: ust be balnnced ag iinst the risks
invilved-in thei cc-. ntinuanmco -f theo arms race.
9. It is arF~ uablo whether th. il-ar-s race is the cause
or the result 7, f distrust betwoen nations. But it is clear
that the pr7, bloris 3f d~ isarnameI~ nt a-nd intorntinmal c-nfidence
are cl7osely linked. Theireforeo, while striving7 f-r the ab-olitio7n
o. f arr2-: : e-nts, all na-ti-ns Klust actively en-leavur red-, uce
tensien by helpDing to rer;,-vc o-ther cause s -of friction and
suspic ion. 
4 ANNE X I I
CYPRUS
Cormuniguo issued on 13th March, 1961
At their ieetin:-thiis nrvrning the C--. 1inonwcalth Primie
Ministers aocer3ted a request fronr the Rce.-ublic of Cy-orus for
admi ss ion-to C or.;: onwealth nE-cr'-bcrs hiio. They invited the President
of the Rep,, ubliLc to j-% in the 1^ 1eting.
SOUTH AIFRICA
Cormunigue issue1 mn 15th March, 1961
At the,-ir meetings this week the Co ~ mo-nwealth-Pri'm
Ministers have -liscusscr1 questions affecting So) uth Africa.
On 13th M--arch the Prire iliniste. r f S-o'uth Africa
informeod -t'htei n that, f-lliwing the , olobiscite in Octobeor,
1960, the ap pr-ou'riate constituti--nal steps were n-. w beinr-taken
to intro,-uce a Republican f~ r. -i f Co nsitutim in t.-1 Uni-n,
anJ that it was the . os ir-C -f the Union Government that So uth
Africa sh--u1l rermain within tL c. Conni-nw. 2lth as a Re1mblic.
In connecti~ n withi this a 1. ainthe rmeeting also -iscussod
with the co: nsent of the -Prii--o 1inister f S-uth A-frica, the
racial policy followewd by the Union Goveornrient.
Thc Pritoe Minister o. f So. uth Africa informe-d the other
Prir~ e Mviniste" rs this evuning-thant, in theo lighat of theo viows
exp---ressedL -n behalf of o) ther meomber G-ornments anl the
inilications of their future--intentirns reg--arding the racial
policy 7, f the Union G--vernricnt, 1he h-ad. 1ecif-ed to,-withdIraw his
app,, lica-tio., n fo. r So-uth Africa's continuing moenbrshi-: -f the
Commo-nwalth as a Re-, ublic. S 7E-. RE LEONME
unique issued! on 16th March., 1961
The Prirme Ministers n-. tcr2 th. at Sierraj Lom; e wo., ule,
attain indceendence o-n 27th A-ril, 1961. Theriy lookd frward
to welc-% mo. ing Sierra as a member o. f th-. Crmnwo] t on
the cxonp-leti-n -f the ncc ssary co-nstitutio-nal poess 



-South Africa
Australia's Migration Policy
Future relationship with South Africa
Possible Royal Visit
Governor-General
P. M.' s lead in arguing South Africa's
internal affairs
Discussions with Dr. Luns Dutch
West New Guinea 
MFIC E OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Australian News and Information Bureau, Australia House,
Strand, London, W. C. 2 Telephone: TEMple Bar 2435
LONDON, 19th March, 1961.
PRIME INISTER' S AUSTRALIAN
PRESS CONFERENCE
On
Australian conference Sunday, March 19, the Prime Minister, Mr.
Press in conference at the Savoy Hotel.
follows Menzies, received the
A transcript of the
MR. MvENZIES:" I notice that there is a good deal of speculation, and
perhaps something more, about the final stages of this
conference, so perhaps I might as well add my own little
bit to it. For some time it looked as if we could
evolve a form of communique which would confirm South
Africa's membership, while at the same time containing
a fair summarised statement of the criticisms of South
Africa's racial policy and of Dr. Verwoerdts reply.
In point of fact as I have followed this and I took a
very active part in it, in drafting various things Dr.
Verwoerd was at first very reluctant to adopt the form
of communique that was suggested because he felt that it
was too much like a concerted judgment on South African
policy, the language ho thought being put in a rather too
positive way. Ultimately, after considering his
position, he agreed TUhat the communique should go out in
that fashion. And quite frankly, I thought at that
time that the problem looked as if it were over. But
when he announced, or Mr. Macmillan announced, that he
was agreeable to a communique of this kind, he was
promptly told by several of the Prime Ministers that it
was not good enough. One or two of them indicated quite
plainly that they did not accept his continued membership;
that if it became necessary to move for the expulsion of
South Africa they would do so. At least half the Prime
Ministers there made it clear that they would pursue this
matter evory time there was a meeting, and between
meetings, on any convenient opportunity.
" In other words, looking at the substance of the matter at
least half the Prime Ministers there indicated that they
did not want South Africa in. Dr. Verwoerd I thought,
with very great dignity, accepted the logic of that
position and indicated that he would withdraw his
application. Personally I don't think he had any choice.
I would have withdrawn the application had I been in his
place. " One reason I know he had in his mind, I thought did him
very great credit; that was, that if he had remained and
in some way or other his application for contined
memborship had been agreed to I don't undertake to say
how it could have been under these circumstances but
suppose in some way or other it had, then he would have
remained in and would have divided his colleagues into
those who would continue to want to be rid of him, and these
who would continue to want to have South Africa as a
member of the Commonwealth. Rather than expose the 
-2
rest of' us to that risk, he decided to remove his
application and avoid that possibility.
" I1 think, of course, that this is the most unhappy
affair. I make no secret of my own view. I
wanted to koep South Africa in. Last year at the
Conference we all agreed that South Africa's racial
policy was a matter of domestic jurisdiction. We
all agreed and that was why we did not discuss it in
full conference. Quite true there has been a good
deal of international argument about it since, but it
will be remembered that the former Prime Ministers'
conference was after the incidents at Sharpeville and
after there had been world-wide reaction,, and we all
agreed, upon that occasion, that this was a matter of'
domestic jurisdiction. This year Dr. Verwoerd
indicated that he would waive that point because he
thought that we ought to clear our minds a'.~ out the
question of policy. He did not abandon the
proposition that it was domestic, but he said ( in
effect), ' Very well, I am prepared to sit in here
and now and have an argument about it'. And he
expressed his own case very powerfully and at
considerable length. But even though there has been
a great deal of international agitation this is still
a matter of domestic policy in South Africa. South
Africa doesn't seek to apply thai policy to any other
country. It is as much a matter of domestic poli~ cy
for South Africa as Australia's migration policy
is a domestic matter for us. And to have a
member of the Commonwealth virtually excluded from the
Commonwealth on a matter of domestic policy, presents in
my opinion, a rather disagreeable vista of possibilities
f or the future. We may object very strongly to racial
discrimination practiced in one country. We might
equally object very strongly to the absence of any form
of democracy in another; we might take exception to the
absence of parliamentary machinery, or the presence of
imprisonment without trial; or any of these things that
lend themselves to exam-ination if we adopt the attitude
that one of our tasks is to examine each other's
policies. A. nd that is why I think this is a very
unhappy development.
" It is quite true that every Prime Minister except the
Prime 1Minister of South Africa was critical of all or
some aspects of South Africa's policy. I don't need
to go into that with any elaboration, but I have up to
now acted on the principle which I believe is sound
that I do not make public comments on the policies of
another member of the Commonwealth; a very good oldfashioned
rule that, and it did a lot of good when it
used to be practiced. But since the thing is all
out now and this has been thrashed out and most people
have made statements about it, I just want to say this:
My objection to the poliz3y of apartheid is, in simple
terms, that in my opinion it won't work. It is a
policy of separate development. It is a policy that
accepts that the white man occupies the superior
po~ itirn. In other word'it is the same policy that
existed in all colonial establishments until a few years
ago. The South African Prime Minister says, and with
great sincerity he is a man of singular integrity, a
most impressive man He says: ' We are spending far more
money on education and health for the Bantu population
than any other African community.' That is quite right;
he h-ad figures to support it. He indicates that every
step is being taken to raise the living and the
educational standards of the Bantu. That is very good.
Excellent. But I don't lelieve that when that object 
-3
has been achieved, the Bantu is going to be satisfied
and adopt the second rate position in the general social
structure or in the political structure of South Africa.
In other words the more this policy succeeds, in a sense
the more certain is it to fail in the long run. Now
that's a purely practical abjection. I have not,. like
some, moralised about this matter. That, in brief, is
my view as to why their policy is wrong. Of course it
has some, to me, some inexplicable detailed consequences.
" I told Dr. Verwoerd that I just did not begin to
understand why he adopted the view that there should not
be an exchange of diplomatic missions with other African
and Asian members of the Commonwealth. I said we did
that kind of thing very successfully in Canberra and
nobody see-med to be very concerned about it. We ate in
each othei's houses and so on. But he had his own reasons
, and he said that it could not be done. I thought that,
psychologically, this had a bad effect. You know, that
seemned to be carrying it a bit too far."
" How do you see the future, relationship of South Africa with
other Commonwealth countries?
" Well, I'm very troubled about it because a lot of people
don't understand anything about the Commonwealth. They
seem to think the British Commonwealth is a court of morals
or law. You sit down and sit in judgment on each other.
It never was so. You meet to discover what you agree
about, not to discover what you disagree about. I spoke
about this last year in the Smuts lecture. We are not
sitting in judgment on one another. That is not the point.
We can talk very intimately and frankly with each other.
We learn a lot from each other. Occasionally you go away
and find that your mind has been influenced more than you
thought by something that was said. But there it is.
Apparently, the character of our deliberations is. to be
changed. I think it a great pity. But in parti cular,
this is the last time we will ever have a discussion on
racial policy in the Commonwealth itself; in a meeting of
Primne Ministers. South Africa is out. Somebody may
want to discuss the racial policy of some othei: member of
the Ccmmonwealth,' but so far as South AJfrica is concerned,
we will never have a discussion of this kind again.
Now the discussion is going on. The passions of other
people were roused on this matter and they won't be
silenced. But instead of having the discussion in a
meeting of a limited number of heads of Governments, who
are men of experience and restraint, this thing will now
be put into the United Nations; it will be debated hotly
in the General Alssembly; it will be transferred in other
words to areas where there will be much less restraint and
much more passion, I think that is a pity a gieat pity.
" There is one other point I would like to make about my
approach to this refusal of membership or expulsion. You
don't -admit a Government to the Commonwealth, you admit a
nation. The other day we didn't admit Archbishop
Makarios, we admitted Cyprus; and one of the foundation
members of the Commonwealth is South A-frica South Africa
the nation. We did not admit only those people who had a
vote, to wit the Europeans, we admitted the whole who
included nine million Bantu. True, they don't have the
vote. But there are one or two other Commonwealth
countries in which the voters are by no means in the
majority let us put it as delicately as possible. You
don't, in due course, put out the Verwoerd Government, you
put out South A" frica all of its people. How do we
know whether the Bantu, as they come along, are not very
very hopeful of such protection as they can get by the
QUESTION: 
-4
Commonwealth association? I don't know, but I can guess
that they might be. How do we know what the attitude
is of people who are for the time being in the minority
among the voters people who support the Opposition in
South AIfrica? Governments come and go; that is a very
healthy reflection. But, in effect, South AIfrica has
gone, includling all those who are ' pro' this policy and
those who are against it, and those who are pro the
Government, anr3thcse who are against the Government. I
think that misconceives the nature of the Commonwealth;
the Commonwelth as I have known it for many years at any
rate."
QUESTION:
ANSWER: QUESTION: ANSWER:
S QUESTION: ANSWER: QUESTION: SWER: &amp; r STION:
' iTSWER:
QUESTION:
ANSWER: " htwas the answer to that argument, si?
" Teanswer was a lemon. That didn't cut any ice".
" Do ycu thidkthat she's out fcr good now?"
' Well, frankly, I do. If I were being very tactful now I
would say ' Well, of course, in a year or two you will be
back with us'. But the world doesn't work that way.
Nor do I think that this decision is likely to have a
tempering effect upon South Afi-ican racial policy. it
may very well stiffen thcir attitude. I don't know.
I hope not. But it's possible.
" Dr. Verwoerd has referred to venomous attacks from the
Africans, the A1sians, and he also included Caad"
" No I won't namXe any names, butv certainly the most extreme
speeches were made at the very closing stages, at this time
when I thought we were probably going to get by with a
statement of the criticisms and the answers, and with
continuance of membership. ' Venomous' is not my word,
but there were very pungent attacks made then, as I said."
" Sir, on this precedent, do you fear any attacks possibly
on Australia's migration policy?"
" Well, once the precedent -Ls established it's obviously a
possibility". " Was there any hint of that?"
" Oh, no. From nobody. They all-concentrated this time
on the one thing. I made a glancing reference to it
myself".
' What would our attitude be if
" That is like, ' If
I can't answer that
they know what mine
mightn't be there".
QUESTION: ANSWER: you had a brother would he like cheese'.
one. I know what mine would be and
would be. But leave it at that. I
" In the case of Australia, Sir,-our own future relationships
with cur new foreign government -I take it that the ( South
,' frican) High Commission will take on another diplomatic
sttu" " Yes, We've never contemplated any of these things like
boycotts or things of that kind. Somebody did suggest
very powerfully that we ought to boycott South 1frica, so
I sent around word to find out what things we bought from
South Africa. What were the main items? When I got the
answer back it turned out that ninety per cent. of the people
engaged in the production of those things were black people.
I said I didn't think there was much sernse in penalising
these fellows under the guise of helping them. I don't
think economic measures are going to be taken in Australia; 
certainly not by us".
QUESTION: ANSWER: QUESTION:
r SR:
QOESTION: ANSWER: ANSWER:
ESTION ANSWER: QUESTION: " Is there any indication how other members of the
Commonwealth might feel about the continuation of
Commonwealth preferences. They apply mainly of course
to Britain, we know that. They do give South Africa
the same privileges in the British market as we enjoy,
and Now Zealand."
" I would be guessing if I tried to speculate about that.
No doubt there will be a lot of consequential matters
that have to be looked into. I don't think most of
us have had time to think about those yet".
" Mr. Menzies, two or three of the Sunday papers today
refer to the possibility of a visit by the Queen to
Australia fairly soon. I wonder if you have any
comment on that?"
" When was a Sunday paper without that atty You know
my rule on this matter. I am having a discussion with
the Queen about Royal visits in general; you know, trying
to look ahead, but that is as far as it has gone. But
any announcement of those things is to be made, as always,
by the Palace, not by me. Nor do I want to infer that
we are likely to have any early visit by a member of the
Royal family. I have a list of requests that I brought
with me that I am going to discuss with the Queen next
week". " Can you give any indication, Sir, as to when the name of
the new Governor-General will be announced?"
" No. I wish I knew the name of the new Governor-General.
Until I know that, I can't put a timetable on it".
" It still hasn't been settled then?"
" No" l
" Will you be seeing the Queen again before you leave?"
" Yes".
" Do you know what date?"
ANSWER: QUESTION: ANSWER: " On Friday".
" Coming back to the Conference, Mr. Menzies. There is a
reference from Melbourne saying that there is a debate
boiling up now on you taking the lead in arguing the
constitutional objection to interference in South Africals
internal affairs; it is suggested that you may have taken
on yourself a role which will be difficult to explain to
our Asian neighbours. Do you foresee any difficulty in
that?" " Not at all. That sounds almost like one of the Sydney
papers which has a bee in its bonnet on that problem. I
must say I find no difficulty whatever in explaining
myself to our AfSrican and Asian neighbours in conference
none. We are on the best of terms. Anyhow, my
principal duty and role is to express the mind of my own
Government, not the mind of other Governments. When I
am no longer able to do that, I will go out." 
4 -6
" Mr. Menzies, can you tell us anything of your
discussions with Dr. Luns of the Dutch Government on the
future of Dutoh Now Guinea?" 1
" Will you mrake any comment, Sir, an the latest position
of West New Gune?
" As~ far
been no
time. as I know, the position is as it was. There has
change. Our policy has been stated time after
There is no change in that."
QUESTION: ANSWER: VOICES:
0 " It seems to be a little hotter than it was".
" Well, you know, we keep on getting stois about that.
Anyhow, I have nothing to say about that. Right?"
" Thank you, Sir". ( Conference closed).
9
QUESTION: ANSWER: QUESTION:
ANSWER: 



61/ 009
PRESS CONFERENCE
Given by the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies in London
On March, 19th. 1961
Mr. Menzies: I notice that there is a good deal of speculation
and perhaps something more about the final stages of this
conference so perhaps I might as well add my own little bit to
its For some time it looked as if we could evolve a form
of communique u~ hich would confirm South Africa's membership
while at thc same time containing a fair summarised statement
of the criticisms of South Africa's racial policy and of Dr.
Verwoerd's reply. In point of fact, as I have followed
this, and I took a very active part in it in drafting various
things, Dr. Verwoerd wias at first very reluctant to adopt the
form of communique that was suggested because he felt that it
was too much like a concerted judgment on South African policy,
the language, he thought being put in a rather too positive
way. Ultimately after considering his position he agreed that
tho communique should go out in that fashion. And, quito
frankly, I thought at that time that the problem looked as if
it wure over. But when he announced, or Mr. Macmillan announced,
that he was agreeable to a communique of this kind he was
promptly told by several of the Prime Ministers that it was not
good enough. One or two of thien indicated quite plainly that
they didn't accept his continued membership; that if it
became necessary to move for the expulsion of South Africa they
would do so. At least half the Prime Ministers there made it
clear that they would pursue this matter every time there was
a meeting, and between meetings on any convenient opportunity.
In other words looking at the substance of the mattei', at
least half the Primo Ministers there indicated that thoy didnot
want South Africa in.
Dr. Verwoerd, I thought with very groat dignity,
accepted the logic of that position and indicated that he
would withdraw his application. Porsonally I don't think he
had any choice. I would have withdrawn the application in his
place. One reason that I know that he had in his mind I
thought did him very great credit, and that was that if he
had remained and in some way or other his application for
continued nienbership had been agreed to I don't undertake to
say how it could have been under these circumstances, but
suppose in some way or other it had then he would have
remained in and would have divided his colleagues into those
who would co-ntinue to want to be rid of him and those who would
continue 2/ 
L6968/ 9
-to want to have South Africa as a member of the Commonwealth.
And-rather than expose the rest of us to that risk he decided
to. rzv. e-his appliation . and avoid that possibility.
I think of course this is the most unhappy affair.
-1 make no secret of my own view. I wanted to keep South Africa
in. Last year at the conference we all agreed that South
Africa's racial policy was a matter of domestic jurisdiction.
We all agreed and that was why we didn't discuss it in full
conference. Quite true there has been a good deal of international
argument about it since but it will be remembered
that the former Prime Ministers' Conference was after the incidents
Sharpeville and after there had been world wide reaction and
we all agreed upon that occasion that this was a matter of
domestic jurisdiction. This year Dr. Verwoord indicated
that he would waive that point for once because he thought
that we ought to clear our minds about the question of policy.
He dy'd not abandon the proposition that it was domestic but
he ' aid " very well I am prepared tc sit in here and now and
have an argument about it" and he expressed his own case very
powerfully I may say at considerable length.
But even though there has been a great deal.
of international agitation this is still a matter of domestic
policy in South Africa.' South Africa does not seek to apply
that policy to any other country. It is as much a matter of
domestiu policy for South Africa as Australian migration policy
is a domestic matter for us. And to have a member of the
Commonwealth virtually excluded from the Commonwealth on a
matter of domestic policy presents, in my opinion, a ratherdisagreeable
vista of possibilities for the future. We may
object very strongly to racial discrimination practiced in
one country. We might equally object very striongly to the
absence of any form on democracy in nnothor. / 3 
V
-c' I1.6968/ 69
We niight--take,-exception to the absence of Parliamentary machinery
or the presence of imprisonment without trial or any uf these
things that lend themselves to examination if we adopt the
attitude that one or our tasks is to examine each others policies.
A-d--that is why-think this is a ver unhappy development.
It is quite true that in fact every Prime
Minister, except the Prime Minister of South Africa was critical
of all or some aspects of South Africa policy. I dont need to go
into that with any elaboration but I have up to now acted on the
principle which I believe is sound that I do not make public
comments on the oolicies of another member of the Commonwealth.-.._
A very good old fashioned rule that, and did a let of good when
it used to be practiced. But since the things is all out now
and this has been thrashed out and most people have made statements
about it I just want to say this: my objection to the policy
of apartheid is in simple terms that in my opinion it won't
work. It is a policy ofsapearate development, it is a policy
that the white ran occupies the superior position. In other
words it is the same policy that existed in all colonial
establishments until a few years ago. The South African Prime
Minister says and with great sincerity he is a man of singular
* integrity a most impressive man he says wo are spending far
more money on education and health for the Bantu population
than any other African community. That is quite right. He
-had figures to support it. He indicates that every step is
being taken' to raise the living standards and the educational
standards of the Bantu. That is very good. Excellent.
But I don't believe that when that object has been achieved
the Bantu is going to be satisfied and adopt the second rate
position in the general social struoture in South Africa or in
the political structure of South Africa. In other words,
the more this policy succeeds in a sense, the more certain is it to
fail in the long run. Now that is a puroly practical
objection. I haven't, like some, moralised about this matter.
That, if brief is my view as to why their policy is wrong.
Of course it has some to me inexplicable detailed
Sconsequences. Mr. LHenzies continued " I told Dr. Verwoerd I just
didn't begin to understand why he adopted the views that there
should not be an exchange of diplomatic missions with other
African and Asian members of the Cormmonwealth. I said we did that
kind of thing very successfully in Canberra and nobody seemed to
be very concerned about it. We ate in each others houses . nnd co.. on,'
but he had his own reasons and he said " no, it couldn't be done.
I thought that psychologically that had a bad effect. You
know that seemed to be carrying it a bit too far.
Q( UESTION: How do you see the future relationship of South
Africa with other Cormmonwealth countries?
ANSWER: Well I'm very troubled about it because a lot
of people don't understand anything about the Conmmonwealth;
they seem,-to think the British Commonwealth is a court of morals
or of law. You sit down and sit in judgment on each other. It
never was So. You meet to discover what you agree about 
I. 6968/ 9
not to discover-what you disagree about. I spoke about
this'las-t--yar in the Smuts Lecture; we are not sitting in
judgment on one other; thatts not the point. We can talk
very intimately and frankly with each other. We learn a lot
from each other. Occassionaily you go away and find your
mind has been influenced more than you thought by something that
Was said, but there it is. Apparently techaracter-ofour
eliberations are to be changedc--I--th'hk it a great pity, but
in particular this is the last time we will ever have a discussion
on racial policy in-the Commonwealth itself,/ Anmeeting of Prime
Ministers. South Africa is out unless, of course, somebody wants
to discuss the racial policy of some other member of the
Commonwealth. But so far as South Africa is concerned, we will
iever have a discussion of this kind again. Now the discussion
-is going on, the passions of other people were roused on this
matter and they won't be silenced. But instead of having the
discussion in a meeting of a limited number of Heads of Governments
who are men of experience and restraint, this thing will now be
put into the United Nations; it will be debated hotly in the
General Assembly; it will transferred in other words to areas
where there will be much loss restraint and much more passion,
and I think that is a great pity.
There is one other point I would like to make
about my approach to this refusal of membership or expulsion.
Your dontt admit a Government to the Commonwealth, you admit
a Nation to the Commonwealth. The other day we didn't' admit
Archbishop Makarios, we admitted Cyprus; and one of the
foundation members of the Commonwealth is South Africa South
Africa, the nation. We diCdnt admit only those people who had
a vote, to wit the Europeans, we admitted the whole who included
nine millinn BTlntu. True, they don't have the vote. But there
are one or two other Commonwealth countries in which the voters
are by no means in the majority let us put it as delicately
as possible. Your don't, in due course put out the Verwoerd
Government, you put out South Africa all of its people.
How do we know whether the Bantu as they come along, are not
very very hopeful of such protection as they get by the
Commonwealth association? I don't know, but I can guess that they
might be. How do we know what the attitude is of people who are
for the time being, in the minority among the voters; people
who support the opposition in South Africa. Governments come
and go.-That is a very healthy reflection. But in effect South
Africa has gone, including all those who are pro this policy and
those who are against the policy, and those who are pro the
Government and those who are against the Government. And I think
that misconceives the nature of the Commonwealth. The
CoQmnLiwalthas--I -have'kn ow' it for many years at any rate.
Question: What was the answer to that argument, Sir?
Answer: The answer was a lemon. That didn't
cut any ice.
Question: Do you think that she's out for good now? 
5 1.6968/ 9
Anmswer: " Well frankly I do, If-I were being very tactful now,
I would sayr '" Well of course, in a year or two, you will be
back-with-s". The world doesn't work that way, nor do I think
that this decision is likely to have a tempering effect upon
South African racial policy. It may very well stiffen their
attitude, I don't know. I hope not. But it's possible.
Question: Dr. Verwoerd has referred to enomoaus attacks from the
f ricAans, Asians and he also incl_ ud-eC'-anada.
Answer; No, I won't name any namos, but certainly the nost
extremo speeches were made-at the very closing stages at this
time wh_ I though. t-wo were probably going to get by with a
statement of-the criticisms, Dr. Verwoerd's answer, and continuance
of membership. Venomous is not my word, but there were very
pungent attacks made then as I said.
Question: Sir, on this precedent, do you fear any attacks,
possibly oh Australia's nigration policy?
Answer: Well, once the precedent is established, its obviously
a possibility.
Question: Was there any hint of that?
Answer: Oh no. Nobody. They all concentrated this'time on the
one thing. I made a glancing reference to it myself.
Question: What would our attitude be if?
Answer: That is like " If you had a brother would he like cheese".
I can't answer that one. I know what mine would be and they know
what mine would be; but leave it at that. I might not be there.
Question: In the case of Australia, sir, our own future
relationships with our new foreign government I take that the
High CorLmission will take on another diplomatic status?
Answer: Yes, We've never contemplated any of those things like
boycotts or things of that kind. Somebody did suggest very
powerfully that we ought to boycott South Africa so I sent around
word to find out what things we bought from South Afric., What
were the main items? When I got the answer back, it turned out
that ninety per cent of the people engaged in the production of
those things were black people, I said I didn't think there was
much sense in penalising these fellows under the guise of helping
them. I don't think economic measures are going to be taken in
Australia, certainly not by us.
Question: Is there any indication how other members of the
Commonwealth might feel about the continuation of Comonwealth
preferences; they apply mainly of course to Britain. We know that
they do give South Africa the same privileges in the British
market as we enjoy and Now Zealand.
Answer: I would be guessing if I tried to speculate about that.
No doubt there will be a lot of consequential nmtters that have
to be looked into. I don't think nost of us have h. ad time to
think about those yet.
Question: Mr Menzies, two or three of the Sunday papers today
refcr to the possibility of a visit by the Queen to Australia
fairly soon. I wonder if you ha. ve any comment on that?
./ 6 
6 I, 698/ 9
Answer: When was aStfwr fay paper without that story? You know
my rule-on this jmttor. I an having a general discussion with
the Queen abou-tR-Royal visits in the general, you know, trying to
look ahead, but that's as far as its gone. But any announconent
of those things to be made is to be made, as always, by the
Palace, not by me. Nor do I wrant to infer that we e r likely to
have any_. arly visit by a member of the Royal Fanily, I have a
list of requests that I brought with ne that I an going to discuss
with the Queen next week.
Question: Can you give any indication, sir, as to when the name
of the new Governor General will be announcod?
Answer: No, I wish I know the nare of the new Governor General.
Until I know that, I can't put a timetable on it.
Question: It still hasn't boon settled then,
Answer: No.
Question: Will you be seeing the Queen again before you leave?
Answer: Yes.
Question: Do you know what date?
Answer: I think it's on Friday.
Question: Coning back to the conference, Mr. Monzies, there is
a reference from Melbourne saying that there is a debate boiling
up now on you taking the load in arguing the constitutional
objection to interference in South Africa's internal affairs,
that you may have taken on yourself a role which will be
difficult to explain to our Asian neighbours. Do you foresee
any. difficulty in that?
Answer: Not at all. That sounds almost like one of the Sydney
papers which has a bee in its bonnet on that problem, I must say
I find no difficulty whatever in explaiinng nyself to our African
and Asian neighbours in Conference. None. We are cn the best of
terns. Anyhow, ny principal duty and role is to express the nind
of my own Government, not the nind of other Governments. When
I am no longer able to do that, I will go out,
Question: Mr. Menzies can you tell us anything of your discussions
with Dr. Luns of the Dutch Government on the future of Dutch
New Guinea?
Answer: No.
Question: Will yci nake any comment, sir, on the latest position
of Wst Now Guinea?
Answer: As far as I know, the position is as it was. There's
been no change, our policy has been stated tine after tine.
There's no chanog in that.
Question: It seens to be a little hotter than it was.
Answer: Well you ] now we keep on getting stories about that,
anyhow I h-. ve nothing to say about that. 



W AUSTRALIA CLUB DINNER
LONDON. ON MONDAY. MARCH 20. 1961
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Sir, My Lords and Gentlemen,
I think I ought to begin by saying how grateful I am
to His Royal Highness the . Duke ( of Gloucester) for having once
more presided over one of these dinners. He and I were recalling
earlier this evening an occasion in this very hotel, in one of
those less civilized days when one wore a stiff shirt and white
tie; and I arrived with a temperature of 1030, which I am told
is a high temperature. I got up and read the speech and
couldn't see the audience at all they were like floating
clouds -and at the end of it I didn't know what I had said, nor,
I imagine, did anybody alse. Because of this very high
temperature I turpied to His Royal Highness, who is a former
Governor-General of Australia and a stout-hearted friend of
Australia, and if I may say so, Sir, always a kind friend of
mine; I turned to him and said, " Sir, I am terribly sorry.
Could you understand what I was saying, because I couldn't."
And his reply deserves to be immortalized, He said,~ " I think,
on the whole, it is the best speech I have ever heai'd you make.'
And then, of course to add to my embarrassment, we
have here Lord Slim, another lPormer Governor-General of
Australia a very remarkable man who, since he c6ased to be
Governor-aeneral has always treated me with thegreatest
affability. All the time I was supposed to be his chief
constitutional advisor you knew, going around saying, " If you
don't mind, Sir, I don't think you should have made that
speech; let me write the next one." To which he would always
reply, " Let it be a little literate for once." AUl this time
I was terrified of him, but since he gave up being Governor-
General-, we have become very good friends. Therefore, I am
permitted to say to you that I think he is a very great man and
that Australia had a great honour in having him. I won't dwell
on the fact that he knows my mind and knows the feelings of the
people of Australia. But then Sir, I look to my left and see this calm,
benign, non-contentious character Lord Hailsham. He was
involved the other day in a slight fracas in the House of
Lords. We don't want -to dwell on it in any way, but somebody
said to me " What do you think about that?" " Well" l, I said,
" You can't understand that unless you understand Hailsham,
because when he found himself, willy-nilly, cast into the House
of Lords, he protested very violently. I don't go as far as to
say that he reflected on his father's choice or anything of that
kind, but he certainly did make do you remember? a little
bit of an uproar: " Why should I go into the House of Lords? I
would sooner ring bells elsewhere." But, having been beaten down
on that subject, and having resigned himself to being a member
of the House of Lords God bless it he then decided that he
would try and approximate the House of Lords to the House of
Commons; or, you might say, to the House of Representatives in
Australia. And so he chose to debate accordingly. You alT
know what I mean, or if you don't, you are not good Australiaihs,
And then there is this wretched creature, the Maste. 1
of the Rolls. Until tonight, I have always admired him
enormously. I have even put myself to the trouble of reading
some of his judgments. I have even persuaded myself occasion.'.* w,
as a former lawyer, that they were right which I think arguefa
high degree of Ch~ istian charity, on my part, This croatuir-.
What does he do? He brings in cricket, It is, of course, an 
admirable thing to bring in; we could have done with a bit of
it in the last week. But having brought it in, he makes a
glancing reference to Old Trafford.
Now if somebody wants to he is at perfect liberty to
talk about Old Trafford because, so far as I can remember, there
never has been a test match played at Old Trafford for donkey's
years. Everybody got worked up and everybody got excited the
newspaper critics, you know, these geniuses, those rather underbred
geniuses who write about all these things they had it all
worked out for Old Trafford. But for three consecutive tours,
not a ball was bowled at Old Trafford because it turns out that
at Old Trafford they specialise in rain. Anyhow, he drags in
Old Trafford as if he was a sort of what is the word? an;
archaeologist even an anthropologist, I would think, He drags
that in, and then he says this I think I wrote down the
ipsissima verba, " Winnie ille N1i" you must attend to your
pronunciation: " And then we went to a wool sale."'
This, of course, fascinated rme enormously because
tonight I'm wasting my time on you and tomorrow I'm going to
Leeds where I am to open, I'm told though ho I haven't been
told a wool research institute, Anid I'm going to be given
one of my many unearned degrees. I think Lord Slim 1 ' s one$
They thought it rather odd that he should al one have an unedrned
degree so they joined me in, you see glad to have a second
and then I make a speech to the Lord Mayor. It is much harder
to make a speech to a Lord Mayor than to have a speech made by a
Lord Mayor to you. But that is going to happen. And so this
wretched character Evershed, he said, " And so we went to a.
wool sale." ' If I had made a remark so fatuous to him as counsel,
he would have looked at me and said, " W~ ell, Mr. Menzies" or
" Mr. Minges" to people who are well trained " what do you mean
by a wool sale?" It was just like the occasion in my own
humble jurisdiction in Victoria, which Sir Edmund Herring will
remember very well, when I ventured to say to a celebrated
equity judge -and he is one anyway I think so none of the
common lawyer -we won't go into that but I ventured to say to
the celebrated equity judge, " Well, Sir, the difference you are
putting to me is merely thie difference between tweedlo-dum and
tweedle-dee." 1 Well like all politicians I thought this not
highly original but singularly brilliant the difference between
twoedle-dum and dweedle-deo. And the old boy put the tips of
his fingers together and said, " Mr. Menzies, I hope you don't
think you are solving the problum!" I say this, Master, only to
indicate that although we have overcome all social distinctions,
these distinctions between equity and the law are still
prevalent. And, as a common lawyer, I think this is not without
merit. I say no more than that.
But the Master of the Rolls, towards the end of his
speech, made some reference to the Commonwealth. I think it
might be regarded as a little odd if I did not say something
myself about the events of the last week or ten days. Because
there is one odd thing about conferences nowadays: Every morning
you open your ten newspapers and you read ten different versions,
each particularly authoritative, about what went on before.,' I
have never known what happened at this conference until I have
read the newspapers; and I have read some of the most astonishing
things. But what I want to say to you tonight I say as a
man who won't be accused of not being a Commonwealth man. I
have, through the whole of ray public life, been a devoted
servant of the Crown. That doesn't go for eve.-. yb~ ody in the
Commonwealth the old Commonwealth and the new Commonwealth.
I think therefore one should say a little about some of the
events of the last ton days and some of the dangers, as I see
them of the results of the last ten days. Because I believe 
that last week we had some of the most dramatic events in
Commonwealth history and if we don't think they are dramatic,
then vie have lost all interest in the Commonwealth and what
happens to it. Because after all what happened last week was
that a foundation member of the British Commonwealth, to wit
South Africa, was in effect told to leave. I use those words.
I will justify them in due course. And that country, South
Africa, has left. Now this is not something to be tossed off
lightly as a morG incident; this is a foundation member of the
Commonwealth, a country which became a member of the Commonwealth
after bitter wars, after bitter disputes,. and after a
superb act of statesmanship by the United Kingdom which created
the Union. Now Sir, we have had in the newspapers, speculation,
propaganda, and if you will allow me to say so, not a little
: Usehood, about the events of the last ten days. Therefore, I
want to say something about the events as I saw them and as, in
an extremely obscure capacity, I have had some part in it.* Sir,
all this argument has arisen about something'which is called
" apartheid", which means, as I understand it, separate
development. Separate development., has been rightly or wrongly
the policy of the Government of South Africa. And : rvdeed I would
like to remind you it has been the policy of South P. 1rica since
it was first erected by J. C. Smuts. I can't cimplain about
Field Marshal Smuts because he was the most distinguished of all
members of the British Commonwealth outside this country. I
delivered the first Smuts lecture last year at Cambridge and in
the course of preparing myself for it I even road Smuts' book on
Holism which very few of you have tried to do, He was a
philosopher, a statesman, a scholar, and he found himself
Confronted by the choice which every Power finds itself
confronted by the choice between having a policy of integration
when you have people of different races, or a policy of separate
development. Nov that, I would have thought, in my innoceihce,
a problem of statesmanship. In the old colonial days it was
putting on one side the Africans apartheid. You had the
European colonising Power doing this and that; running the
country and building people up, all very properly; a process
which has led to the creation of nation after nation in this
world; or you have some other view. nd so South Africa'
decided it would have this policy of separate development. Now
for reasons I am going to give to you I don't agree with this
policy. But the great problem that we have to confront is
whether, because you disagree with the policy of a country a
member of the Commonwealth you push it out ofthe Commonwealth.
And those are two questions that ought to be kept completely
distinct one from the other. The whole problem is not one of
moralizing, or being superior, or passionate; the whole problem
is one of statesmanship. Now I have said to you that I don't myself agree with
this. I am talking to you tonight and I say this particularly
to my Australian fellow-countrymen I am the only Prime
Minister who, until this conference, has never publicly offered
an opinion on South African policy. And I stand by that. I
think that was right, because I am a believer in the Commonwealth,
I ami a believer in the members of the Commonwealth
meeting together, not arguing with each other not lecturing
each other, not sitting in Judgment on each other, but scekinj
to discover between themselves what points of agreement they
have, how far they may assemble their moral force in the woriK
And, therefore, in my Parliarient, and I daresay not much iDmy
advantage, I said " No. South Africa runs its own affairs; we
run our own affairs; Canada runs its own affairs. W4ho are we
to be sitting here in judgment one on the other? I don't have
any observations to make on what the other man does." But a].
this is ' old hat' now because everybody has a go at it. 
I would not be saying anything about it tonight if it
wore not for the fact that in this conference Dr. Verwoera, thle
Prime Minister of South Africa, himself acce'. cx t o the idea that
we ought to have a chance between us all to thrash this matter
out. So I pause here, and say this about Dr. Verwoerd: he has
been accused sometimes by people who speak, I understand, in
the name of dhrsistianity I am a simple Presbyterian myself.-
he has been accused of something that almost approximates to the
bitterness of murder. I want to tell you that I, in fact,
formed the impression never having met him before that h
was a man of iUmmense integrity and of great courtesy. He came
out of this conference, personally, whatever you might think of
his policy, with the very high respect of the people who sat
with him. La I say that at the very beginning because I don't
want to have it thought that I am one of those people who want
to lecture him as if he were a wicked man with no moral sense.
I believe he is a man of utter integrity. I don't agree with
his policy. But I am not bound to your policy. If I diwoe
with your policy I don't mean to tell yet', you arc a man of no
character. And I hope you won't be calleu upon to tell me ' that
. I am a man of no character because you don't agree with my;
poli cy. The whole genius of the British Commonwea*;' and by
Jove,_ I believe in the British Commonwealth with a L~ ith in my
guts -the whole genius of it has been that we are tolerant, we
agree to disagree, we seek to understand we look for points of
agreement, but we don't stand up and lecture each other in the
face of the world; and never until this year, have we sat in
Judgment on each other. Those are things wart h remembering.
Here is a problem of statbsmanship. Now I, never having before
offered a public word about SDuth African policy, am now called
on to do so and not by my wish. I am old-fashioned enough to
believe in tolerance, and in living and letting live, and in the
virtues of Christian faith, hope and charity. I believe in
these things but if thcis is out of date and I am to be
misunderstool about those matters. thsn I simply say this to you:
here is a time of passion and rhetoric; of broad, sweeping
statements, the kind of things you expect to have in the United
Nations Assembly but not in the Bi~ itish Cotmionwealth. The-se
are the times, -and therefore I say to myself: " Must I say
something?" I believe I must, and I say it. I don't moralize
about South African policy because I tftink moralizing is a
pretty cheap thing. All I say is that I ' Ion't think it will work,
You see this is the pragmatic British approach and I
am happy to say that I am completely British. I don't want to
be offensive to the Master of the Rolls, but I believe I am in
the tradition of the British common law and this involves
pragmatic JudL,; ents will it work? &amp; nA it won't work. Nothing
was more impressive to all of us at this conference than the way
in which Dr. Verwoerd, with obvious honesty, with great courtesy,
with great lucidity, explained his policy. He told us what his
Government was doing for the Bantu: for the Bantu in their
territories, for the Bantu in the ordinary provinces. He told
us of the amount of money they were ! p ending on education and
health which I may say is quite an example to all the other
countries in Africa. And he believes that all this will work
out vory nicely. Well, and I speak with great reluctance, I
don't think it will, because I believe in this day and
generation that the more his policy succeeds, the more he br.. L
the Bantu up in terms of health and living standards and
education, the more intolerable will they find it to be secor.-
class citizens. N-ow this is purely, I say purely, a pragmatiapproach.
It is not sentimental, it is practical. And I sa..
to him time after time in private " I know you believe this is
right, but I believe that the more it succeeds in the first 
0
instance, the more it will fail in the long run. Because the
more you succeed in building up the Bantus, the more you succeed
in giving them proper standards educational standards and
universities the more you will develop that proper pride in
people which will make them say, ' I am not to be pushed to one
side', And if it goes on that way then you may find that the
ultimate conflict will be bloody and devastating." Now that
sii. ly is my own view, and I offer it for what it is worth, and
he is familiar with my views on this matter. But if he goes
back to his own country and says " I am unmoved by that; this is
our policy", then I want to tell you I stand for the right of
any Commonwealth country to run its affairs in its own way.
May I remind you Sir I don't want to be too long
but may I remind you that In May of last year, which is less
than a year ago, we had a Prime Minist( ursl conference on this
matter; well not on this matter, but on a number of matters,
but this was the first matter to come up. And after we had had
a discussion we issued a communique. In this great organisation
of ours we do not produce a communique unless it is unanimous.
And this communique said: " The Commonwealth is an association of
independent, sovereign States, each responsible for its own
policy." Now these are, I venture to say Sir fine wiords and
true words. And I emphasise that because, wlthou. bo.&amp;, t
ing, if somebody in a Prime Ministers' conference Li to t: l1
me what the policies of Australia ought to be, I would tell them
to go and jump in the Serpentine. I know mine is an unfashionable
idea, but there is much to be learned from the history of
the past. The Charter of the United Nations and that is a body
with which I don't invariably agree the Charter of the United
Nations concedes-the point. It says: " Nothing contained in the
present Charter shall authorize the United Nations to intervene
in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State". And Sir if I may add to that last year,
after this conference in which these matters had been informally
discussed, I went off, dreadfully daring, to Cambridge to give
the first Smuts Memorial Lecture. It was a piece of irony you
know, as I look back on it, because it was Smuts who devisod the
policy of apartheid. He wouldn't have done it in the same way
no, of course not. But he was a great man, a great figure in
the history of the Commonwealth. Would you mind if I quoted from
this Smuts lecture? You could of course buy it for a few
shillings from the Cambridge University Press, but I know how
impoverished you are and I won't dwell on that. But I really
think this is something I oug.-ht to put to you:
" During the recent tragic episodes in South Africabecause
remember that this declaration I have just been quoting
to you was made after ' Sharpeville, afe Langa, afe those
events which are now celebrated by gentlemen with sashes across
their cLests " During the recent tra!, ic episodes in South 1frica
there were not wanting suggestions that South Africa
should be expelled presumably by majority vote from
the Commonwealth. Any such suggestion, in my opinion
misconceived the nature of our association. We do not dc,..
with the domestic political policies of any one of us, i:
we know that political policies come or go with governinG&gt;.
and that we are not concerned with , overnmients and their
policies so much as wo are with nations and their people!--
If we ever thought of expelling a member nation of the
Commonwealth it would, I hope, be because we believed th" 7
in the general interests of the Commonwealth that nation
a nation was not fit to be our associate. 
" The Prime Ministers' Conference would break up in
disorder and the now Cormmonwealth would disintegrate if we
affected to discuss and decide what we thought to be the
proper measure of democracy in our various couhtries;
whether particular groups should or should not have the
vote; whether oppositions should be respected; whether a
Parliament should control the Executive. On all such
matters ' autonorious' or ' independent' nations must have the
right to manage their own affairs in their own way.
" We are not a court. We are brothers in a special
international family."
Now let ne emphasise this every Government, every
member of the Commonwealth, has achieved self-governmaent, a
right of complete independence. Do I want to go around and to
say to any one of them, " This is how you ought to govern yourself?"
Of course not. That is too stupid for words. You will
have a high degree of authoritarian government in one country.
You will have an advanced stage of parliamentary government in
another. But when you look back on these things and you
remember from first to last, from the Balfour Declaration onwards,
we emphasise that we are autonomous governrent-niaters
of our own fate, masters of our own problems. Don"-
it is a monstrous thing for us to be sitting in jud.: o&gt;
another? I wouldn't have said a word about South African pcLicy,
which I think is doomed to disaster, except that I am the only
man yet among the Prime Ministers who hasn't said something
about it. And it has all been exposed to the public eye and
therefore no one can be misrepresented. But really, basically,
I am a great believer in autonomy meaning autonomy, and selfgovernment
meaning self-government. And if we are to reach a
state of affairs in which, instead of meeting to discover points
of agreement that we might have struggling to understand each
other's problems, every now and then finding out there is some
matter on which we can jointly achieve some results, forward
some good cause we are not to do that but are to adopt the new
rule that when we meet somebody is on trial and we analyse their
differences, then, next time it may be Australia.
How do I know? We have things in our policy which are
our policy and our business but with which somebody may disagree.
I wouldnit tolerate having these things discussed by other
people. I wouldn't tolerate being lectured by other people on
what we ought to do. But alas, when emotional judgment comes in
and there are all sorts of banners being borne in the sky,
people can be misled into misunderstanding what it is all about.
Today it is the fashion to talk about racialism. It is still
the fashion to talk about colonialism so long as you don't
talk about Communist colonialism, which is the greatest and the
most aggressive colonialism in the world. But who talks about
the rule of Parliament? Who talks about the rule of law? Who
talks about an uncontrolled press? Who talksaboutnoimprisonment
without trial? I could very simply, if I am allowed to stay in
office long enough, have a word or two to say about these things.
If the drill is that in the Cormonwealth, which was a communion
of friends who didn't order each other about but met to discuss
and as far as they could, agree; if this is to be changed so
that we are sitting in judgment, so that we are a species of
courts, so that we have accused, and charges, and verdictsi t-
I am bound to tell you with all that inherent courtesy which
characterises me, I will have something to say about that. } I
by tk: time I have said it, and by the time the answers have.
been made there won't be any Commonwealth because we will al.
have expelled each other.
Sir, I think this is really a most unhappy event an-
the last thing I want to say to you is this: don't fall into the
error, which many people are falling into of thinking that the
Commonwealth this our most glorious con~ ribution to civilized
life in the modern world is a sub-division of the United
Nations; don't begin to think of it as if it consisted-of
resolutions and amendments and lobbying and votes,~ I r. x-Isist this.
This has nothing to do with the United Nations. I Q. ni ind if
the representatives of ninety-nine nations in New Vo.. 1 go on
making speeches lasting two and a half hours each, andJ keep going
into committee, and doing all these things to amuse .! eople.
Forget about that. This is highly experimental. It may produce
some good results. But what hurts me is this: thatthis great
Commonwealth is being dragged into this area of thought which has
no relation to it.
In 1935, 1, for the first time, attended a moeeting of
Commonwealth Prime Ministers. It wasn't called the Ccm; J-1.; alth
then, it was called the Imporial Conference and the thX.' L iiMe
Minister of Australia, my late friend and leader Mr. Lyons, was
ill. He asked me to attend for him. That was twontys. x: years ago
and, man and boy since then, I have had a lot of exrnrionce of
these things-. Nothing will ever persuade me that u
identify the exquisite intimate personal relations
Commonwealth with the debating society that goes on \ w .1W : c
God bless the debating society in New York. The Isv~
burgeoning out your Royal Highness from the old all~. ance zo
the-Throne, burgeoning out from the old Crown Commonwealth through
these various processes which I don't resist or resent, so that
you have republics, so that you have countries all of whom have
had old associations with us. I look here at my friend Yousuf
from Pakistan. You can't argue about India. They have all. had
the most wonderful relations with the old British Raj. True,
the allegiance to the Throne, both dear to my heart and to the
heart of so many of you, is no longer the sole condition. But at
any rate we have had a special family relationship with the Queen
as the Head of the Commonwealth, the Queen as our Sovereigu Lady.
If anybody wants us to do something which converts the Commonwealth
with all its warmth and its intimacy, its capacity for
hostility within friendship, which is the great thing about any
family relationship into a forum where we are to sit in judgment
on each other, then all I can say is with great devotion to Her
Majesty it is a sorry day for the Commonwealth.
Why can't we disagree with the South African policy
without pushing South Africa out and believe me it was pushed
out. If Verwoerd hadn't gone when he did, I would have been
surprised. Harold Macmillan, the most distinguished Prime
Minister of this country with his colleagues, and with myself,
worked like horses to develop a communique which would expose the
criticisms of other members of the Commonwealth and the answer of
the Prime Minister of South Africa and, having exposed them, would
then make it possible for South Africa to remain within the
Commonwealth as a republic as every other republic has. When
finally Mr. Macmillan came in and said A" Dr. Verwoerd agrees", I
was delighted. I thought, " This is it' in my innocence I
thought " This is it we will now have ihe criticism fairly
stated, the answer fairly stated... and South Africa rem~ ains in"..
I say this as I have read some awful rubbish in the newspapers
not for the first time I've read some awful rubbish to the
effect that Mr. Macmillan pushed them out. This is monstrous
man worked harder than he did. No man worked harder thanDl
Sandys with him, to produce what you might call a formula und..
which the argum~ nt this way was stated, and the argument that
was stated. But I must tell you in view of all this propagai
that goes on that while I was saying to myself in my simple,
colonial fashion, " Well, I think this fixes it," one, two, thi-
4 0 8.
four, five people got up and made it completely clear that they
wouldn't have this, that they didn't want South Africa in, and
that every convenient opportunity, or inconvenient opportunity,
would be taken to attack her.
Well I'm not Dr. Verwoerd and I'm not the apostle of
apartheid though I have my own immigration policy and I'm
bound to say that in hfs plac,, 1 would have loft certainly not
later than he did. So don't lot us have humbug. There is an
awful lot of humbug in the world and, on the whole, I think that
humbug is one of the more serious offences in the world. So don't
let us have it. The faczt is that in all these circumstances South
Africa is out. And what I am saying to you so many of wi-om are
Australians like myself is, " Don't let us Jump on this latest
band-waggon. Let us think of this Commonrealth of ours. What
does it mean in tolerance, in understandinig, in points of
contact, and to us who are Australians, in a superb allegiance to
the Throne?" What does it mean? If we think it means nothing then
it doesn't matter; let it all go to the United Nations. But if
we think it means something, then I beg of all of you to look back
on these events, not with hilarity for I feel no hilarity about
them but to look back on them saying, " Did we go wrong? Has
what has happened strengthened the Commonwealth?" And the
answers to these questions will depend on whether you think our
marvellous association depends upon tolerance, kindness, and
understanding and the long view; or upon the popular passion for
denunciation. I don't need to tell you that I don't feel good
about this. I apologise for having inflicted my views on you.
But since my earliest days in politics I have had a great A sion
of what the Commonwealth should stand for. I hate to think that
it is blurred. 



61/ 010
: JT: JT 1-7111
Dated: 20th March, 1961
Rec'd: 21st March, 1961.
1330
FROM: Australian High Commission,
LONDON. Excerpts of Prime Minister's speech to Australia'
Club dinner, Savoy Hotel tonight.
The Prime Minister said " The master of the Rolls
( Lord Evershed who proposed the toast of Australia) towards the
end of his speech made some reference to the Commonwealth. I
think it might be regarded as a little odd if I didn't say
something myself about the events of the last week or ten days.
I think cne should say a little about some of the events of
the last ten days and of some of the dangers, as I see them,
of the results of the lost ten days, because I believe that
last week we had some of the most dramatic events in Commonwealth
history. And if we don't think they are dramatic then
we have lost all interest in the Coinmonwc alth and what happens
t-o it. What happened last week was that a foundation
member of the British Commonwealth, to wit, South Africa, was
in effect told to leave. I use those words; I will justify
them in due course. And South Africa hs: s left.
Now this is not something to be tossed off lightly
as a mere incident, this is a foundation member of the Commonwealth
a country which b carnc a member of the Commonwealth
after bitter war, bitter disputes, and after a superb act of
statesmanship by the United Kingdom which created the Union.
We have had in the newsapers, speculation propaganda, and,
if you will allow me to say, so not a little falsehood, about
the events of the last tcn days. Therefore I want to say some-
' thin~ fthat is called apnrt~ h. id(', which means, as I under' 5tand it,
separate development, Searate develop3;-ent hao been, rightly
or wrongly, the policy of the Government of South Africa. AnQ
indeed I would like to remind you this has been the policy
of South Africa since it was first crected by J. C. Smuts. He
found himself confronted by choice which every power finds itself
confronted by the choice between having a policy cf integration,
when you have people0 of different races, or a policy of separate
development. This is a problem of statesmanship.
In the old Colonial days it was apartheid. You
had the European colonising power running the country, building
people up, all very properly a process which has led to the
creation of nation after nation in this world. Or you have
some other view. And so South Africa decided that it would have
Y abcut these events as I sawv them and in which, as in an obscure
capacity, I had some part. All this argument has arisen about../ 2
s omet hing/ 
1-7111
this policy of separate development. Now, for reasons that I
am going to give to you, I don't agree with this policy. Btt
the great problem that we have had to confront is whether
because you disagree with the policy of a country, a member of
the Commonwealth, you push it out of the Commonwealth. And
those are two questions that ought to bo kept completely distinct.
The whole problem is not one of moralising, of being superior,
or passionate; the whole problem is one of statesmanship. I
say particularly to my Australian fellow countrymen I am the
only Prime Minister who, until this conferenc2, had never
publicly offered an opinion on South African policy. And I
stand by that. I think that was right, because I am a believer
in the Commonwealth. I am a believer in the members of the
Commonwealth meeting together, not arguing with each other, not
lecturing each other, not sitting in judgment on each other, but
seeking to discover between themselves what points of agreement
they have, how far they may assemble their moral force in the
world. And therefore in my own Parliament, and I daresay not
much to my own advantage, I said South Africa runs its
own affairs. We run our own affairs, Canada runs its own
affairs. Who are we to be sitting here in judgment one on the
other? But all this is old hat now, because everybody
has a go Wtit and I would not be saying anything about it
tonight if it were not for the fact tha-t in the conference Dr.
Vorwoerd himself, acceded to the idea that we ought to have a
chance between us all to thrash this matter out.
The whole genius of the British Commonwealth and
I believe in the British Commornmealth with a faith in my gutshas
been that we are tolerant; we agree to disagree, we seek
to understand, we look for points of agreement but we don't
stand up and lecture each other in the face of the world.
Never, until. this year, have we sat in judgment on each other.
These are things worth remembering. Now I, never having before
offered a public word about South African policy, am now called
on to do so, not by my wish. I am old fashioned enough to
believe in tolerance and in living and letting live and in the
virtues of Christian faith, hope and charity. I believe in these
things, but if this is out of date and I am to be misunderstood
about these matters then I simply say this to you: here is a
time of passion and rhetoric, broad sweeping statements, the
kind of things you expect to have in the United Nations Assembly
but not in the British Commonwealth.
I don't moralise about South African policy because
I think moralising is a pretty cheap thing. All I say is that I
don't think apartheid will work. You see this is the pragmatic
British approach. Nothing was more impressive to all of us in
this conference than the way in which Dr. Verwoerd with obvious
honesty, with great courtesy, with great lucidity explained his
policy but I don't think it will work in this day and
generation. The more his policy succeeds, the more he brings
the Bantu up in matters of health and living standards and education,
the more intolerable will they find it to be second class citizens..
This is a purely pragmatic approach, not sentimental, but
practical, and I have said to him time after time in private
" I know you believe this is right. 
3 1.7111
I believe that the more it succeeds in the first instance the
more it will fail in the long run because the more you succeed
in building up the Bantu the more you succeed in giving them
proper standards, educational stpndards, and give thiem
universities, the more will you develop that proper pride in
people which will make them say I en not to be pushed on one side".
If it goes on that way you may find that the ultimate
conflict will be bloody and devastating. I offer this for what
it is worth. He is familiar with my view on this matter. But
if he goes back to his own country and says, I e* m unmoved by
that, then I want to t1ll you that I stand for the right of any
Commonwealth country to run its affairs in its own way.
May I remind you that in May of last year we had a
Prime Ministers' Conference and this was the first matter to
come up. And after we had had a discussion we issued a cormuniqUe
which said the Commonwealth is an association of independent
sovereign states each responsible for its own policies. Those,
I venture to say, were fine wirds and true words. I emphasise
them because if somebody in a Prime Ministers' Conference wants
to tell me what the policies of Australia ought to be, I will
tell them to go and jump in the Serpentine.
The United Nations and that is a body with which I
don't invariably agree concedes the point. It says " Nothing
contained in the present Charter shall authorise the United
Nations to intervene in matters which are essentially within
the domestic jurisdiction of any state". Mr. Menzies continued
" Any suggestion for the expulsion of South Africa from the
Commonwealth misconceives the nature of our association. We
don't deal with the domestic political policies of any one of
us, for we know that political policies come or go with
Governments and that we are not concerned with Governments and
their policies so much as we are with nations and their peoples.
If we over thought of expelling a member of the
Commonwealth it would, I hope, be because we believed that, in
the general interests of the Cormonwealth, a nation, as a nation,
was not fit to be our associote. The Prime Ministers' Conference,
I said in my Smuts Lecture at Cambridge, would break up in
disorder if we affected to discuss and decide what we thought
to be the proper measure of democracy in our various countries.
Whether particular groups should or should not have the vote,
that is a fascinating inquiry, whether oppositions should be
respected, whether a Parliament should control the Executive;
on all such matters autonomous or independent nations must
have the right to manage their own affirs in their own way.
Every Government, every member of the Commonwealth has achieved
self government a right of complete independence. Do I want to
go around end say to anyone of them " This is how you ought to
govern yourself"? of course not, its too stupid for words.
You will have a high degree of authoritarian Government in one
country, you will have anu advanced stage of Parliamentary
Government in another. But when you look bak on these things
and you remermber that from first to last, fromthe Balfour
Declaration onwards, we have emphasised that we are autonomous
Governmehts, -aasters of our own fate, masters of our own
problems, don't you think th. t it is a monstrous thing for us
to be sitting in judgment one on the other. I would not have
said a word about South African policy, which I think is doomod
./ 4 
4 1,7111
to disaster, except that I am the only man yet among the Prime
Ministers who has not said soriething about it. i'md its all
been exposed to the public eye and there no one can be
misrepresented. Ncxt time it might be Australia. How do I
know? We have things in our policy which are our policy and
our business, which somebody may disagree with, I would not
toler'a te having these things discussed by other people. I
would not tolerate being lectured by other people on what we
ought to do. Today it is the fashion to talk about racialism.
It is still the fashion to talk about colonialism so long as
you don't talk about Communist colonialism which is the greatest
and most aggressive colonialism in the world.
But who talks about the rule of Parliament, the rule
of Law? I could very well have a word or two to say about some
of these things like imprisonment without trial, if the drill is
that in the Comonwealth this is to be changed so that we're
sitting in judgment, Then I am bound to tell you I will have
something to say about that, and by the time I have said it, by
the time the answers have been made, there won't be any
Commonwealth, because we will all have expelled each other.
I dbn't mind if 99 nations at New York go on making
speeches asting two and a half hours each, and going into
Committee, and doing all these things this is highly
experimental. It may produce some good results, but what hurts
me is that this great Comnonwoaltl is being dragged into this
area of thought which s no relation to it. Nothing will ever
persuade me that you can identify the exquisite personal
relations of the Commonwealth with the debating society that
goes on in New York..... We have had a special family relationship
and if anybody wants to do something which converts the
Commonwealth with all its warmth and its intimacy, its capacity
for hostility within friendship, which is the great thing about
any family relationship, so that all this is gone then all I
can say is that, with great devotion to Her M1ajesty, it is a
sorry day for the Commonwealth Why can't we disagree with
the South African policy without pushing South Africa out, and
believe, me it was pushed out.
Harold Macmillan, the distinguished Pritie IJinister of
this country, with his colleagues and with myself, we worked like
horses to develop a communique which rould expose the criticisms
by other members of the Cormonwealth and the answer of the Prime
Minister of South A frica and, having exposed them, would then
make it possible for South Africa to remain within the Commonwealth
as a Republic as eery other Republic had. But I must tell you in
view of all this propa-ganda that goes on, that while I was saying
tc myself " Well I think this fixes it", one, two, three four,
five people got up and made it completely clear that they
wouldn't have this. They didn't want South iArica in, and every
convenient opportunity or inconvenient opportunity would be taken
to attack her. Well I eam not Dr. Verwoerd and I an not the
apostle of apartheid, though I have my own Ir. migration policy.
I an bound to say that in his placeI would have ] dt, certainly
not later than he did.
So don't let's ha-ve humbug, which I rather think is
one of the more serious offences in the world. The fact is that
in all these circumstances South Africa is out. Wlhat I am saying
to you is " don't let us -jump on the latest band wagon, let ; us 
4 1.7111
think of this Commonwealth of ours. What does it mean in
tolereacop,... iunderstanding, in points of contact, for us who
are Australians in a superb allegiance to the Throne? What
does it mean, if we think it means nothing, then it doesn't
matter... -Let it all go to the United Nations, but if wo think
it moans something, then I bog all of you to look back on these
events saying: Did we go wrong? Has what has happened strengthened
the Commonwealth? The answer to that question will depend on
whether you think our marvellous association depends upon
tolerance and kindness and understanding and the long view, or
upon the popular passion for denunciation. I don't need to tell
you that I don't feel good about this. But since my earliest days
in politics I have had a groat vision of what the Commonwealth
should stand for. I hate to think that it is blurred".
S* 21st March, 1961, 



Speech given by the Rt. Hon. ReG. Menzies at the Wool
Industries' " search Association on 21/ 22 March, 1961
Chairman, ay Lord Mayor, my Lord, ladies and gentlemen, I have
now successfully performed the first part of my duty. You don't know how
lucky you are, because sometimes when you invite a politically-inclined fellow
like me to come to open something and to unveil a tablet, he's liable to forget
to unveil the tablet. Which, of course, means that what he was doing remains
veiled in decent obscurity. So I've developed rather a prudent habit nowadays
of unveiling it first, so that, at any rate, you will all know what it's
about and whatever I may say.
" Now you have been told I've already dealt with two audiences today I
rather suspect that some of you were in the earlier ones this is a form of
torture which exists only in English-speaking countries. But at any rate,
this afternoon I'm back on the home ground; because it can't be too difficult
to speak about wool if you are an Australian, or even if you're a politician.
So your've been properly reminded that this is the greatest of Australian
industries. When the price of wool goes up, everybody smiles, the balance
of payments problem diminishes in intensity, treasurers beoome genial, you can
get a little more money for the universities, and if you have an election,
you wing " If the price of wool goes down, faces become long, Governments have to
do unpopular things, and you avoid having an election for as long as you
possibly oan So that, from my point of view, in that horrible sense, wool
is tremendously important. But, of course, to the whole national economy
of Australia, it means so much. And to the economy of your country, the
country of most of you, it means so much. And I suppose one of the troubles
that we have all been suffering from is this very fluctuation in the cost of wool,
which may, in some ways, be related to a fluctuating demand for wool. And the
makers of artificial fibres have an advantage, because the price of their raw
material doesn't fluctuate within the same violent fashion and they can
therefore attend to their costing a great deal more simply. We are familiar
with these problems; and, of course we are also familiar with some of the
oddities that bemuse political people and administrators. For a long time
Australian wool which, after all, is a very different proposition from
home-grown United States' wool, as everybody knows has been met at the
Customs' barrier in the United States by a high duty. Why? Nominally to
protect the native woolgrower. And if I may say so, quite bluntly, to
relieve him of the necessity of becoming a little more up-to-date, as a
woolgrower and as a wool-marketer. But in reality, of course, the effect
of the duty is to give a comfortable protection to the makers of artificial
fibres. " And these are matters that have to be attended to steadily so far as we
can on the political level by persuasion and otherwise. But in reality what
we have all begun to see more and more in modern times is this that wool
must not simply remain something that we proudly refer to as the greatest
of all fibres, but that it should meet the challenge of other things by the
most persistent research into its quality, into its use, into its treatment,
so that when it does meet competition, it will continue year by year to meet
it at an advantage, and not at a disadvantage*
" You know, there wasn't much said about research when I was a boy, it
was regarded as some mysterious ( I can always be relied upon to do that)
/ knooked over microphone/, some mysterious and rather malodorous operation
conducted in universities. It's only in my own time that the world of
industry, the world of business, has become aware of research, of the
pressing need for it, of the fact that without it no great industry will develop. 
-2-
I reumawber during the war, just about the time I was give the livery of the
Clothworkers' Compan~ y,, going over a great and world-famous motor engine
establishment it needs no advertisement from me and into their research
establishment, with hundreds of poeple employed, a vast series of factories
and workshops, all engaged on research not engaged in the production of
a single thing for sale at the time that's waht we were looking at as a
possible development for 1944. So that we think: ' If it comes out might be
coming right in 194 You kcnow, this kind of thing. And the result of this
enormous vision and concentration on research in today,, it stands pre-eminent
in the world. It is the first with the latest and the bent all the result
of spending, what I'm sure some people thought, a waste of money,, so mowe
years ago,
" Well. gradually we are beginning to approach these things in the right
way. And it is comforting to me to know that in the case of wool there is
this approach at, I think, all stages in the industry. You go down to a sheep
station in the Western District of Victoria and you stay for a weekend with
a man and whose name is 9, famous name ( Oh, dear) / knocked over niicrophone/
S ( Leave it out these modern inventions). You do down to one of these plaoes,
Wthe present owner has a name that has, for a hundred years, been connected with
that property it might be supposed that he has inherited the fruits of the
earth, and that he can have a good time and not worry too mch. TMe after
time the first thing he wants to tell you about is how imuch he has increased
the yield,, how many' pounds he has put into the fleeoe, what he has been
doing in the way of breeding and development, what he has been doing in
pasture improvement. All these things go on at that level, and have, of
course, enormously increased production of the cawitry.
" The great thing ( you refer, Sir, to perhaps one of the great
dramatic things is, of course as you know, was the treatment of our friend
the rabbit with myxomatosis. After this brutal business some people said,
there were others who complained that you could no longer prudently buy a
rabbit for a rabbit pie and admittedly that was a defamation but the
estimates that have been made as to what zg-momatosis with its successful
war on the rabbit it has meant to the Australian wool industry, are of course
as you know, fabulous.
" I believe that but for that, but for the attack on the rabbits, but
for this scientific approach to what had become a great national economic
problem, we wouldn' t have anything like the number of e1eep we have today,
and nothing like the quantity of wool production that we have today. People,
with modesty, estimate the difference that has been made at least œ 50 million
a year pounds, money, a year. And therefore on that side of research with the
kind of work that is done by on the field, so to speak,, the effects
have been enormous. But then, of course, C. S. I. R. O. has been working in
other fields. For a long time now we have been vaguely aware of the work
done by devoted scientists to discuss the problems of shrinkage in wool,
the problem of getting a pair of trousers for a humble decent citizen that
won't get baggy at the knees in side two or three days, permanent creasing
( These are not permanently creased, but the other pair I've got with me, out
in the bag, they're permanently creased). A very great advantage. And then,
Sir,, you are devoting a great deal of time and an enormous volume of ability and
knowledge to the-problems of the processing of wool at its various stages in the
course of manufacture. And whn all that is done, then we have to take the end
products of all these thingsm, we have to present them to the world attractively,,
have to add to their variety, to their qualitfl % e have to make them appeal not
only to rugged, masculine characters in the country, but to finely drawn women
in the cities who~ want a find, delicate, shizmmering piece of woollen material
that looks as if it almost might be silk. This is it. This is the problem
we have. And I am delighted, uiself, as the more or less temporary head of the
Aus~ tralian Governmnt, I'm delighted to ome once more into contact with an
aspect of this enormous task. 
-3-
" Interestingly enough, you know, when you try to do something for a
particular industry, it says: ' Yes, that's a very good idea you pay for it
you, the Government, you, busy bodies, you butt in on this matter, you find the
money'. In the case of wool, I must say for the wool people in Australia they
have shown at all times a very enlightened approach to this matter. They have
subjected themselves to levies, they have raised large sums of money for
research; they are aware of this problem, because they know that bnless this
problem is dealt with progressively, then the future of their industry, and
of the country, may be adversely affected. Now I was almost tempted, for a
moment, to says ' When these problems are solved'. I don't want to enco age
you into a belief that you have had a species of professional inmortality,
but I think you have; because I don't think that the problems will ever be
completely solved. These will be new problems arising every year; there
will be new aspedts of competition in the world which will arise; these will
be new things created in the world, that are a competitive kind. And therefore
the problems of wool will never be completely solved, anymore that the problems
of. human happiness and human health and human political satisfaction, will ever
be solved. This is a continuing thing. But the great beauty of it is that I
think we awake to it today; I think we are conscious of this problem, and
conscious of it as a continuing problem. And to me it is a wonderful thing
to recall that not only on sheep stations in Australia, in scientific
laboratories in Australia, but here in Leeds here in Great Britain somewhere
else in the field of presentation, all around the world people who are
concerned with wool are realising that their task is not a defensive one, but
is an agressive one. It's attacking something done. This is the very dynamic
exercise so far as the qoonomy of Australia is concerned and, I venture to
believe, in the long run in its various aspects so far as the economy of
this acient country is concerned.
We are never to become defensive. You know, people talk about Breat Britain
as " the old country" well, if somebody in Australia, like myself, refers to the
" old country" that's a glancing reference to the fact that Gran-Papa came from
there, you see, and Gran-mama that's very interesting s it's the old country.
( And I speak quite freely about my grandparents they went out quite freely,
themselves). But what you must feel troubled about is when people talk about
Great Britain aa " an old country" not as " the old country", but as " an old
country". Ah well so to speak they are old, tired they've had itl I've
heard it said, you know, quite a bit around the world. I don't believe it.
If anybody wanted disproof of it, he would need only to come here today. But
at the same time, it will become an old country, and heaven help many of us
W around the world if it does, it will become an old country, if it assumes a
sort of static position on various matters. If it forgets that the whole source
of its greatness was the dynamo that was in it right through the 19th century,
in particular, and before that. And therefore this must be kept alive, the
spirit of research; the spirit of looking for quality, the spirit of meeting
the world and meeting all compettion with the certain feeling that " these goods
are the best". And, in the long run, the best goods will defeat the secondclass
in the judgment of people who matter. I always remember that I had a
remote relative who was old enough to me my uncle and was then, I thought,
an imense age I think that he was probably a shade younger than I am now,
but he seemed to me to be incredibly venerable at this time and I said to
him " Where do you get your clothes Where do you get your suits built?" you see
he lived in Melbourne. He named the most expensive tailors in Collins Street
and he added, with a wry smile: " You know, Bob, I'm much too poor to afford
to have an clothes built anywhere else". Now you can broaden that out; this
is what we said about wool.
" We must persuade the world and we will, if we maintain quality, if we
raise quality and if we solve all these problems of the kind to which you are
directing yourselves. And therefore, if this goes on, Great Britain becomes
greater, Australia becomes greater in fact, you might become so great, you
people who are Englishmen, you never know that in due course, you might win a
Test Match against Australia at Heddingly. Sir, if I'm not occupying your
ftL sw 
0.4 as
tim too long, might I before I conclude what has been an over-serious
addes, perhaps by giving you one simple reminiscence of a Test match
at Heddingly in 1948. This was an introduction to a new aspect of English
character to me. There we all were I was sitting with the great; I was
sitting with the Lord Mayor ( not you, Madam, but your then predcessor)
and the people sat behind these little low ropes. ( We keep people outside
the pickets in Australia, you see). There is no argument then as to whether
it is a four or not you hear a crack or rattle on the pickets, you see.
But hen the poeple sit down 8 or 10 rows deep right down both sides of the
ground, there can be an argument occasionally, I suppose, as to whether it's
a 4 or it's a 6. Of course, we never argue and the last people in the world
to argue about cricket would be Yorkshiremen, of coursel) But one of our
fellows one of the Australian players hit a noble, towering 6 mid-wicket
( and it seemed to me to almst kill somebody three rows back) but it wasn't
clear to the uqpirewho was a celebrated Chester, who had as you know
lost an arm, and thereforehad a sleeve flapping. He was/ ficturesque, rather
dramatic character. And he went across in his long white coat unpires in
Australia use short ones, but they're cotton so it doesn't matterl He went
across and conducted a coronial enquiry among the people in that section of the
crowd t was really wonderful. I think he called witnesses and finally
decided it was for 6. But he wasn't going to signal 6 from the boundary
not on your life he went walking with great dignity right back to the
umpire's position and then signalled his 6. It could only happen herel
Don' t know what would have happened to him in Melbourne, but I know what
would have happened to him in Sydney! 



YorpuIIa 14 W SMAOLG-~" fd AI2) 6
I ' hyas a ~ wi* cay * w ibRvya õ ray* oue a~ toM t
' that ~ Oiw -Wwo Ueds sw bUM IA a eod-p3AW no 0A1poUix.. W* VM
theefr 1, Vcwhapal, abW. r~ t do= m at oe9, -beewie hrave
hfa~&amp; p tedp~$ Uc ivsig ht w~ d totirtno WVnOBrv_ t1wgyt
ionagisoI hvo. ha tmo iop e made zoi~ t as W aW I
MAI '" IXOSa1 1 = euor~ k , t hav MV rveort iT a NW twA
b* nr Ibere It's tm thuitlar .194i 1 e up hoetoc SW
Autta&amp; a pI0y EIZ1md at. fla= 1zgW. It G'tVsup ftat -M VJW~ t
oaalon sV eye me ;= od f~ or the firct tim witb the -bZ~ e1
beaat ~~ clty Ran]; and Vhat Oen I * am back~ yq aWWNAV
a1ftevwcm 1 maid cue -I 1me tbatv we~ o~ bul,~ zr
t tb b th" ift Isa t411 bU&amp;. an Jit fa
Ihaviii a O* dopic mo d iWtek a lot iot OX" 1Pe) ae, j .1-dn.' m
tbat ft ; w* atloatm s atdi 41al af Ur aU# dt hen to
Rteap It to-ehr Y2ou never~ itflOm Wiht ' W11. bAppten Uihmi you vash
Soethtzs oWm'. Biut. he om that ot~ ccaI i
ttiorougby 4z1W~ 4a03.901 vely oin, i1y I z
the tcb-: tt v-a u nUket rb W wcmu goat unipeetod-
Zy. TMi then Icrd'&amp;~ m yw cf Le{ e vwa a-1ttng # tt the
final ftyo, an4 I . O~ d-at une iuth fockord aiiboef ta vlm
t* iuco WO CAM to win. W ttio final day bu 1 sld to hiw
* you AM wtr'aL~ * Ml WUi UW* An h@ kd tM O
the next W hou cm tr ñ In the 1ueal 8--eth, I tzau nCat. Mt
I imamt we vo= 4 We~ Just emk vei to. jx-= e Ztbtt beftu~ o
we icc' t. oiWaO8. -Ar % hAA V-421 tapn tuia ymrp' .1 doie~ t kmii
almc e hve bee a f1ven a* pn'ttyr caem~ shook ft Ans'aUl .0118
your br. the ~ IIa
Ila on VOn * Ileasion# a few yewu ago* I: rWade ea P" a
ofthe Cit~ y of~ Loinicz aultha l the erxomQnios w-ftch attend. such+
az evento And 21ke cvewr n idioV, pa'over, 73~ it~ tO42
ma hing having Uer Arlven a2onZ the, 13tvanW In an Q Km
* cmb wi th evWe o m the coh wao'e evi down u thep
ecwbo ( Ift may hlivc Ibe5 the Giiezlt) IVaid+ i n di + XouM Aia
Vee~ at the kwpialta timeo; * The pfit tha-ia nnVw-T
dowzv I+ tb 03i I ? Iavoxu' t axwaugea thla* P~ erhaps tun. 10 robevo
It an-and$*; Am4 up'vt the Vuati Or thO CIOUh WIeM, OW
clo~ mke 0h; 4~ O ba 4 v1ai' Nit
a ook: 4 I who cmi~ ot t sawr a butmr I) wl don zhubbily
InoaOom I 3: 4~~ h t have a CefulA u WIfr wute tzvmh
Wrilk ' of clotbuorkar'A I t I -feovreed from t a As 4ñ did im i94
theyada m~ a cotomer.; -beciuo ' it t a -qp~ endt
appmpriate thinsI that there shcaML be -one mLrebX' V100 I4~ s
bitvuny eoin~ U 7 d your'g~ e Industry uAn ymp oocintv.
Aw~ n~ U thma thl~ ia, Thi to a qmz~ ad tW the vorldo
hIIt0Vin vwIh It bam-ma 2sablemleto be beetile,* EZV0J)
In tho. 3s oan + 4 va love 03OXIede that. It b ea
fas~-nala t -exa-ina * i iat bther# p uole+ a re deftic to rigbake
a docade two dw -c cz hadtIULtW# of the prot1mb~ on of
tiltte, almwy tatk4m onw frIl-ndW~ djs for~ gatW~; and*
tan#' wt take thOLFI tor 8r~ a! t64
R 2he Tyx* noess Acyal 
iVO am Muitte recent one or . tw 04 frtonCbip3
wu rcintu came; rW6 Will svdntaa cnM some Cat cation
Tvlds* cemnn trterws air4 ccnrcu ' fat wz1 iUt ool i
' dtskaif then tvten~ tsips efAMthen ntwUin e to tlmflae
cnt vuvfltg Giw IMnOrledge of amitt athor keepi en retvt2
oU centcete wit h ech Oter. Itt my be the ran on 4et~ i
0a -mnwho hat; 1tve' 91 1wOn 1ooz Una In csiable c-aigt
-tt I believes. sttfl, that thea ttma st nai hcpe, th~ e s'eutst
ios" z'AtiUCnM hope f, if Iw lal -ue tbhst nord,* the woz'd vrMas
! AX. t wfl Oi) VIMai Stiarm12 4y Cet 1bte to ItsI~ SU, we ge-swov
tireda t* it Wft Crow rO ti" 31 of nuthoxity WAn the
Najxb~ biitOtat tboy &amp; am. y With twa; Ut we with'dnw Into
oueileto; it we any: ': 1a24, U-it; It wot U21 re 1Uh bo
detwivlnz the0 Vw~ of,~ wozth$ 4# luthto. tsvht ifhWe Wovli Anz=
-na s~ jeTv, ew a n " OnouI~ q ints Pnalca.~ tn oavs*
attn C rrt OM MWa1 cntW~ mA1v1, 14,. Ve. y sja to s
reczv&amp; h-jra; * vsjd-Ua i to, lave the fl~ t= Mwzit We tz44win 3 tz
pwape 00I~ han Qcao Lnati'ra1 &amp;-tame tt naeh MMxar
eIara with ua. It lo ci doarMh to be ableo to zr4rcfr
V~ revae In WOi za, I tapa~ MA~ tea4o ge on and pvoaIM: rS,
3 heOTQ that as00Y= eaX MO ~ bvy MA afl OD 0 4W~ EMo iA
etzVca~ th. Hiowa1er etvong VO grew, to cannt boe* at " 0b Stnks
toa be as swcng-In vtcrainl te0-to .3Z ene or two cothw ez nztoS
Or. 4gcat gratl o of eotrtrios. Tht dowiv t mfttSp. hat ft
kweO t&amp; te 0f3 1nay V In eif In eeozra: y, In~ e= CxbattM
vie wOliA2 So tWa V, 4t24nuit Q. afl ty, In theI p~ wauit of
ec~ ecs~ in # knter we do* Ant lU4 u cmay ruit
= iestg, ts' so oan' t do It, whw anflt Theres a 1 t rifdo
ts Al4 tiuw thinga* ( Favo~ r weft lv&amp; to &amp; Vy tlat to a YcVrbztU-e
auOnce) ziw g01et eo " w-30e wttb ill the '-fldoze tQ " 4 IOt
to beomxe 5cpcate; tn* o sv not to iozaow* n awne i fljl I
cne vwet -oc w-noct &amp; nvonttzag It : Von yfour pwunao A , ow
wrte aGO&amp;-t tbo Itwpot-neM of Wzrncw In
vbmt I Wat vonmrci to~ call. the; hYewatbie ot t~ i
wwupvtiea, tUllpmt verbal iextev~ tks thaut one oees. Olaztm'c,
Wut, ta. t fie ethsswkl at Is tint c W ' firee iMas i t 1A
the atczch, Oade It~ Vhtt I M1tC benulxzu It LO en~ taa4. Ur thin
rich snue 00i f\ p! this fmVOIXASs &amp; madtvev Cor hcstflig And
ttsn thie ! aoefl~ ty ie W1owU ~ v~ n tso t
at~~ r~ c~ tiettV~~ T~ ohzoi n' h hi~ a% t hr ae to -p
YOU havwUtk w vow M1 aot the 1-atet t'Ustoew at themr
In~ thwg 101WAjg* u And so Io11Z as Z litre 1 hose VoD atflk a q
tamw for tA&amp; I cawflIn M~ wvM ifl0Mor In r-Ay oun, comstry. 



P. M. No. 12/ 1961
CONTRIBUTION TO INDONESIAN RED CROSS
Statement by the Acting Prime Ministers Mr. J. Mc&amp; wen
The Acting Prime Minister today announced that the
AustralianGovernment would contributefElO, O00 to the
Indonesian Red Cross for relief in disaster-affected areas
in Indonesia. Mr. McEwen said that severe damage had been caused
recently by a cyclone in the Tanimbar Islands and by
flooding in Western Java. In referring to these disasters,
Mr. McEwen expressed the sympathy of the Australian people
for the hardships and losses suffered by the Indonesian
people. Australian assistance was being given in the
form of medical supplies ( anti-biotics) valued at f10,000
to alleviate distress in the disaster areas and as a
practical demonstration of Australian interest in the
welfare of the Indonesian people as a whole.
The contribution of medical supplies, which
would weigh more than two tons, would shortly be
transported from Sydney to Djakarta by the Royal
Australian Air Force.
CANBERRA,
22nd March, 1961. 



OOMFRMn NO' V OP ORARY DMRUN ( W DOCTOR OF LAWS ( M U3
PRINE NMIUTR BY THE CHAJ$ CRUR9 THE PRInCES8 ROYAL,
AT UNIVERITY OF" LENS. ON 2US VAR( N, 1961-8P3U= BY
TE RT. HOW, R. G. MNZIBS
Your Royal lighrnses, and Chance"' o
Have 1I W daam. your permission to address this conglegation
without nW hat on? 1 know that Is very well established
that one addresses you capped. but a long life of politleal
spe@ h-fmkiflg has ijersuaded me never tc spea" with my hat ce
I don't know why# because somvetU-nes It might have been a
protection, when I was listening to that ! wre-thask~ nd and loso-than
trw. speech mde about me earlier tod. ay, nVy mind ran baox over
some of the occasions on which I've beeni given a degree not a
degwe0 that T ' d oarned in the nor. ia1 arduous fashion, but degrees
that have since been given to me sometimes I ' ve thought in a
rather light-hearted way. I didn' t know what I had dons fie
rdaensgerev er lgthtetm , a robtuint a ththeye awreo rldv. o ry Yaogu, r ee( atob lel ooakl l att hme e) s aynoau; wtohuelyd a'I
believe that I am a g'raduate of' ct~ ll or that I am a graduate
of Laval In Q~ uebeo where Indeed I made Vy speech, partly in
what I believed to be P'rench; but was regarded,, f subsequently
dieoovered, by the raench Canadians, to be a brilliant rendering
of one of the lesser-know dialects of the Arunta tribe in
Australia. I was on'-e ,' Iven a degree in Malta and I've always
remembered that one, beenuse Jlust at the last moment I was
presented with a long oath In Latin that had to be taken It
was a very long ano, it woulk~ i haive weighed heavily on rrW' coaciene
in any language, I t ran to about 20C~ % ords and I had no time to
discover what went on in Maltap whether you spoke In the old
pronunciation or the new, or In wha3t T call " law-court* Latin
which Is quite diffarint from any other. And I had to sk-the
VieemChancellor about It at the last moment the Vie-
Chancellor or any university being. the fount of all wisdom* lie
saidt ' 1 wouldn't worry about it, if I were you none of thai
will un. Ierotand It ainyhow. Mumble it'.
well, I'aam# here today of course I experenced, amcing
other things, a double pleasure. ' rho first to that you, yourself,
your Royal Iiighnonaa z'iecile over this University. Thisn Is a
wonderful thing, T think, for this i~ nimersity, And the seeand
i9 that your Vloe-Chanoellor has coat aore money ( or nW
Government , av money) than any other person now In this roam,
or for all I know now in the whole city of Leeds. Beeauase
not long after I came back into office after a well-deserved
JourntW in the wilaerness ( these things happen, you know) the
spirit moved me to have a look at the universities position In
Australia; and very unsatisfactory It was We haves unhappily,
not had as some American universities have had enmous
private benefactione. There have been some but not so ninn, and
the result In that the difference between the foom that are p&amp; 14
and what it woets to conduct the university beame gweateffiabd
ber ws sr heavily on the revenues of the State. Well, I've been
a Treasurer a~ self p and I know how difficult it Is to defeat
the Treasury In a straight-out contest. You mst let mes give
and greater/ 
this aftles to you 9 those of you wbe will semw~ boes
Pime Miaister or a miister for omethiaf Novo onS0 In
hea-emeglisemwith the Tes~ r row re b~ 10 IUeS.
Bulk you nost go about It oiwing1 you mast meek on WhM
from the flank you nMet ag thir atteRtiM In ethe
dlaeslein Zile. you got the cod work done In the direstim
thatr habe soles ted. This t tictlyv sWdmUl I
Wo~ nvtmat It to be gonorall known. And so haTIng looke
at the problem,# and having made up sW aind that, thov%* the
a % biltt self the Counvet of Australia# had s
dirot resposbility rot universities ezest tWe alvere
which was establishted in Canberra the time had om when we
must do sonaetbia, about it, Be I went o" t to Hnnland an
other inatters and# while he" e# t had a talk with airi Keith Uazay,
I Persuaded the then Chancellor of the . xehoquerv Mr. Hlarold
Uacmillan, to lot me borrow him for' a while. wAn I " neas the
Obaaoellor seemed very agreeable on that oceaslon . sst Anlim
to say: ' Certainly, qW dear follows whatever yma ask'" until~
of ecare, I realised that the more months tfAt Murray me out
of Eagland. the loss oppor'tunit~ y would there be of getting
reoumnudatioue in from1 University Grants Coiguisin, of which
he was the Chairean. And so I got Sir Keith Murray* I~ o
Sir Charles mIorrIs and than I got some distinguished mn ii
Australia aid established a Committee of enquiry, and it me
only just its it wias about to " o announced that I broke the neos
to the Treasury. A-* sn I &amp; ida t Ynxow what a shattering blow
these people would inf lict on ffs. Itere we were@ we had in miami
ways been Making grants to the Otates on university acounmt,
relatively smll grants totallInly perhaps up to a million or
a million and a half a year. AnW this Cordttes of disomn
people all Vice-Chancellors are dlisarmaing ( they have to be
they disarmt their opponlents carletely iiado a imgIfleault
report. I t raised tho priae that I would have to pay on behialf
of the Conunoalthg tran ( let us say) 3j -nillion, in 3 years,
to 21 million in 3 years. I took it to the Cabinet; we sat
all foorning, we, sat all the afternoon, we sat until midnight,
and by sheer exhaustion I got V. own way. And the 21 million
went down on the record.
Ra~ w this, you rmiih% think, was a great enough shook few
anyone to ousta&amp; in. But not at allI one of their reommuendations
was that we should a~ ppoint a Jaiversities CcnIsuseien of
our own, So we didj anid I picked outp oi' * ourse, the most
frugaly-minded non of standing that I could find in Australia*
AMd they have Just brought In their report for the second
TrIannium -the first# rernenber, was 21 million -this one Is
11I. There's a little moral In all this theres a moral, Ad
It's a good ome. Before the war the numbor of people mating
a Uiveseity traiin,-was not urilimited. Universities wmo
relatively smll. But sine this last war# what has been
happening here, has beew hao'pening in Australia as wall*
Thousands of people come. alons. 9 wanting to have University
training whether this Is due to Irrproved financial cicumstaowem
or whether it is due to a now conception of the need fow
higher training, both,, I needn't determine. All I know Is
that whzen Sir Charles was sitting on this Coim~ tte and wrift
a report@ only a few years ago very few estimaztes were mde
for them for future po,, ulm. tions, under-graduate populations In 
various univereltles. They've all. been falsified since*
It's quite clear that wherever someobody thought ' Well there'll
be 5CpGOC an: ergraiuates a oertain titse' there'll be
And if somebody t1hou'-ht thait there'l1l be 7U 000, at some time
there'll be 90, ' he demand iio risi,! so repidly. My own
University of Nelbourne ha., about 1J430 uncioxrgraduates in rWn
dajr and now has about VCOO. I t hus been found necesary~ ini
the ' Itate of ',' ietorla to establish i second university, knrown
an i: onash nivertmIty,, n'iiod &amp; a'tevth e -roat Austg'sllan general,
and that :" niversitj already hno wht you : niiqht call advanced
entries runznin;-in. very larg~ e fi-ures. Investigation is in
1hand about a thir-d. ' he Univeietity o' Jyaney le. now Lacmpanied
by wha; i was tht ivrnt of~ rwolo -y and Ia, no-. i a fu~ ll
UlnlverRity i'ew ' outli * alee. Anti ao you can go rouind
Aua: rali!~ aj. In: thIn enorttiou.; . lornnd=. It -, rsents :-an~ y
i'reat -roblonn, bccauiss tL create i i.' niveraity you r~ eed : nOre
than c: pital -LT~ jiin. and equi -iont those thinro
of' cc've Pin mntt ' in~ tns. tie L'ifr howt yro. need saaff Ono
0' % Lhu g. r* 341 L ,, roblt.-u;, o.. olit view, Ini how we are to
Cop) e W~ ith this~ vury , v'o~ or eu:. irv., o~ n for -iniversity
adavation, with t3achin: avv~ retn wve thirv. we can seo In the
. aturo. ) ltraeadc. io43 tisk! " 1QJ. th' 14n.. WO C: Af get them
1rioth r-coin vi.; s * tn p e, c.. re, 3, every now nifli then a
. Univavaity heve uni'i'n Itooli', J'Aveus itei. 1f by etting
eorieabody frol rP j~ av~ t t~ oibody iroi ., uzLtU_. ia, But
roally, the viul.~ o,' ; i in. :, iiiveiit.' telrcheru the
nense., a y oranco taW Loi,; 0111 inL in tur'n, will be
among the ; 7reit : 1L~ i fic. t rnowledgajq i , t J think,
even a i'* reate:-.; vobilan that, 41 nroblarm of brickse and !. vrtar,
and of, fin-iij&amp; thu K~ jor-; wit., wv! i) to ay iXor all tee things.
I don' t tt, h -k t. ata.. i dc feel 2-athe.-a:.: iulled
byr the utheu-. o ha~ ve in Aaz3t -tia ju~ st beg,, n, throug. h our
* ni1Ver&amp; 3tI0Et IJO a r,~ iI'( i8 LEtflintu the -Cuture
because lu m on;, it :. iotit of* our ' nivez'eitioo ar,, on
the 19th :(-ntury ' ioacl. Ahey i!-Ii ; tCO. L-An elorient of'
orthodloxy -: tlwat tJh-o:-i; it ias vevy t~ cCo thin,.-none of
us wilt o 1 tin at it bat ." erhuitna the ti:, io ha come when
the wh'olo ' tu ttu o" tertiaiy e-juentlon will havo to be divided
P9looku!: at In a new way; looko] at nrha. s Ina a Garica of
diffñ erenit typos o, icho; la, vv anivor. A tics ' or colleges, or'
wihatever they be, nd ; e . tP ktvIn-a look at that; and
I belie-vo, J tha, Y. eith * aWily 10 G0T1mtt4e itDC~ p Or
so ; tc coiilto a! 3L. Th. Jhui it# lcokini at it here*
h6ut TI on' t 01Ari LCo WeUPiY Yo0. On this -mitter, I merely
want to uay that i'ro-v own oii ; view, I've beeni iivlleged
tc have been : ri* ni i-tei-of ' ustralia. at a timie when so much
coula be jolu for. . uivaraitiau. 1 fa'iit confeseq proud of
having ndi t. nrwi e all have t, dL. 18 to
direct our -' inois ars to hov? c~ iL , iaintain tlis wroithp and
how tie o'* n , vilintain It im the hi * htlevel oil colln etre-ne.
Thoro Is nothln:! vioruo than a seck~ nd-rate liniveraity, unless
It be a 1, hird-rate omiversity,.' e -nust ail, at the highest
possible Btantiar. A&amp; a, anai tho Aront raon for that ie a great
il. tional ao well an individual, reason. Thu) Is a -" rotty hard,
Coo. tptitivo worltl. have a lot of' people in i t who all~ y
teohnolo.-, cal sill take an exrnple to ideas we won' t care
fr; anti i~ jeao, thrit rather frighten us# In tho Cfturo oV the 
wauld. Under all these circustances we imst Incesmingly oak*
up our minds9 that nothin' seord-rate will do* We = uat aim at
the beat* Ns won' t all achieve It,, but we ant all have the
oplportuaity of' achieving the bFAt In whatever field we "" be
engaged Lao I think that Is the great lesson of this VonA
this Poet-war world* You can' t at , oa'd to be seonmd-rate. 8Son
other country may be bigooe; some other couuntry my be rioher;
some other couintry maj hakve more bombs, more entlinees, or more
somuething; but IIn spite 01f a1. that, we you in yourointryp
I In mine am't afford to be second-rate; because it Is
(" wlity that is eounting? more and moro in the world. Thorofare
I regard this i-, roat Influx of atude3ntat this i" reat stirring of
demtand for hl", her education# as a c-ooo Viin,-, because to ins It
expresses that inn&amp; Anctive feeling ( we ad'o r'ather an ' InstinctivO
race), that inistinct~ ive fetilin.-that we -n be seoad-rate.
We -must do bottur. and better-, and better. It will be the duty
of efstemef ( no we cul~ l the-" for this ' urpoa.), it will
be the duty of staltc-orn Uc. -Oliy tt. eir !. art, It will be the duty
of the ' niversitico tharsielves to lay thoir iart. Neither of
them, wil., be a. hle to ' lay thzir irt tnlecat~ our people who
are in the long ruin o~ ur -inaters are iore; and More conscious of
the challenge and coneoloue of the iscet that that challonge
In ca~ ning i'iore '-articul. jily In placese this, in the univeroities
oif the t1; nlish-s3 ea. ir., world than perhaps in any other'
xI oid. And no, your : 7uyal Aii:! hnos, akrn( Chanellor, J ' i vory
proud to be here. J haven' t been In Leaids oinn-c 1948 when I
ca.. i-s here will be sur:) rised to Know) tco hz'Lve a lock at
the Test ' latch. ' 4nd It wvit a very -o olt-a be auty down
at Fea-Aingilsy. T -, itjChje. i thusq excltin,-Toat * atch with the
, reatest cil intorttrt .1.' izt on one occas~ ion durin:-It the Sr.;! Ish
cant~ xn a Ycrkshire-ign -ado n bow2lin -ohanro which I
uid1n't aineretand. ith atli -bt Ctalin, or deepaiw I walJcd
I At bac 1' ro-1 where i iattlng. und uncoanteml 1; erbort
., utl~ fe who winL iuttt,-in. to himself an It turnea) out
about thc a~ n -r-oblemn. I -iontion that ( not that I need tell
you wht,. orhert Lu1' e la, becau~ e ueli : hted to say
that as I lookced dora) cn -ohla audienice sittiriv in thin roomt
h i2%! is mrrnin5, tho f'irst faial'r face 1, saw was hie. 



P. M. No. 11/ 1961
FAREELL MESSA. QE TO LADY DUNROSSIL
The Acting Prime Minister plans to send the
following message to Lady Dunrossil on the morning of the
day of departure of the " Himalaya":
" My Ministerial colleagues join me in wishing
you on behalf of the Government and people of
Australia, a smooth voyage and a safe arrival.
Our hearts and our good wishes go with you.
John McEwen"
CANBERRA,
22nd March, 1961 



FOR PRT. SS AUSTRALIA IN SINGFAOR. E AiIR DISPLAY.
( Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McZwen,)
The Acting Prime Minister ( Mr. J. McEwen announced
today that Australia was to participate in an International.
Air Show in Singapore.
It has been organised by the Singapore Government
at the Paya Lebar International Airport from April 8th t. o
Anril 16th. Mr. McEwen said that Singapore played an important
part in Australia's air links with the rest of the world.. The
participation reflected the-importance which the Australian
Government attached to closer contacts between Singapore-and
SAustralia and the develo-ment of this major communications
centre. The International Air Show had been planned by the'
Government of Singapore as a highlight of its " Visit the Orient.
Year" project. It was the first large-scale aviation display-
. ever. held in South Last Asia.
Among visitors would be representatives of airlines
operating in South-East Asia and of Civil Aviation Departments
-of neighbouring couhtries.
Mr. McEwen said the Australian display would demonstrate
our advances in the commercial aviation and electronics
industries and in the production of aero-components and
equipment.. Features of the Australian pavilion would be
Two revolutionary cameras, designed and made in Australia for
S. installation in target aircraft and missiles and which have
been exported to the United Kingdom, United States, France and
Sweden; rockets and other instruments used in upper atmosphere
research at the Woomera Rocket Range, a model of'the TEE 
S. 2
visual glide path an important Australicn contribution to
world aviation safety which is now being tested at aerodromes
in Australia and the United States; a model of the Australian
pilotless jet target aircraft Jindivik which is also being exported
and a comprehensive display of aero-components and equipment by
leading Australian aircraft manufacturers.
Mr. McEwen sAid the Australian display was being
organised by the Department of Tr: de with the Co-operation
of the Department of Supply and aircr ft manufacturers.
These will also be a three day flying display in
which RAN and RAAF aircraft will participate.
Other countries taking part in the Singapore Air
Show were United Kingdom, United States, Indonesia, Hong Kong,
Malaya, New Zealand, India, the Netherlands and Ceylon.
26th March, 1961. 



61/ 011
STATEMENT AT S. E. A. T. O.
The following is a summary of a statement by the
Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, . t the opening public session of
S. E. A. T. O. Council on March 27th
SEATO is meeting at a very important time in the world's
history. For some time global war has been restrained by the
balancing of military power and feeling has grown that a great
war is improbable, except through an act of lunacy or error of
judgment. But absence of major war does not reflect a Communist
change of heart. They are deterred from major war by what the
free world possesses. They are more likely to move in other
channels. Peaceful co-existence is a rather agreeable expression
if your neighbour underst ands it as you do. Apparently Chinese
Communist conception of the term involves retention of the faculty
of physical aggression to enforce their political aims. Whether
that is so or not, it is still true that the absence of major war
may increase the risk of minor conflicts. It certainly increases
risks of internal subversion, infiltration and overthrowing of
Governments and institutions. The danger is even greater now
than a few years ago.
It is a very good thing that in relation to South East
Asia all of us meeting today, determined to resist Cormmunism,
should have the opportunity of putting our heads together and
considering how we arc to meet those-threats, not merely on the
great and spectacular scale, but in relation to these new methods
and these now risks.
The following is verbatim:
Mr. Menzies said: '! Of course, that is not the only
thing. Cormmunism is to be resisted not only by force of arms,
though we must not shrink from. that. It is also to be resisted
by the developed character of people, by the building up of their
own genuine belief in their owin freedom, by the improvement in
their own economy. It is to be resisted, as I said last year at
a Council Meeting in Washington, by doveloping a sense of
com~ iriunity which will translate the South-East Asia freaty
Organisation into a genuine community of self-interest, of selfreliance,
and of mutual trust,.
We meet here not only as countries that havo signed a
Treaty with each other. I believe that w.-e meet here as people
who are friends, who have courage, who have vision, who recognise
that on matters of detail they may have differences and must
have differonces, but that in total, and in the upshot, they
will be found of one voice and of one mind and, above all other
things, of one stout heart."
CANBERRA)
29th March, 1961. 



FOR PRESS.--295*
V. ANUFACTUErE OF MIRAGL FIGHTER TOR R A. AF.
Statement by the Acting
Prime Minister ( Rt. Hon.
J. PF. I cEwen)
The Acting Prime Minister ( Pt. Hon. J. F. McEwen)
announced this afternoon that Cabinet hac decided that the
Government Aircraft Far-tory woulc be prime contractor for the
Yrench Dassault Mirage Fighter for the Royal Australian Air
Force. He said that the Government had invited the
Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation to manufacture the engine
and the wing and fin for the fighter.
, ir. McEwen said that the wing and fin represented
about one-third of the work on the total air frame.
Canberra. 29th March, 1961. 



S. PRESS RELEASE: GENERAL NASUTION'S VISIT.
The Acting Prime Minister today said that the Indonesian
Minister for National Security and Chief of Staff of the Army, General
Abdul Haris Nasution, would arrive in Sydney on Tuesday morning,
18th April, and from there would travel to Canberra by R. A. A. F. Convair
for a ceremonial welcome. General Nasution would be accompanied by his
wife. Mr. McEwen also announced that the Indonesian Minister and Chief
of Staff of the Navy, Rear Admiral R. E. Martadinata, who had accepted a
separate invitation to visit Australia, would arrive at the same time
as General and Mrs. Nasution.
0 Their Excellencies the Administrator and Lady Brooks had
0 nvited General and Mrs. Nasution and Rear Admiral Martadinata to be
their guests at Government House while in Canberra.
Official discussions are scheduled for Tuesday afternoon,
18th April, and later in the day General and Mrs. Nasution and Admiral
Martadinata would attend a Reception given by the Indonesian Embassy.
That night there would be a Dinner Party at Government House.
On Wednesday, 19th April, General Nasution would make a brief
visit to the Royal Military College, and later meet the Chiefs of Staff
kmmittee. He and Rear Admiral Martadinata would attend a Cabinet
ncheon and before leaving for Melbourne they would visit the Australian
War Memorial and place a wreath at the Commemorative Stone.
0 In Melbourne His Excellency the Administrator of Victoria had
invited General and Mrs. Nasution and Rear Admiral Martadinata to stay
at Government House where there would be a Dinner Party on the Wednesday
night. On Thursday, 20th April, General Nasution would visit the
Department of Supply's Installations at Fisherman's Bend and later,
accompanied by Mrs. Nasution, would attend a Luncheon given by the
Government of Victoria.
In the afternoon, General and Mrs. Nasution are scheduled to
visit the Melbourne University and later to attend a Civic Reception
given by the Lord Mayor of Melbourne and Mrs. Evans. During the
afternoon General TNasution will visit Anzac House to meet R. S. L. Leaders.
/ 2. 
-2-
In the late afternoon, General and Mrs. Nasution and Rear
Admiral Martadinata will visit International House to meet Indonesian
students. That evening they will attend a Dinner given by the Minister
for Supply and Mrs. Hulme.
On Friday morning the party will leave Melbourne for Sydney and
General Nasution will then visit the R. A. A. P. Base at Richmond. In the
late afternoon they will attend a State Reception given by the Government
of New South Wales.
During the morning of Saturday, 22nd April, General and Mrs.
Nasution and Rear Admiral Martadinata will call on the Governor of New
South Wales and Lady Woodward. In the afternoon, the Minister for
* efence, Mr. Townley, will accompany General Nasution on a scenic tour.
On the evening General Nasution and Rear Admiral Martadinata will attend
a Dinner given by the Minister for Defence, Mr. Townley.
SThe Acting Prime Minister then went on to say that a separate
programme would be arranged for Mrs. Nasution for those occasions when
she would not be accompanying the General. However, Mr. McEwen said
that these details were not yet available.
Mr. McEwen also said that a separate itinerary would be
arranged by the Navy for Rear Admiral Martadinata and it was planned
' hat while in Melbourne he would visit the Flinders Naval Depot. In
Sydney Rear Admiral Martadinata would visit Naval Establishments at
* arden Island, Watson's Bay " Watson") and Quaker's Hill
" Nirimba"). It was proposed that Admiral Martadinata would
visit also the Royal Australian Naval College at Jervis Bay and the
Royal Australian Naval Air Station at Nowra. He was scheduled to leave
Australia on Wednesday, 26th April.
General and Mrs. Nasution were scheduled to leave Sydney on
Sunday, 23rd April, but would return on Wednesday, 26th April. That
afternoon General Nasution would give a Press Conference. He would also
meet R. S. L. Leaders. In the evening, he would/ leave Sydney with
Mrs. Nasution. f. eestua i.
Prime Minister's Department,
CANBERRA, A . CT, 29th March, 1961. 



SEATO " Appropriate action" in Laos
hr. Macmillan' s v.--eirs on 8th Africa
6outh ufrica.
Sir Roy Jeiensky J.. hite A'ustralia
Comonjealtia of Ni tions
South A frica and Comomnwalth
Australia's role in Neuj Guinea
Australia's position with Asia
Apartheid
Governor-General
Laos -32ATO agreement
-Jest New Guinea
SEATO Meeting in Bangkok
Icternal portfo-lio
Credit squeeze 
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES AT MASCOT ON THE
MARCH. 6
PRIME MINISTER: Anything I say that isn't right must be regarded as
talking in my-sleep of which I have had very little.
Shoot me!~ ( Laughter) I'd pay a handsome reward to a man
who would shout me and finish it.
dIell what do you want to know about?
QUESTION: First of all, Sir, could you tell us what SEATO
means by " appropriate action" if the fighting in-Laos
doesn't stop, as reported in this morning's papers?
PRIME MINISTER: You mean you want me to speculate about what may
happen in Laos and what might be done if so-and-so happens,
or something else happens. Oh, no! Not for meJ Not for
me., The whole point about the SEATO Conference was that
it reaffirmed the determination to take whatever-action
might be needed under SEATO. There had been a few
doubts, I think, in some minds as to whether it meant
business. I think this Conference resolved those doubts.
But as to what might need to be done under any given
circumstances, whether military or para-military, or
economic or whatever it may be, these are matters that
will be d. etermined from time to time by the Governments
concerned on advice from the Council representatives who
sit constantly in Bangkok. It is not just theoretical,
it's right.
QUESTION: 11ould you care to commaent, Mr. Menzies, on the
difference in view between yourself and Mr. Macmillan?
PRIME MINISTER: What are they? Do tell me; do help me by telling
rae. All I have had is ochoes of leading articles in
Australia. And as I was unaware of these differences I
would be delighted if you would tell me what they are.
Because Mr. Macrmillan and I, who are groat frien4s and
who have seen a lot of each other over these natters,
still don't know what they are. Could you tell me?
Thank you.
QUESTION: Mr. Macrmillan's staterient about South Africa differs
from your statemient which we have received in Australia.
PRIME MINISTER: Does it? In what way?
QUESTION: Your attack on the exclusion of South Africa was
quite fiery at the Australia Club.
PRIME MINISTER: And you thought his was less fiery did you? Well
this is a very odd kind of difference of opinion. He
sounded less fiery than I did. iVell if that is lhe only
difference between us you can put it down to my
passionate Celtic teriperament.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
QUESTION: Yesterday, Sir, Lord Casey, before he loft here
said that he considered that it was a good thing that
South Africa had left the Corrionwealth of Nations. Do
you think it is a good thing
I didn't hear what he said. I doubt rhether he said
Would you care to comment on South Africa's
withdrawal 
PRIME MINISTER: I think it is a great misfortune, a great
misfortune. I have said that repeatedly. I hope it has
reached hero. I think it is a groat pity that one of the
foundation members of the Cour. onwealth should be out.
And I think it is an even greater pity that a
foundation member of the Commonwealth whose citizens
have fought alongside our citizens in two wars should be
out on an issue which is primarily, whatever else you
nay say about it a matter of internal policy. Quite
frankly I don't like this idea that we are to question
each other's internal policies and on the strength of
our views about the internal policies of another
country, either nudge each other out or beckon bach
other in. This is not ny idea of the Comnonwoalth.
Q UESTION: Do you think it is a dangerous principle?
PRIME MINISTER: I do, I do. Undoubtedly.
QUESTION: Do you have any foolings, Sir, about Sir Roy
Welnsky's statement regarding Australia's white
Australia Policy?
PRIME MINISTER: I didn't hear him make a statement on Australia's
white-Australia policy. Sorry.
QUESTION: It was suggested that the white-Australia policy
of Australia and the apartheid policy were one and the
sane thing.
PRIME MINISTER:
PRESSMAN: PRIME MINISTER: s
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
QUESTION: Who suggested this?
Welensky and also some commentators
Welensky? Did he really? Well I didn't hear him
ay it. But what do you think about
But I didn't hear Sir Roy Welensky say it.
Some of the papers have said it
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, of course! The papers have said sonething!
Oh, dear now, cone comel What haven't they said?
Really, you nustnt take advantage of me in this way. I
an an innocent fellow.
QUESTION: Do you think things will be easier now in the
British Commonwealth of Nations now that South Africa
has left?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't, no.
QUESTION: You don't think there will be less embarrassment
now?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't. Indeed it is very interesting. There
will be some people who will now, as they havo indicated,
attack South Africa in the United Nations. A few people
have offered to move to expel South Africa from the
United Nations because of South Africa's racial policy.
But, oddly enough, the very sane people want to import
into the United Nations Cormunist China, which apparently
doesn't deny human rights. All this is too much for me.
I don't understand it. 
QUESTION: But Mr. Menzies was South Africa edged out of the
Commonwealth?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think that Dr. Verwoerd had the slightest
option on the final day. I will be making a full
statement about this in Parliament when Parliament
resumes. I will be delighted to. Aind people, so far as
I an concerned, will be completely at liberty, in
Parliament as well as out, to agree or disagree. But
I shall make the whole of my own views quite plain. But
if there is one thing that is quite certain and after
all I was there and no newspaper reporter was it is
that Dr. Verwoerd had no option but to withdraw his
application.
QUESTION: Can you explain why?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course I can explain why. Suppose you, having
agreed to a form of corunique which stated the criticisms
quite fairly and the answor quite concisely, suppose you
had agreed to that, and then you were told by Prime
Minister after Prime Minister that he would never let up
until he had got rid of you, would you remain? Of
course not! I must say that I thought the gentleman was
very patient I would have left about two rounds earlier.
Of course he had no option but to go. And if what is
said leaves you with no option but to withdraw your
application, well you can use whatever headlines you like
about that, but we all know what it means.
There was a fantastic story circulating in a
section of the aiglish Sunday press to the effect that
after everybody else had agreed to the communique Dr.
Verwoerd attacked the other members. That is completely
untrue. Dr. Verwoerd had agreed to the corvmunique. I
thought the whole problem was over. So did Mr.
Macmillan, with whom I am supposed to have great disagreement.
I remember after that adjournment he said to
me, " It is all right; Verwoord has agreed to the
cor. miunique." " Well' I said, " this is splendid.. Then our
problem is over." And when Verwoerd had indicated that
he agreed, and Mr. Macmillan had confirried that and
announced it, then it was and then only that certain
other Prime Ministers indicated that this was no good and
it was then, for the first time, that Dr. Verwoord said,
" Well I must consider ry position," withdrew for a little
while, considered his position, came back and said I
thought most courteously, because he is a man of outstanding
courtesy and dignity, whatever you think about
his policies he is that kind of man he cane back and
said, " Well, all things considered I must withdraw my
application." Now that was the fact of it. This story I wish
people did not publish stories that can only be got from
lying sources. Because this happened to be a , rivate
meeting, therefore no story could be got with honour from
anybody. But that story ras completely untrueø
QUESTION: If this principle is carried to its logical
conclusion, could it wreck the conference if members were
asked to sit in jud;_ ment on one another?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think I have made this clear. I think it
would be a terrible thing wcre meetings of Prime
Ministers to become courts either of morals or of
justice or of whatever it may be, sitting in judgment on
each other. We have lived for many years by not sitting I 
in judgoent on oach other. Nobody supposes that I am
responsible for the political policies of Ghana or the
racial policies of some other country in the Comnonwealth.
Of course not until this time. I think it is
a great pity. I think it alters the character of the
Couionwealth. Perhaps I an out of date. Perpahs this
is a bettor kind of Connonwoalth. Well that is a matter
of opinion, but it is not my idea.
QUESTION: Do you think this could lead to Prine Ministers'
censure at future meetings about our role in Now Guinea?
PRIME MINISTER: Why not? Once the door is opened, how do you close
it? And if the door remains open, then are we to
understand that our policies, enlightened as they no
doubt are in Papua and New Guinea, won't be exposed to
examination in a Cornonwealth mneting. Our innigration
policy a policy desined to save Australia from the
Smuth African problen, don't forget, and therefore a
great policy for Australia is this to be brought up?
I don't know. All I : now is that if these natters if
this becomes the practice, then the Connonwealthwill
convert itself into a debating society, into a rather
strange forun of judg-ent and decision and, under those
circumstances well, you nay tell ne that it will
endure but it won't be the Cor. onwealth that I have ever
thought about, or known.
QUESTION: Do you think that by S. outh Africa going from the
Connonwealth this will put us into a nore difficult
position with Asia than if they stayed in?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, that is all a matter of opinion. Look you say
" a difficulty with Asia". There is a great disposition
to assume that all Asian countries think the sane. They
don't, any nore than all European couhtries think the
same. Don't fall into that error. I would not
undertake to say that there was an Asian opinion on the
matter of our innigration policy. Tungku Abdul Rahran
has repeatedly said, publicly, that he thinks it is all
right; it is our business, we have the right to do it.
Others nay have another view. Not one of t'en has ever
criticised the policy to ne. The criticism of our
innigration policy is chiefly confined to a few
itinerant Australians and a few gontlemen in Australia,
including one or two on the press.
QUESTION: If that be so, Sir, why was it necessary to raise
the possibility that it nay be criticised in the future?
PRIME MINISTER: But isn't it obvious? Isn't it obvious? If you
can criticise the racial policy of one country the
internal racial policy and put such pressure on that
country that it leaves, why cantt you criticise the
racial policy of another country? I mean these are very
fine distinctions. Nobody raised that natter, but I did
myself. I did nyself. I said: " Where does this process
end?" because I feel very strongly about this business of
butting in on the donestic policy of another country.
And I would like you all to renmeber this. Apartheid,
separate development there is the choice, you develop
the races separately or you develop then by a process of
integration. Integration is a pretty new doctrine, don't
forget, pretty new this is post-colonial integration.
But that is a choice of statesranship and this has been
the policy. 1 don't agree with the policy. Now that it
is all out, I've said so. I didn't nake public comnents
before. I don't agree because I think that the nore it 
QUESTION: succeeds in raising the level of the Bantu the more
disastrously will it fail in the long run because he
won't be treated as a second-rate citizen, he won't be
pushed off the footpath and I think that the end of this
policy is disaster. But that is a problem of judjient.
All I know is that I have attended as many Prime
Ministers' Conferences as anybody else in history and
until last year I had never heard it mentioned, although
the policy bejan with Jan Smuts.
Surely, Sir, it isn't so much apartheid being
directly criticised as the administration, things like
Sharpeville
PRIME MINISTER: ' Things like Sharpeville.'' Is that the only incident
that you know of in which people have been k1illed?
Of course it was a shiocking incident. Of course Langa
was a shocking incident. But the people in London who
stood around talking about Sharpeville and Langa, I
didn't hear a word out of them about the massacres that
occurred in the Congo. Not a word.' Let us be fair on
this matter. Don't let us be too political. If we are
going to be humane, let us be humane all round.
QUESTION: But shouldn't we expect a better standard of
conduct from a foundatin member of the Commonwealth?
PRIME MINISTER: Of course, of course.' But was the Government of
South Africa responsible for the shooting at Sharpeville?
Did the Government order the shooting? Do we know that
yet? No. Well, I think we should wait until we know.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies is there any possibility of you saying
anything about a new Governor-General?
PRIME MINISTER: No, none.
QUESTION: There is a rumour in Canberra
PRIME MINISTE: I'm sure there is.( Laughter)
QUESTION: There is a rumour at the moment that Lord
Carrington could be the man?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, you disappoint me. I thought the rumour would
have been that I was going to be. Oh, what a pity. That
is a blow to my ambitions. There is no appointment yet.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE
QUESTION: re It was reported, Sir, that you made
commendations to the Queen? certain
iR: I'm sure it was. I have read reports of every
conceivable kind.
Is it true?
My conversations with the Queen, my dear fellow,
are private until they produce a result.
When will we know?
Ti: I don't know. As soon as possible.
Mr. Menzies did Australia make any offer to send
forces to Laos if they were needed in the agreement
under SEATO? 
PRIM4E MINISTER: No occasion arose for people to make offers. The
SEiTO organisation is set up under a treaty. The
obligations are set out in the treaty. ' Je affirr: med on
this occasion our obligations under the treaty.. And I
imagine that the resolution has now been published,
has it? Well that contains with precision, the results
arrived at by all of us after a day and a half of
constant discussion. I won't add to it because if I
added to it I night subtract from it.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEl
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEI'
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTEF
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER
QUESTION: Did France raise any objection to the resolution..?
Oh, now look, you don't think I an that kind of
fellow do you? You want to get the lowdown, do you, on
the discussions in SEATO. You won't ; et them from me.
Sir do we support the Boun Oum regime or do we go
along with the British in hoping for the return of the
Souvanna Phouma regime?
1: There is nothing to be added to what I haye said
about this statenent on Laos. There it is. It speaks
for itself. Did you havc any discussions on West New Guinea
when you were in London?
Oh, yes, in an occasional way, yes.
Then you don't think it is an important vital
issue at the moment?
R: Does that follow? I think it is a tremendously
important issue, but I did not go around London t4 king
about it all the time. I had talks in the relevant
places. Did you meet Dr. Luns?
Oh, yes.
Did the question of West New Guinea crop up then?
Oh, yes. You nay be perfectly certain that whenever
Dr. Luns and I meet that question crops up.' I mean
that is a reasonable proposition.
But you have no statement to make on the matter?
No. Except that the policy that we have
repeatedly stated about West New Guinea stands
unaltered. Did you get the impression, Sir, at Bangkok, that
the member nations of SEATO were as strong as ever
against the Comm] unist menace?
Stronger, stronger. I am perfectly certain that
we cane out of this conference with the mnone:' nations
stronger on that matter if they needed to o
stronger than before. SEATO is more powerful and
well-knit and significant today than it ever was before.
I ari sure of that.
Sir, do you still intend continue as Minister
for Ecternal Affairs in view of the increasing world
problems and the strain it riust impose on your time?
i 
0 7.
PRIME MINISTER: 4ell, I don't know, I don't know. There seems to
be a somewhat strange idea that the Prime Minister is
not worried about external affairs, but a Minister for
External Affairs is. I assure you that that is not
right. I am not aware that I do any considerable ariount
more now that I am Minister for Ecternal Affairs than I
did as Prime Minister. Prime Ministers read the cables,
you know, every day. They always discuss the high-level
policies that emerge. I an not anxious to duplicate my
work, but I will change this position as I see an
opportunity and when it proves convenient. But I think
it is easy to exaggerate the idea I notice it is
exaggerated in certain quarters that I am trying to do
two men's work all of a sudden. I don't mind that, but
after all, Senator Gorton does an awful lot of the work
in External Affairs. It is rather offensive to him to
say that his work is negligible. He does a very great
deal of work, so I an not doing two men's work. I am
doing the work of a man and a third. Well, perhaps that
is a mistake. I don't know. I will get around to it.
QUESTION, What about our internal problems, Sir, regarding
the present credit squeeze?
PRIME MINISTER: Well since I left the plane, I have had no
opportunity of looking into that matter.
QUESTION: But you must be kept acquainted with what is going
on here in Australia during your trips away?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I have had one or two cables, yes. But you
are going to ask me now to make a cormient on what has
been happening in Australia while I have been away. No,
I won't take on thro3e men's work. Two men's work is
enough.
With the complinents of
R. C. Maley,
Press Secretary to the Prime Minister. 



61/ 008
MEETING OF COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS
The attached is the official text of the Communique
issued at the conclusion of the Meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers
in London on March 17th, 1961.
It replaces
immediately following
Alterations
paragraphs 3( f) and 7 the text issued in Canberra on March 18th, 1961..
the receipt of cables from London.
have been made on page 2 of the Communique and in
of ANNEX 1, and these have been underlined.
From the Government Public Relations Office,
Canberra.
April 6th, 1961 
MEETING OF COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS
FINAL COMMUNIQUE MARCH 17th, 1961
The Meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers was concluded to-day.
Pakistan, Ghana and Cyprus were represented by their Presidents. The other
Commonwealth countries were represented by their Prime Ministers.
It had been agreed that on this occasion the Prime Ministers would
concentrate their main attention on a limited number of specific problems which
are currently of common concern to them all namely, disarmament, the structure
of the United Nations and certain constitutional problems affecting the
Commonwealth itself. At the outset of the Meeting, however, the Prime Ministers
held a general review of the international situation as a whole, in order to set
these particular problems in the perspective of current world events. They also
considered, in the course of their Meeting, recent developments in the Congo
and in South East Asia.
The Prime Ministers re-affirmed the support of their Governments
for the efforts of the United Nations to restore order in the Congo and to
secure the independence and integrity of the Republic. They deplored outside
intervention in the Congo and recognised that many of the problems which had
arisen were due to such intervention. They considered that the United Nations
forces in the Congo should be strengthened and that the Security Council
resolution of 21st February should be fully implemented.
The Prime Ministers noted with concern the situation which had
developed in Laos. They expressed the hope that the parties would be able to
reconcile their differences, that intervention from outside would cease, and that
Laos would be enabled to enjoy an indepeRdent, neutral and peaceful existence.
The Prime Ministers held a full discussion on the problem of
disarmament. They recognised that this was the most important question facing
the world to-day and considered that a favourable opportunity was now at hand
for a fresh initiative towards a settlement of it. They agreed that the aim
should be to achieve general and complete disarmament, subject to effective
inspection and control, on the general lines indicated in the statement in
Annex 1 of this communique. They recalled the resolution on general and
complete disarmament which was adopted unanimously at the 14th session of the
General Assembly. They agreed that every effort should be made to implement
this resolution by agreement between the major powers, and that further
negotiations for this purpose were necessary. Certain proposals designed to
promote such negotiations have been put by various countries before the United
Nations. 
The Prime Ministers expressed their hope that the negotiations on the
cessation of nuclear weapons tests, which were due to re-open at Geneva on 21st
March, would lead to the early conclusion of an agreement on this subject.
Such an agreement, apart from its importance in itself, would provide a powerful
impetus towards agreement on disarmament generally.
The Prime Ministers considered the various proposals which have
recently been put forward for changes in the structure of the United Nations
including, in particular, the structure of its Councils, the position of the
Secretary-General and the organisation of the Secretariat. They recognised
that such changes could only be made with general consent. They agreed that,
whatever adjustments might be made, it remained vitally important to uphold
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and to preserve the
international and independent character of the Secretariat. They further agreed
that members of the Commonwealth shared with all nations a fundamental common
interest in maintaining the integrity of the United Nations as a force for
orderly political, economic and social progress throughout the world.
The Prime Ministers also discussed certain constitutional
questions relating to Commonwealth membership. The conclusions reached were
announced in communiques issued on 13th, 15th, and 16th March relating,
respectively, to Cyprus, South Africa, and Sierra Leone. The text of these
communiques is reproduced in Annex 11. 
ANNEX 1
STATEMENT ON DISARMAMENT
Aim
S 1. The aim must be to achieve total world-wide disarmament, subject
to effective inspection and control.
2. In view of the slaughter and destruction experienced in so-called
" conventional" wars and of the difficulty of preventing a conventional war,
S once started, from developing into a nuclear war, our aim must be nothing
less than the complete abolition of the means of waging war of any kind.
Principles 3. An agreement for this purpose should be negotiated as soon as
possible, on the basis of the following principles
All national armed forces and armaments must be reduced to the
levels agreed to be necessary for internal security.
Once started, the process of disarmament should be continued without
interruption until it is completed, subject to verification at
each stage that all parties are duly carrying out their undertaking.
The elimination of nuclear and conventional armaments must be so
phased that at no stage will any country or group of countries
obtain a significant military advantage.
In respect of each phase there should be established, by agreement,
effective machinery of inspection, which should come into operation
simultaneously with the phase of disarmament to which it relates.
Disarmament should be carried out as rapidly as possible in
progressive stages, within specified periods of time.
At the appropriate stage, a substantial and adequately armed
military force should be established, to prevent aggression and
enforce observance of the disarmament agreement; and an international
authority should be created, in association with the United Nations,
to control this force and to ensure that it is not used for any
purpose inconsistent with the Charter. 
2.
4. On the basis of the above principles, it should be possible, given
goodwill on both sides, to reconcile the present differences of approach
between the different plans put forward.
Negotiations The principal military powers should resume direct negotiations
without delay in close contact with the United Nations, which is responsible
for disarmament under the Charter. Since peace is the concern of the whole
world, other nations should also be associated with the disarmament negotiations,
either directly or through some special machinery to be set up by the United
Nations, or by both means.
6. Side by side with the political negotiations, experts should
start working out the details of the inspection systems required for the
measures of disarmament applicable to each stage, in accordance with the
practice adopted at the Geneva Nuclear Tests Conference.
7. Every effort should be made to secure rapid agreement to the
permanent banning of nuclear weapons tests by all nations and to arrangements
for verifying the observance of the agreement. Such an agreement is urgent,
since otherwise further countries may soon become nuclear powers, which would
increase the danger of war and further complicate the problem of disarmament.
Moreover, an agreement on nuclear tests, apart from its direct advantages, would
provide a powerful psychological impetus to agreement over the wider field of
disarmament. 8. Disarmament without inspection would be as unacceptable as
inspection without disarmament. Disarmament and inspection are integral parts of
the same question and must be negotiated together; and both must be made as
complete and effective as is humanly possible. It must, however, be recognised
that no safeguards can provide one hundred per cent protection against error Or
treachery. Nevertheless, the risks involved in the process of disarmament
must be balanced against the risks involved in the continuance of the arms race.
9. It is arguable whether the arms race is the cause or the result of
distrust between nations. But it is clear that the problems of disarmament and
international confidence are closely linked. Therefore, while striving for the
abolition of armaments, all nations must actively endeavour to reduce tension by
helping to remove other causes of friction and suspicion. 
ANNEX 11
CYPRUS Communique issued on 13th March, 1961
At their meeting this morning the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
accepted a request from the Republic of Cyprus for admission to Commonwealth
membership. They invited the President of the Republic to join the Meeting.
SOUTH AFRICA
Communique issued on 15th March, 1961
At their meetings this week the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
have discussed questions affecting South Africa.
On 13th March the Prime Minister of South Africa informed the
Meeting that, following the plebiscite in October, 1960, the appropriate
constitutional steps were now being taken to introduce a republican form of
constitution in the Union, and that it was the desire of the Unibn Government
that South Africa should remain within the Commonwealth as a republic.
In connection with this application the meetingialso discussed,
with the consent of the Prime Minister of South Africa, the racial policy
followed by the Union Government. The Prime Minister of South Africa informed
the other Prime Ministers this evening that in the light of the views expressed
on behalf of other member Governments and the indications of their future
intentions regarding the racial policy of the Union Government, he had decided
to withdraw his application for South Africa's continuing membership of the
Commonwealth as a republic.
SIERRA LEONE
Communique issued on 16th March, 1961
The Prime Ministers noted that Sierra Leone would attain
independence on 27th April, 1961.
They looked forward to welcoming Sierra Leone as a member of
the Commonwealth on the completion of the necessary constitutional processes. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
( THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES)
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
TUESDAY, 11th APRIL, 1961
OVERSEAS VISIT 1961
What I am about to say will cover some of the more important matters
with which I was concerned da~ ring my recent overseas journey.
On my way to London I had the advantage of meeting both President
Kennedy and the new Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk, in Washington. Our
conversations were quite extensive, but of course private. But it is, I
think~ proper to say that the new President has a most alert interest in
Australia and its problems. In particular, we discussed the problems of
S. E. A. T. O. and LAOS, and the relations between the democratic world and the
Communist powers. I told him about our policies and activities in Papua
and New Guinea and about the position of West New Guinea. I naturally
seized the opportunity thus presented of making a comprehensive series of
remarks along lines which are familiar to members of this House.
I hope it will not be thought an impertinence if I say that nobody can
fail to be impressed by the liveliness of mind, vigour of approach, energy and
desire for results, and forceful personality of the new President.
The atmosphere of our meeting was warm, friendly, and helpful.
My clear belief is that Mr. Kennedy will not rush to conclusions, that
he will be at pains to ascertain the facts, and that when he decides the
decision will be his. I subsequently saw a good deal of Mr. Rusk in Bangkok,
where, with our other colleagues, we worked in close consultation with most
fruitful results. In my opinion, Australia can regard the new Secretary
of State as a very able thinker and negotiator, and as a good friend to us.
I thein proceeded to the Prime Ministers' Conference in London.
All of the Prime Ministers who attended that Conference have now returned to
their home lands, and most, if not all of them, have given their account of
what went on. The Prime Minister of New Zealand and I are later, for we
both attended the S. E. A. T. O. meeting in Bangkok. It is now my right, and,
more importantly, my duty, to make my report in the Australian Parliament,
on its first sitting day after my return. 
2.
What I have to say will fall into three parts. I will first say
something about the disarmament sections of our London communique, a
document which I now formally table for the information of Honourable Members.
I will then speak of the events concerning the imminent departure
of South Africa from the Commonwealth; an event of great historic importance,
on which I will speak quite frankly, but, I believe, with moderation.
Finally, I will briefly discuss the meeting of the S. E. A. T. O.
Council of Ministers, a meeting largely concerned with the current situation
in LAOS and the attempts now being made to secure a fair and peaceful settlement.
* Turning to disarmament, there are several comments which I would like
to make upon the statement of principles to which we agreed and which appear
in the annex to the communique. But before I do so, let me say that this
overshadowing problem of disarmament is of crucial and urgent importance.
It touches the hearts and minds of all men and women. We therefore devoted
great attention to it. Against this background, these are my comments.
First, disarmament resolutions can give rise to false hopes unless
they are immediately accompanied by action, with concurrent effective inspection
and control.
* Second, nuclear and " conventional" armaments must be dealt with
simultaneously so that at no stage will any country or group of countries
obtain a significant military advantage.
Third, expert consultations must take place during the currency of
political negotiations for a treaty, and should be, in their main aspects,
concluded before any general treaty. To make general declarations about
disarmament at a time when the techniques of inspection and check had not been
worked out or agreed upon would be very dangerous. The Communist powers
would retain full control of their own forces, while in democratic countries
recruiting would tend to disappear, and the public support for defence
expenditure would, on the general promise of disarmament, tend to weaken.
There would, I imagine, be great practical difficulties in securing, by
inspection, the abolition of small arms and other " conventional" weapons in a
vast country with authoritarian control oyer the movements of people and the
reporting of news. Such difficulties must be provided for as part of a treaty,
and not left to subsequent negotiation.
Fourth, we must consider with care the implications of the clause
" All national armed forces and armaments must be reduced to the levels agreed
to be necessary for internal security,." Some nations may claim that,
having regard to their population, territory, and social circumstances, 
3.
comparatively large " forces and armaments" are needed for internal security.
Others may need very little. Yet armed strength is relative, not absolute.
The threat of war may well continue on a reduced level of armaments, unless
those armaments, at that reduced level, provide a reasonable balance which
will discourage aggression.
Fifth, assuming as I do that the processes of negotiation, in the
full sense that I have described, will be lengthy and obviously difficult, I
would wish to see a start made with one matter which, if it could be solved,
would do much to create a new and hopeful atmosphere. I refer to the
proposed ban upon further nuclear tests. The nuclear powers have already made
some progress in this field. There is no reason why, with goodwill and good
human sense, success should not be achieved. With nuclear weapons confined as
they are to-day to the control of a few powers, the danger of nuclear war is
reduced. Should more and more nations come into the field, the dangers of
irresponsible use would be materially increased.
There are many other aspects of this vast problem which deserve the
consideration of this Parliament. All I have tried to do at this stage, and
in a brief compass, is to indicate afew matters of what I believe to be of
singular importance. On the question of South Africa and the Commonwealth, I am indeed
sorry that I cannot be as brief as I would wish, During the proceedings in
London there appeared every day, in some newspapers, so-called reports of our
deliberations which were so false as to be absurd; some of them no doubt found
their way to Australia and may have affected many minds. It is therefore
necessary, while not attributing particular views to particulat Prime Ministers,
to put the record straight.
South Africa, having decided to become a Republic, formally applied
for permission to remain a member of the Commonwealth. On the precedents already
established in the cases of India, Pakistan, Ceylon and Ghana, there could be no
technical ground for refusal. But some, not all of the Prime Ministers
indicated that, as Dr. Verwoerd had already indicated his willingness on this
occasion to engage ( under a later item) in a full discussion of South Africa's
racial policies, they would prefer the question of continued membership and
the question of racial policy to be discussed together. This ( though
Dr. Verwoerd clearly desired that the question of continued membership should
be first determined) was accordingly done. The debate was full, frank, and
courteous. However wrong we thought his policies, nobody at the London
conference could or did challenge Dr. Verwoerd's own sincerity. 
I pause here to say that this debate having occurred, and there being
now no secret about the opinions expressed by others, I feel relieved of my
previous inhibitions about public statements, and will therefore, before I
conclude, state my own condemnation of apartheid, and my reasons categorically.
At the end of this discussion in the conference, a communique was
drafted, after considerable debate, and after various suggestions and amendments,
I took an active part in the drafting. The broad nature of the draft
was that we first set out that we saw no technical constitutional ground for
refusing the application, but that we had debated, with Dr. Verwoerd's consent
on this occasion, the matter of racial policy. We then went on to summarise
the criticisms that had been made, and the nature of the replies made by
Dr. Verwoerd. We then concluded that, notwithstanding those replies, we
adhered to our criticisms.
There were things about the draft which Dr. Verwoerd did not like.
He availed himself of an adjournment to consider whether he could accept it.
I can say for myself that I believed that if Dr. Verwoerd could accept
the draft, the issue of membership would be decided in his favour. Indeed,
I thought this was the reason for the adjournment. After studying the draft,
Dr. Verwoerd saw Mr. Macmillan, and said that, with some possible verbal and
minor amendments, he would accept the draft, thus making it a unanimous record.
On our resumption, Mr. Macmillan announced this with, I thought, some natural
satisfaction. I say quite confidently that both he and I thought everything
was clear; that the effect of agreement upon the communique would be that
South Africa stayed in.
It was at this closing stage that several of the Prime Ministers
disclosed a final line of attack. Two wanted the communique to conclude with
a declaration that South Africa's policies were incompatible with membership of
the Commonwealth. Another agreed, and added that he reserved the right to move for
expulsion, or to withdraw his own country. Another stated quite frankly that
he would attack South Africa's policies and membership at every possible
opportunity. I need not elaborate. There could be no mistake about the
intensity and sincerity of the views stated. As the discussions proceeded, it
became clear to me that, unless South Africa changed its policies, a considerable
section of the Prime Ministers wanted South Africa out. Speaking for myself,
I wanted it in, for the reasons which I will state a little later.
Once more Dr. Verwoerd withdrew to consider his position. On his
return he said he felt he had no option but to withdraw his application. He
made a few pointed comments on policies in some other countries, but he accepted
the inevitable. 
Technically Dr. Verwoerd w~ ithdrew. -But in substance he had to
withdraw unless he was prepared to depart from policies which however criticised
are the settled doctrine of his own Government.
In a section of the Australian press a great effprt is being made to
show that on these matters I am at loggerheads with Mr. Macmillan, and that it
follows that I must be wrong. This is indeed a curious attitude for Australians,
but I will devote a few minutes to dealing with it. I have now studied very
carefully the Hansard record of Mr. Macmillan's speech in the House of Commons
on March 22nd, in order to ascertain what differences of Yvleiwthere may be.
1. Mr. Macmillan said " There was no question of the expulsion of South
Africa, for it became apparent to Dr. Verwoerd himself that he
could not serve the Commonwealth or help its unity and coherence
in any other way except by withdrawing his application."
I have myself stated the facts in their sequence, and what I regard
as the inevitability of Dr. Verwoerd's withdrawal. . The House will
make up its own mind as to whether there is here a difference worth
prolonged debate.
Indeed, I note that in a speech by Lord Home, recently circulated by
the United Kingdom Information Service, Lord Home said " This week a
foundation member of the Commonwealth had to leave the Commonwealth."
2. Mr. Macmillan said " There are some who think that the Commonwealth
will be gravely and even fatally injured by this blow. I do not
altogether share this view. I do not share it at all".
This is not a difference about the facts; it is a difference of personal
opinion as to the consequences of the facts.
I deeply respect my friend Mr. Macmillan's opinion, and I most sincerely
hope that it turns out to be right. But, discarding the word
" fatally", which is not mine, I retain my right to offer my own
opinion that the Commonwealth had been injured and not strengthened
by the departure of South Africa. If I had not thought so, I should
not have been wasting time in efforts to keep South Africa in. Nor,
I imagine, would anybody else! I would like to elaborate my reasons for
my own attitude. They depend, I believe, upon a basic concept of the
Commonwealth which I was not able honestly to abandon. For I believe
in the Commonwealth. Despite what has happewtd, it has much to do for
us and for mankind
But before I deal further with the Commonwealth aspect, I must somewhat
abruptly turn to recent events i'n. the United Nations, so as to. clear
the ground. 
6.
Having regard to the events of the last few days in the United Nations
General Assembly and its Committees, and having further regard to what some
regard as a " switch" of policy by Australia, I crave leave merely to state the
facts, which I hope will be allowed to speak for themselves. Having stated
them, I will return to the Commonwealth issue, which was the sole matter to which
the apartheid debate related in London.
In the Special Political Committee, on April 4th, a week ago, there
was a general discussion on apartheid. The particular resolutions to which I
S will refer later were cabled to us and received by us on the morning of
Wednesday April 5th. Our representative, Mr. Hood, made a speech which
accurately expressed our ideas. He did not ( and, in view of some newspaper
observations, I repeat not) say how Australia would vote on any specific
resolution. For the records of this House, I will quote what Mr. Hood said, in full.
" Although the description of this item has not changed since the last
time the Committee debated the policies of apartheid in South Africa, certain
events since 1959 have understandably injected an increased degree of urgency to
which all of us are certainly bound to pay attention. For one thing, the
procedures of the Security Council here for the first time invoked on this matter
a year ago. More recently the outcome of a meeting of Commonwealth Prime
Ministers in London three weeks ago is fresh in the minds of everyone and the
prospect that the Union of South Africa will shortly cease to be a member of the
S Commonwealth has been copiously referred to during this debate.
However, it is the General Assembly consideration that is relevant to
this at the moment. The Commonwealth aspect is a quite separate thing. It has
to be remembered also that the Security Council still has before it the question
S in the form in which it was submitted following the Sharpeville incident in
March 1960. What then is the right way for the General Assembly to treat the
item? We have at issue here the clear disregard by the Union of South Africa
of many previous strong expressions of the views of the General Assembly that the
policy of apartheid is repugnant to Charter principles almost universally accepted.
The provisions concerning human rights are one of the most notable objectives
set out in the Charter, and any failure in their observationce wherever it may
occur is indeed legitimately a matter for the concern of all. The Australian
Government has stated that it feels a most serious disquiet at the racial
policies which have been practised in South Africa, and that it deplores the
results of the application of these policies, one tragic example being the
events at Sharpeville last year.
With the vast majority of world opinion, we neither support nor
condone policies that is deliberate policies of racial discrimination and
we can understand the strong feelings which have led so many delegations once
again to express their condemnation of the practice of apartheid in the Union. 
7.
Furthermore, in addition to the questions of principle involved, the policy
of apartheid is, as the Prime Minister of Australia has said, unworkable.
We can at the very least hope that through what one speaker yesterday described
as enlightened self-interest, South Africa will come to a realisation of this.
The question arises whether the General Assembly this time and in the
circumstances that have arisen since 1959 should go further in stressing its
repeated requests that the Union Government should revise its racial policies
0 to remove some of the flagrant contradictions that these have brought about with
some of its obligations under the Charter. It must be pointed out in this
connection that the Charter does expressly set a limit to intervention by
the United Nations in a field of essentially domestic jurisdiction. In addition
to those limits, there are further limits set by the Charter to the powers of the
General Assembly. While there may be marginal ground here, many times fought
over and contested, we should still pause before embarking on any course which
would in effect throw away the whole intent'and purpose of the limitations
specifically put into the Charter. The Australian Delegation, as in the past,
will keep this consideration very closely in mind in examining proposals which
are or may be put before the Committee.
Furthermore the important objective is surely to look beyond simple
condemnation and to open the way for eventual improvement in racial relations
in the Union.
SThe Security Council itself in its resolution last year clearly had
such a prospect in mind. We certainly ought not now to foreclose by drastic
recommendations to Member States the possibility that by patience and sustained
contact, such as that already opened up by the Secretary General, the total volume
of effort and opinion both outside and within South Africa may at last be
concentrated to good effect. It is in the best interests of the Bantu polulation
that this should happen and that the South African Government should not be
confirmed in obduracy by an imposed isolation, The weight of world opinion
against the practice of racial discrimination in South Africa is more than
impressive, it is formidable. Once again the great majority of the members
of the United Nations will wish to give expression to it, this time doubtless
even more emphatically, but punitive measures are likely to serve no purpose,
and on the contrary make it more difficult for those, especially in the Union,
who believe there is still time to reverse a collision course."
On the day on which we received a report of this speech, we were
informed that two Resolutions were to be moved. One, put forward by 25 Member
States, recommended to Member States a series of positive sanctions against
South Africa, including
the breaking off of diplomatic relations with South Africa;
( ii) the closing of ports to all vessels flying the South African flag; 
8.
( iii) the prohibiting of ships from entering South African ports;
( iv) the boycott of all South African goods, and a refusal to export
goods to South Africa;
the refusal of landing and passage facilities to all South African
aircraft.
We felt, and feel, no difficulty in opposing such a resolution, for
the reasons so concisely stated by Mr. Hood.
The other resolution, put forward by Ceylon, India and Malaya, was
much more moderate in tone. It deplored the racial policies of South Africa
and some consequences of their enforcement; it deprecated policies based
on racial discrimination; it requested in paragraph 3, action by ' Member States,
within the Charter, to bring about the abandonment of these policies; it
affirmed that such policies violate the Charter and the Declaration of Human
rights; it noted ( in paragraph 5) that " these policies have led to international
friction and that their continuance endangers international peace and security";
it called upon South Africa to bring its policies and conduct into conformity
with its obligations under the Charter.
The time for decision was, as is not uncommon under United Nations
procedures, very short. I consulted my senior colleagues. The resolution
had been up before in the previous Assembly in November, 1959, when Australia
had abstained. In the events that had happened and were happening, we instructed
the Australian Ambassador to the United Nations to vote for this resolution,
having first reserved our position on paragraph 3 ( as it then stood, without a
reference to action being " within the Charter") and on paragraph
Mr. Plimsoll, with our complete authorisation, repeated salient
passages of Mr. Hood's speech and then said
" But, having made this clear, the Australian delegation will record its
vote in favour of the Resolution. This it does so as not to have its
position misinterpreted. It does not support the policy of apartheid and
it joins with other countries in calling upon the Government of the
Union to bring its policy and conduct into conformity with its obligations
under the Charter. To achieve this result, it is, we think, necessary to
vote for the resolution as a whole. But so that there will be no
ambiguity deriving from the Australian vote, it is to be understood that
Australia does not support all the elements of the resolution and that,
in particular, it is strongly opposed to suggestions of sanctions against
Sputh Africa, and that it does not accept the idea that international
peace and security are endangered, as stated in paragraph 5 of the Resolution"
It has been said that this action contradicts my attitude over South
Africa's membership of the Commonwealth. Clearly therefore, the difference 
between a Commonwealth matter and a United Nations matter must be cleared up.
The General Assembly of the United Nations is a deliberative, not an
executive body. It offers opinions, which are of course, entitled to great
weight. If it chooses to offer views upon the conduct or policy of any
country, those views will be offered, with every member nation free to speak.
SResolutions are proposed, and votes are taken.
The CommonweaIth is a different matter. Itis, ina loose. but. real qense,
a special organisation ufider the head,; 6ftheC6dmonWealth, the Queen. -Its membership
grow. out ofa special history,', and is nQt conditionedu* byrules or procedures
ef the United Nations. Members stand in. a very special relationship one to anothera
relationship quite differentfrom.. thatof members of the United Nations.
The Commonwealth has hitherto existed without resolutions or votes
except in such a case as that which arose in 1949, when India became a Republic
and when a new constitutional structure or practice was adopted unanimously.
The Prime Ministers meet in private for a frank exchange of ideas and information.
They have discussions of an intimacy which is quite impossible in the United
Nations. They frequently exercise more influence over one another than they
perhaps realise at the time. Their strength is in their very variety.
In a paradoxical sense, part of their strength is in their differences of
history, of background, of traditions, of personality. They advocate their
own views, but they do not sit in judgment. This year there were suggestions
made by some Prime Ministers that the Commonwealth should " show what it stands
for" by propounding a code of principles, or a new " Bill of Rights", observance
of which would presumably become a condition of new or confirming membership.
I want to state quite clearly that I most strongly opposed any such notion.
I said that it would give rise to problems of interpretation under a host of
changing circumstances; that it would encourage legalisms in a body
previously happily free of them; that it could well lead to charges and
counter-charges of breach; and that the old happy and profitable search amid
differences for unities and understanding would be replaced by an emphasis upon
disagreements. The British Commonwealth, I said, could not long survive
such a development. I went on to say, as I say now, that a written code of " principles"
could not stop short at racial problems, which are in any event not peculiar
to one Commonwealth country. It would presumably set out some of those great
elements which are part of our heritage; the rule of law, the sovereignty of
Parliameht, no imprisonment without trial, an uncontrolled press.
The famous Balfour formula of 1926, which set out for the first
time to define the Commonwealth, used three expressions which are to-day either
inaccurate or not generally accepted. 
practice that Commonwealth Conferences do not discuss the internal affairs
of member countries Ministers avAiled themselves of Mr. Louw's presence in
London to have informal discussions with him about the racial situation
in South Africa. During these informal discussions Mr. Louw gave
information and answered questions on the Union's policies, and the
other Ministers conveyed to him their views on the South African problem.
The Ministers emphasised that the Commonwealth itself is a multi-racial
association and expressed the need to ensure good relations between
all member-states and peoples of the. Commonwealth."
I know of nothing which has happened since May 1960 to convert the
internal affair of South Africa into a matter warranting intervention by the
Commonwealth, except that it has been widely debated, and the policy
roundly condemned. I hope that nobody will suggest that Dr. Verwoerd admitted that
, apgrtheid was no longer a domestic matter. What he did was to face the fact
that on this occasion, with his continuation of Membership application before
the chair, debate about apartheid was inevitable.
However, the departure of South Africa has happened, and I have no
heart to enter into needless arguments about it. But let us, who are within
the covenant of the Commonwealth, make no mistake. The issue concerns more
than South Africa; it concerns the whole characteraind future of the greatest'
international partnership the world has yet seen.
One should, perhaps,. hesitate to speak of J. C. Smuts, the great
Commonwealth man, who, be it remembered, first expressed the policy of separate
development in South Africa, but whose contribution to freedom cannot be reckoned
inferior to that of any man now engaged in public affairs. But in 1960, after
the Prime Ministers' Conference and on invitation by the University of Cambridge
I delivered the first Smuts Memorial Lecture. My subject was " The Changing
Commonwealth". I will quote, for my present purpose, just one passage from a paper
to which I devoted the thought and experience of half a life-time.
" We do not meet as a tribunal, to sit in judgment upon each other,
or to ventilate intra-Commonwealth issues, We are not a super-state.
During the recent tragic ep~ isodes in South Africa there were not
wanting suggestions that South Africa should be expelled presumably by
majority vote from the Commonwealth. Any such suggestion, in my opinion,
misconceived the nature of our association. We do not deal with the domesticpolijpolicies
of any one of us, for we know that political policies come or go with
governments and that we are not concerned with Governments and their policies 
12.
so much as we are with nations and their peoples. If we ever thought of
expelling a member nation of the Commonwealth it would, I hope, be because we
believed that in the general interests of the Commonwealth that nation as a
nation was not fit to be our associate."
These words come back to me to-day. Under inexorable pressure,
South Africa is. out of the Commonwealth. It is not the Verwoerd Government
that is out. It is the Union of South Africa; the nation evolved by the
great Liberal statesmanship of 1909; the nation of Botha and Smuts;, the
nation from which, in two wars, soldi~ rs fought side by side with our own,
the 1st South African Division being alongside our 9th Division at El Alamein;
the nation which provided lines of supply to the Middle East at a time when
the Mediterranean was an acutely dangerous sea; the nation, over 45% of the
voters of which recently voted to remain w-ithin the direct allegiance to the
Throne; the people, three quarters of whom, as men of colour, to whom we have
a great and brotherly responsibility, might reasonably be presumed to find some of
their future hopes of emancipation in the membership of the great Commonwealth.
I hope I may look to my fellow members of this Parliament to share in
my sorrow at these unhappy circumstances.
I therefore now turn to a statement on apartheid, a statement now
rendered l oth permissible and necessary. I preface it by emphasising that I was
not, in Ldndon or here, concerned to defend apartheid, which, indeed, I condemn.
My great object was to defend the interests of my own country.
I deeply resent the attempt that has been made in some quarters to
suggest that, as I wanted to keep South Africa in the Commonwealth, I should
be taken to favour or con ope the shooting of natives at Sharpeville. That
0 incident shocked the world, and me.
I am against apartheid; against some of the modern manifestations and
practices because they offend the conscience; against it as a basic policy
because it seems to me to be doomed to a most terrible disaster. But we are
a fair-minded people, and we should try to understand how the basic policy came
to be adopted, and what it was originally designed to achieve. What I will say
will be by way of explanation and not by way of defence.
In 1917, while in London as a distinguished member of the War Cabinet,
Smuts made a notable speech on South African problems. He said
" Instead of mixing up black and white in the old haphazard way, which instead
of lifting up the black degraded the white, we are now trying to lay
down a policy of keeping them apart as much as possible in our institutions.
in land ownership, settlement and forms of government we are trying to keep them 
apart, and in that way laying down in outline a general policy which it may
take a hundred years to work out, but which in the end may be the solution
of our native problem. Thus in South Africa you will have in the long
run large areas cultivated by blacks and governed by blacks, where they will
look 8fter themselves in all their forms of living and development, while
in the rest of the country you will have your white communities, which
will govern themselves separately according to the accepted European
principles." In our thinking this idea is now outmoded; it is much too severely
applied;-huniane modern political ideas are against it; it will fail
disastrously. But in every country in which there are large numbers of people
of different races, millions of European stock, millions of coloured stock,
the problem must arise as to whether there should be separate development,
or integration, with equality of political and social rights within the same
geographical area. This, to me ( and I still refer to the original policy),
is essentially a problem of statesmanship. It has moral aspects if, in the
pursuit of one policy or the other inhumanity is practised, injustices occur,
or the dignity of man is debated. But the initial judgment is one of statesmanship.
The problem exists in many countries; but it is most acute in South
Africa. I am profoundly grateful that we do not have it in Australia.
It is against this background that I criticise what South Africa does
about a problem which is its problem, not ours.
I think that the policy will, if it continues to be applied as it is
now, end in the most frightful disaster, Dr. Verwoerd told us in London
what his government is doing, in the fields of health and education in
particular, for the Bantu, both in the Bantu territories or homelands", and
in the ordinary provinces. He demonstrated that South Africa was spending
very much more on these purposes than any other African country. He saw
the Bantu, in the territories, coming up by stages to self-government, as we
see the people of Papua and New Guinea. But he saw no prospect of equal
political rights for the Bantu living and working in the ordinary provinces.
Nor did he seem to me to envisage ( if, indeed, such a thing be practicable)
a complete territorial as well as a racial division of South Africa, so that
all members of each race might be completely self-governing in their own place.
As he knows from what I have said to him, both in conference and out of it,
I think there is a fatal flaw in this policy. The more zealously the
Union builds up the minds and bodies of the Bantu, the more certain will it
be that the day will come when, conscious of their own human dignity, their
capacity, and their strength, they will no longer tolerate the status of 
144
second-class citizens. And, when that dOy comes, they will demand their
due, not inan atmosphere of evolving friendship, but with hostility and,
for all Me know, violence. The ultimate conflict, as I said in London,
may be bloody and devastating.
There are, to us, certain astonishing things in the application of
the policy which have, ' I'think, done much to alienate world opinion. One of
them I, and others, earnestly discussed with Dr. Verwoerd in London. The
Union does not accredit-or receive diplomatic missions to or from Commonwealth
countries in Asia and Africa. This discrimination is, to me, offensive to the
great countries concerned. I pointed out that there is great valuein such
exchanges, and that to deny them is to suggest some notion of racial
s uperiority, intolerable in form, and utterly unjustified in fact. I did my
best to point out to him that even this one diplomatic step would do something
to lesson the tension which we all wanted to see relaxed. But Dr. Verwoerd
was adamant on this point, as on others. He felt that there would be a grave risk
of " incidents" arising from public opinion and private action. I said, in
vain, that it was better to accept these risks than to incur the certainty
of mounting hostility-.
A phase has been coined to the effect that I have " equated"
apartheid and Australia's immigration policy. This is quite untrue. One
policy relates to a discriminatory policy in respect of people already
permanently resident; the other, our own, to a discrimination in the
W admission of persons for permanent residence. I hope I do not need UL be. told
that the two things are quite different. I have always been grateful,* to my
friend-, the Tunku Abdul Rahman, the Prime Minister of Malaya, for his warm
and helpful . recognition of the validity of our policy and of our right to adopt it.
But the whole point that I make is that, while I believe that our
immigration policy is both wise and just, is based not upon any foolish -notion
of racial superiority, but upon a proper desire to preserve a homogeneous
population and so avert the troubles that have bedevilled some other countries,
it is a domestic policy. And the right to determine our domestic policy is
part of our sovereignty as a member of the Commonwealth.
In short, what I have been saying is that the rule of non-interference
in the domestic affairs of sovereign communities in the Commonwealth, once
broken, may be broken again in the future. Such a development would concern us
all very deeply. Before leaving the London Conference, I would like to say that in the
course of a general review of the world situation, several of the Prime
Ministers mentioned the matter of Continental China. No conclusion was
either sought or arrived at, reports to the contrary in a section of the press
being quite untrue. 
But I think it my duty to the House to put it in posse-ssion of the
views presented by me.
I said thai I thought there was much lopse talk about " recognising"
Continental China as if the problem admitted of a simple-answber. I pointed
out that we have here a complete nest of questions. liplomatic recognition,
for example, was a bi-lateral matter. Some nation might be unwilling to
" recognise" in this sense, while being willing to admit Continental China
to the United Nations. But then there were further considerations.
Was Continental China to include Formosa? Were the inhabitants of that
country to be handed over to the control of the Communists?
And then, supposing that Continental China accepted, as a condition
Sof admission to the United Nations, the exclusion of Formosa ( the " two Chinas"
solution) was Formosa, as an independent nation, to be cast into outer darkness,
or was she to become herself a member of Who was, in any such events,
to have tie permanent seat on the Security Council, with its right of veto?
And, supposing that, as many nations feel, the Security Council should be
broadened by the addition of further permanent and temporary members ( I have
heard countries like India, Pakistan and Brazil mentioned), should the new
permanent members be permanent in the sense of not needing to be re-elected,
or should they also have the veto?
I ha # re re-stated these points to the House as a warning against over
W simplificatio', and not as containing any suggestion that Australia's policy
on the matter is in process of change. It was stated fully in this House by
Mr. Casey ( as he then was) and that statement stands.
After the Conference, I attended a meeting with Mr. Heath, the
Lord Privy Seal, Mr. Selwyn Lloyd, the Chancellor of the Exchpquer, and
Mr. Soamep, the Minister for Agriculture, on the problem of the European Common
Market, and its relation to the Free Trade area, i. e. the problem of" the seven"
and " the six". As Honourable Members know, our position is that, so far from
complaining about the 6-power treaty we have seen in it great political as
well as economic value. But we believe that some wider association which
would include Great Britain is desirople if Western European unity is to be
achieved and maintained.
But we have our special interests to protect, particularly our
exports of primary products both to Great Britain and Eurbope. I made it clear
to the United Kingdom Ministers that before any negotiation calculated to
lead to an offer or " agreement in principle" took place, Australia
expected the fullest consultation. 
In that sense, I said, consultation was essential % hen ideas were in
proce . ss of formulation, and not after they had become either fixed or
presented. I received an explicit assurance that this rule should be
observed. There was also agreement to my suggestion that our officials
should meet to examine whatever specific proposals might'. be put forward
within a month or two.
Subsequently, I was able to have a talk with Mr. Lloyd about the
possibilities of Australian entry to the London loan market durkg 1961.
As Honourable Members know, Treasury approval is needed in such matters.
Mr. Lloyd was most helpful and favourable, subject of course to amounts and
details which always have to be workedout nearthe chosen time for an issue.
Incidentially, I found that our London stocks were strong in the market; and
our credit good.
Finally, I spebk of the SEATO Meeting at Bangkok. Among those
present were the Foreign Secretary of the United Kingdoip,' the-U, S. A. Secretary
of State, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, and the foreign ministers of
France, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines. The principal subject was
LAOS. That country's future in or out of the Communist orbit is
very important. It is one of the countries covered by the South-East
Asian Treaty. It has a long common frontier with Thailand, a member of
SEATO. It is vulnerable to aggression from North Vietnam and Communist
China. The civil conflict is conducted by relatively small forces, and, in
its own way, life goes on. In such circumstances, Communism has a happy
hunting-ground. But for SEATO, Laos is important in terms of defence. It provides
a test of the significance and effectiveness of a treaty or~ anisation creat~ d
to resist Communist aggression. For, if Laos passes into Communist hands,*
where does the process end? There are grim thoughts in this for Australia.
The conference proved to be both understandirU and invigorating. All
representatives went away feeling and saying that SEATO had bdeen given'ne***
significance and force. We finally evolved a Resolution which was, in spite
of some anticipations of differences and difficulties, unanimously approved.
I had the satisfaction of playing an active part in its drafting andi
acceptance. It has been published, but I table it formally for the
information of H-onourable Members.
At this stage, I will content myself with a few observations 
1. We all agreed with the proposals made by the United Kingdom
to the Soviet Union: that there should be a cease fire, a
revival of the I. C. C. to supervise the Cease Fire and the
stabilisation of the local scene, and an International
Conference of the kind which gave rise to the Geneva Accords
in 1954.
2. We all felt that there should be created in Laos a more
broadly based government which could, by commanding wide
support in Laos, eliminate avoidable causes of internationtl
strife.
3. We made it clear that we did not wish Laos to become a " satellite"
of either the Communist or the non-Communist Powers. We desired it to be
independent, united, sovereign and neutral. We felt that
if Laos were unaligned with any power or group of powers, no
good excuse would arise for further Communist intervention.
4. We had, and I now more than ever have, great hopes that the Soviet
Union would accept the United Kingdom proposals. But we
affirmed that. should there continue to be an active military
attempt to obtain control of Laos, members of SEATO, are prepared,
collectively and in the terms of the Treaty, to take whatever
action may be appropriate in the circumstances. We all hope and
believe that no military intervention will be necessary. There
can be no actual commitment of forces except by the decisions of
governments I say this because I would wish to dispose of any
idea that SEATO is either truculent or aggressive. But it is
necessary to say that if, unhappily, collective SEATO action
is forced upon us, we will need to act together or find SEATO
weakened and destroyed.
I must not dwell on these possibilities. At present, we have
high hopes of a peaceful settlement and should concentrate our efforts upon
it. Before I conclude, I would like to say two things.
The first is that this statement of mine, though inevitably
expressed very largely in the first person since I have been actively and
personally concerned in these matters, and have no desire to escape my
great personal responsibilities expresses the viewi; of Cabinet, which has
taken a full share in its preparation. 
18.
The second is that I have had no desire torehearse differences,
or merely to criticise decisions already taken. But over a period of a
quarter of a century,-it has been my privilege to have something to do,
or say, or write, about the Commonwealth. It is something dear to our
hearts. It means and will mean much for sanity and tolerance in a
grievously troubled world.
We shall play our part with as: much vigour and determination as in
the past. We maintain our faith in the Commonwealth, in its valueto its member
nations, and in its ability to make constant and notable contributions to
the peace and prosperity of the world and of all its peoples. Controversdes
have arisen about my own attitude towards recent events. It is, if I
may say so, only just that my reasons for my views should be plainly stated
to the Australian Parliament, which has given me itsg nerous confidence for so
many years, and to the Commonwealth of which I have tried to be a loyal servant. 
MEETING OF COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS
FINAL COMMUNIQUE MARCH 17th, 1961
The Meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers was concluded to-day.
Pakistan, Ghana and Cyprus were represented by their Presidents. The other
Commonwealth countries were represented by their Prime Ministers.
It had been agreed that on this occasion the Prime Ministers would
concentrate their main attention on a limited number of specified problems which
are currently of common concern to them all namely, disarmament, the structure
of the United Nations and certain constitutional problems affecting the
Commonwealth itself. At the outset of the Meeting, however, the Prime Ministers
held a general review of the international situation as a whole, in order to set
these particular problems in the perspective of current world events. They also
considered, in the course of their Meeting, recent developments in the Congo
and in South East Asia.
The Prime Ministers re-affirmed the upport of their Governments
for the efforts of the United Nations to restore order in the Congo and to
secure the independence and integrity of the Republic. They deplored outside
intervention in the Congo and recognised that many of the problems which had
arisen were due to such intervention. They considered that the United Nations
forces in the Congo should be strengthened and that the Security Council
resolution of 21st February should be fully implemented.
The Prime Ministers noted with concern the situation which had
developed in Laos. They expressed the hope that the parties would be able to
reconcile their differences, that intervention from outside would cease, and that
Laos would be enabled to enjoy an independent, neutral and peaceful existence.
The Prime Ministers held a full discussion on the problem of
disarmament. They recognised that this was the most important question facing
the world to-day and considered that a favourable opportunity was now at hand
for a fresh initiative towards a settlement of it. They agreed that the aim
should be to achieve general and complete disarmament, subject to effective
inspection and control, on the general lines indicated in the statement in
Annex 1 of this communique. They recalled the resolution on general and
complete disarmament which was adopted unanimously at the 14th session of the
General Assembly. They agreed that every effort should be made to implement
this resolution by agreement between the major powers, and that further
negotiations for this purpose were necessary. Certain proposals designed to
promote such negotiations have been put by various countries before the United
Nations. 
2.
The Prime Ministers expressed their hope that the negotiations on the
cessation of nuclear weapons tests, which were due to re-open at Geneva on 21st
March, would lead to the early conclusion of an agreement on this subject.
Such an agreement, apart from its importance in itself, would provide a powerful
impetus towards agreement on disarmament generally.
The Prime Ministers considered the various proposals which have
recently been put forward for changes in the structure of the United Nations
S including, in particular, the structure of its Councils, the position of the
Secretary-General and the organisation of the Secretariat. They recognised
that such changes could only be made with general consent. They agreed that,
whatever adjustments might be made, it remained vitally important to uphold
the purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter and to preserve the
S international and independent character of the Secretariat. They further agreed
that members of the Commonwealth shared with all nations a fundamental common
interest in maintaining the integrity of the United Nations as a force for
orderly political, economic and social progress throughout the world.
The Prime Ministers also discussed certain constitutional
questions relating to Commonwealth membership. The conclusions reached were
announced in communiques issued on 13th, 15th, and 16th March relating,
respectively, to Cyprus, South Africa, and Sierra Leone. The text of these
communiques is reproduced in Annex 11. 
ANNEX 1
STATEMENT ON DISARMAMENT
Aim 1. The aim must be to achieve total world-wide disarmament, subject
to effective inspection and control.
2. In view of the slaughter and destruction experienced in so-called
" conventional" wars and of the difficulty of preventing a conventional war,
once started, from developing into a nuclear war, our aim must be nothing
less than the complete abolition of the means of waging war of any kind.
Principles 3. An agreement for this purpose should be negotiated as soon as
possible, on the basis of the following principles
All national armed forces and armaments must be reduced to the levels
agreed to be necessary for internal security.
Once started, the process of disarmament should be continued without
interruption until it is completed, subject to verification at
each stage that all parties are duly carrying out their undertaking.
The elimination of nuclear and conventional armaments must be so
phased that at no stage will any country or group of countries
obtain a significant military advantage.
In respect of each phase there should be established, by agreement,
effective machinery of inspection, which should come into operation
simultaneously with the phase of disarmament to which it relates.
Disarmament should be carried out as rapidly as possible in
progressive stages, within specified periods of time.
At the appropriate stage, a substantial and adequately armed
military force should be established, to prevent aggression and
enforce observance of the disarmament agreement; and an international
authority should be created, in association with the United Nations,
to control this force and to ensure that it is not used for any
purpose inconsistent with the Charter. 
2.
4. On the basis of the above principles, it should be possible, given
goodwill on both sides, to reconcile the present differences of approach
between the different plans put forward.
Negotiations 5. The principal military powers should resume direct negotiations
without delay in close contact with the United Nations, which is responsible
for disarmament under the Charter. Since peace is the concern of the whole
world, other nations should also be associated with the disarmament negotiations,
either directly or through some special machinery to be set up by the United
Nations, or by both means.
6. Side by side with the political negotiations, experts should
start working out the details of the inspection systems required for the
measures of disarmament applicable to each stage, in accordance with the
practice adopted at the Geneva Nuclear Tests Conference.
7. Every effort should be made to secure rapid agreement to the permanent
banning of nuclear weapons tests by all nations and to arrangements for
verifying the observance of the agreement. Such an agreement is urgent,
since otherwise further countries may soon become nuclear powers, which would
increase the danger of war and further complicate the problem of disarmament.
Moreover, an agreement on nuclear tests, apart from its direct advantages, would
provide a powerful psychological impetus to agreement over the wider field of
disarmament.
8. Disarmament without inspection would be as unacceptable as
inspection without disarmament. Disarmament and inspection are integral parts of
the same question and must be negotiated together; and both must be made as
complete and effective as is humanly possible. It must, however, be recognised
that no safeguards can provide one hundred per cent protection against error or
treachery. Nevertheless, the risks involved in the process of disarmament
must be balanced against the risks involved in the continuance of the arms race.
9. It is-a~ rguable whether the arms race-is the cause or the. re-sult'of
distrust between nations. But it is clear that the problems of disarmament and
international confidence are closely linked. Therefore, while striving for the
abolition of armaments, all nations must actively endeavour to reduce tention by
helping to remove other causes of frict'ion and suspicion. 
4. ANNEX 11
CYPRUS Communique issued on 13th March. 196
At their meeting this morning the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
accepted a request from the Republic of Cyprus for admi'ssion to Commbnwealth
membership. They invited the President of the Republic to join the Meeting.
SOUTH AFRICA
Communique issued on 15th March, 1961
At their meetings this week the Commonwealth Prime Ministers
have discussed questions affecting South Africa.
On 13th March the Prime Minister of South Africa informed the
Meeting that, following the plebiscite in October, 1960, the appropriate
constitutional steps were now being taken to introduce a republican form of
constitution in the Union, and that it was the desire of the Union Government
that South Africa should remain within the Commonwealth as a republic.
In connection with this application the meeting also discussed,
with the consent of the Prime Minister of South Africa, the racial policy
followed by the Union Government. The Prime Minister of South Africa informed
the other Prime Ministers this evening that in the light of the views expressed
on behalf of other member Governments and the indications of their future
intentions regarding the racial policy of the Union Government, he had decided
to withdraw his application for South Africa's continuing membership of the
Commonwealth as a republic.
SIERRA LEONE
Communique issued on 16th March, 1961
The Prime Ministers noted that~ Sierra Leone would attain
independence on 27th April, 1961.
They looked forward to welcoming Sierra Leone as a member of the
Commonwealth on the completion of the necessary constitutional processes. 
THE SEVENTH MEETING OF THE COUNCIL OF SEATO,
BANGKOK, MARCH 29th, 1961
R E SOL UTIO N
Having examined the situation in Laos and the Republic of Vietnam,
the Council unanimously approved the following resolution
1. Consulting together as provided in the Manila Pact, the SEATO
Council has noted with grave concern the continued offensive by
rebel elements in Laos who are continuing to be supplied and assisted
by Communist powers in flagrant disregard of the Geneva Accords.
The Council once more makes it clear that SEATO is a defensive
organization with no aggressive intentions and reiterates, in the
words of the Treaty " its desire to live in peace with all peoples
and all governments".
3. The Council desires a united, independent and sovereign Laos, free
to achieve advancement in ways of its own choosing and not subordinate
to any nation or group of nations.
4. It is believed that these results ought to be achieved through
negotiations and cannot be hoped for if the present fighting continues.
The Council notes with approval the present efforts for a cessation of
hostilities and for peaceful negotiations to achieve an unaligned and
independent Laos.
6. If those efforts fail, however, and there continues to be an active
military attempt to obtain control of Laos, members of SEATO are
prepared, within the terms of the Treaty, to take whatever action may
be appropriate in the circumstances.
7. The Council also noted with concern the efforts of an armed minority,
again supported from outside in violation of the Geneva Accords, to
destroy the Government of Vietnam and declared its firm resolve
not to acquiesce in any such takeover of that country.
8. Finally, the Council records its view that the Organization should
continue to keep developments in Laos and Vietnam under urgent and
constant review in the light of this resolution. 



P. M. No. 14/ 1961
AUSTRALIAN EXCHIBITION FOR TATE GALLERY, LONDON
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzies.
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said today that while he
was in London for the Prime Ministers' Conference he had taken
the opportunity to discuss with the Chairman of Trustees of
the Tate Gallery, Sir Colin Anderson, and the Director, Sir
John Rothenstein, arrangements for an exhibition of Australian
art to be held in the Tate Gallery in the i glish winter of
1962. The Prime Minister said the exhibition would comprise
about 200 paintings and that the Commonwealth Art Advisory
Board had already given considerable thought to its
composition. There would be a small section of Australian
historical paintings and a few paintings of the impressionist
period but the main emphasis would be on contemporary Australian
paintings. It was also hoped to include paintings by young
Australian artists whose work is comparatively unknown outside
Australia. The Prima Minister also said that never before had an
Australian exhibition of the scope of the one proposed been
shown in London and he was grateful to the Tate Gallery
authorities for this opportunity of bringing to the British
public an outline of Australian artistic achievement.
The Prime Minister added that the exhibition would most
likely be shown at centres outside London aftor-the Tate
showing. CANBERRA,
14th April 1961. 


Speech by the Prime Minister, The RT. Hon. R. G. Menzies at the Opening of the Mawson Institute, University of Adelaide, Saturday, 15th April, 1961.&nbsp;
Sir, ladies and gentlemen,
This is a very, very notable occasion. I would have hoped that the reason for it were known to everybody in Australia, and in particular the younger people of Australia, because this is one of these occasions when we say "Let us now praise famous men".
Indeed we are met here to think about and to talk about one of the very greatest Australians that this county has had. I think it is one of the ironies of life, at least of contemporary life, that if you were to say to the average citizen, "Who are the best known people?" he would at once things: In terms of headlines. The footballers would come first; and the cricketers would come second; and the politicians a most honourable third; and the rest nowhere. This has always seemed to me to be something of a monstrosity. Never more do I think that than when we are here to think about Douglas Mawson and his character and his achievements and his enormous stature, not only in our own country, but in the world one of the very greatest of Australians.
That greatness, Sir was a versatile one. He was, of course, a great explorer; but he was a great scientist. I have marvelled as I have, as a non-scientist, struggled to understand something about his work. I have marvelled at the enormous amount of scientific work that he did, the investigations that he conducted, the things that he worked out, the things that he published. He was first and foremost, I think, a great and versatile scientist.
I don't want to say anything that might subtract from his repute, but in the highest sense of the word he was something of a politician; or shall I put it, 'he was something of a statesman'? Because with all his science and with all his exploration, it was he more than anybody else who added to the territory and responsibilities of this country, millions of square miles of Antarctic territory.
That, of course, from a scientific point of view may be regarded as something of an eccentricity. But from the point of view of Australia it was an uncommon thing for a man in the very middle of exploration, and of investigation, to feel that he had a duty to his own country to extend the responsibilities and interests of his own country. If today we look at a map of the world and see certain areas marked out as Australian Antarctica, there may be some in the world who don't agree with it, and some who are perhaps agnostic on the point. But never let us forget that when we ourselves see these areas marked out, there is one man above all men who can be thanked for it, and that man is Douglas Mawson.
Of course he was an immense explorer; but why was he a great explorer? I myself in physical matters rather like the beaten track. I like to go home, for example, at night by the well-known route; I like to proceed from point A to point B by a well-known track. My wife is not like that at all - I'm sorry she's not here - but she is not like that at all: she likes going, down the highways and byways and getting lost. But to be an explorer of this world, and of its resources, you must first of all have enormous imagination. This is not a task for dull people, for routine people, for people who merely see today's job and the result of today's job. This is a task for men of imagination. And I start with that with Douglas Mawson.
I used to think myself in my earlier and perhaps, for all I know, better informed days, that a geologists was a man who went around knapping bits of rock and putting them in a little sack, and then telling you without any danger of contradiction what age they belonged to and all about them. It fascinated me. For many years I wished that if I could be reincarnate I should be a geologist. I dare say I would have found the subject matter to deal with not much more unresponsive than that which I deal with today. (Laughter) It all seemed rather matter of fact: you had a body of knowledge and you applied it to a particular formation.
But of course for the work that Mawson did imagination was of the essence. Not the kind of imagination which knows what the answer will be around the corner; but the imagination which knows that there is an answer around the corner and determined to discover it. So here was a great man of great imaginative qualities. And in the field in which he works needed to add to imagination, courage. Because imagination, the exploring instinct, in whatever field it may be, is worthless without the courage to pursue it, without the courage to meet the unknown, and its dangers. In that field he is a household name, not only here but all around the world.
Then with imagination and with courage he needed, and had, endurance. Not short-lived courage, not an imagination easily baffled, but the capacity for hanging on to it for enduring, for seeing it right through. So with these three enormous qualities which were essential for his work he succeeded as nobody else has succeeded. He set an example that I don't think anybody else has been able to equal. He achieved results which I believe are outstanding in the whole history of Antarctic investigation.
It is almost baffling, Sir, to those of us who are made of more ordinary stuff, to think that one man should have done so much, should have thought so much, and should have recorded so much, as I hope this Institute will make clear to future investigators, should have published so much, and above all, should have influenced so many. That is one of the great things that year after year, generation after generation, people will be influenced by what Mawson did and thought.
It may be, I suppose inevitably, that in 10 or 20 or 50 years' time the boundaries of knowledge will have been so extended that some of the things that he found and recorded may be regarded as commonplace; just as the great basic principles of physics are today regarded as commonplace; just as the great basic principles of nuclear fission are today regarded as commonplace. But they wouldn't be commonplace they never will be commonplace so long as people remember that the foundations have been laid, the great principles established by remarkably great men.
And so Sir, this Institute will, I believe, take its proper place in the life of this University, and in the life of Australia. In it will be found not only information and rich material for research, but a profound inspiration to the people who come later on.
You know, Sir, today I say this with particular reference to the graceful remarks made by the representative of the Academy of Science of the Soviet Union today we are, as I am constantly being reminded, entering the "Space Age". And that, of course, is an exciting imaginative thing. We all admire the achievements, particularly the achievements of the last few days, in that field. I hope that we haven't become so miserably isolated, one from another, that we can't admire and applaud immense work in the scientific and technological field wherever it happens. This is all part of the ultimate inheritance of mankind; though as a rather earthbound character myself I sometimes take time off to say "There are so many things on the earth, and in the earth itself, that we don’t know about. I hope we shan't neglect them". I hope that Antarctic research from our point of view in Australia will continue to be something that we regard as of immense importance.
Indeed if I may, Lady Mawson, with your permission. On interlard these somewhat pontifical remarks of mine with a rather whimsical recollection, I would like to do it. Because I am afraid when I was a boy and for all I know some of Professors were once boys; (Laughter) there may be no immediate current evidence of it, but I am sure you were - but when I was a boy, we thought of Antarctic explorers and of Arctic explorers as gentlemen with furred parkas, with dogs, with sleds. They were remarkable men. And the whole of their history was a history of tremendous courage under tremendous difficulties. But what it was all about we were not too sure, were we? In&nbsp;fact at one stage I remember we had an idea that the one thing that mattered was that somebody should be the first to get to the Pole. No doubt that is very good. We were not conscious - I wasn't anyhow as a boy - of the tremendous significance of all these things which went far beyond the stirring, remarkable, heroic, romantic story of courage and endurance.
Perhaps those who, like Mr. Rymill, like Mr. Law, have been down in those strange parts will bear with me: If I tell them a simple story about that very remarkable man who under Sir Douglas, Frank Hurley, that phenomenal photographer. In 1941,&nbsp;in about February, I was in the Middle East and went with Sir Thomas Blamey to Benghazi, the day after the battle of Benghazi - it wasn’t a Polar region we were in, I can assure you - and with loving care for a Prime Minister, something I have seldom experienced, we flew&nbsp;in a tolerably fast plane and we were escorted, believe it or not, by a couple of fighter aircraft.
But the following day we flew back from a place called Barce in a biplane called a Valencia. Nobody could remember when it was built, but it was regarded as almost the equivalent of a T-model Ford. It had two flapping wings, and it had those windows made of what laymen like myself call "mica" but might be anything, and they were warped and twisted by the weather and by old age. As soon as we made a little height alongside the mountain range that runs there, it got colder and colder, and the blast came in on us. We were all sitting in mangers - that's all I can describe them as - on the side of this plane. The wintry blast came in; we had been provided with reading matter of a good solid kind like London Punch, and other journals of that kind. So far as I was concerned I grabbed as many as I could and tucked them inside my trousers. And then when a very respectful young Air Force lad came along and said, "Would you like a rug?" I said, "Certainly bring me two". (Laughter) And he brought me two blankets and I ensconced myself in them and so did other people.
Finally we got out at a windswept aerodrome called El Adem, which some of you know, so stiff with the cold that it was hard to walk. It was 400 yards across to the airport Building and to a really nourishing drink - 400 yards. Out got Frank Hurley. He had been travelling a little farther back in the plane than me. He was in uniform, and when he got out he could hardly walk. So I said, "My dear Hurley, it's all right for a soft civilian like me to be frozen, but a polar man like you…” He said, "That's the trouble, that's the trouble. When this boy came along to me and seeing my grey hair, and being innocent of my lack of rank said to me, 'Sir, would you like a blanket or two?' I started to say 'Yes' and then my eye caught my polar ribbons and I thought, 'I can't let the side&nbsp;down'. I said, 'No, no thank you very much, no thank you very much. On the whole I think it's rather stuffy". (Laughter) And so, even more than I did, he limped away in the direction of that distant, but tantalising, whisky, as we hoped, in the, Officers' building.
Well there it is; that is the kind of thing perhaps illustrated by that story that we used to have in mind.
Of course that is not the story. Who knows what would come out of the Antarctic? Who knows today, even the rest scientifically gifted amongst you who knows what yet is to be earned from this vast tract, what stores of scientific knowledge, of material resources for all we know, meteorological information from which we may derive matters of immense importance, particularly to this Continent? Who knows whether&nbsp;the Antarctic region itself will not in due course be part of the main highways of transportation around the world? These places get closer and closer. We have just touched, the fringes of knowledge.&nbsp;
I believe myself that what may come for mankind out&nbsp;of this previously desolate area may turn out to be&nbsp;not only exciting but superb in its significance.
But I hope that those who are here when all these mysteries are disclosed will remember, will honour the name, will respect the memory of Douglas Mawson who, more than any other mortal man, will have provided the key with which to unlock the door.&nbsp;
(Applause)



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT THE OPENING OF TI KODAK PLANT AT
COBURG. MELBOURNE. ON FRIDAY, 15TH APRIL. 196L
Sir and ladies -and gentlemen:
You have been listening, so far, to the experts. What
they don't know about this great enterprise and its history, is
not worth learning. I am here in the humble, but necessary
capacity, of a customer.
I am going to say a few words, not too many, about
photography, but before I do, I would like to say this, I was
very glad to hear so much reference made to the firm of Baker
and Rouse because when I was a small boy those names were
practically as well known as Gilbert and Sullivan. Baker and
Rcl; se this was a naima, or a termso familiar to people in
Australia even in those days that it is hard to believe that it
is so long ago.
Now, Sir, I said I was a customer. I want to start
off by making one or two customer's complaints. I have done a
certain amount of cinematography myself as an amateur on tackle
suitably obtained from the Kodak people, and over a period of
years whenever I brought in a great batch of stuff from some
overseas journey, I would encounter my old friend Merton of
Kodak, who is sitting down there now, and he would say to me in
a most amiable manner " lThose things came out quite well; how
lucky you wr". Thai is the furthest I could ever got. I
once took a beautiful lot of sequences, I thought, of a bull
fight in Lisbon, full of colour. I thought it was very good
and so did he. But you must never allow the customer to feel
that he ha got the better of you. he said, " you know
that is a remarkable thing; you know that shot with all that
lighting was impossible!" ( Laughter) Did he go on to say,
" You are a miracle-worker?" Not at all. " Hmmm, you were
lucky weren't you?"'
Now there is anothi,, r aspect of photography. If you
were a politician like r. ysolf; if you had to sit in various
interviews as much as I do; if you had to become so accustomed
to these people, the pross photographers, you would know what
happens. One follow comes in looking all innocent; hots got
one of these little deceiving looking cameras; and ho goes
click, and goes click, and goes click quite rapid fire
while you oare in the middle of a conversaition. He goes away
with about 30 pictures of you, sorme of then showing you scowling
like mad, some of them showing you with a nost fatuous grin on
your face some of then showing you looking down with intense
gloom, and. others with your head so far back that they could
take a study of your adenoids. Back they go to the office and
they are put in stock. And when the day comes that I am
popular if it ever does ( Laughter) in that particular office
they bring out the best one. It makes me look as handsome as
possible; nice photograph: ' Put a good one in this time;
we're writing a leading article in his favour'. But most times
of course it is the odd ones. Oh, dear! I've suffe3red from
photography as much as any mortal man.
Yet I am delighted to be here as a customer, and as
somebody who has naturally an immense feeling for his own
country. The name of this Company is so world famous that
whenever one thinks of photography, photographic material, one
naturally thinks of Kodak. That is a remarkable thing. It is
not a monopoly because there are others. But if any enterprise
in this century has establisheod its name as a nane of irmmense 
2.
honour and repute and quality in the fields of photography it
is Kodak. That, I think, is soLuething to be proud of; something
for everybody connected with it to be proud of.
After all you don't become pre-eminent in this field
or in any other field without producing the aoods or without
having some quality. Of course this vast concern has based its
development and its prestige and its power upon devoting at a
time when lots of people didn't do it, lots of time and lots of
skill to research. This is one of the first of the great
fields of free enterprise, in which one observed many years ago
a concentration upon research.
So starting with research and going through
production and processing, and selling, this enterprise has
not only been able to provide the vital materials for the
astonishing modern developments of photography in all its
aspects, but it has, if I may come back to myself as a customer,
provided world-wide facilities for the itinerant amateur
incompetent photographer.
But, Sir, there is a relationship between photography
and modern life that I think one ought to glance it. After
all I suppose I am getting a bit long in the tooth as I am
occasionally reminded by my political opponEts, one of whom I
can see beaming at me amiably from the audience. I must be
because I can remember the day, as indeed many of you can, or
some of you can, when to be taken to the photographer to have
that cabinet size picture taken for posterity involved sitting
in a chair rather rigidly and uncomfortably, and having a pair
of forceps put in the back of your neck do you remember?
and you backed into it. And there you were held like a v0ice,
keeping you quiet enough for the slow speeds of those days to
have a chance. That, of course, Sir, explains the glassy eye that
you detect in our more reaent anccstors, When you see the
family photographs in tie family zlbur: s it is all due to the
forceps and the primitive rmaterial of that time. Now, of
course, all these things have changed.
But this b . siness of photography is not a : ere
matter of providing somebody with a hobby, or somebody with a
living, taking portrait studies in Collins Street. These are
very useful undertakings, though I have never been able to
secure that tremendous amount of mercy that I would wish from
a photographer. Apart altogether from that, Sir, photography is now
entering into almost every aspect of life. You consider how,
with its trenendous developrnent in precision and speed it ns
been able to come to the aid of medical work, of scientific
investigation. WIhen we think of the miracles of colour
photography with its enormous developments we can see how far
this has come in aid, not merely of individual entertainment,
but of the sciences and of advancement in many branches of
knowled ge. It is not so long since a world event could happen
which would come to us by telegraph or by cable, be the subject
of a certain amount of letter press, and then there would be a
delay for sometime before any graphic picture of the event
could arrive. Isn't it amazing today to think that within a few
hours, thanks to the mir. cle and precision of photography, and
the great new arts of transmission, we can see the pictures,
literally, of events, all round the world. This, of course, 
adds to the vivacity of the printed sheet; it adds to our
comprehension of what is goini on in the world. Because we
don't all read and like reading; many of us like to look
because we like looking. It is therefore the great, the
tremendous art of photography xrhich is at the basis of a
growing amount of knowledge of the other countries in the world.
God knows we need a growing knowledge of other countries in the
world, and they need it of us, because the one hope of the world
is that we shall, on a basis of genuine knowledge and
understanding, become tolerant of each other and live in peace
with each other.
Sir, wherever I have lone in the world I have been
immensely struck by this fact, that the possession Df the
camera is becoming almost one of the signs of a high-living
standard in any country. More and more, every youngster, every
young man and woman every adult, every veteran feels more
and more the attraction of being able not only to see something,
but to record it. It was truly said that ' journeys end in
lovers' meetings'. Journeys end a great deal today in
photographers' meetings. I don't know of any more remarkable
way in which to refresh the memory which is at best a
treacherous thing, than to have these superb records of events
and of people. So, both publicly and privately this industry has
merited its growth. This day today is for your Company an hour
of great triumph. This is a phenomenal development, this
magnificent site in this good setting, with a vista of the
future that exhibits no small outlook on the future of
Australia. I am delighted to be here. I would like to
congratulate everybody who has had anything to do with it and I
give myself the singular pleasure of declaring it open. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES$ UPON RECEIVING AN H6NORARY DOCTORATE
OF LAWS AT THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE ON
APRIL, 1961
Mr. Chancellor and ladies and gentlemen:
You have just been reminded that this is not the
first occasion on which I have received what I must properly
describe as an unearned increment. ( Laughter) Indeed I look
back over some of those events with great pleasure, and with
particular interest. Perhaps I might begin by telling you why
it is so interesting to me, once more, to be in a position where
I am receiving a singular compliment and to look back on some of
these occasions that I have referred to.
I remember in 1941 when Winston Churchill was
Chancellor as perhaps he still is, of Bristol, and the Council
thought fiZ to confer a Degree, or Degrees, upon Mr. John
Winant the then American Ambassador to Great Britain, and
myself. A few hours before thc ceremony Bristol was bombed and
the ceremony which was to have t,. ken place in the Great Hall
took place in the Senate Chamber, and the members of the
Council and the Professorial Board arrived with their academic
robes over battle dress. Thoy ware all smoke-stained the
Hall was still blazing; and there were fires raging in the
streets radiating out from the University. That was a most
memorable, unforgettable occasion. Unforgettable, ais I know,
to Sir Winston Churchill himself. Certainly to me. And
memorable in this respect: that in the middle of all the
destruction and the war was then in its very crisis with
all its destruction the Universities and the University spirit,
and the University radition wont on. That to me has always
been a tremendously significant thing. It was, in a sort of
graphic fashion, a proof of the indestructibility of the
things that we all hope to stand for.
Reference was made to Malta. How I ever came to be
given a degree at the Royal University of Malta I don't know,
But I was. And it was a very long full day of d~ riving around
Malta, having the experience, previously and subsequently
unknown to me, of being checored by people in the streets,
( Laughter) When I began this journey somebody thrust into my
hands not an elegant piece of English, but a long oath in
Latin, at least 100 to 150 words. Well, of course, that would
appal anybody. I have a certain native supply of impudence,
but 150 words of a Latin prayer, this seemed to me to be a
little hard. When I arrived I whispered eCagerly to the Vice-
Chancellor Vice-Chancellors being, as you know, the fount of
all knowledge en these matters " Old pronunciation? or new?"
( Laughter) He gave mec the most superb piece of advice I have
ever had. He said " lIt's all right; mumble it." ( Laughter)
And I did. ( Laughler)
Then Sir, you referred to the French Canaidian
University in uobec Laval. 41ell that was something that I
remember pretty vivid. ly because although you allow me to
address you here in uihat passes for ihglish I felt very
strongly that at Laval portion of my speech ought to be in
French. From my point of view, it was. ( Laughter) I must say
that was the most polite audience for at the end they all
nodded to each other with appre ciation and you could hear them
saying, " 1Mram, il essaie, il essaie". 9 0 there we are.
The other occasion that I want to mention is that at
Oxford the year before last I had the misfortune, as it turned
out to be first in the list to go up for a Degree at the h1ands
of Lord Halifax. The public orator was there, ready to give us 
our Citations in impcn~ able latin modern pronunciation. But
when we reached the Divinity Scho~ 2. and were being marshalled
for the event, I was given a sheaf of paper which contained on
one side Latin and on tho other side the Engl. ish, but of
course I didn't have time to road it because I had to go off at
once, you soe. The others all sat down and read carefully, in
English, so that they could thereafter pretend to have
followed the Latin. I didn't have this oppirtunity; I had to
stand up first and listen to it. And I want to say that it is
a remarkable tribute to the truth that the older you get the
more you remember of your early days, that I practically
understood it all. ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, may I just turn to this University, this
rermarkable place. It isn't the first time that I have spoken
in this magnificent Hall but this magnificent Hall
characterises what I want to say about the University of
Adelaide. There was an itinerant book writer, some of you may
remember, John Foster Fraser, who compiled that immortal
phrase, " Adele'. ide for culture Melbourne for business Sydney
for pleasure". Oddly enough there was something in il.
Because when Sir Keith Murray was out here presiding ever the
Universities Committee of Enquiry, had finished taking his
team around Australia, and had almost completed his report I
was having a long discussion with him about the problem.
that time he told mie that in the true essence of what a
University meant he thought that Adelaide was pre-emninent in
Australia. Now that interested me enormously, because he
didn't rmean that Adelaide had enormous buildings, surrounded by
spacious grounds and gardens, vast sporting arenas and an area
of land such as that which enriches the University of British
Columbia. But I think I do know what he meant, and that was
that this University almost uncomfortably placed as one might
occasionally think, right in the heart of the cily, without the
elbow room that one would like to see, has succece: 4ed in
attracting the interest, the help, the enthusiasm of the most
eminent people in this city, and in this State. There is not
that kind of remoteness about the University which one
occasionally sees in Australia " Well that's an academic
place; nothing to do with us; letts go on with the business;
let's get on with our profession; we've finished with all
that." I don't observe that sort of thing in Ldelaide because
year after year I have seen men of the greatest distinction in
the life of this city serving actively in the University,
maintaining what is needed for a Univarsity -an outlook by the
University on the world, and inlook by the world into the
University. You have only to see here my tuo old friends the
Chancellor and the Deputy Chancellor, to realise that In this
city, in this State, men have not forgotten this place when
they have gone out from But they have come back to it,
and worked for it.
Now, Sir, you have been reminded that I have had some
small part to play in the furnishing of funds for the
Universities. The State Governmients have aided on the great
scale, but my own Government has, progressively, entered into
this field and I think very properly so. I am sure when may
sponsor, my learned sponsor, threw out that slight but
delicate hint of favours to come ( Laughter) I'm sure that he
was right. Because when Sir Keith Murray's Committee brought
in a report, we having beon in the habit, at that time, for a
few years of spending about f-lm. a year, or œ 34p. a year by 
3.
way of subvention to tho Universities, found ourselves with a
recommendation that amounted to about œ 2lra. over a period of
three years. If it hadn't boon for a certain aim-ount of rather
devious conduct on my part I don't know whether it would have
been approved. I won't go into the devious riethods, but anyhow
Treasury approved and that is a great milestone in the
history, not only of the Universities, but perhaps other people.
Then we appointed a Commission under Sir Leslie
Martin. And they brought in their report, not long ago. œ 21
million in a trienniura, that shocked us. This time it was E+
million for the three years! What it will be in the third
three years I wouldn't know. But I will be quite safe to
consider that it will vastly exceed any figure that we now have
in mind. It is a groat pity in Australia that Universities
should have become so remarkably dependent on Governments on
the decisions of those in politics, on thei particular outlook
on Universities their status, their freedom, their future,
which may be possessed by some current political uind. I would
like to feel that in Australia, as in the United States of
America more and more will we find people who have wealth to
dispose of looking to help the Universities. Having so said,
and before I conclude, I would like to-offer a few perhaps
platitudinous remarks about why I believe so deeply myself in
the University structure. tJhat does it stand for? What must
it aim at? It is a trite observation that it exists for mere
than the training of people for professions; although so bs
it that it does its job it will train them not only in learning
but in character and in wisdom.
The first thing that is needed and this is gZoing to
be no easier as the years go on is to preserve the highest
standards in objective study and enquiry, the highest standards.
This vast pressing undergraduate population which we can see
coming alongl over the next 10 years, over the next 20, is going
to put the most enormous strain on Universities, not merely on
their buildings, not merely on their breathing space, but on
their capacity to teach to lead, to guide, so that the
standards rise all the lime. I hope, Sir, that in the course of
those processes, and particularly under the pressure of miodern
events we will not neglect " useless learning", as it has been
called, useless learning. which has contributed so mch to
civilisation, to tolerance, which is the same thing, and
furnishes the minds of'men and women for hours and days of
great importance to them aond to others.
I an always prepared to make a plea for what is now
called " useless lozning" l. Not, of course, that we are to
neglect the tremendous impact of science on the world and the
clamant demand upon Universities to produce people of science.
These two things are not irrencoDncilable. The great danger
would arise if we preferred one to the other so exclusively
that we failed to strike that balance of the min-d, and that
balance of interest, that balance ofcontribution by a
University which the world so much needs.
Finally I would like to say this: to those who are
the academic people of this audience it is a 3reat pity that
the word " academic" should have acquired a sor., ewhat contemptucus
connotation, " Oh he has an academic mind; lie lives an
academic life; these academics, yo) u know they are not strong,
practical, sensible follows like us". We have all heard this
kind of thing said. The truth is that without these who devote
their lives to academaic work this would be a pretty sorry place. 
They perform an enorrous service not only for the University
but for the cormiunity. They incur two dangers. If I state them
I will leave it there.
One is of becoming so completely absorbed in their
own discipline, in those fascinating matters of the r: Lnd which
we have all experienced who have been students, thcse 1: i tters
which comnand the whole of a man's intellectual onthusiasm and
interest, that they may be tempted to be rather coitm( rytuous of
ordinary men and women outside. That would create a gulf of a
dreadful kind. The second risk is that in order to avoid developing
what I will call a somewhat academic contempt for unacademic
people there may be a disposition to go to the other extreme
and be too much influenced by tho opinion of people outside,
too much afraid of what the politicians may do, of what the
public may think. Never, never fall into the error of thinking
badly of the public mind, because the public mind in this
country is a good mind, and the public character is a good
character. Never fall into the error of looking down on it.
But in the name of academic freedom and study never be afraid
of it, never be afraid of what the opinion may be outside.
Here is this happy balance, I hope, that will continue
a great tradition in a great University. Because I believe tha
I would like to say Mr. Chancellor that I am profoundly honoured
by this occasion. I regard it as no formality. I have
received a singular honour from a great University; and I am
happy to think t7iat I have received it, physically, from the
hands of an old friend. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 1/ 1961
The Prime Minister today received the following
telegram from General Abdul Haris Nasution
" On behalf of myself my wife and my party I convey
through you our hearty congratulations on the happy
occasion of the birthday of Her Majesty the Queen
E'.. Izabeth Second and our wishes for a prosperous
future for Her Majesty."
The Prime Minister has sent the following telegram
in reply to General Nasution
" Thank you for your telegram containing your gracious
message to Her M jesty the Queen. His Excellency the
Administrator of the Commonwealth Sir Dallas Brooks has
conveyed your message to Her Majesty."
CANBERRA, 21st April, 1961. 



FOR PRESS.
P. M. No. -16/ 1961
The Prime Minister~ and Minister for External
Affairs today announced that the Australian Government
would donate one hundred tons of rice to Tonga. Including
shipping and insuranmce charges the gift is worth œ 7,200.
Mr. Menzies said that severe damage had been
caused recently by a hurricane in the northern islands of
Tonga and many Tongans were homeless as a result. Australian
assistance was being offered to alleviate their distress an'd
to help the Tongan authorities to put into effect their plan
of establishing a store of food to guard a-gainst shortages
arising from natural disasters. The gift was a practical
demonstration of Australian interest in the welfare of the
Tongan people.
CANBERRA.,______ 22nd April, 1961. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ON THURSDAY. 27TH APRIL,. 1961.-
WEST NEW GUINEA
We have had. a brief, but-. most-interesting, visit from
General Nasution, the Indonesian Minister for National Security
and C. G. S. He met Ministers for discussion, while subsequently
I had two long talks, at each of which Mr. Townley was present.
In the result, though no new policies were exprassed,
both General Nasution and I thought that there was a
considerable clarification of points of view, and further
elucidation of the facts..
The discussions throughout were conducted, as one would
expect, in an atmosphere of the utmost good will and of mutual
respect. Our two countries are neighbours and friends, with
very great interests in common; our interest in peace, in
security, in resisting communism. The one matter of difference
of opinion relates to West New Guinea. And even there, as I
have been able to point out to the General, Australia's
interest in New Guinea as an island derives from our desire to
see the economic and social progress of its inhabitants, and
from our natural interest in the character of its political
future. It 1i rn interest, which has been emphasised by the
significance of New Guinea to us in two wars, and more
particularly in the second. It doo5 nort arive from
hostility to Indonesia, for thcre is no such hostility in
Australia. Having made these general remarks, I think i. t dno to
this House and to our distinguished visitor that I should state
in summary form and, I hope, with complete fairness, the
Indonesian point of view as explained to us, and the
Australian point of view as explained by us. I put it in this
way, though at all stages it was made clear that, in the dispute
or difference between the Neotherlands and Indonesia, Australia
is neither a party principal nor a self-appointed arbitrator,
but is a naturally interested noighbour.
As General Nasution explained it, thn Indonesian
position is that its claim to West New Guinca is not legal, but
political and historical, West New Guinea having been part of the
Netherlands East Indies. He claimed that Jeo'st New Guinea was
part of Indonesia before the establishment of the Netherlands
East Indies. It is because of this, he said, that Indonesia
will not take the matter to the International Court a
procedure which Australia has constantly advocated, and which
the Netherlands is willing to adopt.
We dwelt on this matter for some time. I once more
made it clear that Australia attached great importance to
sovereignty, in a world in which new sovereignties are being
created and independent rights maintained. I said that we
recognised Dutch sovereignty in West New Guinea ( with all that
such recognition involved) and that we could not reasonably or
successfully be asked to reverse this recognition. If the
matter went to the International Court, I said, and the
judgment went for Indonesia, we would of course respect that
judgment. General Nasution said that he understood our argument
on that point, but added that one consequence of it should be
that, in any discussions between the Netherlands and 
Indonesia about West New Guinea, Australia should be strictly
neutral, and should not support and encourage the Dutch either
generally or in the United Nations. This indeed, as he made
clear, was the great thing that he wanted to establish with us.
I therefore reiterated that, as we had said at the time of Dr.
Subandrio's visit, we desired three things
1. That there should be no recourse to armed force, whether
by major or minor operations by armed
infiltrations) to give effect to Indonesia's
territorial claim.
2. That any negotiations between Indonesia and the
Netherlands should be voluntary and free of any threat
or duress.
3. That any agreement made as a result of negotiations so
conducted would be fully respected by Australia.
I went on to explain what we were doing in our section
of New Guinea in pursuit of our long-held goal of improvement
of living standards, education, and health to a point where the
population could freely determine its own future. I will refer
to this again, a little later. I said that the Dutch were
pursuing broadly similar policies, with the same objective.
The General enquired as to whether Australia did not
have some military arrangement with the Netherlands in respect
of West New Guinea. I said we had no such arrangement, either
directly or indirectly, and that whatever might be rumoured or
suggested to the contrary had no foundation. The only
agreement related to administrative consultation on common
problems and for the forwarding of self-determination in New
Guinea. That agreem nt was published when it was made on
November 6, 1957. I recall to Hon. members the principles set
out in that agreement as follows
1. The Netherlands and Australian Governments base their
policies with regard to the territories of New Guinea,
for which they are responsible, on the interests and
inalienable rights of their inhabitants in conformity
with the provisions and the spirit of the United
Nations Charter.
2. The territories of Netherlands New Guinea, the
Australian Trust Territory of New Guinea, and Papua,
are geographically and ethnologically related and
future development of their respective populations
must benefit from co-operation in policy and
administration.
3. The Australian and Netherlands Governments are
therefore pursuing, and will continue to pursue,
policies directed towards the political, economic,
social and educational advancement of the peoples in
their territories in a manner which recognizes this
ethnological and geographical affinity.
4. At the same time, the two Governments will continue,
and strengthen, the co-operation at present existing
between their respective administrations in the
territories. In so -c'ing the two Governments are determined to
promote an uninterrupted development of this process
until such time as the inhabitants of the territories
concerned will be in a position to determine their own
future. 
At the same time, I said, not only Australia but other
nations could not but be disturbed by any use of force, since
even limited hostilities, whether in New Guinea or Laos or
elsewhere, could have unforeseen and deplorable consequences. We
were therefore glad to have the General's renewed assurances that
force would not be used. I will refer to this again, a little
later. I took the opportunity of asking about the infiltrations
which were reported to have occurred along the West New Guinea
coast. The General replied that there had been some
infiltrations some of those concerned being armed; that such
cases were not due to any policy of the Central GovCrnnent, but
arose from some unavoidable lack of control in particular areas;
and that there had been some infiltration in reverse from West
New Guinea to the eastern islands of Indonesia, inspired he
said, by the Dutch for the purpose of fomenting disaffection in
those islands. In answer to a question, he agreed that there
was no suggestion that the Dutch were contemplating any form of
conquest, but maintained that their actions were a form of
subversion. I have stated without coiment these remarks by the
General, so that the House nay have a balanced picture of our
discussions. To conclude this phase of ry report, I should refer to
two other aspects of the matter.
As has been frequently pointed out in this House, the
native inhabitants of New Guinea have no ethnological
association with Indonesia. General Nasution retorts to this
that there are several distinct ethnic groups in Indonesia, and
yet they are within one political structure, and that Malayan
is widely spoken in West New Guinea.
In answer to this we have pointed out that the indigenous
inhabitants of the island of New Guinea have more in common, both
ethnologically and otherwise, than any of them have with the
various races of Indonesia, anr: that this is a factor which
should not be ignored.
But General Nasution adds to this another point. In
answer to our enphasis upon ulti-iato self-determination for both
sections of New Guinea ho contends that West New Guinea ahould be
( and, as he would say, is) part of Indonesia, and that there is
no nore reason for conceding self-deternination to West New
Guinea than to any other racial group or geographical area in
Indonesia. This neant that Indonesia rejected the idea of selfdetermination
for the people of West New Guinea. It was further
made clear that the only form of trusteeship acceptable to
Indonesia would not be one under the Charter of the United
Nations, but would be one for the purpose of transferring West
New Guinea to Indonesia after a brief intervening period,
Having roeard to this view, I carefully developed our
views on self-deturnination, and now record then for the House.
In our own New Guinea territories, our policy is, by
steady degrees and up to the linits of our financial and
administrative capacity, to promote the advancement of jthe
people so that ultimately they will choose for themselves
their own constitution and their future relationship with
us. We will respect their choice whatever it nay be. This,
for us, is not a new policy. We have pursued it for years. 
It arises from our sense of responsibility, a responsibility
which cannot be suddenly or prematurely abandoned if our
trusteeship is to be honourably performed.
Having regard to these undoubted facts, Indonesia cannot
reasonably expect Australia to take, nor will Australia
take, an initiative in a procedure designed to lead to a
handing over of sovereignty and the abandonment of the
right of self-deternination in the trritory concerned.
That was, and is, the reason why Australia is most
definitely not prepared to put pressure on the Netherlands
to negotiate for the transfer of sovereignty and the
abandonnent of self-deternination.
In other words, we recognise Dutch sovereignty, we deal
with the Netherlands as a sovereign power, and we approve of
the policy of ultimate self-determination which has been
adopted by the Netherlands in relation to West New Guinea.
If this is regarded by Indonesia as partisanship, we point
out that it favours the recognition of sovereignty and the
objective of self-determination, to both of which Australia
is inevitably attached.
But on such matters the Netherlands, as the sovereign
power, will nake, quite freely, its own decisions. Those
decisions will be recognised and respected by us.
We are on most friendly terns with the Dutch, as,
renenbering the last war, we ought to be. We are also
close to and friendly with Indonesia. What Australia has
done in the United Nations when the West New Guinea item
has cone up there, is to support sovereignty and doncstic
jurisdiction. Sovereignty is basic for Australia nc loss
than to others, including Indonesia. None of this is
hostile to Indonesia, and it ought not to be thought so,
Before I conclude, I return to the matter of military
involvement. I repeat, in the rost categorical terms, that
Australia has no military conmitnent with the Netherlands in
relation to West Now Guinea, lirect or indLirect. But armned
conflict in that country, whether arising fron mass invasion or
limited guerilla episodes created by armed infiltration, would
present Australia, in cor. ion with other countries, with a grave
problem. Any such conflict could certainly not be ignored by
the United Nations. It would engage the attention, helpful or
otherwise, of the great powers. It would threaten world peace,
and could well bring disaster to South-East Asia by its
encouragement of Conmunist activity and intervention.
It is therefore necessary to nake our position quite
clear. We stand for peaceful negotiation at all tines,
provided that such negotiation is conducted without the threat
of force of any shape or kind.
I have stated our recognition of Dutch sovereignty, and
our approval of the Dutch policy of self-detormination. We
have entered into no military cor. nitment beyond those involved
in the Charter of the United Nations. But if nilitary
conflicts, groat or snall, arose out of these differences, new
and grave problens , wuldar ise for many nations, including our
own. It is for this reason that the runewed assurances of
peaceful pursuit of Indonesia's clains, made by General Nasution,
are of such profound importance and international value.
Before I conclude this section of my statenent I would
like to say that we were all impressed by General Nasution's
frankness and personality. I an sure that he and his wife 
enjoyed their visit to Australia. Every opportunity was given
to the General by the press, broadcasting and television
stations, to express his views. I know that he appreciated
this, as we do. He has left Australia after faithfully and
ably representing his own couhtry, with, I an certain, a
confidence in his own mind that, while his visit nay not have
changed our policies, it has certainly made a powerful
contribution to our common understanding and good will.
LAOS Since I last spoke to the House on Tuesday, llth
April, new and important developnents in the continuing crisis
in Laos have occurred.
In Moscow, negotiations have at last resulted in a
measure of agreement between the Soviet and the United Kingdom
Governnents as Co-Chairnea of the Geneva Conference of 1954
which settled the Indo-China conflict.
The United Kingdom Government has acted throughout
these negotiations in close consultation with its friends. We
hope and believe that the Soviet Government did likewise, for
the value of the new agreement will lepend largely on its being
respected by other conbers of the Commnnunist Bloc.
The arrangements agreed upon are, in brief, that
the Co-Chairmen should call for a cease-fire in Laos
which should be arranged by the Laotian combatants
themselves. This call was issued on 24th April;
the Indian Government, as Chairman of the International
Control Commission for Las, was invited to reconvene that
Commission in Now Delhi. The Connission is to report to
the Co-Chairomn and to receive instructions from then on
the Commission's functions in controlling the cease-fire.
( The Indian High CoJnissionor in Australia, Mr, Sen, has
been chosen by his Government to repr.. ent it as Chc-rman
on this Commission. do welcome tiis, f. r. Mr. Sen has a
close knowledge of Laos, and a wide understanding of the
problems involved.)
an international conference on Laos should be
convened in Geneva on 12th May.
Invitations have already been issued for the proposed
international conference which will be attended by 14 nations
Those will comprise
The nine nations who net in Geneva in 1954
Communist China, United Kingdom, United States, France.
Laos, Cambodia anl North and South Vietnam).
The three-nation members of the International Con.: r: o
Commission ( India, Canada and Poland).
The other two nations who border on Laos ( Thailand and
Burma).
( Pending the establishment of a Government of Laos which is
accepted by both sides, it will be for the conference to
determine how Laos : hould be represented at the conference
I make the following observations. 
6.
First, no explicit condition has been recorded by the
Co-Chairnen that the cease-fire must take place prior to the
convening of the international conference. Arrangements for the
negotiation of a cease-fire are placed in effect in the hands of
the various Laotian elements. I believe that the representatives
of the Laotian Government, headed by Prince Boun Oum which I
should add is regarded as the constitutional government of Laos
by the Australian Government as well as by the Governments of
the United Kingdon, United States and other countries will
co-operate actively in making the necessary practical arrangements
for an immediate cease-fire. We can only hope that other
Laotian elements will adopt a similar attitude.
Both the United States and United Kingdom Governments
have made it clear that they will not be prepared to attend the
proposed international conference until they are satisfied that
a cease-fire has in fact occurred in Laos. The point has great
importance. It is out of the question to confer on ways and
means of ensuring the future independence and neutrality of Laos
a policy of non-interference by Western powers and Coxrmunist
powers alike if fighting is contihuing in Laos and new
military threats are added to the recent series of offensive
operations by the Pathet Lao. Those operations have won
important and increasingly dangerous gains for the insurgents.
They have been supported by the Soviet air lift of arms into
Laos and by overland transport of supplies from Connunist North
Vietnam as well as by some military personnel from North
Vietnam. Both Luang Prabang and Vientiane the two capitals
are now threatened by these offensive operations. The most
important of then occurred simultaneously with the final stages
of the recent negotiations in Moscow.
Second, the Australian Government has long been
determined to support genuine negotiations of a peaceful
solution of the Laotian problem. At the same time we have made
it clear by our recent association with the S. E. A. T. O.
corlunique of 29th March, that we are united with our Allies
also in our determination to prevent armed Comnunist doninf; tion
of Laos. This being cle-r, there is now . r better -rospec-of
coming to an agreement, by negotiation, on a solution which will
satisfy all legitimate interests and avoid ar. The comm. on
ground is the desire of the Laotian people, the iostern and
neutral powers and ( as we hope) the Corjunist powers, that Laos
should be a genuinely neutral State under a national government
representing all responsible opinion.
Third, the problem of Laos has not been solved. It
is an economically weak State, lacking social and political
cohesion. It will always be exposed to pressures, open and
clandestine, from its Cormunist neighbours. It will be the
task of the conference to try to devise ways of relieving it
from this pressure. The security of South-East Asia depends
on Laos being neutral and free from Conmunist or any other
domination. The next three or four weeks will rve:.. how r. ucco-
operation we can expect from the Ccmmunist powers in these
efforts to establish by peaceful negotiation the fri:.. Av. ork fo.
Laotian security, independence and neutrality.
4 eL 
7.
SIERRA LEONE I draw the attention of the House to the fact that
Sierra Leone, one of the oldest British territories in West
Africa, will attain its formal independence today, 27th April.
Sierra Leone last year declared its intention of applying for
membership of the Commonwealth and at the Prime Ministers'
Conference last month, ww elcomed its entry, subject to the
usual constitutional processes. These processes are now
complete and I have received a message from Sir Miltrn Margai,
Prime Minister of Sierra Leone expressing appreciation for the
acceptance of Sierra Leone as a full member of the Cormonwealth.
Australia is represented at the independence
celebrations in Freetown this week, at which H. R. H. the Duke of
Kent is representing Her Majesty. Lord Casey, who, as Minister
for External Affairs, had so much to . o with developing our
relations with newly independent countries in Asia and Africa,
kindly agreed to attend on our behalf. He is accompanied by Mr.
D. O. Hay, our High Coriissioner designate to Canada, who is on
his way to his new posting.
Sierra Leone is not a large country, but by no means an
unimportant one. The cmrse of its constituti.. nal development
towards independence has been smooth and peaceful, in full
agreement and co-operation with the United Kingdon. It will be
a valuable addition to the Commonwealth group in West Africa.
In the past, Australia has had little contact with Sierra Leone,
but we look forward to the development of close and friendly
relations within the brotherhood of the Commonwealth, and will
be glad to offer the new nation any assistance within our
capacity. I feel sure that all Honourable members will join me
in extending a warn welcome to our nJwest Commonwealth mrber
and in expressing our sincere good wishes for the future welfare
and prosperity of Sierra Leone and its people. 



-11L ' k. SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTR, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, AT THE OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE NATIONAL
HEART FL7q-DATION CAIPAIGN AT CANBEIRA, ON 28TH
" FRL, 1 ,61
Sir, Your Grace, Your Excellency and gentlemen:
I think I ought to begin by telling you two things that
have entered my mind very powerfully, first, since I read the
literature that was circulated; and second, since I came here
tonight. Here is my friend, Warren McDonald, a great
Australian, presiding over this appeal and saying to you quite
modestly, ? I want œ l millions". What in reality he -ants is
œ 2j millions: And this relresents a complete contradiction pf my
earlier and more respectable life as a Barrister. Because when
we wanted, on behalf of our client, œ 1U, 000., we always asked for
œ 2,000. He is revdrsing the process.
And the other preliminary observation is that when. I
read the book of the words, because having inveigled me into:
doing this task some time ago they then sent me masses of what
I believe is loosely called " literature" ( Laughter) and it had
hearts all over it, I read the rules to be observed to avoid
being a heart subject. I want to begin by confessing to you
that I have violated them all. You are not to be overweight.
( Laughter) Well, now, thank you, thank you so much for not
having laughed louder. ( Laughter) You are not to smoke too
much, whereas every time, and it doesn't happen too frequently,
that I am offered a good cigar, I smoke it, at once. And third,
you are to take regular exorcise. The only exercise that I ever
got cohsists of getting up out of my chair in my office and
going out into ry private secretary's office to kick up a
frightful uproar because something hasn't been done. But in
spite of that I hope to run for a year or two longer. ( Applause)
Oh, I'm so sorry. I shouldn't have let this have even the
merest hint of political significance. I hope to run for
another nine months. ( Laughter)
But my interest in this problem, my particular
interest in what is being done now, arose when some day
somebody brought into me a rather self-effacing, but very famous
man Dr. Paul Dudley White. ( Applause) Having got tired of
curing President Eisenhower he decided to have a look at me.
And he came in to see me. I learned more about the
possibilities of a Heart Foundation from him in one hour than I
think I might have learned by reading blue books and white
papers sounds rFther like Seidlitz powders, doesn't it?
( Laughter) for a long, long time. He introduced me to a new
outlook on this matter. All I want to say to you tonight is
something about my new outlook on this matter, because I
believe I was going to say I hope but I believe that the
Appeal that is being launched tonight will produce a responsive
chord in almuost every human being in this country.
I remember saying to the Doctor, " Well, of course when
I was a boy" which as my opponents would say is an incredibly
long time ago " and somebody was reported to have had a little
heart trouble, that somebody wtas put aside ' ell he's had a
little heart trouble' and he lay low, as yo i might say, and
was treated quietly." It was understood that he must not be
disturbed. Finally he almost frittered away his life because it
was understood that nothing must be done to disturb it. And I
said to him to our most distinguished visitor, " Is that true
any longer?" and he said, with that easy manner that a thin
man adopts when advising a thick one, " No, no, this is all quite
wrong. What happens is that if a nan has a little coronary
trouble good or bad as the case may be he rests until this 
particular lesion is corrected. Then if he has been in the
habit of playing golf, he plays golf; if he has been in the
habit of walking, he walks; if he has been in the habit of
stepping in smartly to the division lists with the bells ringing,
he steps in smartly ( Laughter) and registers his vote. He is not
to be encouraged to gallop upstairs. dut subject to that let him
live a normal life and "' here is no reason why he shouldn4t live
for 25 years". Now thatt I thought, was a most illuminating
observation by Dr. Paul 4hiue.
Then when I was approached first about this matter and,
as I have been unkindly reminded, made a speech about it, about
two years ago was it? Anyhow my office produced it the other
day. At the time I thought it was terrible; and reading back on
it I thought " Jolly good, jolly good". Then it was, I think,
that I began to understand a few things, a few things that I hope
everybody in Australia will understand.
We have been accustomed to talking about, and indeed
doing something about certain major diseases. For example, what
we in this country have done about tuberculosis in th3 last
years is, I believe, almost fabulous. We have been as people
devoting as we think, a good deal of money, but as the great and
devoted experts in this field know, an immense amount of genius
and spirit and enthusiasm and skill to getting rid of certain
great complaints. Yet perhaps until this Foundation was mooted
we had never realised that although all of us some day will die,
because our heart ceases to beat, the fact is that more than half
of the deaths in Australia still occur from some disease of the
heart. And of those I'm no expert but of those I should
imagine quite a perceptible percentage are deaths ol people who
need not die, who need not become invalids, who need not be
treated as something odd, to be carefully respected on the
sidelines. If only we could discover the causes of heart trouble,
the proper treatment of heart trouble, the right way in which to
make people who have some heart trouble understand that they are
not out, but that they are still, under proper conditions, in the
full stream of life.
This, I think, is a tremendous adventure in medical
science. And like all other groat advanturos in scientific work
it is not just to be loft to Governments because Government
departments there are many famous heads of Department here
tonight can do a great deal. But when you attack an enormous
problem of this kind, then, as the people expect to have the
benefit, so the people must rally around and say " Lie are going to
have a hand in achieving this thing."
This is what I call, Sir, the " new wisdom". In my days
as a boy I so well remember as I have reminded you, " Poor old
chap", they used to say " hels had a heart attack, and therefore
he's out". And now the whole concentration of the greatest
cardiac experts in the world is not on smoothing the passing of
the man who has had a heart attack, but in bringing him back
into the full stream of life and to his full usefulness as a
citizen. This is really, when you think about it, one of the
greatest efforts at human reconstruction that has occurred in our
time. That is one of the reasons why I am here.
Now, Sir, like nest of you I have my own feelings of
respect and of affection for medical men. I know it pleases the
doctors to make disagreeable remarks about the lawvyers nothing
to the disagreeable remarks that the lawyers have made about the
doctors under suitable circuimstances. But when we got right
down home it's true, isn't it, that we all have a remarkable
feeling of confidence and trust in the medical man who looks
after us, who advises us, who treats us. This is a marvellous
and noble profession. 
0 3.
But it isn't all a matter of looking at today's doctor
and saying, " Well, of course, he owes his skill to his own
genius". He may have no more genius than his father who was a
doctor before him. But if he knows more, if he has greater
skill, it is because things have been happening outside the
immediate practice of medicine that have enriched his
experience, enriched his knowledge, enriched his own technique.
Therefore, Sir, the truth is, in each generation,
that medical men, and we may all be thankful for it, are better
equipped than their fathers. And if they aro better equipped
it isn't because they are necessarily more able than their
fathers I've never laboured under that error it's because
research, investigation, experiment have increased knowledge and
skill in the new generation. Never let us forget that. Seventy
per cent of what did you say? œ 1 millions, œ 2 millions,
œ 2 millions, œ 3 millions that may be raised by this appeal
of it is to go to research. Now research is not a matter of
some man sitting down and having a brilliant inspiration and
writing it down on a piece of paper. Research, properly
considered in this world, is a matter of infinite pains, of
patient seeking, of patient recording of knowledge; it is
something that I am afraid most of us have never understood. We
think that research means suddenly having a bright idea. It
doesn't mean that, except in one case out of a hundred thousand.
If we are to have research into these matters, if we are to
discover the impact of certain physical conditions on the heart,
then clearly this will take years of work maybe months of work
in some aspects, years of work in others. It will require the
concentrated and organised labour of devoted and skilful people.
And so be it that the research be great, and the results be
great, shall we, or other people, in a few years' time meet
together and say: " This development of research into the
conditions of the heart was one of the greatest things to
happen in Australia". Now, Sir, that provokes me to say just one other thing.
We live, as I am constantly reminded, in a new world. And I am
constantly reminded, and no doubt, quite justly, that I am an
old-fashioned person. This is the " space age" and we are
invited to tremble, or applaud, as the case may be, at the
researches into space by clover modern men who know all about
propellants, who know all about putting rockets into orbit, and
monkeys into orbit, and men into orbit. This is no doubt
spectacular and magnificent. But I will still say this to you,
that from the point of view of the welfare of human beings, men
and women and children, the greatest researches and the greatest
discoveries in this century have not been in space, but on this
earth. ( Applause) When I an invited to quake because somebody has
launched a sputnik or a man or something my mind runs back to the
undoubted fact that in this century, so otheruise mangled by the
villainy of people, the greatest things that have helped mankind,
that have prolonged life, that have aided human happiness, have
been made by those people who have worked on the probleos of
health. My mind runs to the surgeons, the great developments
in surgery, the narvellous developnents among physicians, the
rarvellous, the miraculous work of the bio-chenists, the work of
the physiologists. Add then all up and you will find as I an
prepared to assert, that the simple truth is that of all the
people who gaze up occasionally and look at a sputnik in the
sky, quite a considerable number wouldn't be there to see it,
if it were not for the nagnificent work of medical research in
this century. ( Applause) 
Those, Sir, I believe, have been the greatest benefits
to mankind in our time. s I am not disposed to believe that all
work is done and we must now turn to another, I believe that the
Heart Foundation in this country enriched by the experience o
our colleagues in the United States of America, will probably
produce in 0the next generation a ri~ volution in this fiel~ d,
compared to which the launching of rockets the putting up of
things that go into orbit, will in the ultimate judgment of a
just and wise mankind, be as nothing.
The last thing that I want to say to you is this:
This is our problem. I read the material that was sent to me
and I was delighted to find a passage from old John Donne I
wonder how many people can write English today as he wrote it
and I remind you of it:
" Any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in
Mankind; And therefore never send to know for whom
the bell tolls; It tolls for thee".
Now this I think is the key note of this matter ' never send
to know lor whom the bell tolls; It tolls for thee'. This is
our human problem. If, as a result of this appeal, to which I
hope every man woman and child in Australia will respond, if,
as a result of this appeal great things are done in this vast
field of medical know'ledge and the prolongation of human life
and of human health, then$ Sir 7 I would say that tonight we have
begun a great and humane exercise, not for one, but for all
the most remarkable essay in brothurhood that we have known in
our time. ( Applause) 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HiON. H. G.
MENZIES AT NEWINGTON COLLEGE, SYDNEY, ON 29TH
APRIL, 1961
Sir, President-General, and ladies and gentlemen:
I want to confess to you that I camne up here with
some doubt as to how I should begin what I hope will pass for a
speech. As I am an old boy of tUesley College in Melbourne,*
your opposite number, I thought that courtesy might require that
I should address you as " Fellow Methodists" ( Applause) And
then I remembered that I am not; I'm a Presbyterian. ThenI
thought, " Well perhaps", having a look at the Chairman, " I might
begin" because it's a good note 1" r-' llow Presbyterians"
Until I found that a man who had lived for years in Scotland
couldn't pronoiinde Y'ackayo Then to my intense interest I'
found that this is really a very diverse audience because just
as I was trying to settle in my own mind the fine points of
doctrine I discovered that we are practically occupied by the
Dalys, the Ryans and the Fitzgoralds] ( Laughter) So I think
I had better avoid any of these doctrinal differences -and ju~ st
address you as " Ladies and gentlemen".
The first thing that I want to do is to apologise to
you. I am, for the only time for a long time, wearing a rather
dashing looking blue shirt some of you may have noticed it.
I think I ought to explain to you how that comes about* This
morning I had to make a television what do you call it
performance, appearanco, show? Anyhow it had something to do
with television. And when you go on television I say thi? for
the benefit of those of you who have been fortunate enough to
escape it they do their best to improve you and of course
for all of us that is very necessary. But one way of
improving you is to get you to wear a blue shirt; apparently
it does something to you. I don't know; I've never got to-the
inner mystery of it. The other thing is that you sit back in a
deep chair, pretend you're your own wife, and have your face
made up! ( Laughter) Very lightly, mind you, very lightly. A
touch here; and a touch there. The effect of it, I want to
tell you at once, is appalling.
I once did a famous political broadcast I hope my
colleague, Mr. Daly, won't object to this a powerful
political broadcast in the last election. And as my hair, a s
you can observe is white, they thought it was necessary to
preserve the distinction where the forehead ended and the hair
b6gan it's not so obvious in his case. So the young woman
put a certain amount of a pale blue substance in my hair and
it did the trick: everybody could tell I did have hair,
instead of being bald. When we left she said to me, " Now" and
I thought she said " wash it out". What she said, as my wife
told me afterwards, was " Brush it out". But I washed it out;
which meant I washed it in! That night I had to speak in a
very, ve ry strong industrial suburb and to see me standing up
there with a blue rinse ( Laughter) must have cost my candidate
quite a number of votes.
Now I referred to ray wife then. I want to refer to
her again. She didn't come back with me to Australia, not
because she ~ sdeserted me, but because she has remained with
my daughter and her children for various reasons, and she's
going to be back on Friday; and she will be very disappointed
indeed that she couldn't be here.
I am delighted to be present on an occasion like
this. It does great honour to the School that the School should
have had this tremendous addition to its buildings; and it
does great honour to the School that it should have named the
additions after Mr. Nesbitt who has worked so valiantly in the 
vineyard of this School for so long. ( Applause) Therefore I
regard it as a 7roat privilege.
Furthermore, I always regard it as a particular
privilege to be invited to do something, however small2 of some
notable event in the history of a great Church School.
Because there are two kinds of things that matter in a School
one is that it should have a continuity of education and
tradition and growth; and the other is that it should have a
continuity of the spirit. These are the two things that matter
in a great Church School. Newington, of course, has stood for
them for many, many years.
ilhen I refer to continuity I refer to something that
is very close to ray heart. It may be said by some that this
represents my essential and deplorable conservatism of L. ind. I
don't know. But I am an inmmenso believer in continuity. I am
not a believer in looking at the past because it is dead; but
looking at the past because it is living; looking at the past
because it reminds us that we are in the groat procession of
life. Any man who walked in the procession of life and who
aims at doing anything in life, who is unaware of what went
before him, unaware of the great truths that have come down to
him, is a foolish man. He is essentially, a short-sighted man.
When we were listening to the words of a Paalm my mind
went back to a time, many years ago now, when I first visited
Chequers in Buckinghamshire, the new country home the old
country home, because it is both, of the British Prize
Ministers, a home presented to the nation in the time of Lloyd
George and now occupied as a place of rest and recreation but
in my experience even more of hard work by Prime Ministers
and those who come to see them.
Many years ago I stood on the utmost fringe of the
Chiltern Hills looking down over the Oxford Plains. The man I
was with had a great feeling for the geography and history of
the country. We could just see the spire of the Church at
Great Kemble where John Hampden went down and made his speech
to the gentlemen of Buckinghamshire against ship money and so
began the whole history of the parliamentary control of
finances. We could see the long road that stretches acrosp the
plains, the Roman road from Andover; we could see on the Jides
of the hills the little ancient, almost ibliterated, marks of
the old British trenches put down at the time of the Roman.
invasion. This is the very microcosm of English history, the
most fascinating place in the world.
And my friend said to me, " You know, over there
Hampden was mortally wounded at the Battle of Chalgrove Field
and he rode off the field slowly, with his head dipping, into
the village of Thane just around the corner of the hill. And
he died there. His men brought him up to Hampden House, just
over here on the hill, and up the drive" to which he latQr
took me " and there at nightfall these men, these Roundheads,
with their lanterns in their hands marched the body of John
Hampden up singing the Paalm that ends" I've forgotten these
words, but the reference is to justifying the work of our
hands. I had it in my mind and it slipped away. That's the
Presbyterian coming out, you see.
Now this seemed to me to be the most marvellous
thing. Here was one of the yreat historic events in England
and the very men who took their magnificent leader dead off the
field were thinking and speaking and singing in terms of the
Bible. That hasn't disappeared; that hasn't gone, This is
still one of the great elements in continuity. 
3.
Does anybody suppose that every time a great crisis
arrives in the world and sane, Ean is raised up to deal with it
that he is a sudden accident, Was Churchill a sudden
accident? Unexpected? Unreinforced by history? Unconscious
of a sense of continuity? How absurdl If any boy at this
School wants to understand the continuity of great things in the
world, just as I want him to understand the continuity of what
this School stands for, he right take an hour off and read tho'
speeches of the Younger Pitt at the very turn of the 19th
century. Then read the speeches of Churchill in 191+ 0, and 141t
and 142. He will find that although the mode of expression h~ s
changed, as it always does, here are the sane ideas; here is
the splendid eloquent expression of defiance, of strength, of a
sense of continuity, all of which meant we we the people of
Britain, are not to be overthrown by tyrants,
There it is. This is a marvellous thing, the sense
of continuity. And the people who live as if we were here today
and gone tomorrow, I don't envy then I'm sorry for then.
Unless we have a sonse of continuity, unless we know wrhat our
fathers and our grandfathers bestowed on us, what ideas are in
the currents of our minds, almost at the moment of our birth,
we know nothing. We must feel that in our tine just as the
boys of Newington today, I hope, will feel that in their tine
we and they are not only the inheritors but in our oiwn fashion
the creators, the people who continue the tradition, who build
on it, who improve on it, who are not just reactionary in th~ eir
minds, who look forward, who are free in their minds and
enterprising in their thoughts, but who always know the
foundations on which they build. This is, I think -well it is
to me at any rate a stimulating thought on an occasion of
this kind. It is easy enough for the old boys of a School to cone
back and become a little sentimental about when they were at
school, to glorify the wit with which they replied one day to
the Maste r, a wit almost entirely retrospective, to be sayinig
something sentimental about the " good old days" when probably
half of them hated a good deal of it as it occurred, That is
all very well, very agreeable, I do it myself, I'm not being
superior. I can equal anybody in these amiable hypocrisies on
a suitable occasion. In reality however, down in their heapts
they look at the school not in a backward-looking sense, not
0 remembering what a superb foot~ aller Tom was, or what a
wonderful cricketer Jack was, but as something that they
themselves have helped to make in their own time. They won't
say so because they would think that rather pompous. And
therefore I will say it for them: it is something that they
have helped to make.
That is true too, about all the boys who are here,
old and young; truest of the old who are about to leave. But
for all of them true because this is a school that is
established, that was established in the beginning, that
continues to work, realising that you may have all the clevqrness
in the world, you nay have all the scientific skill in' the
world; but the one thing that will save the world will be
civilised minds. And civilised minds are minds conscious of
the past, aware of responsibilities of the future, ard~ above
all with standards in their minds, standards of faitri, standards
of the spirit that will enable them to avoid the bitter wretched
paganisma that has beset the world in the last 50 years.
Sir I want to say no more -I've spoken too long.
But I did want to tell you, so far as icould, what I had in my
mind in accepting this invitation and in telling you how
delighted I am to open, as I now do open, this wing. ( Applause) 



Jest New Guinea at length
South~ . Af-rica Nev Guinea
Unemployment fi gure
Cons titutiona. refLormn
Restrictive Trade Fractices
cternai -Iffairs portfolio
L~ aos
Britisla Commonwealth Southi Africa
J.-hite Australia Policy 
TEXT OF TV PRESS CONFEIhENCE JITH THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. E. G. MENZIES IN SYDNEY2 ON SUNDAY,
APRIL 1961
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister can we talk, first of all, about
West New Guinea? Both you and General Nasution have
said that as a result of your talks here in Australia
that the issue over West Now Guinea has been clarified and
has added, perhaps, to cotmton understanding. However the
two views remain quite opposed. Would you say the two
countries have grown farther apart, or closer together?
PRIME MINISTER: I would say closer togather for two reasons, applying
one each uray; So far as Indonesia is concerned it has
obtained quite readily, a statement by myself that
Australia has no military engagement with the Netherlands
direct or indirect. Ho attached irportanco to that. It
had been said before, but perhaps not by me. So from his
point of view that was something cleared up. And in my
turn I felt that I had cleared up with him pretty
completely the importance that we attach to selfdetermination
for the people of New Guinea, whether in
West Now Guinea or in our section of New Guinea. And I
think that that registered in his mind.
qUESTION: Do you feel, then, that they nay press less vigorously
this claim to West Now Guinea after these talks?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think that one should assume that they won't
abandon their claim, they'll pursue their claim. But I
think there will be less disposition, perhaps, to permit
people to suggest a forceful solution of the matter. I
think that the General means it when he says " We are not
going to use force to establish our case". But that he
will use propaganda, all these other means that are
available, is quite clear. In fact he was very frank
about it.
QUESTION: Do you think that the stand that we have taken may
increase the influence of the Communist Party in
Indonesia?
9PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so. The Communist Party in Indonesia, I
gather, is on the bandwagon, to use our expression on
this matter. It is among the leaders of the demand for
lest New Guinea. Then thero is a difference of opinion.
Some people there think that if the claim succeeded and
the Dutch handed over West New Guinea then the position of
the Government against the Communists would be
strengthened. I would take leave to doubt that. I would
think that if they could claim that they had a big hand
in ; etting West Now Guinea that their position might be
strengthened. But anyhow that is an Indonesian problem
at the moment, not mine though, of course, if the
Communists did a lot of good, made a lot of advance in
Indonesia that would be our problem.
QUESTION: Do you feel that the possibility of an incident
creating some greater conflict, which General Nasution
mentioned when he first came here, has disappeared now?
PRIME MINISTER: It would be saying too much to say that it had
disappeared. But I think the dan~ er has receded. Because
this business of infiltrators, and soue of them with
arms, has been discussed and has been made public.
Everybody now knows that this kind of thing has been
going on. And I think, thoreforu, that there will be a
little less csposition. 
QUESTION: What will australia do, though, if such a conflict
does arise, whether it is limited guerilla activity that
you have referred to yourself, or open conflict?
PRIME MINISTER: Now that is a question that you really shouldn't ask
me at this stage. I said all I had to say about that in
my statement in the House.
QUESTION: Can I ask you this, Sir? On that don't you think it
would be of advantage if the Indonesians knew the type of
policy you were envisaging in such circumstances to
prevent then possibly bringing about a fait accompli in
that area?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think so, no. What I indicated in my
statement in the House was that if anything of that kind,
if force were used I've forgotten whether I used the
actual expression either in wholesale or in retail and
this gave rise to arried conflict then of course we
couldn't profess not to be interested in it, deeply
interested in it. So are the other nations affected by
these natters. The United States would be deeply interest
-ed in it; Great Britain, all the SEATO powers would be
greatly interested in it. And then I indicated it was
something the United Nations itself couldn't ignore; and
that what any other nations irrespective of such an
intervention by the United Nations what they were to do,
they would have to determine. But I don't think that it
is wise in a natter of this kind for us to be sabrerattling.
There's enough of it been going on; I'd
like to keep it outside
QUESTION: Do you have any fears Sir, that the President of the
United States might adopt an attitude towards Indonesia
that would be opposed to your onm?
PRIME MINISTER: That would be opposed to mine? No, I have no fear.
It night be differcnt fron nine. You see what I mean by
that? It may be that the President I don't know, this
is pure speculation would find his nind attracted by
some forn of Trusteeship for West New Guinea. I mean
this thing is floated around. Not the kind of trusteeship
that was proposed by Malaya which was not a true
Trusteeship under the United Nations, but was an interim
mnanagenent, so to speak, before handing it over to
Indonesia. Well, the President may very well be
attracted by some idea of Trusteeship. We don't reject
soe idea of Trusteeship; neither indeed, so far as I
know, do the Dutch. It is when you get down to the brass
tacks of it, what kind of Trusteeship, who should be the
Trustee, who should be the Administering powers this is
the kind of thing that they . rgue about in the General
Assembly of the United Nations for about a year. We
night not be exactly identical in our views that's
the point that I want
QUESTION: In the event of there being conflict you have mentioned
that perhaps the United Nations would be interested. Is
there a possibility, do you think, that a United Nations
attitude may be, in fact, against Australia.' s stand on
this, with a majority of say the Afro-Asian nations
supporting Indonesia's claims?
PRIME MINISTER: The first thing that would be done if this were taken
to the United Nations would be that they would call for
a cessation of hostilities. That, one :; ould expect
would bring to an end for the time being, these matters
of hostilities fighting, the conflict on the spot. 
QUESTION: Then you are quite right: if the United Nations then
said, " Well this has become a matter of international
significance and we therefore propose to investigate it",
and having investigated it proposed then tu alter the
sovereignty of host New Guinea, and they had the numbers
for it, well that could happen. You are asking me to
speculate now about something that is a contingency on a
contingency. Sir don't you feel that there is a contradiction in
the policy of one, recognition of sovereignty and two,
the insistence upon, or the preference for selfdetermination
on the Australian Government's part? Is
there any way in which the securing of self-determination
for the indigenous people can be brought about by
Australia? Could it go to some tribunal to get that?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don t think so. I don't see this conflict that
you are speaking about. We have sovereignty over at
least portion of our New Guinea territory and we are the
Trust power in relation to the other. We recognise
Dutch sovereignty. But the whole point about selfdetermination
is that the colonial power, so to
describe it, having sovereignty, exercises that by
pursuing a policy designed ultimately to give the
indigenous people the right to determine their own
future. That is an exercise of sovereignty.
( rJESTION: Sir, if Indonesia got control of West New Guinea
legally and had a sovereignty that you recognised would
there be any chance of the indigenous natives of West
New Guinea achieving self-determination at any time in
the future?
PRIME MINISTER: None.
QUESTION: That would be the end of it. There would be a
conflict then?
PRIME MINISTER: That I thought was made quite clear by General
Nasution. It was one of the matters of discussion
between us. Because I was saying, " We think that selfdetermination
of these peoples is of the essence. The
-, utch have promised it; the Dutch have made an agreement
with us" which I quoted in the House " undertaking to:
pursue this end and you won't have it". And he said, " No,
we won't, because we regard West Now Guinea as part of
Indonesia, not as a colony of Java and Sumatra or
whatever it may be, but as part of Indonesia, and it
therefore would have no more right of self-determination
than Sumatra would, or the Celebes, or whatever it may
be". So that there is a marked distinction between the
Indonesian approach and our own, and the approach of the
Dutch. And I think this has been tbrought out into sharp
relief as a result of these discussions, in a perfectly
friendly way. There is the point of difference.
QUESTION: On the other hand we have shown our interest in selfdetermination;
and yet we have said in the agreeuent
that we will respect any decision mutually reached by
the Dutch and Indonesians about this which, in fact,
would not involve self-determination by the people of
West New Guinea, would it?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I see what you mean. You think there is a
conflict between the idea of sovereignty and the idea of
self-determination. I don't think so. We start off 
about West New Guinea by saying " We recognise
sovereignty". We want our own sovereignty to be
recognised and we therefore respect the sovereignty of
the other man. One of the faculties of the sovereign
state is that if it wants to deal with its territory in
some way, it nay. It has agreed with us that it will
deal with that territory by producing self-determination.
But if it made an agree-ent tomorrow with Indonesia to
transfer Jest New Guinea to Indonesia, in the exercise of
its sovereignty, that of course w) uld be an end of selfdetermination.
But it wouldn't prove that our policy and
approach had been wrong. It would merely mean that the
Dutch themselves had changed the policy that is contained
in the Agreement with Australia. And we would regret it,
of course. Sovereignty is the paramount thing because it
is the beginning of the whole matter. Without sovereignty
it is idle to be talking to people about giving them
something in the way of self-deterination because only a
sovereign power can do that.
QUESTION: And yet in pushing self-determination hard do you
feel that wo may arouse snoe cynicism in certain quarters
about this very thing? I mean for instance, do you think
people may ask if Australia believes in self-determination
for the natives of South Africa, for the Bantu?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, of course, here you are raising the whole issue
of South African policy. You have to remember that the
Bantu population is in the sane country, South Africa,
within the Union of S. uth Africa, within the sane country
as the European people. It is not a case where you have
a separate race in a separate cor. mmunity in a spearate
spot, as we have with New Guinea. If you have a
geographical area like New Guinea, and there you have a
lot of Papuan people living in it, you can then talk
about self-determination for those people in that area,
because the problen lends itself to separate treatment.
But if we had the Papuans mixed up with our own people in
the Continent of Australia, you wouldn't be talking about
self-detormination because that would be an irrelevancy
you would be talking about racial policy, you would be
deciding whether you wore going to have intoeration or
separatencss; but you wuldn't be talking about selfdetermination
in the case of a com-: unity which itself was
a ringled community.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, could I switch to a local issue? Your
figures for those registored for oeploymnt are in the
neighbourhood of 82,000. Does the Govornoment regard this
as a satisfactory figure? Or does it propose remedial
action on that?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you Imow, this expression " a satisfactory
figure" is a little bit . m. biguous, because if I say " Yes"
then I will be told I an all in favour of having 80,000
unemployed, which I am not. No figure of unemployment is
satisfactory so long as it exceeds the inevitable limited
numbor of people who will be unemployable and there are
some such, of course. But intrinsically, this is not a
critical figure, of course. The work fdrce today in
Australia is estinated to bo 4,200,000. And if, out of
that number, you h: ive 80,000 who are, at a given moment
registered for neployment, with of course another 20,000
vacancies bein advertised at the sane time, that is not
a critical figure, that . dosn't present a major problem.
But if it grow then of course nobody could ijnore it if
the nurboers grew. 
QUESTION: The point is, Sir, that the Government does rocognise
it as a problem?
PRIME MINISTER: Look we exaggerate thle problem not for a
nonent. But so much do we have it on our mind th? every
week in Cabinet we have a report on the figures an.' iwe
have some discussion about where there nay be a pach of
unemployment, and what may be done about it. It's veiy
much in our minds.
QUESTION: Well how do you look at Queensland, Sir, where the
figure is
PRIME MINISTER: Queensland, of course, will always have a certain
amount of unemploynent, technically, because Queensland
has so nuch seasonal employment. If the cane cutting
season is long, then the people who are standing off are
fewer in numbers. If the cane cutting season is shorter,
then you will have people registered for employment rather
more numerously. Sane way with the neat season, so much
affected by the weather by whether they have had proper
rains in the cattle country beoause this will determine
the length of the killing season in places like
Rockhampton and Gladstone. Therefore there will always be
a slightly fluctu-. tir g figure in Queensland.
QU.. O: As you do reoard it as a problem, Sir, though not a
grave one at this stage, what remedial action lo you
contemplate for the foreseeable future?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, well, look I'm not prepared to say that at this
stage because as I say, the problem doesn't call for
drastic action at the present time. What you do is to
have a look at Queensland, to take that example, and say,
" Well now is there really a serious pocket of unemploynent
chere; and if so where?" Then you consider whether
by some adjustment of your public works programne, or by
some dealing with the housing programj. io, you night be
able to bring about some relief in that area. But I an
not going to be dogmatic about this because that very
problem is at present under examination.
QUESTION: Would yju say, Sir, that likewise the repercussions of
the so-called " credit squeeze" don't call for drastic
action at the moment? In the way of remedy?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you know, there seemed to be profound differences
of opinion on this natter. I noticed in your State and
mine that is if you are still a Victorian that there
is a widespread belief that the right cure now is to
restore import licensing, to slacken out on the credit
squeeze.
QUESTION: I don't think everybody in Victoria shares that view,
Sir, but I do think even some of your own friends feel
that perhaps the width of your own responsibilities today
and the pressure of day to day ev-nts moan that there
isn't sufficient attention possible for the job of
winning the next election right at this moment.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it's interesting that y.) u should say that,
because I had a conference yesterday with what they call
the " organisational planners" in my Party, and they, and
I, had a very strong belief in common and that was that
we were : oing to win the next Election. And we
discussed ways and means of d: ing it. 
QUESTION: Did you fix any taret, Sir, of what would be your
employnent figur for round about the election period?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. All these estiratos of figures are, of course,
as you know, rather speculative.
QUESTION: What has happened, Sir, to one or two of the ie
loosely described, perhaps, as " planks of platfo:.--ch'at
haven't been mentioned for a little while constitutional
reform? Was there not an all-Party report subitted to
you on this apparently very vital question? Are we going
to hear any more of that in the course of this year, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we had a debate about it the other day in the
House. The Opposition, very naturally, is warmly in
favour of the entire report because it embodies
practically every constitutional principle they srcand for,
QUESTION: You haven't particularly fond memories of referendums
Ithink, Sir, have you?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't mind telling you I am a complete sceptic
about these referonduis: ' When in doubt, vote " No"'
QUESTION: And will constitutional reform require a referendum?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, yes, oh, yes. Therefore you have to consider very
carefully not only whether it would be a. reeable to have
a particular am. endmont in the Constitution, because on a
number of occasions it would be, but you have to consider
' Will the people vote to include this amendment'? And
past experience, you know, doesn't lend nuch support to
the view that they will. Because the Constitution is a
complicated docunent, not very many people have read it,
and fewer have understood it. Judges have disagreed
about it; and the man down the street who is a sensible
chap says, " Well if the Judges can't make up their minds
what this means, who am I to say so?"
QUESTION: Does that mean, Sir, that there will be no
constitutional reform proposed?
PRIME MINISTER: Let me choose ny words with some care. I don't
anticipate that you will have a constitutional referendum
before or at the election.
QUESTION: Now, Sir, if we could ask : f one of these other
things that have been oposed by your Party. Will we
shortly hear of any progress in regard to restrictive
practices, and the measures necessary to eliminate them?
PRIME MINISTER: I'm sorry, old boy, but you have been so occupied with
such success in the television world that you haven't
been reading your parliamentary debates. Because the
Attorney-General has boon questioned about this matter
several times. And I can tell you that he takes this
problem very seriously; he has done an enormous amount of
work on it; he invostigated when he was over in Aerica
to see how they were handling their problem; we had
another investigation made in London about the working of
their Restrictive Practices Act. It is not a matter on
which the Commonwealth has single power. Therefore the
Attorney-General himself is in consultation with the
States on this matter. But it is not to be hurried. It
is no use pretending that you have discovered the answer
to all this, and putting duwn a piece of legislation that
can have a coach and six driven through it. But the work
is being continued. I myself attach very great importance 
QUESTION: to securing the best possible measure that can be got in
collaboration with the States.
Have you any hope, Sir, that at least the broad
principles can be stated in your Policy Speech wh ch
should be the end of this year?
PRIME MINISTER: I would hope so.
QUESTION: Sir, there has been a great deal of talk about the
burden that you bear carrying the External Affairs portfolio
as well as the Prime Ministership. Is there any
chance that you will be relinquishing that portfolio?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know yet. All I can say is that I have had
two najor operations in the capacity n-t intc':-..
operations major operations in the field of rYl:; r. al
Affairs, that relating to the Prine Ministers'
Conference and South Africa an'. the attendant mi. a-; turs,
and the other matters on which I spoke the other day. I
don't think anybody, really, on either side of the H* ouseo
felt that I wasn't informed on the matters that I dealt
with.
QUESTION: Without suggesting that, Sir, don't you feel that a
weakness could be that in this day and age there must, of
necessity, be contact with Asian heads of State, and your
dual role which demands your presence at Primeo Iinistrs'
Conferences, for exaniple, and things like that, "-n. ter
restricts your ability to , o to Asia to see thes0 ., eople?
PRIME MINISTER: Look if that is a disability in ne, let me remind you
that it is a disability which is shared by the Prime
Minister of Now Zealand and by the Prime Minister of India
QUESTION: By the way, Sir, wasn't there criticisn of that by
your : wn High Cornissioner in India, Mr. Crocker, in a
departmental document?
PRIME MINISTER: Was there? Well, I haven't seen it. You seem to have
an infra-red eye.
QUESTION: When Lord Casey was Prine Minister up until January
last year, I think, it would be true to say that he
travelled very intensively in Asia. Do you feel that you
have been able to do that as nuch as you would have
perhaps liked because of the fact that you occupy both
portfolios?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I have done it enough. Y. u can overdo this
business, you know. I find when I an talking to Foreign
Secretaries around the world, both in aeigland and in
iWashington, that they are all getting a little tired of
the idea that a F: reign Secretary, or a Foreign Minister,
has to be in the air all the tine. They have been forced
to the conclusion that if there is to be continuity of
policy there has to be a great deal of work done at the
centre, and more responsibility imposed on Abassadors.
And consequently if I wore Foreign Minn ister Minister for
External Affairs, and nothing else, you wouldn't get me
hurtling around the world at a great rate, at intervals o:
a nonth or two. I'n not criticising anybody. I would
find that, nyself, inconsistent with the proper performance
of my policy work. Other people thrive on it. John
Foster Dulles absolutely throve ontravelling around.
QUESTION: At the other end of the scale, Sir. we have Mr.
Khrushchev who does get around a grea deal, doesn't he? 
Presumably because he fools that it is worthwhile,
particularly in the part of the world in which we have
this vital stake, in sia.
PRIME MINISTER: But you nust always ronember that Mr. Khrush. r-v. has
an extraordinarily what shall I say?-well-dis.:-, lined
administrative structure under hi., and is, hirs: o7
essentially, the reatest living Minister for Pc-, ania
and propagandca, he finds, is nore usofully exhibi..:.
outside his own country. And so he -oes.
QU-STION: Do you ever attempt to enwy him these advantages of
his efficient propaganda
PRIME MINISTER: Never! You see I have a reasonable oxpLect-tiov1 tho. t
when I an dismissed I'll still be alive.
feel that this is an enormous advantage in c
country. ( Laughter)
QUESTION: Sir, if we c., uld ask you a qu.-sti n as PrimLe i, . ister
and Minister for External Affairs, Yo-u must be v y
disturbed about the events in Laos the last cuup'. of
days. Do you regard then as very dangorous?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I do. This thin isn't going very well., the
SEATO meeting we were aobl to get a unanimous on the
part of the S.., TO powers in favour of having an d, .~ endent,
united, neutral Laos, quite independent r'l
by the Soviet Union or the Comnmunist powers., . l
by the Wostern world. That was the objectiv, . n
order to get that a proposal was made by Great 1 M. jn
which was approved of by the United States for r : easoefire,
for the re-constitution . f the Internati-,.: l
Control Comission and the re-cAlling of a 14-pc o; er
Conference. All this looked to be good. And the Soviet
Union itself, after a little delay, agreed and has joined
in the call for a cease-fire. I hope, bona fide.
QUESTION: You have some doubts about that?
PRIME MINISTER: Certainly Because the fighting has gone on. The
Pathet Lao has been fighting and fighting since, making
advances since. I would like to be sure that the Soviet
Union has exercised its imeo nse influence with the Pathet
Lao, the Comnunist group, to bring about a cuaso-firo.
But as it is the fighting is going on. And roc-lly, as at
today, as you know, the position is very serious. It may
be that before the Conference can over be in there will
be a conquest of the essential areas of the country and
once the Cor. unists become established in that fashion
it is not a simple natter to get rid of then; and
indeed every SE._ TO power will have to think very hard in
the next day or two about the circunstance that arises
should the capital, the r:) yal capital and the administrative
capital, both of them, fall to the Cor. unists.
QUESTION: Is SEATO allowed to intervene in Laos, as there has
boon no indictable invasion?
PRIME MINISTER: It could intervene un. ler the South East ,. sian Treaty
on the request of the King.
QUESTION: Has ti re been such a request, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, not up to the uonent.
QUESTION: Do you anticipate Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. 
QUESTION: I think a point that viewers would like very much to
hear from you, Sir is what you consider nenbers of the
British Commonwealth still have in cor. mon? And \ hrt do
you see as the future? A lot of people, I thin, ': nk
that there is a slow disintegration, or an end1' the
worth of the Comr. ionwealth.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think, in spite of what has happenoed, . at tbo
great thing we have in common is that we all rec,
that we stand in a rather special relationship to eoc.
other naybe rather undefinable but a rathe:--
relationship to each other which enables us t: o . ct a;-t
Prime Ministers' Conference and have a discussloi,
the doors, of a kind that I don't think you couldc Cs.-; L; y
have in any committee or forum of the United fntj* i'::
Now that is a tremendous advantage. We c:
other pretty well and we can talk quite
other. We can assist each other, if you . o3 I
that way, with advice on matters falling wi"'-o-' tC rn
experience. My trouble, essentially, abc. tt thiJ. &gt; t one
was that I felt that South Africa, being . ff! et put out
on a matter which was a problem of policy '.. s: idj
boundaries of South Africa, may, if we are noet. ' ul.
give rise to further difficulties in the we
begin to talk, in the Prime Ministers' t
our internal, what we all think of our int..-il " s,
then I don't see any end to it. Perhaps
to the Cornonwealth by these recent event i. ll. n
realisation into the minds of the other irO.;
countries that this process is not to be l c,' 2.
continue, except perhaps under the nost
circumstances.
QUESTION: Was that your motive, Sir in raising the ' i: d.. 3
Australia question so promptly when this thing happenqd?
PRIME MINISTER: I'd like to make it clear that I didn't raise the
White Australia question nor do I ever refer to the
White Australia policy, as a matter of fact: I refer to
our immigration policy. That matter was promptly raised
by Sir Edgar Whitehead of Rhodesia ad was given some
prominence. That having boon raised I, in private, took
the opportunity of pointing out to my dolloa~ as in the
Conference that that was our business, just as wvhat
happened to the Chinese inlialaya was Malay's b usiness and
not mine, just as what oight happen about the Tamils in
Ceylon was the business of Ceylon not nine.
QUESTION: This support, Sir, for domestic jurisdiction which
you have adhered to in the Colrmonwealth is not so now, in
the United Nations, where Australia recently cast a vote
condemning apartheid. Is there some danger, do you
think, that we may be accused of doing one thing in the
Commonwealth, and another thing in the United Nations
over this?
PRIME MINISTER: I have been. I have been accused. An eminent
journal in this city, when the vote had been cast in the
United Nations, said that I was the grotost political
acrobat of all time. But when I nmde my full statement on
this matter to Parliament and had explained our actions
on this matter Igot a very commendatory leading article
in the sane paper. So the acrobatics were not all one gvy.
QUESTION: Why were thc.' e acrobatics, as you put it, Sir? Why
did we change our policy at U. N? 
PRIME MINISTER: Well, the position historically, in the United
Nations was that Groat Britain and Australia had, over a
number of years, voted a. ainst this ros. lution not
because they were in favour of apartheid, but because
they said that this was a natter of domestic jurisdiction,
This tine Great Britain altered itL vote from opposition
to straight out support.
QUESTION: Was that a surprise to you?
PRIME MINISTER: It was. A complete surprise. I had knowledge of it a
few hours before the vote was to be taken. In the
result they said, " We raintain domestic jurisdiction, we
maintain our attitude on that; but in the events that
have happened and particularly the removal of S ) uth
Africa from the Commonwealth, this matter now has
achieved international si. nificanco, and we therefore
propose to vote fcr it". And Aust-L-lia? What would have
happened to us if we had been the only Corinonwealth
country standing out sitting . ver there with Portgual?
We would have been r. isrepresented all over Asia about our
attitude; and we were not going to be misrepresented. We
had had enough. We weren't gping to be misrepirosonted any
further. So we voted with the United Kingdom. 



P. M. No. 17/ 1961
GOVEHNOR-GENERAL DESIGNATE'S PLANS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
His Excellency the Governor-General Designate,
Viscount de LtIsle, accompanied by the members of his
family will leave Angland on the liner Orcades on July
He will fly to Canberra from Perth where the Orcades is
due on July 29.
Lord de L'Isle has found that the transfer of
his business responsibilities as well as the arrangements
for the management of his private affairs cannot be
accomplished as quickly as he had wished. Consequently
he has asked for a little more time and the Government
has, of course, willingly concurred.
I shall look forward personally to welcoming
him and his family to Canberra at the end of July.
CANBERRA, 3rd May, 1961. 



P. M. No. 19/ 1961
EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 9 p. m.
TUESDAY, 9TH MAY, 1961
STANDARDISATION WESTElN AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS
KWINANA TO KALGOORLIE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
In my statement on 21st February, 1961 on economic
policy I said that the Commonwealth Government had under
consideration some large public works which seemed likely to
contribute in a substantial way to the development of our
national resources and, particularly, to the expansion of
export production. It would not be possible I pointed out,
for the Commonwealth to provide during 1961 largo additional
amounts for these works. However, I went on to say, so that
there would be no avoidable delay in having these works put
in hand when circumstances permitted, lowcre prepared to do
what we could to facilitate prompt detailed planning. To
this end, we proposed to put ourselves into touch with the
relevant State Governments at an early date.
We have done this and have made good progress. Of
course, much detailed planning remains to be done but
practical results have already boon achieved. For example an
early start is being made by the Queensland Government on the
Normanton to Julia Creek Road in the beef cattle country of
Queensland. Moreover, following discussions between the Commonwealth
and the Western Australian Governments at both the Ministerial
and official levels, it has now been agreed that the Government
of Western Australia should put in hand immediately the work
of surveying the route that a standard-gauge railway line from
Kwinana to Kalgoorlie would follow. Although the Commonwealth
still has to give further consideration to the State's proposal
for the standardisation of the line, it is prepared to make
available to ilestern Australia the funds required to meet the
cost of this survey. The survey is, of course, essential to
the planning of the project and the Commonwealth is happy to
facilitate the matter in this way.
In all these-itteri-the Coanaa6altfi will . bO6:.-ntinuing
its dtioussions withthe Stats Governments concerned.
CANBERRA, 9th May, 1961. 
61/ 020
P. M. No. 19/ 1.961
EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 9 p. m.
TUESDAY, 9TH MAY, 1961
STANDARDISATION WESTERN AUSTRALIAN RAILWAYS
KWINANA TO KALGOORLIE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. HIon. B. G. Menzies
In my statement on 21st February, 1961 on economic
policy I said that the Commonwealth Government had under
consideration some large public works which seemed likely to
contribute in a substantial way to the development of our
national resources and, particularly, to the expansion of
export production. It would not be possible, I pointed out,
for the Commonwealth to provide during 1961 large additional
amounts for these works. However, I went on to say, so that
there would be no avoidable delay in having these works put
in hand when circumstances permitted, wewere prepared to do
what we could to facilitate prompt detailed planning. To
this end, we proposed to put ourselves into touch with the
relevant State Governments at an early date.
We have done this and have made good progress. Of
course, much detailed planning remains to be done but
practical results have already beon achieved. For example an
early start is boing made by the Queensland Government on the
Normanton to Julia Creek Road in the beef cattle country of
Queensland. Moreover, following discussions between the Cormmonwealth
and the Western Australian Governments at both the Ministerial
and official levels, it has now been agreed that the Government
of Western Australia should put in hand immediately the work
of surveying the route that a standard-gauge railway line from
Kwinana to Kalgoorlie would follow. Although the Commonwealth
still has to give further consideration to the State's proposal
for the standardisation of the line, it is prepared to make
available to Jestern Australia the funds required to meet the
cost of this survey. The survey is, of course, essential to
the planning of the project and the Commonwealth is happy to
facilitate the matter in this way.
In all thos'a* itteir the Conmori6ialth -wi'l bo ontinuing
its' di oussions ' with-the State Governents concerned.
CANBERRA, 9th May, 1961. 



Spec made by the Rt. Hon. iR. G. Menzies
Prime ' IV. inister of Australia, prior to
Unveiling the "' irjG orgeHolland Plaque
H. . L. National Headquarters, Canberra 9/ 5/ 61.
" Mr. President, the ieap-ue has of course done a
remarkable piece of work in its history in Australia. It
has succeeded in doing somethiing qiite Darad ical; it has
never become a p~ olitical party, it alway~~ d g * reat influence
with rolit1c t t,. ink has b * en an
excellent thing.
You have b-en able to meet rolitdcal people of all
shades of opinlion fair terms, not as irolitical p. rsoris
but as neople who have and feel gre: at responsibility for
the welfare of Ex-servicemen. it's, been a wondierful record,
an: d I think perhaps the bCest nrooC ot' the nuality of the work
that the iteague has ( ic-. e it thant has had 4.-n itct; history
so few Federal ireside-t,-r-remar. rihly few ith long records
or srvie, become q-uite Ouiliax friends with the
Prime Ministers and inisters of the day. D have been singularly
fortunate because by :*, ome r. lracLe I was 1Prime Minister
of the country all the time that .' ir George Holland was
Federal President of tne 1jeague ,-each of them a miracle in
its own fashiona but a very ~ py thitru, for mie, and whenever
he ) as come to Canberra he ycaine to see me. 1 must say that
he4 n-, 6ever q., ite succeeded in coming just to say " I1 just
wanted to have the nleasu-re of looking at you, old man"-oe
has usually a few thOliW, YiOU Know, in ' Ade r'ocket, and
when he has left me . I have nuad a fe'. iesis Lhin,. s: ieft in my
hip poc.-et Aut we ; ot on very weLL iride'-d. I have always
had great respect and a-ffection for himi and of course in
addition to that, in the last ten years we have had an
Ex-servicemen's Commttee of Cabinet th. at has had direct
discussions with the members of' tne i ' ederal E~ xecutive and
with the officers of the Ljeague) the f ' ederal ecretary in
part icular, This I. think has made for great mutual understanding.
it is not to be supposed that the Leag : ue will
cver entirely agree with the cGovernment,! 6'_ t might as well
go out o siness it' it entirely aurees with the Goverruiinentb,
It is no~ spposed that the Governrment will always entirely
agree with' the League,, Tere ight be some letuitimate complaint
by the reasury, but we have got along, We have always
met each other and discussed t* e-1Aingsthi b~ n each side
we have done our br'st, arid the whole matter has been conducted
on a high level, and I believe in that. doni't t~ nkthat~
l gn ptt -the pzti~ fs~ bi
-arourn-A the~ zte ought to be able to meet each other
as responsible people and do thle best that we can about what
is after all not just an individual problern, but a W-tional one.
Now Sir George Holland has I think, been a perfect example
of how these things should be conducted. I want to teLl you that
so far as my 1irinisters and I are concerned we thought so highly
of him that when he came to retire from office we had him along,
with his successor Mr. Ulee, and gave him a dinnerM Tt takes an
awful lot to get roliticians to pay for a dinner out of our
own pockets. I would not want that to go any further but we did,&amp;
.3 e even enriched him with a piece of silver to commemplorate
whnt for all of us has been the happiest possible association, 
-2-
and all I can say George is that I hope that now you are
out of office, they will allow you to come to Canberra
occasionally. It would be equally pleasant for me and
probably less expensive if you are not Iresident of the
League , d tach time you are here I hope you will be able
to look at this lanue which I hope to unveil in a iiinute,
with -leasure and with leritimate pride, because this is
a proud day for you ft ought to be, and we all would lie
to share in your pride with you.
Now I h, e ben told to a-T s d thi T will
hannpn, it r. omet. ine. , oe2; o 0o 00 



P. M. No. 18/ 1961
STATE FUNERAL
LATE HONOURABLE PARKER J. MOLONEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzies
SThe Prime Minister announced today that a State
Funeral would be accorded the late Honourable Parker J.
Moloney, who was Minister for Markets and Transport in the
Scullin Ministry from 1929 to 1931. The late Mr. Moloney was
0subsequently Chairman of the Australian Dried Fruits Control
Board until he retired in 1957. He is survived by two sons
The Reverend Father Parker J. Moloney ( next of kin), Mr.
Bryan Moloney and a daughter, Margaret, ( Sister M. Marguerite).
S A Solemn Requiem Mass will take place at 10.30 a. m.
on Wednesday 10th May at St. Patrick's Cathedral, Melbourne
after which the CortEge will leave for the Melbourne General
Cemetery, Carlton, where intorment will take place.
S CANBERRA, 9th May, 1961. 



P. M. No. 2311961
ATTORNEY-GENERAL RETURNING
Statement by~ the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Commonwealth Attorney-General ( Sir Garfield
Barwick) left London by air on Wednesday on his return
journey to Australia. He took a leading part in the two cases in the
Privy Council in which hotel-keepers in Melbourne and
Brisbane challenged the validity of the licence fees imposed
by State law. The States of Victoria and Queensland, supported
by the Commonwealth and by the other four States, succeeded in
establishing, as a preliminary point, that the question raised
by the hotel-keepers could not be entertained by the Privy
Council except upon a certificate by the High Court of
Australia, under section 74 of the Constitution, which the
appellants had not sought to obtain. The majority decision of
the High Court in favour of the States therefore stands.
The Privy Coincil's decision made an important
clarification of the constitutional position of the High
Court, and extended, in line with legal thought in Australia,
the constitutional cases in which an appeal to the Privy
Council will not be available without a certificate from the
High Court. The Attorney-General will interrupt his journey
to make brief calls at Karachi, New Delhi, Bangkok, Kuala
Lumpur and Singapore. He is expected to reach Sydney at the
end of next week.
CANBERRA,
llth May, 1961. 



OFFIgJ" A D&amp; IIIUG, OFJAHQE24 &amp; gg7--v T l JRL 71A3ORFO
and
AUSIRAI9IAN t1ATIOONA, UIT13T~ l~ 4\~
i3~ eeoh Prime. MI ~ iaihWt rE &amp; Weo 114M~ A2
I am credibly informed that as wve sit here, moro or less in
comfor~ t, there are other people clustorinj around foundation stones add
switohos, hanng on our ever~ y uord. That may or may hot bo the case,
but I'vo been inf'ormned that it Is, and so I must got on uith rWy job.
I will follow the order that you followed, S3ir$ and speakz ffirst about
a natt% of uhich I am an utter master, the Tandem Slectro-static
Gonor'atorJ ( Laughter)
There are two things among~ many that oeccito ny a&amp;-iz'ctiori in
Professor Tittertono The first is that he Is a persistent Tollow and
nevor ta! hos " Hol" t for an answer, The socond is that he pronounces this
contromosial viord 11labgratoryll which is, aftor all, much oaoior than
11 . ab-) ratory" Iand Indeed, m~ uch loss liable to misinterprotatpiofl
( Ldueghtor) Nlow I just t-ant to toll you this about titi Tando3 ' ectrostatic
Gonratoro It came up to me because, f'or somo odd roason
thoaah It hasntt worked out too badly from the point of view of the
Univo7-sity, I happen to be their MI-nicter. They brush o-mrybody
asido, they cora Into my rooo and they lay do= m the lau to mle, '. 1ell,
I s~ ioudn't say " lay down the law" be cause I miGht have somo
opportunity of correcting them on that. B~ ut they produco tc.
icoan.-! Jhon this one came up I twas completely baffled as to what It
was, Nzdoed, it vas only yesterday that I said to my uifoe, who is a
perfoct raine of unscientific inforwationg " Do you Ino; w, my, doar, w'hat
Tm-idon Gonarator is?" S3he said, " E3vorybody 11nows that a Tandedm is
bicycle built 20: 0 two". B~ ut I oaid " This one cost hal~ f a illion!"
( Laughtor) She said " It must be studded with diamonds". Yola knoxi,
joi-illod in evory movemaent. B~ ut really, we were quite my~ ifleo
I cant an eye on to Sir 1,, 1ark Oliphant, who is a fount of
visdom for us, and he gave it a benevolent look. Ile saidt ' Yon, he
thoaCght this had a great deal of merit, ' that it would open up a now
phase of' thbis tre-nendously important rosearch work that hae boon
goinE; on in this depar'txont. As for Profossor Tittorton, ho had no
doubt about it. Bly the time he had finished writh me I tiondored
vhether perhapu wo shouldn't have three ( jLaughtoi) you knou Lit a
a. i~ ht price advantage if tie took throo, instead of one. that's
the kind of man he Is*
Then I thought., " No, no,) ve must got back to what ;. eY talk
about i. n politias.., but seldom practise, the 6great principlo of
priorltles". 03o I asked the then almost newly formed Acadeny of'
Sclonco whother It trould care to advise us on this matter# iknd It
Savo tis a high priority. Well that left us defenceloess, if not to
our enemtes at any rate to our friends. And so all that rouained for
Ejo ygiu to onrgaj~ In the triflin-exercise of persuadinG tize Treasury
that half a million pounds vould bo well spent in this direction.
And tkie Treasury, still rooling from the blows of the uIurz'ay
Comtu. uion and uhat was to come thoreafter collapsod# more or los$
and in a small voice said, " All right", fith proper roserv.-ionog and
without creating a procedentf and without all those othor Whings that
a docontly-conatitutod Treasury 3ays, and it got through, 



P. M. No. 20/ 1961
PUBLIC SERVICE RECRUITMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies,
announced today that amendments to the Public Service Act
passed by Parliament in December, 1960 come into force today
1lthi May, 1961. The alterations arose from the (..-vern~ ment's
consideration of the recommendations of the Boyer Committee
and the Prime Minister again acknowledged the valuable work
done by the Committee in its comprehensive and constructive
review of recruitment problems in the Commonwealth Service.
Amendments to the Act now being brought into
operation maintain the structure of the original Public
Service Act, but in the light of current conditions place
greater emphasis on qualifications roquired for appointrumt,
give greater flexibility in recruitment procedures, and
remove certain provisions experience has shown to be
defective. Notable in the changes is the establishment of
the Leaving Certificate as the firm minimum standard for
entry to the Third Division of the Service.
CAN BERRA 



P. M. No. 2219L
LOAN COUNCIL AND PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Ministor, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said that he had
today proposed to all Premiers that a meeting of the Loan
Council and a Premiers' Conference be held in Canberra on
Wednesday, 14th and Thursday, 15th June,
It is expected that the main business of these
meetings wiD. be Loan Council matters, but there will, ' f
course, be the opportunity for any Premier to bring forward
other matters he would wish to raise and which would be of
concern to the Commonwealth and all States.
CANBERRA,
12th May, 1961. 



UHIV23Xñ jj2K 031911 IX. 111 4Y. i6
I want to say, Siz, that I am very grateful to you for
what you have said about me, and about my Government. I think It
proper that 1 should also reind all of you hore today that what
hats been done could not have been don* without the most extensive
financial co-operation on the part of the State Oovornent
bnoause the now era, as I like to think It in In univeraiy life
whioh began with the Murray Rport# and the ZA0ption of the
Murray Reprtg imposed great burdens if we accepted them, on the
Commonvoalth and on the S3tatel and I think it is a very remarkable
thing# worth remembering, that all the Oovernments, in Australia
ooncerned and Indeed all parties conoerned, acoopted those
rosponsibIl itien, which of course* as you know, are not growing
lese As a result of the Murray Commission we round ourselves
called upon to find a sum of money which was staggering to me
arud I cani only assume, catastrophic to the Treasury. Juat we
Wallowed three times and in a snail voice siaid " Yes* and my
state oolleasusg I have no doubt, swallowed five times and In a
small voice said " Yes* and then we appointed a Universities'
Comission, under as mild-mannered a collection of bandits as I
have ever come across In my life, When they made their
reoomendations for the next trienniu I ns one of the bandits
horet) when they made their recommendations i'or the next triennium
well, they were roughly twice what they had been when we swallowed
three times and said " Y~ es" . so this time we swallowed six times
and uaid " Yes".
Suit theso are, of course, light-heasrted ruxarks about a
very, very remarkable period of development,. The development In
the university's field has been and Is of course eoing to be so
phenomenal that one would almost have oxpoctod It to Datisfy the
demand, Jut of course It won't; It won't because circumstances
in Auistralia. are such that the demand for tertiary education is
grwing much more rapidly than the population Itself* Buit all
this is a pood thing, thoujh It poses the most tremendous problems
not only in terms of money but In terms of trained and adequate
teachers and enquirers. There Is a tremendous challenge to
education In Australia.
Now when one thinks of a University one, of course
thinks of a Variety of methods, but for myself I would like to
say that I think that not only is a fine library the heart of a
university, but In a real sense It is the University. One
cannot imagine a university without a library of such quality and
of such extent that the sager students in their thousands will
not be prepared to find sustenance In It and enooura ement in it.
A~ library is a marvellous thing, and books are marvellous things,
Carlyle, you know, saids " In books lie the soul of the whole past
time, t? e articulate audible voice of the past when the uoy and
material substance of it has altogether vanished like a dream".
Nov that was, I think, a remarkable observation in 011eroes and
Hero-worship He was thinking of books primarily as the
repository of the mind and expe., ienoe of men in past days. He
was speakIng as an historiang and I am very ; lad that lie was,
bucause a university that loses Its sense of history a student
who has no sonsis of history is only half a university or half a
student. And so, if a ligrary is to be the repository of the
past forms and experienc, of men, It must be an adequate one. 
I know that in my days at the University of Melbourne,
if I may refer to so humble a foundation In your presenoo a
JrnIversity that was once decorated by the Vice-Chancellor
himself In our time a library was a small affair rather dark.
I romenter it so wells a bit ding a few students coming in and
peering at the book-shelves and jetting as near as possible to the
window to get a little light, and a magnificent person oalled
idward Ilippius Jrombyq who wore a beard, presiding at a desk and
being ; reatly shocked every time someone dropped a volume of tho
Law reports on to the floor# an art whiob I acquired theni and
which turned out later on to be extraordinarily useful when
appearing beflore a somewhat somnolent High Court,
Nowv ir it is saidt and one, can quite understanid it,
* Awe't we putting up too many libraries; aren't we setting up
too many of these ,, reat places?" And the comment is a oomment
niot to be surprised at beoause I believe in reoent times, almost
In the last few years, there has beon a greater burgeoning of
library buildinj and equipment in Australia than at any other time
in our history. I doubt whether it can be matched In any other
* ountry of our population. Tharefore people of economical minds,
which distinguishes them* of course* very sharply Vrou economists
the word is quite different but people of economical mids will
say to uss " Wells why spend all this money on a university library
when only over thero you have a National 6ibrary?" : ust as I said
at Canberra University$ people say ' Vhy spend all this money on a
University Library when you are already devoting your attention to
the preliminary planning of at great National Library in Canberra?"
The answer Is that no University can do its work, and
above all a University so tremendously over-. crowded as this In In
torms of numbers, no University can do Its work if It doea Its
library vori Its study of books, at a distance, The book must be
with the stu~ ntg the facilities for work must be in my opinion,
instant facilities because$ unless students have Improved a great
deal since my time, It doesn't take more than a mile and a half for
enthusiasm to evaporate, You want the Library on the spot and,
of course, If you have It on the spot, It must be the best kind of
Golleotion of books and of documents, that you can possibly achieve;
it It isn't, then the great student, then the great resuarch
scholar, the man or woman full of ambition to probe more and more
into the knowledge of some matter will find himself or herself
leaving lustralia and going to where all these resources are
available, We will tend to lose some of our best students,
. Ehereas on the other hand if w have here on the spot a library
of extensiveness and signIficance and value, selectivity, then we
. fill not only maintain our own students and keep themt but we will
gather students from other places and that is very important for
Australia because for somebody In Australia to omue to a library
that has great resources from some other part of Australia involves
a relatively small journey, but for Australian students to have to
go to the great repositories in the world involves not only large
sums of money, but many, many thousands of miles of travel. This
Is, one of those thing inm which ve ought to aim at beinu as selfoontainied
in resouros as we possibly can be.
There is, of course# one aspect of that matter that
perhaps I ought to refer too I do not think, myself, for the
reasons I have given you, that there Is any Inoonsistencr between
having a great library here and another one three miles away , a
public library. Not at all., jut there will be ; reat trouble for
us In getting what we ought to jet for our resources if our
libraries are allowed to be unduly competitive for scarce resources.
-do det the idea oqoasionally, don't we, lookcing at the
book-. shops, that the flood of books now pouring out over the world 
3.
is phenomenal. Your reforenoee 31r, to the statemnent in
Soclosiasticus is very much appropriate, because evenr then they
thought that writings published, in the sons in which they were
published then, vwr pretty plentiful and rather exceeded the
scope of one man's work or lit.; but today we got the idea that
books and reoords are flooding out on the world, and no doubt they
are, but of the books we need as students, of the publioations we
need as students, there will always be in our time a supply smaller
than the demand because as all the new countries come to lifa, as
all their inteliectual processes begin to deliver, so will they
more and more be demanding then* precious resources In the world*
If we# therefore, are going to do our best for the nation,, as
apart from one univeruity,, we will need to have the alosest oooperation
between all the universities and other libraries In
Australia so that we may do the best that we can for the resources
that we haves Nov Jir, the only other thing Viat I want to tiay is
this# This library is named after one of~ the ; roat original far.
soelng benefactors in this dtate, I venture to say that Noew South
dales and, In particular, Sydney has been very fortunate In having
0 thhaidn gisn otfh e thaiss t kminedn , whAo nhd adw hUatI mthgenya tihoanv e, a tndI ~ tfh oirneks, i ghsht owann d two huo s bIegsan
that every man' s collection of books and papers may itself, though
private today, have something to contribute to a groat library in
the future, and that poes particularly f'or documsents.
0 Now I want to make a confession to you: I am more
addicted to the waste-pape: basket than I ought to be; and I have
no doubt that many times I have thrown things into the waste-p
basket which would havre made screams of rage aome from Mro -oe
4hite, the Comonwealth Librarian$ If he had seen me engaojd mint.
A= he one looks back and thinks of all the pamphlets that
have been published, the various occasional documents that have
bea pblished In Australia -what would an ordinary private
Xisn interested In political history, for example what would
he # Weto have on his shelves a complete, set of all the paphets
that wore published, in the nineties, In the great period ofth
campaigns for Federation . well I wasn't engaged In political
affairs in those days but if I had been I an sure that I would
have read them and said KRubbishl" and put It In the waste-paper
basket; or If It suited Xy book, 04hatts splondidt" I must lend it
to my neighbour" -from who It would never return. And so both
ways they have gone,, I want to say that I believe that It In the
duty of all people * fltaged' In affairs to try to contribute not
am boring autobiogrpy because that would be mostly Ra ayhov,
mostly self-justifying aniw, but to contribute something of
contemporary observation oithe e tents of the country and the
events thiat people theuisel rs have witnessed, be : ause a greoat library
Is the one that contains mises, almost myiads, of documnts of
pwofbund interest to the a lar, and not only to the scholar of the
htmaities but to the saie tist, to the man who, an a scientist must,
not only proceed on his experimental work In the laboratory but
whio also must reach out gather Mion all round the world the
written product of the wolof others.
Sol Sir, it is a pod thing that this is the Fisher
Library, because he, set us an example in that field. It Is &amp; good
thing for this Univeralty o have this groat library, whioh will
provide facilities for, I pe, eager students in their thousands
for maby, many years to c It Ina ood thing for the Gtate of
VNew South Wales that this hould happen, but above all I venture
to say, It In a good thin for Australia, beoause It ; W be oneS
more contribution to = kin Australia more and more a centre, in
civilised life, of intelligent researah, of cultivated understanding
and of eagerness for greater knowledge* 



OFFICIAL OMIING OF * IZZU WING" ST. JOHN'S ( IDLLI4
Spoodi t' the Prime Nlaisterg the Rte Haon* R. Ge NenS1q 0.11.
Verny Revs Father, Your Minenoe I
I can't remember the sequence an the Premier did* I shell
theroftore start agein following my usual practice and say " 610" fteb
I think always dives you a good beginninge
As a matter of fact in the Courts of Cuiminal Awuviotian I
believe It in not unknown f'or a man uftor su4ffering~ the œ ndipity of
convistion to have a few words said for him by way of an appeal f6w
. erqi~ I am ,, o: nd to reverse the process 1 appeal for mrqW betor*
you find me guilty. Im iltat ing in early,
Firs3t, I apologise for my inability to follow the routine#
iSit lin the second place I vant to :-ay this to you, that the Reotol
made rather a point of direotin,&amp; attention to the presence here this
afternoon not of my old friend the k'remier, but of my present
opponent, 141. Iwhitlan. He seemed to think that this was a rather
good thing, that ir, -4hitlwn should be here as an old friend of this
college* want to tell you that this man 1hltlams if I way s
refer to him, has been pr'isent at each of the fbur speeches I1 have
mab in the last four days on a University occasion, And each time I
start the next ono he in stratesoaUy placed and his eye boomes
glassier, and glassier, ( Laudhter) However 1 am very ; lad, Sir
that you ahould remember him, lkat I am going to forget him for the
rest of the afternoon. ( L~ aughter)
now 51r, vhen T was being baad I think that to the
right vord Into coming here this afternoon I was sent the history of
the College, and in prticular a fascinating document tiat was
prodseed on the 100th Annivosrsary. I wrote down one sentence from
this history, ' If a poorly endowed minority of less than 90,000
could build ate John's what might we expeat from the Cktholies, of
todoy7' Now that, I thought -m~ s a very pungent 3onenoce I an not
going to use it in an accusing sense, Any accusations that I have to
make are, of aoi'rsot directed exclusively to the Presbyterians*
( Laughter) ~ at thore is in that single simple sentence a ' oMu of
significance. Whenever I have travelled in the world and have fbId
myself looking at some great Cathedral built back in the Uth .12th,
13tk century a fireat Cathedral rising from the middle of a ;" lS
andq at the time ti-at it was built, rising from the middle of a tfV
clusters of hamlets or perhaps the old monastic foundation itself,
whenever I have seen these miracles of beauty, these &amp; ar Ml9 f
worship, not miserablo, hungry things, but generous thins wAM
remembered how fey people did them, I have been reminded that upon us
there tlls a responsi bili ty never to do less than the past domands9
but always to do more if we can*
That is of ourse , articularly true if you are dealing
with sae place like thi * his is part of a University -aa Osilepe
withina the University. It Is also a place of religous learning
It is in a real sense, a place of worship* And when it cams
vorsl9pq as these our ! orefuthers have taught us, there ts no room fft
the nea approaa ohno room for what Wordsworthq you remeber
desaribed on lookig at the Xing' s College Chapel at CambridI9 as
the % ioly calculated loe or more". " A ma's reach should emee
his gaspt or what's a Heaven for?" 
Ro, Sir I have a particular pleasure in oans here
in suma I th ith most thougtfual people I feSl that " to
hasult been a noble centry. It has, beuen a clever am., a hWUIMSa
oneq It has pushed back the boundaries of knovledpq prtilawly in
sqieaeeq to an extent never dreamed of before but it has bela
disfigured aso other century has for a long tieby vans M veise
than vars9 by bitter inhumanity by barbarim9 by an senS
of rsponsibilitky for others9V Poo bys pressures W'_ ter is
only oft correction for this and that to t hat education should never
lose sight of its ethical rosponsibilities. We are not 11o psoftes
clever barbarians. We are to produce educated Christian people as
suchi as we can. ( Applause)
Sir, one might elaborate on that theme for -leag time.
1 don't need to elaborate It in your presence. U~ nless yuap both
Church and 3tats r' 3, preaented Iliere today, believed in these things I
have boon mentioning this College would never have boon establishedl
and It would never have been extende If a highly aultivated
barboxism is enough you don't need Jte John'ts. But i. f the ultimte
responsibility of man is tia thing that matters, if the true values
of elvilisation are -, he thin tnat matter, then you not * ni~ j noe"
one St. John's,
heatvhei cathl ast tabnad.. aanrdceys o, ub wenthweieecedhn , a isfhc uhenodlxarierssdth iniItnpg aawznild l nrroeaultinigodin o. tu hse Brvoeocasrltpdisogo nwhsoeiubreli ldityyo9u
elimte war more rapid&amp;. j than all the United Nations that were
ever established, ( Applause)
Sir, I don't propose wo detain youg but before I
conlud Ithink pei~ ftap T. should say that when I found qyself, k
reason of the inscrutable judipent of the electors onob mor" irMe
XInistev at the end of 149 decided to 6ile me a second chance
oe of the fisttingthat Idid was to have aComaitte Well
befdo the Xurray Comittee, which eximined the then urgent needs of
the Universit~ ies, The reoasons for that vere sound, a a result of
the enolmous pressuras that came after the war, as a Sequel te the
tal roonstruation training schesme that my preo. essor established
after the warp there was a alamant demand for maom~ 4ation ift tkw
Univerities, far more clamant, far more rapidly growing in terms of
groportion than in any primry system of eduoat'. on, or the lie,
he Uivesitis ehibted every sign at that time of incuar~ fl
either a strong risk of' bankruptqy, or, at the beed, of 4 fAdeu&amp;. ww
or of involving for State Governments burdens which it wa" AN" t
reasonable to suppose that any State &amp; overnment could eaMr unaided.
So this 00mitte, pt to work. It vas a coonittee of
people who bad, tor the most part, praotical experience of
Universities and of University affairs. About two-thir'ds of the Wa
tthhreo uhg~ eha thoef ior ned eolifb ethrea tiroenssi dIe nwtaisa l Incfoolrlmegeed, s awti thth ep rUeant ivvIpamiwir9 or
Mlbvowrn that this Caittee had decided that residential $ Ueg
were a firill a priviate and personal luxury, and they did not am
within their charter of reference. That was really the onW poed
deed I ever did for ybu. Because I suw the members of the Casmittee
and I said that unless there was some sum provided specifieally for
resiftntWa oolleges their report would carry no vight whateer.
( AV9lause) And a little bit-of money was put in. When I leek back
an It nowadays I think " How little it was" until of couMs I
remembered that the greatest technique in the world is to put ywa
ftot In the 6oor. ksvery time I see the Prmier he smiles ed miles
aeots tslweew Bbee'sc auas ev etrhye oroodo t friise nidn othfe mdinoeo ritoog but occasiona a
Whenever I see your brilliant and mueholoved Anehbishap
at Canemt Arbhbishop O'Brien for whom I have an unqualifid
tahdea ifreaettie itni, athned dheo osr. i ts Adnodwq n aws he awneo 9u ld1 csaqn walmit. o stt hstmees ehIM a puttinth
has Of language, one thins leads to another. 
rbmrefftw 1 do osirm Just a little bit of wev. 4 fm
UZ% a not boastins. Bt I think the fbot in the dew at that
time did Ito An6 of oourse sines thong as you knows the" have bon
isoasing and now qite substantial1 reoan natiods wth I beeve
will transform the face of lniversity eduoution.
Wherever I p in itustralia and viit a Qniverstif I sea
peat Welldings in hand. I au very delighted to find that In te
wesidential oolleips whiob in a true sense are the heart of the
University, the same sijpo of groVth are to be seen*
Sir Iwazit c~ o tell you that whatever little I way have
been able to do I have done with a very varm heart and a pad Aiii on
this matter. I take it as a jx-: at om iment that you, in thim
groat and famous Collee, should have thought fit to allow v nm
to be inscribed an the wal, This 1 think, Is something that
certainly I had no'er expected. It ame to me as a edat surpriSe.
I wiant Z tell you that 1 shall remenber it for my life with reat
graVtitude and with u tue sense of pride.
-j 



P. M. No. 23L1961
EXPANSION OF BEEF PRODUCTION FOR EXPORT
Statement by the PFlime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. MenzIes
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today that
the Commonwealth and Queensland Governments have agreed that
construction of a road from Julia Creek to Normanton should
form part of a broad plan for development of roads to
facilitate increased export of beef from the North. To
facilitate early commencement of the work on the road the
Commonwealth has offered to contribute up to œ 650,000 towards
expenditure on this road to the end of the financial year
1961/ 62. The two Governments will consider the basis upon
which the cost of a wider scheme of road development might be
shared when the planning has further advanced.
The Prime Minister added that he had replied to a
letter from Mr. Nicklin in which the request had been made that
officers c. f t20e Commonwealth Government confer with officers of
the Queensland Government with a view to exploring various
aspects of the question of expanding beef production in
Queensland. Mr. Menzies said he had told Mr. Nicklin the
Commonwealth Government is very interested in expansion of beef
production which could lead to increased export earnings, and
has decided to appoint a committee of officers which could
provide it with a more complete picture of the likely extent of
the market for beef and possible means of securing an expansion
of beef cattle production. These investigations will be part
of the comprehensive examination being undertaken by the
Government of avenues for increased export earnings.
Mr. Menzies said that arrangements would be made for
this committee to confer with officers of the Queensland
Government so that both Governments could study information
provided from their talks together. CANB MA y
lday, 1961 



CITIZENS' LUNCHEONS ASTH'IELD TOWN HALL
MAY, 1.961
Speech byv the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menz--LSir
and gentlemen: I have been suffering this morning from a sort of-I
think I am right when I describe it as a sort of undulant fever.
Is that right? When the temperature goes up; and then goes
down? Because my good friend and colleague, Fred Osborne,
originally inveigled me into this matter, and that depressed me.
Then he said to me, " Of course you understand that they are not
all political fans of yours who will be there". I said, " Oh,
no, I know that", So he said, " Make a non-political speech".
And I said, " Do you mean by that, Fred, a non-Party speech?" He
said, " That's right". So that depressed me still further.
But then, by a singular stroke of genius on the part
of somebody, just as I was to come in here, I saw Tommy Androws,
Look at him! Tommy Androws! And as I am the greatest living
hopelessly incompetent cr~ icket lover in this country, I greeted
him like a man and a brother. And that cheered me up. Tommy
I must say that if I manage to say something worth listening t
today, you may take the credit.
I thought perhaps I might say something to you in a
genuinely non-Party way, about the business of Government,
because you are, for the most part, business men. I am
perfectly certain that in your more inaccurate moments you
criticise the Governme-int, and criticise politicians, and say
it's a great pity more businessmen are not in politics and
course I agree with that. The trouble is they won't come. An.
you say there ought to be more business in Governm,, ent, and, I
think that highly original phrase goes on, less Government in
business. Well I an familiar with all those things. Man and
boy now I've been in Parliarment of one kind or another for 33
years. The Mayor and I are contemporaries, I think he said.
Thirtythree years! He's a bit inclined to complain because he's
been an Alderman, treated rather badly, and he thinks that I am
a silver-tail because Itve been for l years or so, in total, a
Prime Minister. But 33 years, man and boy, we've been engaged
in it. I know most of the noises people make about us, and
about the business of Governrment.
I just want to say this to you: The business of
Government is not only the greatest business in the country, but
it is, I think, the most difficult business in the country. It
is extraordinarily difficult. I amn able to make a complarison,
because, believe it or not, it is now 21 years since I was
first sworn in as a Prime Minister. In these days I well
remember the kind of problem that fell on to the table. The
nizmber of problems has quadrupled in that time. I well remember
thie amount of paper one had to read, the number of actual
decisions that had to be taken. Today all those things have
quadrupled. Wge have all around the world, diplomatic posts.
We have to instruct Zhem and be instructed by them. I suppose
it is pretty safe to say that I would read 100 to 150 cables in
the course of one day and a great number of them pretty longwinded
because, thanks to the pe~ rson who invented stenography,
people dictate cables now. If they had to write them by hand
they would be much shorter and Much more readable. You have
masses of things ee-r-ing up fronm the various departments; you
have ministers to interview; you have to give a nudge at the
appropriate time in the direction of a particular decision on a 
particular matter. And above all things you must keep
yourself informed, because it is a changing world, and it is a
world that can't be coped with even from here in Australia
without irmmense study and concentration. I would have hopelessly
collapsed under this job if I hadn't earlier in life
acquired the habit of concentrated work, and close stu of
particular problems. Therefore I assure you that this .5 a
very difficult business.
It is frequently a very technical business. There
are all sorts of things that one has to consider. You can't
deal with the economic policy of a country without having
acquired laboriously over years, a knowledge of economic matters
a knowledge of financial matters. There is a mass of
technique that underlies the easy and platitudinous
observations that you expect politicians to make to you.
Of course all this demonstrates that it is a
business that can't be learned over night. Now I wish I could
persuade everybody that that was true. The older I got, the
more experience I have, the more I know, because I must know by
this time a great deal about these things, the less dogiatic do
I become, the less certain am I that my voice is the last voice
of authority. But you produce to me some fellow who is in the
way of airing his mind on these matters and who knows nothing
about it at all, he knows all the answers. You can read him
frequently, day by day. The less you know, the more certain you
are that you are right.
Now there is another aspect of the matter that I wan
to say something to you about. I wonder to how many of us th
business of politics is an emotional business. There are a 1
of people who write and speak, who convert everything into tc:
of emotion. If I am discussing somewhere in Parliament the
question of the level of social services, for example, there i.
bound to be some hearty emotionalist who will say, " How would
you like to live on a week?" And of course I wouldn't.
That seems to me to have nothing whatever to do with the case.
This is an eimotional argument. It is easy to whip up emotions.
I toll you that on any great problem that arises, whether it is
the position of South Africa or whether it is the position of
some social service or whether it is something else entirely
unrelated to both, the easiest thing in the world, and the
quickest thing, is to be emotional. I don't think that I am a
stranger to emotion because I have a great number. But it is a
very great mistake to think that because a man has a cool head
he's cold-blooded. The two things are entirely different. I
hate cold-blooded people. But I like to hqve people around me
who have cool heads. Because cool heads and good judgment are
needed in the management of your public affairs, more than
perhaps anything else. So I say to you, distrust the easy
rather cheap emotional reaction. We all have it. It isn't to
be supposed that we are not human beings. Of course we all
have it. But when you have responsibility you must exorcise a
cool balanced jud: ement, because that is, after all, what you
owe to the people of your country.
Now, Sir, may I turn from that to say somethin%, about
our attitudes to Government? These are perhaps a few cautionary
observations which a Prime Minister of any political party could
make to you, if he had had a lot of experience in these things.
First of all Australia has now, as a result of great
efforts by Australians in two wars, and as a result of a growing
enlightenment in our own country about the rist of the world,
become internationally significant. I suppose that it's very
sel~ om that a few weeks may go by without I nyself being in 
communica. tion in a direct sense with the Governr. ent of the
United States or the Goverm. ont of New Zealand, or the Government
of the United Kingdom. Fortunately I know all these men
now extremely well and we exchange our ideas with considerable
point and with complete frankness. I like to believe, :. nd I
think I am right in believing that Australia has a sir ficance
in the world of affairs rather more than the population of our
country would warrant. We are regarded, increasingly, as a
notable country, as a happy country as a country with an
immense future, and as a country made up of people who have
good common sense . and courage. These are good things to have
thought about our country around the world.
The result of all this is that from time to time an
Australian Government through its Prime Minister, or through
somebody, will offer an opinion on what goes on in the world.
It may be necessary to offer a public opinion on some problem in
some other country. I have done it myself a few times. And
the moment a Prime Minister does it he will be told " You mustn't
say that there's some other country that won't agree with you.
Now you mustn't do that you'll be misunderstood, here or here
or here". Gentlemen, this is an absurdity. Never offer an
opinion unless it is well considered; never offer an opinion
gratuitously, as if you wanted to blow your bags out and tell
the world how clever you are. But when you find yourself
called upon to offer a view on behalf of Australia, don't fall
into a state of terror because somebody, or some other country,
disagrees with it. If you didn't believe in your own view it
would be idle to state it. If you do believe in it, it's
pathetic to run away from it because somebody else, somewhere
else, doesn't accept it. That's the thing, that's one of thr
elements of maturity in our country which I believe we have K:
hang on to. You know there are a lot of people around the world
who talk about the ' colonial powers' and the ' colonial
attitude' of mind. There may be a few people left in Australia
who still think that the great problems of the world can be
safely left to other people. It's not true. Of course we must
have groeat friends; and occasionally we must subordinate our
views to the views of our great friends if we are to ensure the
security of our own country. But these things are well
understood by statesmen. The real point is that we are an
adult country, far more adult, far wiser in judgment, though I
say it myself, than some countries with many times our
population. And we must have in relation to these matters, a
decent pride for this is a remarkably great country.
I an not one of those people who believes that we
ought to go on as if we had a hundred million peopla as if wea
were a second United States of America, but I do want to
emphasise to you that we are so addicted, still, to the o.
knocking our own country and our own people that we occasionally
forget that this is, man for r. man, a great country, with a great
place in the world, and a great future.
Now, Sir, having said that may I refer to another
aspect of our relations to Government? Every now and
somebody comes to see me under the simple illusion that in ry
official capacity of course, control unlimited supplies of
something fascinating about money, particularly if you haven:
got it. And people come along, " Well now this is a thing, all
we need is œ 0,000, all wo need is half a million, all we need
is I've had all the vriants of this even in the last
few weeks. And they say, " Now the Cormmonwealth can provide all
this money. What about it?" If you show some reluctance, it
you are a little coy about ante-ing up œ Xmr, the assumption is 
that you are an insensitive character, you are a cold-blooded
fellow, you don't understand the real needs of the case,
because if you did, of course, you would just find the money,
It would oms out of some magnificent cornucopia, just flowing
out. Thoerfore I want to renind you, if you need to be
reminded gentlenen, that Governments are not proprietors of
money. Al the money I have wouldn't solve the problem of the
smallest municipality in the bush. Governments are not the
proprietors of money; they are the trustees for the money
that ordinary citizens earn and pay to them. That's their
position. Easy enough for a Government to say, handsomely,
" Right œ 50m; that's no trouble". But the people will find
the This is the basic element of Government that
Governments don't have any money of their own. They borrow
money from the people, or they tax money from the people; and
whatever money they get in these various ways they are able to
spend according to their jadgment. We must never forget that.
ll the money that a Government has to deal with is money that
has been worked for and earned by private citizens and
transferred by them to the Government in order to give effect to
the Government's policy.
Therefore, if, as private citizens and we all are
we want more from Governments than we get today then there must
be more of us at work, we must perhaps work a little more
successfuly we must certainly produce considerably more. The
greatest illusion in the wjrld is to think that the standard of
living is a monetary standard whereas in fact the standard of
living is what a man has by way : f a house, by way of shelt('-,
by way of food, by way of the amenities of life. These are cK!.
material things I'm now talking about the material standards
of life. And they all have to be produced by somebody.
I say to you, therefore, that in addition to having
some pride in our own country, we must not place upon Governnents
demands which jointly we are not prepared to place on
ourselves. Because you are the Government. If you add up all
the people in Australia who work and produce and pay, they are
the Government, they are the creators of the available
resources of the nation. I don't need to tell you that if a
Government pretends to pay us as individuals more, and carries
out the pretence of inflating the currency it's just giving with
one hand and taking away with the other.
And yet, Sir, the odd thing about political life and
I say this quite dogmatically is that though inflation is
unpopular with many people, not by any means with all people
for there are some who have a vested interest in inflation,
measures against inflation are always even more unpopular..
Because you can't restrain inflation, you can't push down
inflation without imposing some immediate disability on -ohn
Brown, or Ton Smith I hope neither of then is here which hc
will resent and say " Why deal with me, why am I the follow to
be affected?" You can't have any policy, no Government can have
any policy, which is designed to produce some stability I. the
currency a firm foundation for future expansion unlc:
time to tine it takes measures calculated to produce ti; ar
result. Now, Sir, the next point that I want to mention is
this. We talk a good deal about democracy and I'm a groat
believer in democracy. Democracy is the only system of
Government so far in the world that has operated with over..
shadow of social justice. Pople can be very superior about . to
They may say how ridiculous that every man's vote should be oi 
the same value when men are so infinitely varied. True enough,
perhaps. But I want to see a better system. The world hasn't
yet produced it.
The truth is that the great glory of democracy is
that it does pay attention to the individual person. The
authoritarian systems that exist in other countries tend to
reduce the individual to a mere cipher to a more calculating
medium in a blue book, or a statisticai record. But in
democracy it is the man and the woman who count. The business
of Goverrnent is to promote them, to enlarge their opportunities,
to broaden their borizons, to develop their personalities.
But when we have said that, I believe we must
remember that the point of democracy is not just that everybody
has a vote that's the mechanics of democracy, that's not the
essence of democracy. The essence of democracy is that every
individual, and he may express it through the vote from time to
time, has his own responsibilities, and because he has his own
responsibilities he has his own unalterable rights. This could
not be said about any other system of Government in the world.
If, occasionally, I think that I detect in our own
democracy a weakness it is simply that I think that occasionally
do you agree? we think too much of our rights, and too
little of our responsibilities. Because if we think of our
rights only, of our demands only, of our claims on Government
only, then we will transfer the responsibility for meeting those
claims to a smaller and smaller body of men; until ultimately,
we'll find that we have brought about a system of oligarchy or
bureaucracy, or even of autocracy, because the responsibilit7
has been piled on to other people while we ourselves assert ou. r
rights. Now, Sir, finally I would like to say this to you. I
have just said something about responsibilities. We don't have
responsibilities only to ourselves, or to our own country.
Here's something quite remarkable that is going on in the world.
We are, in a broad sense, aware of it; we have, in a true
sense done something about it as a nation. But in 1950, which
is not long ago, there were 2,500 million people in the world
2,500 millions. In 1975, in the absence of unprecedented
pestilence or ruinous war , or some disaster on which we can't
predicate any views of ours, in 1975 other things being equal,
there will be not 2,500 millions, there will be 3,800 millions
1,300 million more people at the end of a period of 25 years,
And by 2,000, again predicating the same conditions, it is
estimated that there will be 6,000 million people in the world.
Now here are we, in 1961, half way through that first span so
let us assume that we have perhaps a little over 3,000 million
people in the world today. Double that in the year 2 000;
double that in the lifetime of many, any hundreds of thousands
of -people now living in Australia.
This is a colossal problem. It is not only a problem
for the people who live in the large countries in the world,
it is a problem for us. Do we, in Australia, contemplating that
by 2000 we might have what? 20 or 25 million peoplet I don't
know remain indifferent to the fact that in Continental China
alone thore will be 1 000 millions at t; he same time? What are
they . oing to live on; What's going t) become of wor. 1M food
production? To feed 3,000 millions more people is a to.-k, a
challenge, a challenge to education, to our Ionorosity of
outlook, to our technical skill, our willingness to cont. i~ bute
so that land now not fertile will produce food for this coming
hungry world. This is a tremendous problem. We do sormethtng
about it through the Colombo Plan. We have a very creditable 
4 1-6.
record in technical aid to new countries, under-developed
countries in the training, of their students in ;. ustralia. But
we can't afford to sit back on it, we can't afford to say " How
kind we are, how cltcver we ar". we, as a highly intelligent
and highly qualified cormaunity because we are in world terms
have a responsibility far beyond our numbers on this matter.
If the world as a whole doesn't do something increasingly about
this tremendous, this overshadowing problem1 then I believe
that we can look forward, or our sons can," l all the most
terrible results of a hungry population pressing upon inadequate
resources, with all the threat that it contains of starvation
and pestilence and war as the last desperate expedient.
Thereforo, Sir, I like to foel that when we bask a
little in the satisfaction that we occasionally have in our own
system of Government in our own happinoss, in our own relative
prosperity, though iz may vary a little, a high relative
prosperity, we should recognise that as a rowing nation we have
a significance and a responsibility in the world, and not only
to ourselves. I think that one of the unfortunate things is that all
too few p~ eople study history they think it's a rather
academic matter. History academic? The world would save itself
from an abundance of errors if it knew something about human
history. And we ourselves night g et a more proper understanding
of our opportunities in this world if we recalled a little
history. Because don't let it be forgiotten that in the spacious
days of groat Elizabeth, the first Elizabeth, the days of
Shakespeare and Marlowe and Beaumont and Fletcher, running on
into the time of Francis Bacon, the days of Raleigh and Drake,
the great blossoming period in 13aglish history, a period which
made this little island in the North Sea one of the groat
factors in the world, and in civilisation, at that time the
population of England was probably no more than todayts
population of New S_, uth Wa. les. We forget these things. It
isn't just numbers. It's quality. Give me 10 million people of
quality and they will influence the current of human events, and
human dLestiny, more than 50 million people of poor quality.
This is our ; reat opportunity. Vnd we seize it if
we just take a little time off, occasionally, as I've tried to
take with you today, to consider what our relation is to
Government, not in an or., anised Party sense, but as citizens,
what is our relationship to Government in our own country;
what is our relationship to each other in our own country; and
finally, what is the rolationship of all of us to a world which
will unquestionably bring its prob~ lems to us in due course,
unless we can have made our own contributions to the solving of
those problems, to the well-being of mankind, 6,000 millions of
them, and therefore to the peace of the world. 



0 ASSOCIATED CHAMBERS OF MANUFACTURES OF AUSTRALIA
BANQUET
CANBERRA, 17TH MAY, 1961
Speech by the PrimeMinister, , the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Sir, Mr. ( Norman) Robertson, Your Excellencies, Gentlemen:
When I was beguiled, as I was, into coming here
tonight, quite a long time ago so long that I've forgotten I
thought that this would be a very, very pleasant non-political
affair. Of course to me that's wonderful rare but wonderful.
Then your distinguished Director, against whom otherwise I have
nothing, sent me a printed document and it began by the most
concentrated blast against the Government that I lead ( Laughter)
that I have read for a long time. And although I am a quiet'and
uncontroversial fellowwhon I sat down to prepare myself for
tonight I naturally directed myself to the opening paragraph. I
made a lot of notes. Life has been intolerable for my Cabinet
colleagues for days because they have all understood that I was
getting ready for tonight.
Having made some notes, and having had them typed by a
typiste who, oddly enough, undarstood my handwriting, I showed
them to my friend, the Treasurer. I had no idea that he was
the patron saint of this appeal ( Laughter) well I don't dwell
on this matter and when he read the first page of my rather
abbreviated notes, he said: " I don't think I would say that;
never start an argument unless you can finish it". ( Applause)
Which shows that under ray careful tuition over many years he has
learned a great deal. ( Laughter) So I tore up the first page of
the notes which will deprive you of some of my more pungent
paragraphs. But I think he was right.
Because the truth is that we are here tonight I and
John Mc?, Von, who is going to address you from the point of view
of, whatever it is John, and Arthur Calwoll~ who will collect a
few crumbs that fall from the capitalists' table ( Laughter)
all of us, to say something to you, but it will all, I suppose,
theoretically, be non-political.
In a broad sense it is, because this is a great
campaign. This is really, as somebody said, an historic event.
I have never myself understood why m,-anufacturers in Australia
should think that thoy were under attack, because I don't think
they are. But if there are, in Australia, a few thousand people
or, for all I know, a million or two of people, who still retain
some prejudice against what Australia producos, then this
campaign will fix them. ( Applause) For if there is one thing
about which we can all agree it is, with our characteristic
modesty, that whatever any other country does, we can do better.
( Applause) Sir, it is because of that that I believe that nobody
who takes a balanced view of Australia's present economy or
future prospects, can possibly be, intelligeontly a possimist.
I'm no pessimist ( about today I'm ' the most glorious optimist
about tomorrow. Because if anybody can look around the world
and find a country so young, so rapidly developing, which has
achieved so much in two or three generations, then I would like
to hear about it. And the fact is that this has been achieved
in a few generations not b-cause of all-wise Governments, or
pertinacious Oppositions and I can speak on behalf of both of
thema in may time but by imagination and effort and skill on the
part of our own people. 
0 2.
Now, Sir, of course it is quite true lot no admit
this, or perhaps not adnit it, but claim it, and get it over
anti-inflationary policies are occasionally necessary. I hope
everybody understands that. They were necessary to deal with
the great inflationary boon of last year. I don't think that
anybody would seriously deny that. And yet, Sir, all antiinflationary
measures nust be unpopular with nany and, let us
confess it, are occasionally hostile to the material interests
of some. In Australia we have, and we have had for a long tine,
more than people realise, more than perhaps exists in other
countries, efficient tariff machinery, now supplemented by
emergency tariff provisions, about which ny colleague, the
Minister for Trade, has had so much to do, and to say. With
that protection Austalian nanufactur. ing has increased
enormously, and I would like to say that the best proof of our
capacity for the future is what has been done in the past. With
respect, I remind you, that in these last 10 or 11 years I
speak not in party torms, but only of the particular period
concerning which I have had some special reason to know what
goes on the developnent of Australian manufacturing has been
phenomenal. The gross value of production in Australian
factories has grown in that period by 252%. The raw materials
used have grown by 240%. And that, at a time when the number
of employees grew by 27% and the nurber of factories by 41%.
I mention those figures, not because I expect you to
carry them quite comfortably in your minds, but because I want
to remind myself and you, that this country of ours is one in
which skill and energy and imagination have produced results far
beyond the percentage increase in our population. If that has
happened it is very largely due to the fact that in Australia
where the manufacturer was a curio at the turn of the century,
manufacturing industry has proved itself to be the most flexible
instrument of development. That has been a wonderful thing
for Australia. Somebody has said we couldn't have absorbed annually
100, 120, 130 thousand migrants, as we have done, first
beginning under the imaginative prograrme sponsored by my
opponent, my present opponent, the Leader of the Opposition
( Applause) and since carried on, unless, in Australia, we
possessed the genius, the energy, the imagination to produce in
our factories the things that our people needed.
And so, Sir, I am all for this campaign. I don't
understand why anybody should need to be persuaded that Australia
today has, in an industrial sense grown up. We are one of the
industrial countries of the world. Ule are among the first ten
trading nations of the world in actual absolute terms. And we
have demonstrated that in our own country we can produce what
our people need; and that more, and more, and more, we will
produce what our people need. If any prejudice or snobbery
stands in the way, then I hope the people of Australia will
sweep it aside. There is nothing that others can do, I say
modestly, that we can't do bettor.
But, Sir, we have had our troubles. Indeed, I've
gathered from my friends sitting to the left and right of me,
who, with all the aiability in the world tell me what's wrJng
with me, among other people that we have had, and are having
our troubles. Because the truth is and let's face up to it
that with all our expansion, with full employment, with much
overtine, with large and growing production, we have not been
able to satisfy the purchasing demand of our people without vast
recourse to overseas supplies. Now, there is nothing 
0 3.
intrinsically wrong with that. If we are to sell to the rest of
the world, if our great staple industries are to maintain
themselves, we must be prepared to buy as well as to sell. But
the interesting thing to me is that with all these expansions
our demand for imports has grown and grown beyond the capacity
of Australian industry to supply. That is why we are here tonignt
engaging in the beginnings of an enterprise which is designed to
increase the capacity of Australian industry to supply to match
the demand by Australian people for what Australian industry can
supply. But, Sir, apart from these passing phases and
believe me about these things I am no miserable pessimist, not
at all; I've been through a few fluctuations in my own political
lifetime and I'm not dead yet what we must try to do, and this
is of the essence of what we are here to consider tonight is to
reduce the incidence and the frequency of short term problems by
aiming at long-term policies. I'll explain that somewhat
cryptic remark. We must, for example, increase the supply of locally
produced goods so that there is not so great an unsatisfied
demand to spill over into imports. Sir, even under the present
policies dealing with relaxation of import restrictions which I
know you, and for all I know others here tonight, have
criticised, let me remind you that 82% of the additional
imports since the " no licensing" decision of February of last
year have been in rospect of plant, of material for manufacturers
and for transport. To put it in concrete terms: of the œ 231
million of extra imports which came in under that fateful
decision no less than œ 190 million were, and I repeat, on account
of plant and materials for manufacturers, and for transport. So,
we are not to assume that all imports are fiercely competitive;
or indeed that the great part of them will be fircely competitive.
Now, the history of 10 years that I have referred to
gives us the greatest possible cause to believe in our capacity
for expansion in manufacture. But the real point that I am
leading up to is this. ' Je will have periodical problems of
balance of payments: they'll come and go and come and go so long
as our exports are almost entirely those of primary products.
This is something that we must get all our people to understand.
But if we continue to have the vast percentage of our exports in
wool and wheat, and meat, and the primary products of this
country, great as they are, vital as they have been, and are, to
Australia's economy, then of course, inevitably, if there is a
drought our wheat exports will fall; if there are bad seasons in
the cattle country of Australia our beef exports will fall; if
the world is beguiled for some reason or another into lessening
its demand for wool, then the price of wool will fall. We may
find our export income fluctuating, not by a few millions, but
by a hundred millions, by two hundred millions, by three hundred
millions, in the course of 12 months. Many of the countries
with whom we negotiate are unaware of this fact. It is the vital
fact in Australia. It is the fact which distinguishes our
country from almost any other country of magnitude that I know in
the world. I can look back, as many of you can, to a time when we
were almost entirely dependent on primary exports, almost
entirely dependent on primary production. Then, when a world
depression hit us we were almost defenceless. We had a
percentage of unemployment in Australia which was, as we look at
it now, and as we looked at it then, horrifying 25 to 30% of
people in the great trade unions unemployed. That was because,
economically, we stood on one foot: we were a primary producing
country; we met the whole blast of the world's fall in prices. 
Since then something has happened which should prevept
anybody in Australia fron becoming a gloomy pessimist. W'e have
developed an industrial structure, a manufacturing structure, in
Australia which means that today we stand on both feds What
happened in 1929-30, could not happen in Australia today; and it
could not happen because we are not uneasily balanced on one
foot, but have two feet to stand on and if one gives a little,
at any rate we have the other one to rest our weight upon.
Now Sir, that is our domestic position. But our
domestic position will suffer from all the fluctuations that are
involved in variations in our overseas balances, in variations
in our overseas reserves, if our exports remain predominantly the
exports of our farms and our fields. They are the items which,
through no fault of their own, with all the industry with all
the skill in the world, suffer from these world fluctuations,
and from ses-: onl fluctuaL-ions at home. Therefore what I want
to say to you suns itself up in this: That what we must aim at
in Australia is not only to have a balanced domestic econoiy,
as I believe we now have, hut to have a balanced economy in our
export markets. If some day, and I am sure it will come, and
cone more quickly as our population rises and as our pride and
our skills grow, if some day half of the exports of Australia to
the world are manufactured goods then to that extent we will not
be subject to the wind and weather of a drought at hone, or of
falling markets abroad. We will have produced in our international
economy a sense of balance which we now have, and enjoy,
at hone in our own country.
Sir, we can't isolate ourselves from world affairs.
If we seek so to isolate ourselves then we will forget all
about the importance of costs, the importance of those basic
conditions on which we can do business with the rest of the
world. Therefore I believe that it is of the first order of
national importance that manufacturing in Australia should
become international in its product so that it sells to the
rest of the world, and in particular sells to all those growing
hundreds of millions of people, near to us in the world, nearer
to us than to any other modern country remember that, nearer
to us than any other modern industrial country. iJe must sell
more, and more. That is why we do our best to raise their
standards of living. That is the whole basis of the Colombo
Plan, that is the whole basis of technical aid. We are not
being kind we are engaging in an intelligent operation in
international relations.
Somebody put the figures in front of me the other day:
in 1950 2,500 million people in the world. Subject to the wind
and weather plague and pestilence, and war and disaster how
many in 2000 A. D youFll be happy to know it will be after my
time 6,000 million. In half a century 3,500 million more
people in the world, all to be fod, all to be clothed, all to be
housed, all to Le helped to reach a higher standard of living.
What's wrong with us in Australia if we, placed as we are, can't
undertake to supply to this groat area of the world and to these
teeming millions of people in the world, something of what they
require? Do we lack skill? I don't believe it. Do we lack
courage? I don't believe it. Do we lack enterprise? I don't
believe it. But if we are going to become a great exporting
industrial nation then I'n quite certain, and you are quite
certain, that we must realise that the essential foundation for
a great industrial exporter is a great, faithful home market.
( Applause) Sir, that's really what I wanted to say to you I'm
forgetting about the rest of the notes that's what I really
wanted to say to you. 
Here we are, 10-million people. I have no tine for
the pessimists. I think that people who talk depression without
reason serve only to create deprossion in fact. I pay no
attention to these people, though of course I have my responsibilities
and so have my colleagues. But I look back to just
before the second world war when the wisest statisticians that
we could find, not only in this country, but from overseas, for
we gathered then in, said that the population of Australia would,
by 1975, be 71 millions and that thereafter it would begin to
decline. Well gentlemen I permitted myself to say, at the time
I wasn't Prine Minister and therefore I could speak quite
freely ( Laughter) even to my colleagues " How do you know what
the birth rate is going to be in future?" a very homely, and I
think proper and human question. But anyhow there. it was, 71
million by 1970, or 1975. And here we are, in 1961, with
millions. Who is there so niserable in his mind, so circumscribed
in his imaginative horizon as not to believe that by the turn of
the century we will be 25 million people in '. ustralia? Who is
there so timid about his Australian quality as to believe that
with this growing population we won't develop, not only our
skill, and our capacity for production, but our market at home
to an extent which will enable us, on the basis of that market,
to meet in the markets of the east, to say nothing of any other
country, all the challenges of older cuntries, whether they be
in America or in Europe. This is no time for pessimism; this
is no time for sitting in the Club arm-chair and moaning about
these stupid politicians. Because we always were stupid, from
the beginning of tine. I can't remember a time when we weren't
stupid. ,/ nd when I retire, either voluntarily, or involuntarily
Arthur ( Laughter), I have no doubt that I will sit in the Club
arm-chair and say, " Oh, they're so tiresome, these politicians".
rAnd that will make me very popular with some people who don't
like me very much. now.
But, really, I say this to you as the Prime Minister
of this wonderful country, this country that has grown so much,
and has prospered so nuch, and has counted for so much, and has
served the world so much, let's look forward to a tine, and it
is not far distant when, with the support of our own people, a
support, Sir, that you are going out to get in this campaign,
there will be such an expansion of production in Australia, as
will provide a foundation for an expansion into the world's
markets which will in due course render Australia, if not
iniune to, at least unshakeable by the economic incidents of the
world. This is a very wonderful problem that we are considering;
this is a superb conception that you have. And the reason that
I came here was that I just wanted to say to you that however
much I might challenge what I hear and read occasionally, from
time to time, I have lived long enough to believe that first
things ought to be put And the first thing that we have
to do in . ustrclia is thing that I am talking about. Let
us get the backing of our own country, and of our own people, for
what is producc-l in Austr-lia and the day will come when one of
ny successors in office w.. ll be able to say, with pride, and
with justice, that ! ustr-iia's economy not only domestically,
but internationally, is as sound as any in the world.
Sir, I wish you the greatest of good luck in this
campaign. 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT.
HON. R. G. MENZIES TO TME AUSTRALIAN COLLEGE OF
EDUCATION, ADELAHP. FRIDAY, 19TH MAY, 196,.
THE CH-, ', ENGE TO EDUCATION
It would perhaps ' e prudent to say, at the very outset,
that I am not here as the lead of a government making a policy
speech outlining new poli ies or forecasting future financial
benefits and burdens. 1 ' ave been honoured by your invitation
to make the Inaugural e at the second annual meeting of
the Australian College ucaton. That very great teacher,
Dr. Darling, wrote to me . e wo. 1d like you to speak on the
theme of Australia in th rnext t,-enty years and what you, as the
leader of the country, expect or desire from us the teachers."
This opportunity I have accepted, if I may say so,
not as one who seeks to express a Government or a party point of
view but as one who has been privileged to have something to do,
small enough in all conscience, with recent educational
advancement in Australia, something which had the support of all
parties; and as one with a profound belief in the tremendous
significance of the teacher's calling. What I have to say will
therefore be more philosophical, in the non-technical sense,
than political, in the narrow and partisan sense.
For indeed, your voluntary responsibilities are very
great. You have established this College to help you to
discharge them better and better. You have made it clear that
you look on teaching not mer,. ly as a means of earning a living
but as a vocation which will enable you to contribute to the
fullness of life,
To do anything to help or to stimulate is therefore a
singular privilege. Education and educators are beyond doubt confronting a
great challenge both material, intellectual and spiritual.
At a later stmgo I will endeavour to bring these
elements into association For the present, however, I will
speak of the material cLa challenge which is to be
heard all round the world,
It is calculated by the statisticians that in 1950
the population of the world was 2,500 million; that in 1975 it
will be 3,800 million; and that in 2000 it will be over 6,000
million! These forecasts are, of course, based on present trends
and the absence of massive catastrophe. To produce food, shelter,
clothing, and a decently ordered life for such growing myriads is
a vast problem. There is a strange irony in this reflection; that as
what is called the " space age" begins to what end and for what
human purpose most of us cannot understand tim " FRrth Age"
approaches the most acute problems it will have ever confronted.
The solving of those problems should be our first priority.
Clearly the population problem will be insoluble, and will
therefore produce the most frightful struggles for survival, with
wars and pestilences their regular accompaniment, unless the
earth's productivity is onormously increased, and/ or the rate of
population grcwhis slowed down.
If productivity is to be increased in economically
backward countries, advanced countries will need a growing sense
of international social and economic responsibility, and will,
both directly and indirectly, need to increase efficiency and
skill all round in production, transport, and distribution. 
There must also be immense improvements in organization, in
political and civil administrati on, in scientific research and
in the application of th?/ roso-ech to the provision of human
needs. Not one of tho rosul. ts c;. i reasonably be achieved
by the ignorant, the unskil. ful, * r by the socially
irresponsible i. e. the lay:
In general, ppr. aching crisis presents a
dramatic challenge to . tio. : p. o who enjoy pence,
order, good government, nii u . Ii. al tr:--dards. It is a
rebuke to those who, Lc. oo. a: brd,;-s for international
assistance, remind us oi Yhat proverb, that " charity
begins at home."
But in particular -it is a challenge to us, as a
nation, to play our pa-rt in incirasing the world's resources.
And, in essence, that is a challengo to us to improve our
education; for it is only by constantly improving education
and skills that we can discharge our world duty.
Improvements in a. ricu1 trein pastures, in stock
breeding, do not come about by acr-ident. They are the products
of research, of scientific application, and of concentrated
skill. The storing and d-. stribution of water calls for
engineors, surveyors, and a host of technical people. Moreover,
much available skill will. be wasted without intelligent and
trained managers and organisers. Without increasingly educated
people and political ad: inistrators, material potentialities
may be either unrealised or partly frustrated by confusion or by
a lack of imagination. Those are obvious and elementary truths.
It should be equally obvious that without growing
numbers of trained and dedicated teachers, we cannot meet the
demand in Australia and elsewhere, for the scientific,
technological, and managerial and administrative skills demanded
by the task and the time.
Yet this does not mean that if, in the homely phrase
we could " write our own ticket", we would concentrate upon
producing technicians and specialists destined from their
earlier days to the particular technique or specialty. We would,
I hope, want to do bet-or than that. For, as I shall remind you
later on, a specialist '--Ithout some reasonable degree of basic
education of a humane kind can do more harm than good.
We must do our best to avoid early specialisation. In
an educated man or woman, specialisation will come soon enough.
It will come more effectively, valuably, if it is the
product of a judgment enli. htoen-d by broad and basic studies.
In 1959 Admiral Rickover, famous for his driving work
in nuclear propulsion, evidence before the United States
House of Reprosentati-s' Coi:. tt. oo on Appropriations. He had
some good things to say, ixhi. clhl take leave to quote for my
present purpose. " A liberal , ation tends to liberate the mind from
the narrow confines of pcrs. ona-l observation through one's
senses. " A liberal education also lays the foundation of
knowledge upon which professional education is built."
" Too many people here think of a liberal education as
a luxury, something of no inmediate usefulness. It is true
that a liberal education does not in itself prepare one
to earn a living. For this one needs in addition some
specialist skill". 
3.
We know that there are difficulties, not all of them
financial, in the way of achieving this ideal, One of those
difficulties is the parent wlbo sys: ' I want i-. r son to earn his
living in a specialised and i, ,, b2. y-pad or craft. I want
no time wasted on frills. What is not cilearly and immediately
relevant to the main end is un--i.._,. rtajt. and a waste of tine".
The good teacher, who wants to help to produce not just
a good scientist or engineer, but also a good and wise citizen
will resist these basically uncivilised ideas to the very limits
of his capacity. This does not mean, of course, that all must
be educated in the same way; that there will be merit in
uniformity. If, as I hope and believe the grand objective is an
educated personality, and personality Is of all elements the most
individual, we must not bow down and worship a false equality.
For education, though. it has a mass aspect, since we
must aim at certain basic training which all should have, is not,
properly considered, a riass matter. It is not the business of
today's educators to turn out the 1961 model, with automatic
mental transmission gears. Once we get above the rudiments,
education is the business, I repeat, of produc1ng an educated
personality. The wo: k of organising a coinaunity educational
service is therefore a complex one, requiring great skill,
devotion, and understanding. What is to be aimed at is a
general system, producing individuals of great variety.
In Australia, I. believe that we tend to carry unifon'ity
too far. Even in the drafting of the Commonwcalth Constitution
the fears of the self-governing colonies, fears that one prospective
State might secure some advantage over another
produced a series of requirements of " uniformity" which have not
always been of advantage. For example, Section 99 of the
Constitution provides, reflecting the fears of the Nineties, that
" The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or regulation
of trade, commerce, or revenue, give preference to one State
or any part thereof over another State or any partthereof".
Though this promisiorj has pcrhaps been splendidly
ignored in the special tax prov: ii ra0 1! ting to remote areas,
it is clear to many of us that slIa] Lisc. b or trade treatment
of particular parts of thc; Comnn x tt rnay ' rove to be vital to
a true and balanced n dov 0 passion for
uniformity can be carric?, much far,
I return to my subject, education, whore this same
passion can do great harm. Except in broad physical
characteristics, men are not uniform. They all want education,
but they do not all need the same kind of educa-tion. I oppose
early specialisation at sdool, for it serves to narrow the mind
and restrict the full development of personality. But in the
later stages before matriculation there nust be some room for a
consideration of the life which the boy is expected to live.
What is good for the prospective University student is not
necessarily identical with what is good for a prospective wheat
farmer. Each should know something of language and literature
and history, to take some examples, for these are part of the
essential furniture of his mind. But when it comes to special
subjects, each should be given his chance.
When I first met them, years ago, I was much
impressed ( as I still am) by the Tasmanian Area Schools, with
their special studies for boys who were going to live and work
on the land. I saw great cono. on sense in this, so long as it
did not impair those general studies which seem to me to be
essential for education of any kind. 
It is just because I think that too much uniformity in
education is bad, and philosophically considered, self-defeating,
that I do not believe that the constitutional power over
education should be transferred to the Comnonn. alth Parliament.
In a continent like ours, with i: rnohse vari. et.~ e-s of physical and
humrian characteristics, variety bu ( i'volopod. Men are
different. It is just because they are differmnt that our
parliamentary democracy survives. For the greatest of all
liberties is that which exists in a nan's own mind. It is a
liberty of which he alone is master, and it makes him to that
extent a master, not a servant. Produce in a nation a generation
of men and women with liberty in their own individual minds, and
dictatorship becomes impossible.
Montesquieu, who has had such an influence upon organic
political science, had no respect for uniformity. He looked for
a system of government ( which the United States and Australia to
Sa degree adopted) where there is a division of power, where
power checks power. He firmly believed that the idea of
uniformity appealed to little minds, who found in it a species of
perfection. Whatever brand of politics the student nay some day
profess, or reject or ignore, the educator must look at him, not
as an economic unit some day Lo be recorded by a statistician,
but as an individual, to be sent out into the world some day as a
better individual. For the better the individual the more
conscious will he be of his responsibilities to his neighbour and
to society. But learning and skill are not all. One of the aims of
this College is " to uphold within the profession and to proclaim
in the community the higher values of education". This is
supremely important, if bad money is not to dkive out good, and
lead to a general debasement of the moral and intellectual
currency. I take leave to adopt, with acknowledgement, the wise
words of Father J. P. Gleeson at the Founders Convention, when
this aim was under discusion
" All knowledge is grist to the mill of the educator;
but unless he conctrms himself Tith his pupil's character he
remains an informer, a source of fLicts piled upon one
another and imparted to a mind both immature and untrained
in their proper use."
This idea that character, a proper conception of
life, is the element most necessary to be achieved, runs right
through every aspect of life. As Charles Morgan said in his
" Liberties of the Mind" a book which should stand
alongside Sir Richard Livingstone's " Education for a World
Adrift" near every educated man's fireside
" Everything, including democracy, is destroyed by its
own extremes: personal rule by absolutism; oligarchy, or
bureaucracy, by closeness, rigidity, and centralisation;
plutocracy by avarice; democracy by a watering of its only
valid currency of self-discipline and self-respect."
I seek your indulgence when I quote another passage
from the same book which I have for years found quite haunting
" Immortality is not to be voted at a political meeting.
Posterity will not stay in any man's school. We are wilful
and enchanted children, by the grace of God He whom we
love and remember is not he who thrusts upon us his own 
dusty chart of the Supreme Reality, scored over with his
arguments, prejudices, and opinions; nor he who will draw a
nap of heaven on the blackboard and chastise us with
scorpions if we will not fall down and worship it; but he
who will pull the curtain away from the classrocm window
and let us see our own heaven with our own eyes. Añ d this
enablement of mankind I take to be the function of true
education for the very word neans a leading out, and to
lead out the spirit of man, through the wise, liberating
self-discipline of learning and wonder, has been the glory
of great teachers and of great universities since
civilisation began to flower".
In other words behind, inspiring and making a good
use of skills, there must be an increasing awareness of the
ethical aspects of life. For without such awareness, and the
individual attitude which it will produce, all of our educational
efforts can bring us to ultimate disaster.
I use the word ethics in a general way; not as
denoting " Christian ethics", th. ugh to nany of us these are the
highest; not in any discriminating sense. Christianity remains,
as a Scottish preacher once said, dramatically, in my hearing
" the greatest ninority movement in the history of the world".
But there are other religions with their own ethical rules and
moral compulsions. The main thing is that education must notbaso
resolutely utilitarian as to be pagan and degrading. Secular
education must not come to mean selfish education.
I an convinced that if our approach to education is
( in the popular " practical" way) " how much can I get for myself
out of it or how much can my family get out of it in terms of
financial advantage or social position?" then we shall see the
material advancement of the nation matched by moral decay, and
ultimately destroyed by it.
I have stressed the point of ethics because I believe
that the most important thing to consider and learn in this
world is the nature of man his duties and rights, his place in
society, his relationship to his Creator. This is why as Sir
Richard Livingstone says in " The Rainbow Bridge" " history
and literature must enter into any education; for they are our
chief records of man and his ways."
This is, of course, not to subtract one thing from
the immense importance of the teaching of science and technology
to which, quite clearly, we must devote more and more effort and
attention. For the world reasons to which I have referred, we
have a moral obligation to promote all of those practical
studies which will help to solve the population and production
problem. But this is not to obscure the truth that, whether our
education is to produce scientists or engineers or doctors, or
lawyers or teachers or preachers, there are basic studies which
are essential for educated people, and the absence of which can
make a man of technical skill a social menace.
It is perhaps unfortunate that a notion has obtained
some currency, that there is an educational conflict between
the study of science and the study of the humanities; that
students should be put to their choice of one or the other.
This is quite wrong. We live in a material world, the forces in
which it is the business of sciance to understand, and the
business of technology to harness and direct. But this world,
of matter and physical dynamism, is a world in which men live;
in which the fate and welfare of men must be the prime
consideration. 
It is in this sense that " the proper study of mankind
is man". I believe that the greatest scientists are well aware
of this; are conscious of the duality of their task. We must
not achieve a lop-sidedness in our education. L scientist who
was unaware of literature and history or of the principles of
social responsibility would be dangerous. A humanist who turned
his back upon the discoveries in natural science, who did not
know something of their impact upon life and living would be
conder ming himself to a socially fruitless lifo in a non-radioactive
ivory tower.
I come back, therefore, to those basic studies which
are essential for educated people. In Australia, Latin and Greek
appear to be on the way out, to the impoverishment of our
understanding of our own language, and of our historic sense.
We must seek to repair this position, not by a vain attempt to
restore the old classical learning, but by insisting, in all our
educational plans upon some reasonable knowledge of our language,
of history, and of the processes of thought. This last is
important, not as some separate subject for the class-room, but
as something which pervades others. After all the business of
the educator is to teach students to think, ana to think for
themselves. The neglect of the English language, both in writing
and in speech, seems to me to be quite seriois. I have known
Doctors of Philosophy in Economics, for example, whose disregard
of clear and grammatical Ehglish and whose subservience to
jargon add to the natural difficulties of the reader, and make
one regret that J. M. Keynes is no longer with us. There are
some men of great mental ability and equipment who struggle to
find utterance through obscurity " you know what I meanl"
Perhaps we have not fully realised that the more
complex life becomes, and the more the business of discovery
goes on, the more important is clarity and persuasiveness of
speech and writing.
Knowledge, to be of use to others, should be
communicated to others. I remember, many years ago, saying to
the late Sir John Monash, after hearing him put a case to the
Victorian Government in relation to the State Electricity
Commission, of which he was the founding Chairman " you know,
Sir John, everybody knows you as a very great soldier and a
notable engineer. But I think of you also as one of the
greatest advocates I have ever listened to." He smiled and
said " These things are, after all, not unrelated. I doubt
whether I could have done what I did in France, or got my ideas
put into operation, if I had not acquired and practised the
great art of expression!"
Clearly we neglect the treasures of our language at
our peril and, on occasion, to the loss of others.
As for the treasures of our literature, perhaps the
richest in the world, we owe it to ourselves and to others
constantly to refresh our minds and our memories by
enthusiastic reading. May I illustrate this by a reference to
an art of which I must by now have learned something; the art
of politics. Nothing has so widespread a significance for the
daily life of a nation as the decisions taken by goverrnments.
Small errors can do harm; great errors can inflict grievous
injury. The statesman therefore has the initial responsibility
of close study and concentrated thought leading to a decision
in his own mind. 
But the problem does not end there. Ho must
communicate his ideas, to a Cabinet, to Parliament, to the
people. He must do this as well as he possibly can. His
language must be such as to arrest and sustain interest, He
must not condescend. He must seek to instruct, to oxplain, and
to inspire. The vocabulary he employs must be rich afid flexible.
He must not under-estimate the public by thinking that the
comon-place is good enough. I am no great example in these
matters, but having prepared my ideas and my arguments for an
important speech, I find it a good thing, tho night before, to
read poetry. To some, this sounds silly; but it can make a
great difference in the choice of words and in the weight and
balance of sentences when the time to speak comes.
I turn now to what I will call some specific
challenges in the field of education.
There is, of course, a great challenge to our
university structure, brought about by the fantastic rate of
increase in the demand for higher education. This is the most
remarkable feature of the post-war years.
I remember, just after the war, brooding gloomily upon
the future of the great public schools, many of them Church
foundations. Could they survive what was likely to be a
prolonged period of high taxation? Could parents face
increased fees under such circumstances? My brooding was wasted;
these schools have doubled and trebled in size, and have long
waiting lists. The same is true of the universities. The end of the
war saw a great rush of new students. Accommodation became
hopelessly overcrowded; classes became too big for effective
work. The Murray Committee writing in 1957, when actual
university enrolments were 6,50Q, forecast an enrolment by
1960 of 4+ 8,000. In fact the figures turned out to be 53,0001
Murray thiought he was entering the realms of phantasy when ho
gave 71 000 as the prospective figure for 1965. But the present
Universities Commission estimates that the figure will be just
on 90,000. In the face of these figures, at once so stimulating
and so mienacing, are we to go along the old paths of the 19th
century university conception, or must we devise new and varied
instruments of tertiary education, some more advanced and
costly than others, some simpler and cheaper? Can we make more
effective and economic use of the facilities we now have? My
Government is about to set up a special and powerful committee
to advise the University Commission on these questions. It will
" consider the pattern of higher education in relation to the
needs and resources of the nation and make recommendation on
the future development of higher education in Australia".,
A similar investigation is being conducted in Great
Britain. The demands of education at all stages are tremendous.
Socially, this is good. But we shall do badly if we ignore ( as
I fear rmany do), the inexorable practical considerations which
must be taken into account.
Money is not unlimited, even in the Commonwealth
Treasury. I find it constantly necessary to point out that
governments have no money of their own. Governments are trustees
not independent capitalists. Every effective pound of their
expenditure must be worked for and earned by the people, and
transferred to government by means of taxation and loans, 
Yet, within the limits of their capacity thus
created? governments in. Australia have been both aware and
responsive, In university education, the student aspects of which
I have-just mentioned, the financial involvements are huge. in
my own time as Prime Minister the Comonwealth without direct
constitutional responsibility save in its own territories, has
found, 9for State university grants, rapidly incraasing sums.
From 150, when our first special grant was made, until and
including 1957, the total was al. gm In the Murray trienniiuma
1958-59-60, it'was œ 21.843m. In the current period 1961-2-3
it rises to œ C40.809ml Great and growing though these figuresare,
they are very greatly exceeded by the amounts found by the
States themselves. On the forecasts of student population, it is clear
that even with a " Inew look" at the structure and instruments of
tertiary education, the Budget burdens will continue to grow
greater and greater.
In education, including primiary and secondary, State
Governments have, I believe, dlone remarkably well, assisted by
the Commonwealth-States financial arrangements for taxreimbursement
and loan works programmes. In 1950-51 total
expenditure on education by the States was œ C+ 6m. Expenditure
for 1959-60 was over œ C160m.
It becomes clear that gYovernments of all kinds are
aware of the challenge of education and are striving manfully
to meet it. But even more onerous than the financial burden
which the nation will cheerfully carry as it sees the national
benefits accrue, is the problem of maintaining the supply and.
the standards of professors, lecturers, and teachers. We must
in large measure produce these ourselves for the demands of
education elsewhere are no less insistent than our own.
Standards and quality are vital. If the pressure upon our
trained human resources grows too g; reat, higher education will
suffer a grievous and perhaps a fatal blow,
And there is another challenge, to teachers of all
grades, primary, secondary, tertiary. You may exercise
yourselves, not unnaturally, about your rights. I understand
this. For a good teacher is a good man, and he ought to be
paid as such. Every man of intellect and responsibility who
chooses the noble vocation of teaching should not have to devote
too great a share of his timie to the problems of physical
living. Right through the whole structure of teaching, salaries
should be adequate,, There have been, in modern times, great
improvements in this field. No doubt, there is still room for
improvement. But a sense of vocation has its own compulsions. And
the greatest of these compulsions is to seek out and expound the
truth. There can be no room for the slipshod or the tendentious.
The old rules hold good; that " references should be verified",
that facts should be ascertained with care and presented wit
precision. An educated man is one who, In addition to a
reasonable stock-in-trade of factual information technical or
otherwise, has learned to think for himself and to form
objective judgments. " Read not to contradict and confute, nor
to believe and take for granted, nor to find talk and
discourse, but to weigh and consider".. 
Thcre is still agoo) deal of mental dishonesty in the
world; it is perhaps more prevalent than larceny from the
person. " Arrive in advance at your conclusion, guided by emotion
or prejudice; then force the facts into the pro-determined
mouldi" No man can be a great, or even a good teacher, who
yields to this temaptation. Yet there are those, in schools and
universities, who do. To teach history, for example so as to
justify some current and porsonally held political theory, is to
deface history and obscure the lassons it can teach to the
uninhibited and unbiassed mind. The -ood teacher has a great
power and a great glory. As we all know, looking back, he
achieves though he may not know it at the tim, a species of
honourable immortality with his students. Butl this is because
he is a true teacher, not one who worships false gods.
I fear that in this address which, you will have no
difficulty in understanding, I have had to prepare in stolen
hours in a period of great political pressures my remarks have
been unduly discursive. But it may be at least not harmfiul if I
sum up my own thesis.
Education in Australia has two great tasks. One, which
it would be aloofly academic to ijizore or to disparage is to
train as many students as possible in bodies of knowl eage which
will make them more competent to deal with the practical affairs
of life. We must train and equip more competent workers in
every branch of every industry; more and bettor sciontists and
technologists; more and better admr~ inistrators engineers,
doctors and lawyers; m~ ore trained and dedica ed educators;
more and. more equipped and responsible electors and those they
choose for the duties of government. This is a great and costly
task, To the extent that we fail in it, we will imperil our
own material advancement. But the other great task is even more
important. It is a anmon, but attractive error, to think of
modern advances in applied science, from the telephone to
television, from the motor-car to aircraft to rockets and space
vehicles, as in themselves the proof of advancing civilisation.
These are among the mere mechanical aids to civilisation, They
may be wisely or wickedly used6 Civilisation is in the hearts
and minds of men. It will advance or fall back according to the
use we make of knowledge and of skill. In spite of all we have
had to our hands, the twentieth century has seen more of greed
and inhumanity, more of war and barbarism, more of hatred and
envy and malice, than any of us could have foreseen when we were
young and hopeful. We have seen great skill employed with hatred; science
with envy; diplomacy with threat and blackmail; the distraction
as I pkjrsonally believe, of too many skilled people from
improving the lot of mankind upon earth to a tremendous
competition in space, in which prestige threatens to out-match
usefulness, We must recapture our desire to know more and
feel more, about our fcllowmen; to have a philosophy ol living;
to elevate the dignity of man, a dignity which, in our Christian
concept, arises from our belief that he is made in the image of
his Meker, The tasks of the educator in this century have not
ended. Properly and thoughtfully considered, they are only
beginning. 



P. M. No. 24/ 1961
FUNDS FOR HOUSING
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said today that the
Government had decided on further action, through the
Cormonwealth Savings Bank and through the War Service Homes
Division, which would provide a prompt stimulus to home
building. An increase in the rate of home building would
produce useful consequential effects in the timber, textile and
furnishing industries, as well as those producing other types of
domestic equipment and supplies.
Earlier this year the Reserve Bank had askod the
Savings Banks to increase their rate of lending for housing in
the present quarter, and they were doing this. The Trading Banks
were also currently lending for housing at a higher rate than in
the March quarter. The two member banks of the Commonwealth
Banking Corporation involved in these arrangements the
Commonwealth Trading Bank and the Commonwealth Savings Bank
were playing their full part. It had now been arranged as a
special move for the Commonwalth Savings Bank to expand
substantially its rate of lending for housing during the next
few months. Port of the funds to be made available would be
lent direct to individual borrowers from the Savings Bank, but
a large proportion would be placed through building and housing
societies. Assurances had been received from the building
societies that they are in a position to make quick use of
additional funds.
With regard to Uar Service Homes, the Government would
in the existing circumstances make, for the time being, a
special arranement to eliminate waiting times for new homes.
Details would be announced shortly by the Minister for National
Development, Senator Spooner.
Prior to this decision, applicants for new houses were
required to wait from three to eighteen months according to
the way in which they arranged for their houses to be built.
Under the new arrangement, finance would be promptly available
over the coming months for the building of new War Service
Homes with no waiting tine at al]..
Mr. Menzies said that the Govrnment had, throughout
its term of office, recognised in a practical ' ay the
importance of sustaining home building at a desirable level.
Apart from action taken through the banking system, the total
amount of finance provided through the Commonwealth Budget in
1960-61 for 4ar Service Homes (œ 35 million) under the Housing
Agreement with the States (œ 37 million), and in other ways was
more than œ 80 million. Legislation had been passed in the
latest Session of Parliament to enable a renewal of the
Commuonwealth/ States Housing Agreement.
CANBERRA, 22nd May, 1961. 



7 s
EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 7 p. m.
THIFS-DAY, 25TH MAY, 1961] P. M. No. 25/ 1961
SOUTH AFRICA'S WITHDRAWAL FROM COMMONWEiLTH
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister and Minister for External Affairs,
Mr. R. G. Menzies, said today that the Government had been
considering the practical consequences, as they would affect
Australia, of South Africa's ceasing on 31st May to be a member
of the Commonwealth. Certain consequences would follow automatically.
South Africa would no longer participate in Commonwealth
Conferences or in various Commonwealth Committees and schemes
set up for the benefit of Commonwealth countries. Also the
designation of the Australian representative in South Africa
would be changed from High Commissioner to Ambassador and the
formalities for this were in hand.
Mr. Menzies pointod out that Australia's relations
with South Africa went back over a long period and covered a
wide field. In some matters, such as trade, finance and civil
aviation, these relationships were not dependent on Commonwealth
membership and would be unaffected by South Africa's ceasing to
be a Commonwealth country.
In a number of other matters, however, the
relationships between the two countries were covered by
legislation. In some cases, South Africa was referred to by
in otitics, it came within the scope of the laws
concerned by virtue of being part of Her Majesty's Dominions.
The need to nake any legislative adjustments to moot the now
situation was now under study. However, the Government did not
propose to make any alteration in existing legislation for the
tiro being. Mr. Menzios referred specifically to the Nationality
and Citizcnship Act. This Act, as it stood, offered the sae
trea-m..: nt in Australia to South African citizens as to other
British subjects. No alteration to the Act was contemplated
for the present at least.
In conclusion, Mr. Menzies said that the Australian
Government would be guided by the desire to avoid any abrupt
or unnecessary disturbance to existing arrangements with South
Africa which served the mutual convenience of both countries.
However, there night need to be some adjustments over a period
in the light of particular developrents, including the
policies which might be adopted by South Africa itself.
CANBERIRA, May, 1961. 



Y 61/ 030
FOR PRESS
STATEMENT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMIION-. K: ALTH PUBLIC
SERVICE BOARD
The Director-General of Health has
forwarded to the Public Service Board Dr. Bazeley's
reply tn the charge made against him by the Directnr-
General. Dr. Bazeley has denied the truth of
the charge; he has denied that he was guilty of improper
oonduct in his official capacity and that, being un
officer of the PublicService, he made statements to
the public press in criticism nf, or attempted to
promote opposition tn, theCommonwealth Serum Laboratories
BillAntroduced in the Parliament by the Government.
Dr. Bazeley having denied the charge,
Sthe PublicService Board, as required by Section 56 of
the Public Service Act, will now appoint a Bcard of
Inquiry which will inquire into the truth of the
charge and report to the Board its opinion thereon.
Canberra 27th May, 1961. 
A. EXTRACTS FROM PUBLIC SERVICE ACT
SECTION 56, PUBLIC SERVICE ACT 1922-1960
Where any officer of the First or Second
Division is charged by any person with any of the
offences mentioned in the preceding section, the Minister,
in the case of an officer of the First Division, and the
Permanent Head, in the case of an officer of the Second
Division, may suspend the officer, and upon such
suspension shall forthwith report the charge and suspension
to the Board. If the officer does not in writing admit
the truth of the charge, the Board shall appoint a Foard
onf Inquiry ( consisting of three persons, one of whom
shall be the Chairman of the Board of Inquiry, and which
shall not include the person by whom the charge was made),
which shall inquire into the truth of the charge and
shal/ report to the Board its opinion thereon.
If any of the charges are admitted, or are
found by the Board of Inquiry to he proved, then the
Board of Commissioners may make such recommendation as
Sto the punishment or otherwise of the person charged as
to the Board seems fit. On receiving such recommendation,
the Governor-General may dismiss the officer from the
Commonwealth Service, or reduce the officer to a lower
Division and salary, or impose such penalty or other
punishment as the case demands.
If the charges are found by the Board of
Inquiry not to be proved, the suspension shall be
immediately removed by the Minister or the Permanent Head,
as the case may be. 
2.
SECTION 57. Any officer, upon the hearing by a Board of
Inquiry or Appeal Board in relation to any charge against
him, shall be entitled to be represented by counsel,
attorney, or agent, who may examine witnesses and address
the Board on his behalf. The charging authority may
likewise be represented at such hearing by counsel,
attorney, or -agent.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Inquiry
or Appeal Board to make a thorough investigation
without regard to legal forms and solemlnities, and to
direct itself by the best evidence which it can procure
or which is hi. d before it, whether the evidence is such
as the law would require or admit in other cases or not.
SECTION 58. The Chairman of any Board of Inquiry or Appeal
Board may at any time
summz-n any person whose evidence appears to be
0 material to the determination of any subject of
inspection, inquiry, or investigation being
conducted by the Board;
take evidence on oath; and
require the production of documents.
Any officer who, without reasonable cause,
neglects or fails to attend in obedience to the summons,
or to be sworn, or to answer questions or produce documents
relevant to the subject of the inspection, inquiry, or
investigation, shall be Egtiilty of an offence against
this Act. 
3.
Any person, not being an officer, who, after
payment or tender of reasonable expenses, neglects or
fails, without reasonable cause, to attend in obedience
to the summons, or to b'sworn, or to answer questions o
produce documents relevant to the subject of the inspection,
inquiry, or investigation, shall beguilty of an offence.
Penalty: Twenty pounds.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as
compelling a person to answer any question which would tend
to criminate him.
B. EXTRACTS FROMi PUBLIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
REGULATION 148B
Immediately upon the appointment of a Board of
Inquiry pursuant to section 56 of the Act, the Board of
Commissioners shall notify the charged officer that a
Board of Inquiry has been appointed to inquire into the
truth of the charge and report to the Board of Commissioners
its opinion thereon and, at the same time, advise him of the
names of the members of the Board of Inquiry.
0 A copy of all documents intended to be used before
a Board of Inquiry shall, where practicable, be supplied
by the Board of Commissioners to the charged officer at
least seven days before the inquiry is held.
REGULATION 149
The Chairman of a Board of Inquiry appointed to
inquire into the truth of a charge laid against an officer
of the First or Second Division shall fix the date, time;
and place of hearing the inquiry and shall advise the
charged officer and the members of the Board of the date,
time and place so fixed. The charged officer shall receive
at least seven days' notice of the hearing of the charge. 



oMCIAL OdNING OP 1961 UCIR1IQ 9IZP 3XsW 63CP
and u. 1961
Upfeeh br th Prime Miniter. th t. Hon. It. aG. MenLAsies. H. P.
Hr, Falkiner, ladies and gentlement
In case I forget it, I declare the Show Open. ( Laughter)
( Applause) And I gather from your applause that that's really all
I need to do about it. ( Laughter)
But I had a very plaintive letter from Geore Falkiner
inviting me to come aown here. lie reminded me that it was
years since I wae here last to do this Job. I vasn't likely to
forget it) Jeouse with all the optimism that characterises a
man who had only been Prime Minister, at thIat time, for two years
all that optimism has long sine deserted me I come down Just
with a hat, flow down from Canberra and was to rly back at the end
of the afternoon. There I was, Just a hat and, of courseo a
oi tain number of garmots on aeo I was very well reooiVed people
were immensely courteous they were not so angry with me in 1951
as they have been occasionally since and we got on very well. I
left here and caught the plane at about a quarter past five and
we got overhead at Canberra, There was a thunderstorm and the
lightning flashed and the clouds were sweeping around and every
nov and then I could see the lightss as 1 imagined them, of my own
house and a clear mental picture of my poor wife saying " Where is
my wandering boy tonight?" Finally the pilot came down and said
" I'm sorry, we hove to go back to dyney". If any of you have ever
tried to sleep in a Sydney hotel, having nothing to oear except the
kind of thinj I'm now wearing, you will understand exactly how
well I remember that occasion.
There's one other thing I would like to say. I zrmember
it from the time before and it is quite fascinating. There is a
very studied form of insult delivered to a politician by you
" sheep fellers". Just as the politician begins to think " how that
asn't a bad sontenoe", an intorjaector says " baaaa, haaa baaaa".
iou can hear it all round the place. -4hereas this regrottable
looking old ran opposite me, ever since I arrived and sat down has
been wrinkling his nostrils at me. ( Laughter) A very subtle form
of insult that, and one which I must set about introducing into the
louse of Reprusentatives ( Laughter) You couldn't call a man to
order, could you, for wrinkling his nose. You can't rise to a
point of order and say " The honourable member for"-let's take a
name at random " East Sydney" ( Laughter, applause) " is wrinkling
his nose at ms",
Anyhow, Sir, whaever my sins or long since forgotten
merits may be, you don't nded to apologise to me for asking ae to
come to this Show, because as you have rightly said this is ihl
great industry in Australia. There can be no question about that
at all. ( Applause) I've had it very much in my mind of recent
times becauseo as Imay tell you rather confidentially9 we've taken
a few rather unpopular steps in the last six months I wouldn't
want to have it mentioned outside but I don't mind admitting that
that is so, ( Laughter)
Jut I Just want to take the opportunity of saying to you
that every step that is taken to suppress inflation in Australia is
bound to be unpopular with somebody; but it can't be unpopular
with you. Jecause if there is one great industry in Australia it
is the wool industry, and if there is one industry that can't
afford domestic inflation it's yours. You meest the world, you meet
the world's demand, you are paid 4hat the world will pay youl but
you can't pass your added costs on to the man next door. Ieople 
0ooauionally forgot that even so amaxing an Industry as the wool
industry oan really be priced out of profitable exi!; tenoe booauue
of the rise In costs internally,
Therefora I suy for myself that It doesn't worry me it
somebody doesn't like some carefully conceived anti-inflationary
measures because I happen to havre enough wit to know t at the
solvency of Australia, the arvth of AuetruJial the capacity of
Australia to receive mi,; runts year by yeurs the prospects of
Australia having 20 million people in the lifetime of many of the
men here present today, all those things depend niot only upon a
world makt for wool, but upon a sucoeamfil ; 2ld market for wool*
-Ind it can't be a aucoessful market if &amp; alloping inflation is
allowed to take charge on the home-front. ( Applause)
Thereioreq Sir, quite unblushingly I Invite you to think,
to understand, that as nobody has yet blot rid of an inflationary
boom without hurting somebody, without treading on somebody's corns,
it is the duty of a practical statesmanl to select toe corns, rot to
* a afraid of treading on a few corns, but to say " WJhat Is th Xzeat
object to be achieved? And If I can achieve that for millions of
people I must content to annoy thousands of people". That's It.
This is, In the old phrases the problem of the jreatest 4,00d for
the gftatost number.
Now 1 believe as you belie ze, that these passing
incident* are only passing Incidents* 4. have had then before
today -and we've come through Lhem. George Falkiner -dus good
enough to ref ir to what has happened in Australia In the last
years. It In really fabulous. do forget so easily, ' Old men
forgot; yet all shall be forgot' yo-i know, Shakespeare, as usual,
was rightt we do forget . hose things, Jut if any one of us here
today had sat down In 194~ 9, or,' 50, and had put In front of him or
her a statement of what the position In Australia would be In 1960
he would have disbelieved it, she would have disbelieved It, It
would have been reearded as perfectly Coolishe dho had any reason
to suppose that 90 million sheep should become 150 million, to take
you~ r own great industry* WIho would have supposed that we could
ha-io seen, with our handful of peoplo the tremendous do iolopment of
this country, a development so remarkable, If you will allow me to
say so, that the ieople overseas who are shrewd Jud,, os of our
, ountryt who are not interested in our ooubitry In order to lose
money In its are so interested in this country, and Ita Aiture
prospects, its potentiallties, that contrary to all the
pessmistst i. rophecieos we are having In the current year an even
greater inflow of private capital invoutment Into ' 1stralla than
we had last year, when It was an all time reaurd. ( Applause)
Siwg all this means something to you; It means something
to this groat Industry. It means that more and more and more we
are developing a large population ourselves and t-he strengtii of a
nation to sustain, and be utained by, our major Industries*
Now the only other things that I want to say Sir are,
first that one of the groat problems In this industry Is research.
I donit suppose I wuuld have such difficulty In , oin4 down the
street somewhere, In Sydneyo even In that boni~ hted centre that
I came from,. Melbourne, to find somebody who would say, " Oh yes,
Ltd love to be a sheep man, 4ulte eusy, quite easy. YOU just
sit on a verandah axnd smoke a pipe., and watch the wool grow. It's
an simple as that**
I lke to remember that even in my own lifetime the
quality, the yield of wool, the knowledev of pastures, the pride of
achievement in the wool-grower, has grown out of all sight. This
Is a proud industry, as veil as being a &amp; reat Industry, And
because It'is a proud one, it must have research; it must grow
and grow. People of pride are not satisfied to decline . they must
go on and be strong. 
In the pavilion that I went throuagh before lanch,
lookind hastily and, Itm isfraid, nut always intaligently1 at the
exhibits and at what was .4oij on, I once more had reason to be
tiani~ fu2. that the wool indust~ ry has been aware,, increasingly, of the
need for researoht some of It in the laboratory, uiomo of It in the
officel a lot of it on the sheep farm Itself, a lot of it
conducted by practical sheep men, a lot of It conducted byr
scientists who, an I was hmappy. to obseve toduy, are in no case
" lone,-hairod" l scientists they all looked quite respectable to me.
('. aughter) Rather like politicla 5. Jut the Importancoe of
reseurch, I. think, oun't be over-estimuted because wool of course,
hias. Its battle to fight in the jorld. I'm an optimist on that
matter,-if I may say so, buicauso for the last 20 years I've been
listening to people who have said " Wool is finished. ' Thore's a
synthetic fibre that's joing to put It out of business". I once
4as cajoled into a darment mude of on. of these synthetic fibres.
I put it on onae, I hated it, and I'Ve never vorn it siode
We've aliraya been told that the day of jloom theday of
disaster, is around the oorner. I don't believe it,. believe
that If wool Is constantly reinforced, as the ; reatesi; of all
riatural fibres by the efforts of scientists and passing out,
ultimately, iiato the efforts of breeders Qn developors of wool
production, it will hold its own ajainst competition. If it is of
any Importance to any of us lid like you all to have this In mind
! eawase live had it in my own mind for various purposes a g~ ood deal
of lates the population at the w~ orld was 29500 adliions, so the
statisticians uaid in 19% 0# In 1960 this had become about 3,200
millionis, a very big increase. Wy the year 2000 wind and wnather
penItitt, in the absence of some enormous worlA catastrophe, the
estimate is that there will be 6 000 million people in the worldt
that the p~ opulation will double 1n a period of 40 years, or near
enough. Does this make you pessimistic? It presents uzt with
problems, It presents the world 4ith colossal problems bucause
the se people must be fed and clothed* jut from the point'of view
of this great Industry Lhis Is a marvellous opportunity. We are
not to suppose that you are~ just cate~ ring for the existin,,, demand
for the great fibre. The demand us the atund-ird of living rises
around the world* will 4rov will double, will treble# will
cjtwdz'upl* of course it wiii provided that t~ he Industry itsirf
4ith * all the aide of theoreticl and applied soienoe is able to
meet the market to most demand to meet the calls offashion, to
meset the calls f~ or trousers that don't have to be crossed by your
' ii~ fo, all these maorn developments that have been of such great
importancu, and will. be moro so in the Puture. Therefore
research by you, by the technical experts# by the sclentists is
trixendously Important.
The other thinjg 131rl In promotion, because this is a
sort of salesman's world. Do you know, If I may betray a guilty
secret of politics to yout that I occasionally have the most
manificent and brilliant Ideas ( Iaughtr), but the trouble is I
have to sell them to people, I have to make them understand that
they ure magnificent and brilliant. That's reasonable, isn't it?
Jo the art of salesmianship is tremendous the urt of promotions
I am delighted to see that under the virle leadership of my
friend Sir William Gunn ( Applause) this promotion campaign oes on,
The orld is not going to beat a path to our door just bocuuse we
grow ereat wool. I know that somebody said that that would happen
if somebody had a good idea, You must go Into a world, no
country in which an compare with Iu~ zralla as a drower of fine
wool* and you mast constantly have right under their noses, and in
LI-wir minds the virtue, of this jreat fibre., You iean't leave It
alones, you can't stay at home iand say$ " Well, they will ome along"
4uoause they won't, It's not that kind-of world. 
4*
Therefore the promotional programse seems to me to be
something of the most tremendous Importanoo. I hope nobody is
going to say, " Well if the Govurnment thinks that, let the
Jovernment do it." Do you know one of the things I like about
this greatest of all Australian industries is that it has never yet
put Its nook Into the overnment, -Oe politioal noose. It has
been its own m aster; ( Applause) it has had Its own pride; it has
made its imortal oontribution to the life of this country. Sir
I hope it will be like that alwuyst long after my time; long after
the time of other people here.
Therefore I hope I have conveyed to you that this to me
is not Just one of those ohores that a political man has to do.
This to me has been an occasion of opportunity and of very great
pride. So. for the seoond time, I declare the Show open* 



61/ 032
P. M. No. 26/ 1961
NEW AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE COMMONWEALTH
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, ainounced today the
appointment of Mr. V. J. U. Skermer, as Auditor-General
for the Commonwealth. He succeeds Mr. H. C. Newman, who
retires this week-end.
Mr. Menzies. said that Mr. Skermer, was a highly
experienced audit official, who had occupied a number of senior
I positions in the Commonwealth Audit Office. Since 1951, Mr.
Skermer has been Secretary and Chief Inspector of the AuditCffice
aand, in that position, has been deputy to the Auditor-General.
He has acted as Auditor-General for the Commonwealth on a number
of occasions during the absence of the Auditor-General.
Mr. Skermer, who is 53, was awarded the O. B. E. in the
New Year Honours List for 1961 for his distinguished public
Sservice. Mr. Newman, whom Mr. Skermer replaces, has been Auditor
S-General since 1955. Ho retires after a career in the Commonwealth
Public Service extending over more than fifty years.
Reforring to Mr. Newman's retirement, the Prime Minister
expressed high praise for his work as Auditor-General. Mr.
Menzies said that Mr. Newman had served the Commonwealth with
great distinction throughout his long Public Service career.
Mr. Newman was awarded the O. B. E. in 195+ and, in the
1960 New Year Honours List, was promoted to Commander of the
British Empire.
CANBERRA, 4+ th June, 1961. 



61/ 031
FOR PRESS: Statement by the Chairman of the Common real th
Public Service Board
Dr. Bazeley, Director of the Commonwealth Serum
Laboratories, having denied the charge made by the Director-
General of Health, the Pdblic Service Board has, as required
by section 56 of the Public Service Act, today appointed a
Board of Inquiry which will inquire into the truth of the
0 charge and report to the Public Service Board its opinion
thereon. The Board of Inquiry is composed as follows
Chairman: The Honourable Mr. Justice R. M. Eggleston,
Judge of the Commonwealth Industrial Court
and of the Supreme Court of the Australian
Capital Territory.
Members: Sir Patrick McGovern, of Forrest,
Canberra, Aø C. T.
Mr. F. P. O'Grady, Deputy Director-General,
Postmaster-General' s Department.
The Chairman of the Board of Inquiry will determine
the time and place for the hearings. The Board of Inquiry
will decide whether the hearings shall be held in public or
in private.
CANBERRA,
7th June, 1961. 



I. P. M. No. 27/ 1961
SECOND COMMON1JEALTH EDUCATION CONFEv'ENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that Australia
would be represented at a Commonwealth Education Conference to be
held from llth to 25th January, 1962. At the invitation of the
Indian Government, the Conference will be held in New Delhi.
The Prime Minister added that the Conference would be
the successor to the Commonwealth Education Conference held at
Oxford in July, 1959, at which plans were made for various kinds
of educational co-operation between member countries of the
British Commonwealth. The Conference will review progress to date and make
futhi-plans for developing the scheme of co-operation between
countries of the Commonwealth. One of the major activities
decided at the Oxford Conference was the institution of the
WConnonwealth Scholarship and Fellowship Plan whereby scholarships
are awarded for students to study at universities in other parts
of the Commonwcalth, mainly at post-graduate level. Australia
has awarded scholarships to 32 students from 15 Commonwealth
countries and some 60 Australian students have received awards
for overseas. Commonwealth countries also undertook to assist
emerging member nations to develop their education systems and
Australia's contribution has been the provision of training for
specialist teachers, arranging study tours for African educators
and. supplying Australian oducational personnel for key posts in
these countries.
CAN B* ERRA,
7th June, 1961. 



P. M. No. 28/ 1961
APPROVED ITINERARY FOR PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT TO TASMANIA
The Prime Minister, Mr. R. G. Menzies, will pay a three-day
visit to northern Tasmania on July 4-6. The itinerary for his
visit is as follows
TUESDAY, 4TH JULY:
10.30 a. m.
12.30 p. m.
2.00 p. m.
3.00 p. m.
5.00 p. m.
8.00 p. m. Arrive King Island and tour soldier settlcrs'
properties
Attend lunch to be given by Council and meet local
representatives
Depart King Island
Arrive Burnie
Civic Reception to be given by Warden W. A. Young,
Warden of Burnie and endorsed Liberal Candidate for
Braddon Public meeting at Burnie to be chaired by Warden
Young
WEDNESDAY, 5TH JULY:
9.30 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.30 a. m.
12 noon
12.30 p. m.
2.00 p. m. Visit Associated Paper Pulp Mills, Burnie, and
inspect Mills in company with foremen of various
Departments. Leave A. P. P. M.
Call on Warden of Ulverstone
Depart Ulverstone
Arrive Devonport and be guests of Warden for Lunch
Depart Devonport for Launceston
8 9.30 p. m. Rally of Party supporters at Navalmen's Hall
THURSDAY, 6TF JUrY:
11.30 a. m. Inspect Irrigation Scheme at Poatina
1 2 p. m.
2 2.45 p. m.
3.00 p. m. Guests of Launceston Chamber of Commerce for lunch
Discussion with Chamber of Commerce and Rural
Industry representatives
Television interview 15 minutes, with Mr. Ray
Sherry ( Channel on the Prime Minister's
impressions of his visit. It is likely that this
programme will be circulated to Associated Chcnnelz
on mainland.
. UiJlLE 6A,
7th June, 1961. 



P. M. 29/ 1961
WEDDING GIFT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Iion. R. G. Menzies
The wedding gift from the Australian Government and
people to His Royal Highness the Duke of Kent and
Miss Katharine Worsley consists of 12 dessert Spoons and
12 dessert Forks made of Australian gold.
The gift was sent to the Australian High Commissioner
in London last week-end to be delivered before the marriage
which will take place tomorrow afternoon at York Minister.
A gold plaque in the case containing the gift is
inscribed as follows Presented To
His Royal Highness the Duke of Kent
and
Miss Katharine Worsley
With Warmest Good Wishes from
The Government and People of Australia
8th June, 1961
Above the plaque is a small map of Australia in gold
showing the States of the Conmnwealth.
The Government will nlso mark the eccasicn of the
Wedding by the flying of flags from all Commrnwealth Buildings
tomorrow, CANBERRA
June 7, 1961 P. M. 



61/ 036
EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 7.15 n. L1. June 8.
A TALK TO THE NATION
Telecast and Broadcast by the Prime Minister, the
Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.. on 8th June, 1961
Ladies and Gentlemen:
For once in my life, as you might say, I'm going to talk
about politics not about party politics, but about the policies
of the Nation, the policics that you have been rc ading about,
hearing about and many of you, I've no doubt, have been
criticising most heartily.
Political policies of these large proportions have a
great effect on your job, on your income, on your whole standard
of life, and therefore you have a perfect right to be told
occasionally by those whom you have elected to Governm-ent what it
is they are doing; and how itts going on.
Therefore in the first place I would just like to say to
you, because I haven't very much time, I would just like to say
something to you about the policy: what is the basic objective
that we are after? After ten years, I think you will agree, of
unexampled prosperityin 1960 we ran into a bom, a boom that was
large and threatening. We all felt, no doubt, very happy about
I it except those who were contemplating what would occur when it
burst. And what we have been setting out to do in these last 12
months is to quell that boom to bring it down to a normal state
of prosperity and advancerien not an inflationary condition that
hurts so many people, but a slable condition
Now stability doesn't mecan that you are just going to
get down to a dead level and stay there. Stability, by itself,
is no good to Australia. Our population is going up; we have an
enormous territory; year by year all sorts of new things are
being discovered. This is really the most exciting country in the
world. And people overseas, more and more, think so. Thcrefore
when I say " stability" Itm talking about stability as the
foundation for a tremendous growth and expansion. But we believe,
p atnhda t wet het hiinnkf lraitgihotnl yi, s ntohta t ruunnlneisnsg aywoauy hwaivte h sytoaub ilsoi tyt haitn tthhee wsheonlsee
value of money changes all the time, unless you have that, you
will never attract the investment that you need, you will never
have the confidence that you need for developing the country.
Now that is what the policy has been in the broad. That
policy, of course, has to vary in its application because
circumstances change so frequently, particularly in the case of
Australia. Here we are, an exporting country, with exports that
are primarily the products of the land. If there is a drought,
our income falls; if the price of wool goes down, our income
falls. We are very very subject to fluctuations of this kind and
therefore the Governm-ent has the immensely complicated task I
think more complicated than most people realise of doing what
it can in its own fashion to stabilise conditions.
Now we have applied this policy in various ways. I
won't go into them tonight because you are familiar with them.
But perhaps I should say something to you about, first of all,
why I believe that it is essential to get rid of the boom because
and here are my reasons as quickly as possible in a boom
costs rise, prices rise. This is all right for people who can
stand it; it's no good to people on fixed inco. es; it's no good
to people on social sorvices; it's no good to the savings that
you have in so many hundreds of millions in the Savings Banks, and
otherwise invested. And, above all, it's no good to our export 
industries, because when the cost of their production goes up they
can't pass it on to somebody else. Their price is what the world
will give them; just as it is in the case of wool.
Because of that, it is essential from our point of view
that we should keep the inflatio) nary processes under control. It
would be a terrible thing for Australia and a very bad thing for
our future if some day we found that wool itself had been priced
out of the world's market; or that the taxpayers in a~ ustralia had
to subsidise the production of wo. ol. This would be a deplorable
state of affairs. Well we have applied these anti-inflationary measures,
and, I think, with some result.
First of all our overseas funds were running down. Now
those overseas funds sound a little mysterious, but in reality
they are substantially what has been paid for our exports
overseas, less what has been paid out for the imports that cone
into Australia. You always have to preserve some sort of'
substantial balance overseas. Some people think you ought to have
the cost of six months' imaports; some may put it a little lower.
But at any rate you can't afford to have your overseas funds
running down so fast that overseas people lose their confidence;
or you are not able to pay for your imports. So that it is very
important that the overseas funds should be maintained, themselves,
in a stable position.
Well, at the beginning of November when the last
measures were announced we were quite apprehensive about what was
happening to the balance of funds.
But as a result of the various measures, as a result of'
the effectiveness of the credit restrictions as the greatest antiinflationary
measure, our reserves have not been running down to
the extent that we feared, and will, in fact, end the financial
year in a healthy state. So that that particular danger has, I
think I can say quite cinfidently, been averted.
In the second place we th:) ught that the most effective
fairest way of reducing an excess of imports, particularly of
consumer goods, was credit restriction in Australia. And that has
proved to be right because in the month of May that vie have just
concluded there has been quite a notable " turn down" in the
volume of imports into Australia.
Now you may say, " Well all this business in Aiustralia
has created great trouble; there's a little unemployment;
there's some less of confidence" and I'll say something about
that in a moment " Isn't this a great price to pay for
controlling your overseas funds, and controlling the inflation?"
Well it isn't a great price to pay. Do you know this: are
here or I'm here and you're there I'm available to be
criticised, I don't mind it, I'ri usod to it, we have a lot of
critics from time to time in Alustralia. But the people outside
Australia who are shrewd, hard-bitten investors, who are looking
for a country in which they see oppirtunities for expansion and
development, these people, so far frema being frightened off by
our policies, have come in more and more. Do you know that in
1959/ 60, the previous financial year, the investment of overseas
capital in Australian business -I dintt nean borrowed by
Governnients but actually in hiustralian factories, businesses
was an all-time record? It ran into hundreds of millions. This
year, in spite of the events, in spite of the criticisms there
is such approval of policies of stability and development in
Australia, that the investmient of funds is larger than it was last
year, 
3.
Quite frankly I didn't expect that. I thought that with
the inevitable arount of dislocatioDn that must occur when you are
dealing with a boom because you have otto hit something if you
arc going to deal with a boom I thought " Well, this may nako
people a little wary outside". On the contrary! Obvi:) usly our
credit in the rest of the world has never stood higher.
Now the only other thing that I want to say to you in
the time that I have is this. Don't let people persuade you,
don't let anybody persuade you that you are living in danger of a
depression. If the boon had been allowed to on it could easily
have produced a burst. Our grandfathers could have told us about
that in the nineties, in the great land boon and bank smash. The
right way to deal with these matters is to avoid the excess of the
boom, press it down to get it back on to an even keel. Aind if we
do that, as we are doing, then of course we are not g; oing to have
a depression. We won't have a depression unless the people of
Australia lose faith in themselves. Now I don't. mind you losing
faith in me you've been very k'ind to me; you've had some faith
in tie for a long time. But whatever you do don't lose faith in
yourselves. Every material element in Aiustralia marks us for
another 10 years of the most remarkable national 1growth. These
troubles are passing troubles. I'm not denying that there has
been some lack of confidence. We're conscious of that. That,
indeed, has been one of the real reasons why some productive
industries in the manufacturing side in Australia have had orders
falling off. Not because people are unable to buy, but because
there is a little hesitation: " I wonder what is going to happen:
I wonder how long this is ,-oing on".
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I tell you I understand that
feeling. I don't think it is well-founded. I beg, of you, go
about your affairs in a normal fashion, do your spending in a
normal way, because these policies are temaporary policies. Its we
recover from the inflationary pressures, sowill all these policies
be diminished. They are not put on forever; they are not put on
for fun. They are put on for a purpose, and as the purpose is
achieved so they become no longer necessary.
Now I am a complete optimist about our future. I under.-
take to say that by this time next year many thousands of people
in Australia will wonder what they were worried about, because I
believe that the maladjustmients, the little bits of difficulty
that occur here and here, the amiount of unemployment that exists,
and which nobody likes, these are temporary things. The permanent
thing in Australia is that we have a remarkable country, a rich
country it's going to be increasin'gly rich as we work at it.
But the g reat elements that we need are a good foundatian
to build on that's stability, that's cutting out booms a clear
vision of growth and expansion in the future, and in the individu.
heart a decent confidence in your own country. Aill I can say is
I have an unlimited confidence in an unlimited future for our
country. Goodnight ladies and gentlemen. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIM MINISTER9 THE RT. HON. R. G.
I4ENZIES9 TO STUDENTS OF TOW'NSVILLE UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE$ ON 20TH J NE 1961
Mr, Warden, and ladies and gentlemen:
I would like to relieve your mind at once this is not to
be a long, heavy, political speech; nor do I propose to make a
speech to you of any comprehensive kind about universities and what
they do. All I do -want to say to you is that after the last war one
of the remarkable things that occurred in Australia was that there was
a tremendously increased demand for university training. The number
of students qualified for and desiring university training grew
phenomenally. It became quite clear that the task of providing for
them, the task of keeping the universities going and growing, was
going to be beyond the capacity of the Governments of the States and
could not be brought within their capacity by extraordinary increases
in fees because that would have the effect of depriving people, too
many people, of the opportunity of study,
So I went on a sort of frolic of my own. I got hold of Sir
Keith Murray when I was in England, the Chairman of the Universities
Grants Commission, and I asked him whether he would become the
Chairman of a Committee to Investigate the universities position in
Australia. Hie said that he would provided that his Chancellor of the
Exchequer for whom he worked was agreeable. The Chancellor was Mr,
Hai-old Macmillan, an old friend of mine, and I was able to cope with
him. And so we got Sir Keith Murray.
4e got together a very, very fine committee, partly people
from overseas, partly very eminent men in Australia. And the result
of their report, I believe, was phenomenal. It was regarded as quite
shocking I know, by people in the Treasury because it presented us
with a 13111 which we speedily accepted I did a little more
dragooning on my own account and which increased the Commonwealth' s
outlay on universities from a figure that it had stood at of about a
little over œ CLm. a year to a total of œ 21m. in three years what we
call the first triennium. This was accepted by the Govrxe nt. It
imposed not only great obligations on the Commonwealth, but it
imposed even greater ones on the States. One must always remember
that the development of the university structure in Australia
represents a remarkable piece of co-operation between the Commonwealth
Goveirnment and the State Governments, each of which has accepted large
burdens, financially, in relation to the matter.
Then we adopted another recommendation of the Murray Committee
and we appointed a Universities Commission which is presided over by
Sir Leslie Martin, the eminent scientist. Not to be outdone by Sir
Keith Murray and his myrmidons, they brought in a B3ill, the other day,
which increased the œ 21in. over the first three years to over
the second three years. I haven't yet begun to think of u~ hat the
third triennium may bring forth. But it remains true that in
Australia among us all, we are spending now sums of money on
university development which would have been regarded as simply
fabulous and absurd., before the war. This I believe is a Lreat thing.
And one of the things that has happened is what is happening
here. You can't Just create a new University, so to speak, fully
fledged, because it is a very expensive operation. I would hate to
tell you what it would cost to establish, in the full sense, a full
univorsity, with all the equipment that goes with it. It runs into
many millions of pounds.
But in various places in Australia the first stCep has been
taken some of them were taken before the war; some of them taken
after it the first steps have been taken by creating a university
college and attaching it to one of the established universities, In
Canberra., for example we have had for many, many, years a Canbe rra
University College which was attached to the University of Melbourne 
and the degrees that were ,, ranted, though they were earned in
Canberra in the University College, wore &amp; ranted in the University of
Melbourne. Recently I brought about a marriage between the National
University, essentially, at that time, a post-graduate research
institute, and the University College. So that they are now all part
of the Australian National University and a student may start in
First Year, go through to post-graduate work, to hiigher degree, and if
lie is of the right kind, and has the right feeling for it, move into
higher realms of research work.
The University College which was established at Armidale a
good number of years ago has now become a fall University.
I look forward Wiself to the idea that this so prom~ isingly
beun ' University College will, somne day don't be in too much of a
hurry; these things take a good deal of doing will some day
develop into a University for the northern part of Australia. But that
is on the knees of tile gods or rather, to be more precise, if less
theological, on the knees of' the University Commission which itself
will advise us on these matters from time to time,
But I mention these matters merely to indicate and I am
talking particularly to the students that you have the jroat
priviloc; e really of being the firsL students in a place wihich will,
in duo course, whether here or in expanded form across the riger, or
whatever may come,, develop into a matter of immense import-ance to the
north o f Australia, and thorefore to Australia as a whole. This I
think, is a great privilege. I permit myself to envy you a lithle
because you are at the beginning of your studies; and I occasionally
feel that I must be getting perilously near the end of mine,
I was very pleased to notice, among other things, warden, that
you have already, wisely, if I may say so, aimed at developing even
though in a small way at this point of time, all tile aspects of student
life, A University Collerge which has an ambition some day, to be a
full University, must be able to cater, in my opinion not merely for
the work done at a desk but for the whole life of a iniversity: the
life on the playing field, the life in a social way, the life of the
common room; in due course, I trust, the life of residential colleges.
All these things build up into something that distinguishes a
University from any other institute of learning because it oncourages
freedom, it encourages the ability to meet people? to get to understand
people, which is after all, one of the great problems of life and &amp; no
of the problems that requires a great deal of work, and a great deal of
experience. When I came in I saw an eminently respectable young man who
turned out to be the President of the Union, thle Students' PI-esiddnt.
I uant to confess to you this may discourage you a lot I used to
be that myself. That, perhaps, was the beginning of the end with me.
It marked the beginning of my downfall which ultimately took me into
political affairs.
But it is a fine thing for students in a University to feel
that they have not only an individual existence but a corporate
existence, that they are part of a body and that as the University
College goes on, as the University goes on, more and more they are
part of a continuing body each of the years, each of the drafts of
new students learning something from those who have gone before them
and translating into terms of the future their own inafluence, and
their own work and their own knowledge. It is a wonderful thing to
belong to a continuing body. I want you to have that firmly in your
mind. If you just came along here and were told " Well, you are
going to do a year's work, and then disappear and the whole t11iad
over", that would be a rather depressing thought, wouldn't it? But to 
be members of something that will : o on and on and on if' we are left
alone, for a century, for twocenturies, that will ultimately build up
its own immense tradition, its own marvellous moral and spiritual and
intellectual compulsions on the mind, this is a great thing. So
that people some day will be able to say, " Oh, yos, I know so-and-so,
he's a Townsville man", jus' as they might say, " He's an Oxford man",
" He's a Cambridge man". Getting something and giving something all
the 1ime. I could talk to you for a long time about this; it is a
ma ter very close to my hort. I sometimes pormit rayself the unworthy
hope that when I have departed from politics, voluntarily or
involuntarily, when I have departed from public lifo and somebody sits
do wa, as somebodyill, perhaps rather unpleasantly to say, " ell what
did lie do, anyhow, what did it all amount to?" I hope No. 1 in my
credit list, which will be a short one I hope the deficit will be on
the next page so that you have to turn over to reach it will be,
" Well he understood the need for Universities in this land; he understood
something of the need for the highest intellectual and
scientific training that can be given in this country".
Ours is a new country crying out for first-class -eople; and
first class people, trained people, are always, as the economists say,
" in short supply". It is very true; it is very true that rhen I
survey the whole of the university structure in Australia and discuss
it ith the Universities Commission tre are naturally influenced in our
minds made a little fearful, when we contemplate the enormoue'inancial
demands that will arise. But much more important than the financial
demands will be the demands for first-class people. You can't have a
first-class University with second-class University teachers. We must
maintain the standard of the Professor, the standard of the lecturer,
the standard of the demonstrator, if we are going to be satisfied that
we are going to produce graduates whose degrees will be honourably
recognised around the world* and who, themselves, vill be able to make
a powerful contribution to their own country, or, indeed, to other
countries outside Australia.
That, Sir, is one of the _ reat problems that we have in the
future: the problem of keeping up the supply. -Je can't hope to get toc
many teachers from overseas because they, themselves, have a growing
demand no less than ours. There are new countries around thd world
which are bound to help if we can and they certainly w-on't be able
to help us much in the field of teaching and of scholarship. So we
have the responsibility of doing it ourselves to the utmost of our
capacity, to concentrate our minds on it, to seek to achieve the
ultimate in excellence because if we do we will be able to furnish the
universities of the future, and the university students of the future,
with the high level of teaching that they require. It is because I
have been able to do a little about this matter that I not onl]. wish
you well and envy you this opportunity, but would like to have that
little credit entry in the book of my life that I did something about it.
But chiefly, thismorning looking at you, I hope you will allow
me to say that I do envy you a little
" Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive;
Buat to be young, ttwas very heaven."
That is the way to look at this thing and you will create a new heaven
on earth. ( Applause) 



SPEiECI 3Y ñ THE PRIME MINISTE~ R TKE RT. HON.
ii 1' iE. NZIES~ AT .,* rVIC RtiCEP'lION, TdN
HALL, TOJ1{ AIILLE, ON 20TH JUNE. 161
Sir, There is just one thing that you said in your very generous
speech to which I take e. ception: " You people from the south", you
said. ( Laughter) N ow i wouild have you know that I am a sort of
expatriated Victoifian beclUnse I live in Canberra, but Australia is my
PLarisif. Thie i-r-ime M. inister of Australia must be a ueenslandec, a
New 3outh . Jelshrnan, a 3outh itustraiian, a Vict6rian and so on right
round the Corm~ onwealth. So let'' s , et thie record straight. My
responsibilities in r.' l ition to queensiand are every bit as . gre-t as
my rcsporisibilities Lo any other part of the Commaonwealthi. Indeed,
they are rather retrbecause 1* ha-ie always, as you know, believed
profoundly ;:: hat the develop. ent of this J3tate wh-ich is relatively an
unde-. eloped 3-Gale, is one of the great, exciting tast~ s of the future.
It becomes all the more e citing as the character of our
economy chan!, es. ' Aheirc vas a time, well withain my memory at any rate,
when we exported urimary products in a fairly orthodox fashion, we
imported lot of m: nrnf uactured -oods, a-nd we madb some ourselves, But
as t*( he years hLave _. one by and as thie pressure of events hAas developed,
this country of ours 1 as uecome a remarkably viell-b~ al ' ncedl one
economically. 0Oir Industrial develo,), enL has been p) henomenal; and
beczcuse it iias be * n neloi, unal we iioif have ti capa_, city Lo iti-stand the
stres.-es of int., rnitiorial 3conoiriic ev,. ents .! iuch :-rEat. er thian wel1ad
years ago. tiat is r,-y Iconsta; Itly ant to remind ieonle that the
greaL depression of thle ttiirties *. rhiich did not oe--in in " tustralia hi
in the United Jt:: uces ofL J_ r_ oic r-easons thiat i co-iid -liscuss with
yoll, couald not hap) pen tLoday. It could not h appen and I don't say
that simply becaus I f. -rime M, 1inister it could not h-afpen under
any Government t. hat took advantag e of the knowledge that hnas been
gained over the intervening_ period, and . cooLk advon , a e of the fact
that we are now a rirxiydevi/ eiopeu. Couzitry Onl both primary and
secondary sides of idstry.
But t1ie ! gr at t'ltat no; J -uts imiore and wiore, pressure on
our minds is how we can :-void tu--e pi) i," odical rises in th,, e bala~ nce of
paymients, the fluctuatios in our overisoas ' unds. Thtie re are two or
three bankers here t iis ;: orin en, se -1 h-aie met them, and if they
were hc--vin g an u~ o~ cLi! 2uoment ! id not just saying " No, !' in sorry,
it's the credit suueozety odtell yo itat tne move . Aent up and
do-vn ofc our int(-rn ulinal reserves has at direct acid profound effect on
La n'-in-poli,-cy inside A trla-bec:,. ase it affects the liquidity of
th1e7 ban!-, s. .1' ien You a~ thJ a run-down of your overseas funds, you will
expect liquidity of thie ar.. zs to oe teiidin g to dry up in
Aus tralia. So we !-ll hra ie a tremendoiis inter~ est in ( ureserJ: Ln ga
reasonable balance of .' aYiients in our trade . zith th:-e rest of the world.
And our trade aith uh.-, e rest of thie cforld is enormous. ihere is no
other country in t. he voend that could compare, peir capita, withair
trade with the rest', of tnie world not one. Our export u. rade, our
import trade, are both en) ormously sigiificant in world terms, ta
absolute terms. Plore and more, its ftou dy this problem, we realise,
don't we, that w., e must liave more ex ports, a -greateir va: riety of
exports. You must, so far-as you can, insulate yourself ag_, ainst the
violen't fluctuation that ., ay be produced by drought or by a
fluctuatuion in the world's wool price. . iVe are doin-g what we can
about that. 0,1l, in thi-e last 48 hiours have I been p-utting myself in
communication w. ith the administration of the United States on the old
question of the American tariff on Australian waool, which I venture to
describe as a perfectly foolish tariff since it protects an American
wool-growing industry w'iich-is not tremendously efficient that is the
understatement of the year. It protects it at the expense of
Australia, the ctreatestwo-rwn nation, the -reatest grower of
fine wool in the wJorld. And to hiave a tariff on our wool passing into
the United States is really very foolish. I hope that having regard 
to current neg-otiations the light lay be seen in that great and
generous country. If '. ie could secur1-some m., odification of that tariff
we would in one stroke do a great deal to improve a little andidien to
staullize the price of wool in Austvr,-, lia. This would be tretmendous.
Jut tliere Lre two other iterts on which our export income can
be built up, I believe, in the relatively shnort term, very
s i~ ni f icar t ly. 0Oie is in miinerals; " ite othler is in the exp ort of
M eat. ; And both of thfes; e concerin ! 4iueensland as perhaps they concern,
to 4th e samte de free, no ot; her Sta-t; e.
d ent P) iomt sa. 11m excited about Nit. Isa. I think
thiis is a phnenomenal clevelopL,,. ent.. 3ut wo t're o:, ly scratching'-the
surface of our rric~ i rEso ~ rces yet. 8~ y t: ie time the geophysicists
and w. e neologis -s t elone Their stuff I believe that are . oing
to ex fiose ; mineral 1veso : Ces 1i ljstrali1a i iicii ., ill be t-uite
t r, idou s. In 2 VeCA,; i~'. . n inl t'a of lead itad zinc, we
thin. i_ erfls of pop-per, ! e 1t inki. in tern-) of bauIxite; -ie are
be -in i i to) ti&gt; if. tent..:-Of ; Jatritd 1' e ha-s, ultimately of
metol" Llc aiunrinitz:. Wh'. ese thiin,; s, :) rcvJded we have thie n! t a-d
Timaginat ion to cope tht.; it emri ll ei produce a-deve-, lop.) ent
not on-'! y Ill 1t.: e SKrAu ~~ P,. Lf&gt; IS ve~ ry importa.-ut, Lout a
d , vlo;,, ent in thie intarn e: ein i . i-ch J ll rcitove rom
Austrclia this partic-olar ( uroblem of the,( fluctuatin-* balances of
payments nd t ; e b., lances of intern, icnal reserves. This, I { hink,
is tremendously important. And when a born Victori-an tnd an Fedopted
Canberran comes up to th-e noith: uenmsland you maustn ' t thn: that he
is bein. g entirely uns3elfi. sh I kno; youi : tould neveiT Laccuseany
politici,. n of that ustn't hei is 9: tirely unselfsh: the
fact is he is ; Avlono l: over &amp; iv L rt of iuthc li e
believes viil]-yield, inie2ure n o h reatest dividends for
th!, e riatioi,. Lou i. ustn't 50 eio ile LutC iet, " InacL tnis is mt in
our .1inds: it is iaosere nt fron zm-y own. mind for more thlan 24+ hours.
tiosw . urnin--2ua our Iocl-1 newspaper and Iread it
wvith ~ radv;: inta . go. I tookl lile to * 2-omiiiment ', dito.-oecause
it h&amp; an imi ense . y 1.111_ e OVV 1u, so . tas c+, oncecrned, seemed
to hiave an u1. comiutonly, -ii -i~ e o * ac: c' o -~ elilco wvs like
mysel e noL 1 dc-u'I I.~ e d ocil : 4 iery * htfu leading
artcleon thie questio' ' oc O1cnt jjt h o. censusso2-1. rether
conice. n _ ny Xustraliaci , b ecl-1) rts LtLCg 20 &gt; 0o inket'S of
th-e old * corld: o :~ n;~ tso ~ oe
1 rIi sñ tri rPSed1,7 I to roln : u. lf 6t ozen
newspa s tl It4 ir0 tj I-. ro o :-ii. he i-t: ln nited
ingdo;-. sivoull -ntoe-iry Oari Jrtion i, ket is sonet viag hat h-as
suddenl: iJsen. I Asueyou i, 3I-~ dnl isen. I know
there iL. s an ' r: vetin the " ouse of ' Ji: OiSTe oth2_ i day nd this
ga~ ve rise, very propeirly, to 6ret. e:-. 1 of'L specIUltir about it.
3J_ 1t i f i t is aiv co,. fori; to _. nyboDdy 1' 3. :, ua. ld tell y ou t ha t th i s i s a
L~ roblein -hat hias been .4iUC! . cssi-, a. jsct. ieen t+, y 6ovcarxalen aid the
. iovercn: m-ent of the riite'J 1ing: daim, A-11 . ie last tlhrec years. Iis a
problem that I have i-iyseif discussed in !) erson witi . denauer in
German and witlh de + daul'le in 1'' rance, atnd *: iith representatives of the
Governmaent in Italy. The last timie T was in London w., e hadI L. v. ery
zpc. lconfer-ence about it. It i! s as a r-! sult of th-at ( coli1-vre,
some mionths go, that. at this very ii _ tent. Astralian offlicialsane
sittin. downm with thne United :, ingdom officials dis.: ussin-'. he essential
details of this mattter. ^-ll this was atrra nged sotme t(. ime a: o. I-t is
perhaps my fault thlat -then -7 nae r g. ents to onduct wihanother
Governm-Pent in th. a Aritish, '_' OfEll' : 2Jaltii I lilke to conduct them
priv-ately and not . ioli ely. They . tre vary familiar ,-ith our lbs.
I attended ( a contference in Loildon this lasL'* tiine andnede
two tiiin-s per ~ ectly cle, r. Tihe firsl, is thlat thle Unrited iigo
sh-ould not agree, even in pjriinciple, to go in to thie Lmropean mmon 
Market without haviri,-prior effective consultation with the
Comonwcalth countries concerned, incltudinz, in particular, Aun ralia.
That is agreed, an. tiere will be rio commitment, even in principle,
. until these consulta : ions ha ve -oncluded.
In the second pl.. ace I said th-at in order to bring the
GLeneral problem dotmi to brasis taicks it ,-ias essential that component
officials of theirs n' 1 of o irs shiould, in fact, ' ork out in detail
uha intcres ts of ours iniight ba affected, wiliat e/. orts of ours might
be concrrnedl tfh,-t -,: rice ue t oulo. require to be paid in ter-ms of
entry to the 3uropean marle-P aiid to tile market in tUhe United Kingdom
before we % ri ld : say " Yes". iJou. r tiis is a very practical approach.
What I wiould iil-e to emolmhsise to you is that t'ie problem
is not problem of * h'iolesaie diiscuss. io, ut of ratail discussion.
' here ., rc very good reasons Zo iited ii! dorn should iant to be
in the Eu. iropean area.
( Tapn! i,. comv'ie: Ie) 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY, CITY HALL$ BRISBANE
21st June. 1961
Speech by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon, R. G.-Menzies
Mrs Chairman, Mr. Morris, parliamentary colleagues and ladies and
gentlemen: For some time now, in spite of comments to thie contrary
I have thought we were right in what we have been doing. Two
nights ago in Townsville, Townsville not being served with
television but with broadcasting, I listened to my distinguished
opponent, the Leader of the Opposition making what I thought was a
singularly generous and powerful speech in my favour. And that
encouraged me very much. But tonight looking at this remarkable
meeting, I confess to you that I am utterly certain that we are
right; and that we will form the next Government in Australia.
( Applause) In spite of the fact that I have had a lot of
experience, good, bad and indifferent, frankly I did not believe
that you had not made a mistake in taking the City Hall for the
opening meeting of the Convention, because I have many happy
memories of this hall I've been counted out most scintifically
in this hall ( Laughter) Itve been enfiladed by gentlemen who not
only disapproved of my politics, but of my ancestry ( Laughter)-
and I thought " This is a gamble,; what a risky thing this is to do,
to take the City Hall because evon if it has 1500 people in it, it
will look half empty." Now that's a very grim expr~ ssion " half
empty", because when my friends of the newspaper press are In
favour of the man who has 1500 in a hall that will hold 3,000,
they say " This vast hall was at least half full." ( Laughter)'
But when they are not so much in favour of him they dwall on the
fact that it was " practically half empty". ( Laughter) I think I
understand that that's very good colour. But tonight I must say
that even in my heyday, I can't remember a finer crowd, a greater
arowl of people in this hall than you have tonight.
I've just been up in the north and for those of you
who in spite of the intensely depressed state of the economy,
still have a television set, may have seen a rather dreary looking
old fellow on it tonight at a quarter to seven. I looked at it;
I thought it was terrible. ( Laughter) But ray wife who, being a
wife can detect a husband's faults quickly, thought it wasn't bad.
But at any rate those of you who saw it and listened to it, will
know that not for the first time in my life I have been excited
about a visit to ti-ic developing areas of this most developing
State. It's no mere piece of humbug on my part to say ti-at I
believe, I roally believe, we ought to get over the problems of
the week or the month if we can, occasionally, and have a look at
the future of this country, our country. If we do that, then, in
my opinion, wo will all increasingly look north, not just because
of some theory that we ought to have more people in the north for
some reasons of defence, or something of that kind, but because in
the northern part of Australia we have at least two, and probably
maore of the groatest potential developing industries that this
country will stimulate, and from which this country will benefit
in the next 10 years. Mincrals I must be a little alliterative
on this matter, I was going to say " minerals and cattle"
minerals and rieat. And there is no doubt about it that in spite
of the fact that the tasks are enormous, this country is going to
see a development in its north which I balieve will be exciting to
people all over Australia. ( Applause) 
But, Sir, a little time ago I thought perhiaps one ought
to say something to people about the policies that we are
pursuing and the reasons for them, because sometimes they are
shrouded in mystery, i know. So I gave myself the pleasant
exercise of writing down questions which I was going to answer
Myself. Now that, of course, is a cross-examiner's dream, isn't
it? Wdrite the question down; and then write the answer.
Having thought about that, and having realised that it had been
done before I decided " Wdell I'll put down questions quite
bluntly, as I know people are putting them to us".
Tonight I thought I would talk to you about some of
them, because, after all, you are the core of Liberalism in this
State and you must have been troubled by questions; and
sometimes, for all I know, you may have found it difficult to
answer them to your own complete satisfaction. So I thought it
might be a little helpful to all of us. You don't need to be
converted to our cause, but perhaps you do need to be
strengthened in our cause, to be made more effective in our
cause; because our cause is the cause of Australia. So I will
take a few of these questions it depends entirely on the clock
as to how many I deal with. And not only on the clock, but on
your patience. I have heard this question put: " Well what would have
happened if the Government had not taken these unpopular economic
measures? IW-ouldn't the boom have faded away quietly on its own
account, and no harm done?" Now this question is put by people
who know that in 1960 we were having a tremendous boom and it
wasn't without in! terest to me, two night ago, to find that our
opponents agree, because the Leader of the Opposition, Mr.
Calwell, agreed that there was a boom and that something had to
be done about it. The differe7nce between him and me is that his
idea for curing the boom of 1960-61 is to have a referendum on
the Constitution in ' 62, or ' 63, which doesn't seem to me to be
tremendously relevant to the problems that we are dealing with.
But there was a booraT. There was a boom which was
leading to a high degroe of inflation, to a high stimulus in
costs and prices. I hoar a gre) at deal about housing, very
properly so it's a great problem. But in the boom conditions
of 1960 every house was costing more, every block of land that
somebody wanted to buy on which to build a house was costing more.
Thoro was a high degree of speculation going on. Thero was an
under-supply of labour. We easily forget it, but thero was a
groat shortage of labour in 1960, and the re sult was that people
" bid-up" for the labour thay wanted, for the resources theiy
wanted. I don't need to tell you, for example, that the
Australian iron and steel industry is at least as efficient as
any corre sponding industry anywhere in the world. Australian
steel could be exported, profitably, to the United States of
America. This is the proof of the efficiency of our industry, of
its management, of the people who work in it. And yet so great
was the demand on our resources in this tremendous booma of 1960
that instead of being exporters of steel, we became importers of
steel. The Australian steel industry could not satisfy the
demand. So we were importing at that time, and beforo it, many
maillions of pounds worth of steel every year this in a country
that can produce steel as cheaply as we can. Of course all that
had its effect on our balances of money overseas, en our
international solvency, because if your reserves overseas keep
running down, then you are going to get into trouble. Therefore,
perhaps, I don't need to labour the point that there was a great
boom, Now, Sir, booms don't come to an end on their own
account with satisfactory results for ordinary people, I was 
born almost in the middle of the 90' s this is a remote period
of antiquity that is beyond the understanding of some of you
here tonight the middle of the 90' s, right on top of the great
boom of the 90' s, which was a land boom, and the great Bank smash
of the 90' s, which followed it. And there were people for the
next 10 years in Australia who lived in straitened circumstances
because a boom had happened and a boom had burst. I accept no
responsibility whatever for the well-being of speculators, none
whatever. If they bring it off, well good-luck to them; and if
they don't I've no feeling for them whatever. ( Applause) People
who gamble on the affairs of the community are not my concern.
But I have an irremoveable obligation so long as I
lead this country, to people who can be the victims of a
speculative boom, and who can suffer from a crash of that boom.
It would have boon a monstrous thing for any Government to say
" Well let the boom run its course. If we do something about it
we'll hurt somebody; that will be very unpopular." If we think
there's a boom in the motor car industry as there unquostionabj
was and we do something to damp it down, then there wi1 be
somebody in that industry who will say, " Look what they have done
to me". I understand that, I understand that.
But my business, and your business, is to look for the
good of the groat majority of the people, to be willing to impose
discomfort or inconvenience, or some sacrifice on people who are
benefiting from the boom if the result is that the boom is
brought down to a normal state of affairs in which people of
modest incomes, people of fixed incomes, can feel that their
money is worth what it appears to be worth.
There is another aspect of this matter I don't want
to labour it unduly, and that is that a boom in Australia gives
rise instantly by some of the black magic of economics to an
enormous demand for imports into Australia. When wages have been
pushed up to premium rates, when there is a shortage of labour,
when all these boom conditions obtain, then people want to buy
more goods than they ever bought before. And there is a limit
to what they can buy out of the production of their own country.
So more and more imports cone in; added to which, if I may say
so to you, there is a certain anount of snobbery about buying.
I was talking to a manufacturer a comparatively small
manufacturer in my own loctorate recently, a . ood man who has
built up a business and he was able to produce two articles to
me, one made by him in his factory, and another one imported
from the United States of Amirica. They were of the same
material and they were identical in design and in quality. But
the American one could be sold in the shops at almost twice the
price of his. You know there's a lot of that, isn't there? A
tremendous lot of it.
Whether that is so or not and I believe it is so
the fact is that in a boon condition the demand for imports
grows at the most phenomenal rate. There must be quite a few
people about you meet then don't you? who think that there is
no trouble about that: if you want an imported article you pay
for it at the shop. The process begins there; it doesn't end
there. Because the follow who sells it to you has to pay for it.
If he has bought it from an importer, the importer has to pay for
it overseas. So he is drawing money fron overseas for these
imported goods; and the money is the product of what we have sold
overseas whether it is wheat or neat or wool or butter or
whatever it may be plus what we have been able to borrow
overseas on capital account. ' We refer to this balance
sometimes as our " balnce of payments" and sonetimes as our
" overseas reserves". But if you run then down too low by an 
uncommon spate of buying of imports, as we were doing in
Australia, then you know you can got to the point at which you
can't pay for your imports. That is a stage we have never
reached; that is a stage we are never going to reach while we
are in Government. Ne are not prepared to contemplate an
international bankruptcy on the part of this country. Nobody
need imagine it for one moment. Therefore when you find this
tremendous boom and this tremendous demand for goods something
has to be done about it if worse things are not to happen to the
groat majority of the people.
I said something about housing. Perhaps I ought to
add that these conditions in 1960 were lifting the price of the
building allotment lifting the price of the house that was to
be built, lifting The price of the goods to be put into the
house, whether they were refrigerators or washing machines, or
any of what the economists in their delightful jargon call
" durable consumer , oods". Lots of people didn't know they were
going up in price because they would say, " You know we can get
that refrigorator for 17/ 6 per week" nobody knows how long,
how many weeks but " it's 17/ 6 a week and I think we could
afford that". And so it goes on.
Under this boon of consumer credit, under the enormous
development of hire purchase, in itself a Lost useful
arrangement, people wore incurring debts in a boom which, in a
burst after the boom they would never be able to honour. That
doesn't please me; and I hope it doesn't please you. I wouldn't
want to see a boom that was followed by a burst which led to an
inability on the part of hundreds of thousands of good decent
hard-working people to honour the obligations they had entered
into in relation to house or home or equipment.
Therefore, Sir, we rogarded it, and I am sure that on
reflection the people of Australia will agree with us, as
imperative that we should take steps to get rid of the boom and
bring matters back to a position of some normality. When we did
that we weren't unaviare of the fact that we were about a year off
an election; we weren't unaware of the fact that you don't win
an election unless people vote for you; we weren't unaware of
the fact that policies to get rid of inflation are always
unpopular in the short run because they restrict the activity of
a nuEber of businesses, and of a number of people. But we
thought our decisions were designed to save very many people from
grievous disaster. I would like you to look back over the last almast 12
years now. We have had two or three of these relatively minor
economic crises and each tine our popularity rating has sunk
almost to the floor. I can rcmember at the end of 1953 or the
middle of 1953, beinj told by staunch supporters, candid fiends
" You're sunk. You're gone. The Government is so unpopular it
can't recover". Those are the encouragr. ents that one's friends
heap on one under these circu: stances. But we did recover. And
we won. At the last election in 1958, in spite of it all, and
the prophecies of gloom, io caule back with the largest Dajority
that any Government has had in the history of the Comi:, onwealth.
( Applause) The gruat thing on those matters is never to be
afraid because there is some unpopularity attaching to what is
done, to get rid of fear, to cast it out. The great thing is to
have a belief in the people of Australia, which I have profoundly
deep dowm in me, a belief that this is a natijn of honest, decent
people who respect firmness, who respect what they believe to be
intelligence, and who are honest and are not looking for some
cheap advantage. We must have faith in ourselves because we have
faith in our people. 
Now, Sir, I have ta: ken a very long time to answer that
particular question so I had better turn to the next one,
because this is a very popular one. I have had this put to me
by great friends of mine and I understand why they put it.
One of the things we did early last year there were
certain exceptions in relation to Japan and so on was to get
rid, in substance, of import licensing. Import licensing, may I
remind you, was never devised as a protective measure. A lot of
people thought that it was. I myself, at least 10 times a year
made it quite clear in public statements that it wasn't a
protective measure. We are entitled, internationally, to introduce
import licensing in order to protect our balances of
payment, and for no other reason. If an Australian industry
is to be protected it ought to be protected by the tariff; and
the tariff board is there to investigate whatever claims may be
made. This is the traditional, sound method of protecting
Australian industry. But when we took off, in substance, import
licgnsing, which had already half disappeared over a course of
years, we were at once accused of having left Australian industry
naked to its enemies.
Therefore, perhaps I ought to tell you one simple fact.
You've heard people say " But, you know, you removed import
licensing; we have a flood of imports now. This seems to be the
wrong thing". And when one of my interlocutors comes to me and
is in a picturesque mood he'll say to me " How can you justify
importing into Australia frogs legs in aspic?" Well in the way
of justifying that matter I can remind them that only lunatics
eat fr, gs' legs in aspic! ( Laghter) I suppose about Z200.
worth of these ridiculous things have come into Australia.
But putting those silly little things on one side,
here are the facts. Since February of last year, taking the
year 1960, after the lifting of import restrictions, œ 241m. more
of imports came into Australia, f2lm. more as a result of the
lifting. Of the œ 241m. œ 190m. consisted of raw materials for
Australian manufacturing production, plant and equipment for
Australian production, and for Australian transport. Some 82%
of all these added imports were things calculated to improve
production and distribution in Australia. I occasionally think
that if we hadn't lifted the import ban I night have had other
deputations containing some of the same people who would say to
me " You're depriving us of the raw materials we need in our
industry". Now I'll come to the favourite charge, one you've
hoard made many times. I wrote it down in this way: " But the
Cormmonwcalth Govorrmiont changes its policy so frequently that
people are bewildered. They don't know where they are for more
than a few months. What do you say about that?" Now that's a
fair question isn't it? I haven't watered that one down have I?
I've heard about it; I've heard it put to me chopping and
changing, start and gc. Now I want to say something to you
about this. We have not at any time changed our policy you must
distinguish between the policy and the way you give effect to it.
The broad policy of the Liberal Party has not substantially
changed in the last 12 years; but we havve had to deal with an
enormous vriety of changing circumstances. The application of
our policy to these matters has, I think, been employed to the
considerable satisfaction of the people of Australia. The
policy is one thing; the way you give effect to it is another.
Now our policy let's got this clearly in our minds
is to produce economic stability not boom and burst economic 
stability as the foundation for notional development. Every new
building must have a firm foundation. Building this now
country of Ours, with all these enormous opportunities you sop
them in your own State, in Queensland we can't develop these
resources without having capital to our hands, because all these
things take groat investments. How are you going to get capital
to your hand if your economic position is one of instability, if
inflation goes rip-snorting along? Do you suppose that people
in other countries who entrust Australians with a great deal of
their capital, would do it if the finances of this country were
blowing around like those of a South American Republic? Don't
believe it for one moment. Wiatever some of my opponents may say
about these matters, the people who count around the world have
the greatat belief iz what we are doing, and in the object that
we have to maintain a stable foundation for a great Australia.
4e were told, not so long back, a few months back,
before the end of last year, that all these strange measures we
were taking would disturb people overseas, that we were ruining
our prospects of getting investments into Australia. The answer
is that in 1960, the boom year, we had a record amount of
investment in Australia. But in 1961, the year in which we are
told that the economy is wrecked, we are having a bigger
investment from overseas than we had last year. ( Applause) I
don't want you to think that that is just a matter of Government
borrowing, I'm not talking about Government borrowing. You may
think that some plausible old boy like me can go away and borrow
a bit of money on the public account perhaps I can, I don't
know, but I've done it a bit in my time. But I'm not talking
about that. I'm talking about private capital investment in
Australia which now amounts to hundreds of millions a year. If
we didn't have it our balances of payments problem would have
become completely hopeless of being contained years ago. Why do
we want this money? I know that there are those wlho say " It's a
very great mistake to let foreigners get investrents in your own
country". Well let me tell you this, or remind you of it.
Australia has an increasing population that nobody
dreamed of once t We have a large irmigration programme. We are
today, what, l-j millions? At our present rate of advance many
of those in this hall tonight will see a population of
millions in : Lustralia. More and more as time goes on this is
becoming a considerable country in terms of human beings. But
it happens to be a country roughly the same size as the United
States of America. It has resources of many of which as yet we
know nothing. We haven't found oil yet, effectively; but I
have yet to meet a knowledgeable man who isn't confident that we
will. The indications are all there. used to thin1: of the
north as a dry and very arid country. lie knew that we had soqe
lead and zinc at Broken Hill and we know that we had groat coal
resources on the east coast of Australia and so on. We'vle onlr
just begun to realise in Australia, haven't we, the immense
resources that have been unearthed of uranium, the tremendous
resources of bauxite, with all the prospects of aluminium
industries in the very, very near future. The more the
geologists go out, and the Yeophysicists go out, the more the
mineral wealth of Australia will be tapped. But you can't
tap it without enormous investments, not only of skill, but of
money. Ten million people can't produce all the capital that is
needed to develop a country that may hold 50 or 60 millions when
it is developed. This is elementary common sense.
Therefore w( e, as a Government have always been in
favour of people investing their capital in Australia, producing
employment for thousands and th. usands of people. Making
profits? Yes. But bringing to Australia something without
which we would become a stagnant community. If our policies 
were as silly, as changeable, as some people think I don't
imagine for one moment that the hard-headed people in the United
States, in Great Britain, on the Continent, would regard AustraJa
as the greatest field for investm ent that is now open to then
outside their own countries.
That is our policy stability, development. But we
have, of course, changed the applications; even since November
of last year we've made changes. And people have laughed and
said " There you are, they don't know their own minds". May I
remind you of this: every change that we have made since our
announcements of November, 1960 has been in the direction of
softening the severity of one o1 the measures announced in
November. Didn't we make it clear at the very beginning that we
weren't putting these things onfor fun; we weren't having a
credit squeeze for fun; we weren't having increased sales tax
for fun; we weren't doing what we were doing about deductibility
of interest in Company transactions for fun? U4e were doing it to
quell a boom, and, that as we succeeded, these measures would be
relaxed. That is exactly what has happened.
Take the motor car industry, a very important
industry. We started off in November by doing two things: first
there was the general credit policy which involved through the
Central Bank, the Reserve Bank, a tight control of advances
policy; and second, we increased sales tax on motor vehicles by
By early this year it became clear, on the evidence,
that this was having a double effect. A lot of people were
saying " Well we won't buy a car yet, the Government can't keep
on the extra sales tax in election year when it is producing a
Budget, let's wait four or five months and we'll get it without
the 10% tax". It was therefore quite clear that there was an
undue sag in the demand for cars and motor vehicles. When this
was established we didn't sit there pig-headedly saying " No, we
said what we were going to do in November and nothing can
change it". We said " That's right, the effect is too great". So
we got rid of the added Sales Tax. Somebody says that's a
bewildering change of direction. I would have thought it was
the obvious logical result of the broad policy that we had
announced. You company men, you take the great problem of whether
you can deduct for income tax purposes the interest that you pay
on money borrowed, sometimes on very short term, interest
deductible before the profit is struck. Quite frankly we thought
that this was leading to an abnormal expansion of credit so we
said " We're going to limit the extent to which it can be
deducted". WJe brought in a measure that was, I agree, a bit
rough and ready, the best that could be worked out at the time;
and by the time it operated it had a great deal of effect. Then
we had to consider whether that measure which was to peter out
at the end of June ought to be replaced by a permanent measure.
Quite frankly you couldn't work out a permanent measure that
wouldn't produce the most tremendous uncertainty in the business
community. Therefore we said " We'll drop it; we won't go on
with it after the end of June". Was this a bewildering change
of front? I would have thought that every man in this hall
tonight who has anything to do with companies, or their management,
would have found it a very agreeable decision on the part
of the Government; and a very sensible application of its broad
policy. Therefore don't let us be too upset about the
allegation that we change our minds. 
I give you a third example, a very important one.
That there were boon conditions in the building industry last
year, as I've said to you, is unquestionable, and something had
to be done about it. We applied our rules. It became apparent,
not in a hurry but by about April of this year, that there was
an undue fall in the rate of house construction. We didn't
leave it alone. Ue at once got to work to see what could be
done; and uhat have we done?
I would just like to toll you this because it is
perhaps overlooked. In order to restore the level of home
building, not to an exorbitant rate, but to a proper and healthy
rate, we, the Government of the Commonwealth, were in touch with
the Reserve Bank and the Reserve Bank was in touch with trading
banks. The trading banks themselves much to their credit, not
being banks that usually lend money to a great extent on housing
because it is not a normal banking transaction, have in fact boon
laying out more money, substantially more money, in the housing
field. The savings banks? Why we made an arrangement only a
month or six weeks ago which involved the Commonwealth Savings
Bank in finding another œ 5m. on housing ovor the last three
months, or two months. At the last Loan Council meeting last
year's State works programme, a substantial percentage of which
is paid for out of the Commonwealth Budget, and therefore out of
Commonwealth taxes, was maintained and was added to by œ lOm. of
which œ 6m. in the cut-up is an addition to last year's housing
vote. These are large sums of money. You can hardly say that a
Government is unconscious of the housing problem if by those
direct means it succeeds in putting into circulation œ 6m. and
and another œ 3m. on the other item that I mentioned. This
is a large sum of money to be going into added operation at this
time of the year.
We did that because we weren't particularly afraid of
being told that we had changed our minds. We hadn't changed our
minds. We were giving effect to our policy, which was to pull
the boom down to normal and relax the severity of -i= easures as
opportunity offered, and as occasion required.
There is just one other matter that I want to put to
you. I had almost forgotten this but my friend, the Chairman,
told me last night that this was something I ought to say
something about. Not long ago my colleague Mr. Holt, the Treasurer,
made a statement to the House about a drawing that we had made
from the International Monetary Fund. Now I ari not going to bore
you stiff by talking about these intricacies of international
finance, but Australia happens to belong to the International
Monetary Fund, we are a subscribing member, we've put a bit of
money into it in our day, just as other countries that belong to
it have, and we have certain drawing rights. Not a bad idea.
If you put a bit of money in the Bank it's rather useful to know
that you might be able to take it out when you want it. It's as
simple as that. We had drawing rights in the International
Monetary Fund, and we made a drawing. Not because we were
desperate about our international reserves, but because it is a
very good second line of defence if your imports remain high.
This was done before imports began to fall, quite recently.
In the course of making our drawing we submitted a
document to the Intornational Monetary Fund. I may say that that
fund, which is managed by some of the shrewdest and ablest
banking minds in the world, were good en. ugh to say that our
policy in Australia was, to then, a classical example of the
right policy to pursue in dealing with an inflationary boom. So
you see of course they don't have votes in Australia so they 
can't help me at the next election it's rather nice to think
that they thought that way. But when you make a drawing you put
a document in; and when this document was published in the
House, tabled in the House there was no secret about it one
or two newspapers, I regret to say, or perhaps I should be more
particular7 one or two rather hurried sub-editors in newspapers,
put a flaring headline on the report " Credit Squeeze until June,
1962". Probably some of you saw it. It must have had a very
depressing effect on a lot of people. It was quite untrue. The
document didn't say that at all. So that there may be no
risunderstanding I would like to read to you the two material
paragraphs from the document that we presented to the fund. I
don't think you will quarrel with a word of them. Tho first is
this " Economic conditions in Australia are subject to rapid
change"
as indeed they are in this country of drought and fluctuating
wool prices, and what have you
" and are influenced by a number of external factors outside
the Government's control. Policy has therefore frequently
to be adapted to meet a shift in conditions. The
declarations of policy made here must therefore be understood
as applying only to conditions as they now appear.
Should any major shift in the direction, or emphasis of
policy become necessary during the currency of the arrangement
the Australian Government would be ready to consult
with the Fund, and, if necessary, reach new understandings
before any further request is made".
There's nothing in that, is there, that indicates that we have
padlocked ourselves until June, 1962? It's too silly, because
since that headline you have seen two or three of these
relaxations that I have talked about. Those of you who read the
paper and cast a wintry look on the financial columns of the
press will have noticed only two days ago the Commonwealth Bank
has just made a substantial release, another C17-2. to the trading
banks out of the special reserve deposits. This headline was
always what they call, in homely terms, " a furphy", and was
based, I suppose, on the next pararaph:
" Seasonal needs apart, the monetary authorities"
that's in Australia
" intend to keep a firm control over the liquidity position
of the banks"
that's quite right, the Banks would want that, and they do it
themselves " with a view to limiting during the year ending June, 1962
the amount of outstanding bank advances to a total that would be
consistent with the maintenance of financial stability".
Now if that isn't a perfectly , ood, cold, hard-headed,
accurate description of the business of a central bank, then I'm
a Dutchman. There it is. It's as plain and as simple as it can
be. It's a sound statement of a sound policy. If any final
proof were needed of the inaccuracy of this rather depressing
headline it would be found in the fact, the undoubted fact, that
bank advances, notwithstanding the squeeze that we've heard so
much about, are today highr than they were a year ago. 
All that, ladies and gentlerien, cones to this. I do
ask you to believe, as I know you do that we don't act
impetuously. We do an imiense amount of work on those matters.
We do know what we are talking about on these matters. Many of
us have had years and years of experience, working in the middle
of all these problens, year after year. We are not newcomers,
we are not novices, we are not theoretical people such as some
of those I occasionally hear on the other side. What we have
done we have done, I believe, quite rightly. I believe the
results are justifying what was done. I know there are aspects
of it which gives us all concern. There's rather too much
unemployment under the circumstances that now exist. There had
to be, no doubt, some transfer of people from one kind of
employment to another if you were dealing with a boom.
This is not a permanent state of affairs. This is a
temporary phase that we are going through. I venture to say,
whatever the result of the next election may be, that not long
after the next election, most of us, most of you, most of the
people you know, will be looking back and saying, " Well, it was
temporary. Ill that's over. I-e're back into the stream of
normal prosperity. We have a wonderful future in our country,
of course we have". I'm not afraid of depression in 1962. I
would be afraid of an inflationary boom in 1962 if we hadn't
taken the steps that we have taken. But having taken those
steps I will go on record, tonight, as saying to you that I
believe that 1962, next year, is going to be one of the happiest,
most productive, most profitable years, that this country has
ever known. 



P. M. No 31/ 1961
COMMONWEJJELTH . lS JANCE TOJLRDS CYCLONE FLOOD
., ND BUSH FIRE D-M.. GE IN 4ESTRN " LIA
Statonent by the Prime Mlinister, the Ht. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prine Minister announced today that the
Con1monwoalth G:-vornment has rv: reed to contribute up to
œ 160,000, on a for c-basis with the Western australian
Governent, towards the restoration of roads in the North West
of the State, which suffored serious dai. ua; e fron floods between
January and March this year.
The Corn-onwealth had agreed in February to join
with the State in contributing on a fir basis towards the
cost of relieving personal hardship ccasioned by bush fires,
cyclones and floods at that tine, and following advice fron
the State it has now provided an anount of up to œ 40,000. for
this purpose. In expressing the Government's synpathy to those
who had suffered fror: these natural disasters, Mr. MOnzies
said the Cormcnwealth was glad to be able to , ive practical
help in this way in accordance with its established practice.
CANBERR 29th Juno, 1961. 



EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 7 p. m.
Monday, 3rd July P. M. No. 32/ 1961
COMMON MARKET
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. Duncan Sandys, Secretary of State for Commonwealth
Relations, will arrive in Australia from New Zealand on July 6.
The United Kingdom Government has informed the
Australian Government that he would like to discuss with us
various aspects of the European Common Market and the particular
questions which would arise should the United Kingdom seek to
join the Common Market.
These problems have been the subject of occasional
reference over the last two years. We have beon assured of full
consultation before any decisions are taken. But, we have not
had any specific views or proposals put to us. The moeeting with
14r. Sandys will therefore give my colleagues and myself our first
opportunity of hearing the views of the United Kingdom
Government expressed with authority and in reasonable detail.
There have been in the last few weeks meetings between
officials. I suggested these when I was last in London at the
time of the Prime Ministers' Conference. But although there have
been quite a few discussions on the official level, it must be
made clear that the problems have not been solved and that the
outlines of practical proposals have not yct omerged.
It will at once be seen that there are two aspects of
the problem one is economic; the other is political. On the
economic side, we have a large and legitimate interest in
protecting the entry of our goods, particularly our agricultural
products, into the markets of Great Britain. Should Great
Britain obtain entrance to the Common Market without preserving
Commonwealth preferences, the effects upon our trade would be
extremely severe, heth,, r the European nations in the Common
Market would be prepared to admit Great Britain to membership
with reservations preserving her Commonwealth arrangements is an
important question upon which we hope that Mr. Sandys will be
able to throw some light.
The political problems are also extremely important.
The whole Common Market arrangements point in the direction of
closer political association and even unity in Wester'n Europe. A
Great Britain which acquired organic political relationships or
obligations in Europe would I should imagine, find her normal
Commonwealth political relationships profoundly affected. These
are all matters upon which we will be anxious to receive the
carefully analysed views which Mr. Sandys will no doubt be able
to put to us.
CANBERRA 3rd July, 1961. 



61/ 040
PUBLIC MEETING AT BURNIE
on 4th July, 1Q61
Speech by the Prime iinister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. Warden, parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen:
I won't need to tell you that the hero of that story
that the garden told you was my old friend Sam Bird, whom I missed
very much indeed when I called at the " seat of the great" this
afternoon to see the 1arden himself. I said " Tell me, was Sam
warden of Burnie for 20 years, or was it 25?" They took me and
showed me a photograph which seemed to show that he was warden
only for 9 years. I don't believe it, I don't believe it. And
Mr. Bruce, as he then was, wouldn't have believed it either,
because he and Sam had this little interlude that you heard about.
Now I am in a sort of dubious position tonight: I'm
not here on an election campaign; I rather like to get around the
4 country from time to time Vwhen there is not an election on. They
are having one in Victoria but it's not mine it's a State
election. No doubt, if all goes well, somewhere towards the
Fcderal election I will be around, as usual, in Burnie,
Sappreciating the beautiful draughts that flow up the streets from
i the sea ( Laughter) and having a good reception, or a bad one, as
the case may be. But on this occasion I thought it might be
useful not to make a contentious speech to you, but to say
something to you about what is going on overseas, and here; and I
know that what goes on here has a very particular interest for all
of us. In the last 12 years I have had a good deal to do,
rightly or wrongly, with Australian foreign policy; and a good
deal to do, rightly or wrongly, with some of the leaders of the
great nations in Che world. They are nations with whom we do have
Ssome influence that's the remarkable thing to me. . e are a
small country, 10 or 11 million people, hew could we have any
influence with great countries with 180, or 200, or 400 millions?
But the fact is that we do.
' 9io have some influence because we go to some pains to
undurstand what the problems of the world are, and are willing, on
suitable occasions, to tell our friends what our opinions are, and
what our suggestions are. It would be very easy for us to nurse
ourselves, comfortably, into a belief that the only problems we
have are those that we see at our front door. We have, I venture
to say, Sir, very nuch greater problems in the world at large.
Because the first problem for Australia is to remain a free, safe
country, able to work out its own future.
( To an inturjector: I know that you are delighted to
think that there aru s. me unemployed there have been mighty few
during my torn of office, righty few during my term of office. Of
all the periods of Australian history that you can select the
period of my own Government has eon the highest record of
employment. ( Applause) I know there are sono people who,
professionally want to whip up the agony and make things worse,
instead of better. But I happen to be talking to you about
something that is Luch mnro important than you, my friend, or than
me, and that is the peace of the world, the peace of the world.)
I was saying something about a matter that ay
interjector ought to understand, the peace of the world and how
it affects Australia. Australia has fjund itself engaged in
two wars in our lifotirco. It is troeendously important that we, 
as an intelligent and self-respecting people, should do our best
to contribute to the maintaining of the peace and security of the
free world.
( Interjections) Now, ladies and gentlemen I'm accustomed to this kind
of thing but I just want to point out to you that the world,
today, is eJez'y bit as uneasy as it has been at any time in the
last 10 years. Je talk about the cold war as if it . rere something
frozen. The cold jar goes on because the Communist powers want it
to go on; the cold war goes on because by threat and pressure,
by blackmail, by violence where necessary, they keep the free
nations of the world all agog, all anxious, all more or loss
standing to arms. This is the tragedy of the decade. And before
this year is out we will have discovered whether all this is
bluff, whether bluffs have to be called. Bacause before this
calendar year is out we will know whether Khrushchev's talk about
Berlin is merely talk; or whether he means war about Berlin, war
about East Germany. These are tremendously important matters for
us to be thinking about.
. c have in south-cast Asia, practically next doer to us,
problems now bubbling up in the country called Laos, and liable to
bubble up in other countries on its perimeter. They greatly
concern us. Because if the Communist nations of the : orld can
take over an Asian country whose only ambition it is to live
quietly within its own boundaries, if they can take over a
country like Laos where do they stop? They have already taken
North Viot-Nam which is part of ihat we used to call, many years
ago, French Indo-China. South Viet-Nam is exposed to daily acts
of revolution and violence within her own boundaries. Thailand,
which we used to call Siam, is there with a long land frontier
with Laos. And if Laos goes, Thailand will find
perhaps, more difficult to stand. If South Viet-Nam is exposed to
attack then we have a problem which concerns every nation which is
involved in the South East Asian Treaty, what we call SEATO Great
Britain, France, the United States of America, Australia, Now
Zealand, Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines. Here you have a
group of countries who, between thomsalvos, have entered into
Treaty obligations which, or the performance of which, alone
stands between us and aggressive Communism in Asia.
When people want me to put an order of importance on to
things I am quite prepared to say that the most important thing in
our national life is that we should not pass into the Communist
orbit in this world. That is the imperative thing for which
Australia rust stand, and for which every honest political party
in Australia must stand. At this very moment there is a
Conference at Geneva about Lior, with much manoeuvring going on.
I haven't the slightest doubt myself that the Soviet Union are
playing for time because they believe the more tie that is
occupied in discussion at Geneva, the more opportunities will
their Communist supporters have to put themselves into a position
to take over the entire country.
. e cannot be uninterested in these matters. The very
reason why we exist in SEATO, the very reason why we hope under all
circumstances to keep American interest in South-east Asia, which
I am glad to say is great and powerful, the very reason for it is
that if the forward surge of Communism in South-East Asia continues
uninhibited, then before we are very much older we can look out
across our northern seas and contemplate a Communist world as our
nearest neighbour. Now, Sir, having said just so little, or so much as that,
about the international position which is, of course, very grave,
which will require cool heads and firm minds, firm judgments, and 
.3.
firm actions, I want to turn to the position of our own country
because it happens that after a period of 10 years which nobody
will deny has been a period of the greatest prosperity this
country has over enjoyed ( Applause) ( Interjections)
No responsible person I'll amend my statement no
responsible person could denly that in the last 10 years we have
had the most remarkable period of growth in the history of this
country. I am surprised that anybody should deny it in Burnie
which itself is a--magnificent example of the growth that has gone
on during the last 10 years.
Right through this period we have attracted enormous
capital investments into Australia, we have seen the most
phenomenal industrial growth, we have seen the development of
national resources on the grand scale, we have been increasing
our population by natural increase and by immigration at a rate
even higher than that in Japan; and, in the result we have a
country so strong, so respected so worthy of credit in the
world, so full of busily engages people that we, today, represent
in the other countries of the world, the most attractive field of
investment that they know.
Now this is worth considering. I know there are people
who just take a superficial view, you know what I noan, about
these things. ( Interjections) But I wonder, I wonder if my
friend will know what I mean if I say that there is one rather
good way of testing the prospects of the development of a young
nation like ours. First of all l'e--us ackuiowvdgo I hopo wo
all will that 10 million people, 1 O( million people, eanst, out
of their own savings produce all the capital that is required to
develop a continent the size of the United States of America.
That is pretty obvious isn't it? Therefore if we are going to
develop our resources, if we are going to have great water supply
schemes, great power schemes, and great mineral developments, then
we must be able to look to the rest of the world for some of the
capital at least, that is required for these purposes. If the
people In the rest of the world are not prepared to trust us with
their money, then we are going to be handicapped, we are going to
be tied down to a lower rate of progress. I want to say this to
you that if, over these last 10 years, the investors of the world,
the citizens of other countries, had not been willing to invest
money in Australia we couldn't have had the immigration programme
that we have had, we couldn't have had the same increase in the
standard of living, and we couldn't have had the same high level
of employment. Now that is perfectly plain English. And I will
demonstrate it to you.
About 10 years ago we had a look at the accounts of
money coming into Australia to be invested, not in Government, but
in ordinary business activity In Australia, and it amounted to
something a little under œ lO00m. That was a lot, a great sun of
money to have coming in. Last year it was over œ 300m. And in
the current financial year, in spite of the fact that iv-, who
have worked so hard to develop prosperity in Australia, are
supposed now to be busy destroying it, the amount coming into
Australia from oversoas is higher than it was in the previous
' ycar, It has reached an all-time record. ( Interjections)
( Well if I may put it not in roubles, madam but in
Australian ( Applause) well over œ 300m. Australian ana in anybody's
language that seems to me to be quite a bit of money)
What happens with it? It develops industry. You go
around Australia and look at some of the great industries which
give employment to t'liusands and thousands of A,' ustralians and you
will be surprised how frequently that its an industry7 the
financial prevision for which has come fron. outside L~ stralia. 
Does anybody complain about that? Is anybody prepared to say to
those people, " Don't bring your money here; we don't need you".
I remember making a speech at the last election in a
great factory, financed by AIerican capital and my opponent
incautiously, the previous day, said that they objected to this
importation of capital, that we were pawning ourselves to the
overseas money lenders a very attractive phrase. But I said it
was simple to test. I said to these thousands of non, " You know,
you're engaged in earning a good living, a steady living, in a
good job with prospects, in this business which is entirely
financed from outside Australia. Are you in favour of cutting off
the supply of finance? Are you in favour of telling people in
Canada, people in the United States of America, they are not to
invest their money in Australia?"
I apologise to you for talking so long about so
elementary a matter. But I began it and I end that particular
thing by pointing out to you that the people who have control of
investable funds outside Australia are not to be treated as fools;
they are pretty shrewd people. They are just as shrewd as the
average financial critic in a newspaper in Australia, just as
shrewd. And while a local man wastes his time occasionally by
saying " We are confronting nothing but disaster", which is utter
drivel, the fellow outside, the shrewd man, who has money to
invest, and money to lose, wrho has to back his judgment with his
investment, finds us rore attractive this year than he ever did
before. Now I ask you to make a mental note that.
And now perhaps you will allow me to put one or two
questions to myself, then answer then myself. I find that is a
rather convenient arrangement.
( Interjections) ( Well madam I an sorry to disappoint you but I like
putting questions to myself because I find them intelligible)
( Laughter, applause)
The first question I want to put is this: Why should
the Government of Australia, having presided over these
remarkable developments, suddenly go mad and decide to tear down
the whole building that they have been working to construct for
or 11 years? Last year, 1960, the prosperity in this couhtry
converted itself into a great inflationary boon and I have yet to
read any expert, so-cilled, in any organ of opinion, who denies
the existence of the boon, an inflationary boom. Costs were
rising, prices were rising, there was a great shortage of labour,
with far more jobs than there were men to hold them, or women to
hold then, a great shortage of labour, prices rising, costs
rising. The effect of that kind of thing is two-fold.
First of all it meant the most tremendous demand for
imports. Whenever people feel well-off, whenever overtio is
high, whenever wages are much higher than the award rates, whenever
there is a shortage of labour, whenever people are fooling
good and prosperous, then you will have, always in the experience
of any country like our own, a tromendous demand for imports;
because the local production can't satisfy the demand. The
result was that imports were flowing into Australia under
circunstances which were lowering our overseas reserves so
vital to our solvency month by month. At the same time, of
course, inflation was inflicting grievous injury on people who
can't chase the market, but who live on fixed incomes. Whether
they are people on salaries, or fixed waess, whether they are
people on pensions or social benefits, whether they are people on 
superannuation, it is they who are on fixed incomes who suffer
murderously through inflation. Thereforo social justice required
that we should quell this beoi, and international solvency
required that we should quell this boon.
Now, Sir, it must be at somebody's expense, I'n sure you
realise that. I'm sure that you are not so naive as to believe
that you can que'. l arn infla'ti: nary boor and not touch anybody. Of
course you have to touch sor.: body. The greatest complaint that
have come as a result of our neasures have not cone from people on
fixed incomels, have not come from employed people; but have come
from others. But you must hit and hurt somebody if you are going
to get rid of an inflationary boon.
( TI-_ erjection) ( My dear sir the worker is the least affected by this,
and will profit most by the success of our policy. All right, I
know you don't agroe with no, you've registered your pointo
( Interjections) If I belonged to your Party, Sir, and had no
outlook on the problems of the country, I would pray for more and
more inflation every month, because that is your only stock-intrade.)
I have a great responsibility in this matter. It is, of
course, deplorable that you should have to enco: unter any degree of
uhcuployment in Australia. But it is much better to encounter
some, by strong measures, and get back to full. employment at the
quickest possible moment, than it would be to sit quietly by and
allow the boon to go on and burst. If it were allowed to go on,
and burst, then I want to tell you that unemployment in Australia
wouldn't be measured by thousands, it would be measured by
quarters of millions. You can't afford to trifle with a great
serious economic problem like an inflationary boon.
( Interjection) ( You know I marvel at the vanity of some of you chaps.
You sit there and you chatter the same little bits over and over
again; I'm sure you have &amp; ot them written down on a piece of
paper. I remember two or three chaps like this years ago at a
meeting of . ine and they kept saying the most pungent things, but
unfortunately when they left at the end of the meeting they left
their printed bits of paper behind them. And I read then.)
Now, ladies and gentlemen, lot re ask, " What would have
happened if we hadn't taken these counter-inflationary measures?"
Would it just have settled itself, quietly, with no assistance by
anybody? If we had lot the boon run on and said, " No, we're
afiaid to touch it, it will hurt somebody and it will make us
unpopular" as if unpopularity ought to trouble responsible
people suppose we had just stood by and said, " No, we will do
nothing about it', the boom would have run on, costs would have
risen, prices would have risen. And in the result two things would
have happened to this country of ours that I want you all to think
about. The first of them is that our primary industries in
Australia, which are our life blood in international trade, which
provide over 900 of the whole of the export income of Australia,
would have been put at great risk. What a fantasy it would have
been if, following the popular course, we had sat down and said
" We are not doing anything", and the price of wool had not been
adequate to cover the cost of producing wool in Australia, then I
want to tell you that this country would be bankrupt in every
international sense of the word.
L 
ai~ no,' or :' ofo-Vx y Governuent, going tO see
that fha pp'r. ! le must na-. intain s wd on thao Dlcr. lants of
cost, for the sake of o) ur exr-. ort :. Indus trios, whfichi hav a D
battle today in the mw'iikct-s of the uorld, and rmay ia ve an even
-r. tr b-~ l in the fWu o mch _ 1e ,; 3eneing upon 7 lat : 7aspi
Europo. If. ru are gto ' aold those cxcports of ouors and hos
gr~ at inhcabsuiZ~ rai rd anin or1
a. w~ cen'vru u. j~ st.: J aining a it a
_ 1 t b( , i nn; t with.
Novw a is one reason, I ; iljust 6ive y. Du one more,
II 1ustral-Ja we Lc,.-c 7,. x sta'a Govornnen-;: s and a Cumrab
Gmre'm( 1_ 1mnT. o; ret t1no'e have eonormous 1publJ c works to
I. o 11; I dozli,: 1t--_ Llr KIjey wfo-st ieney on thorn-. I ' nave no
c! Ltl; cisr of the orlspogare of the Stlatfes of . ustUral~ ia, or
of the Counonwal. th-14ll I know is thnat thLa avoi~ n'a go citizen in
his ow. n dList;-ict v.-nts thy::-to 1o nc rot less. ndwhat are
thaose public works? Theoe are not frippori-es. When StLA:-, e
Government, for example, bil--ds a sc!, ool, sciaools, it is
building sonothing, vital to the prog ross of theo Sta,, te; whe; n it
r. mokes roads it is doing Sorl~ inE vital to tho expansio) n of
enterporise and of coim1e-rco-, when we spend money year by year,
large am~ ounts of it on the Snewy, we :, re doing soi: eth-inEg vital for
tho provision of poor in factoriejs inVictoiii and Now ot
1+ 1 C, and for ir2? igation in the who I broad ; ep of thle
You look at any of these public wiori ho-using,
sch.-ools, roa-ds, transport, water supply, irrigto. p~ ower, all
thiose rnatters tha.-t I have been rafoniing
( Interj ection) My friend down hcere and I are on the saine wave length
at last ( Laughter) He said " Not enough" il. I think I agree.
But thjro wouldnMt be as m~ uch se-,-) nt o. n it teDda-y if we
haC. an inflationary boon.-. May I toll y-u w-hy? Because tho money
that the St~ itos spend on p,,, blic works, on kid tlh Itm es I
ho,_ ve rentioned, COCeS, non -ally, fronm theo LoanA Ha: koet. Tae States
don't use their ordinary r,_ venuo to provide capitol go0ods, capital
se-rvices, capital building-, S and works, but Loan nroney. The Lean
Market in A1ustralia improves when you don't hiaver inflation
boc. ctuLuo peo&gt; 1havo more c+ nfidonce) in a fixed interest investment.
The Loan Market drics up when you haave an infj. ationary boor) 1'
because people say " The value of r-iy mioney is runnig away ai th
tii-e. Uhet is the point in taking? out a 5'-yoar Bond, or a
3ond?" A1nd, Sir, what has huplec-Led in fa,, ct, is that m-, y
Government, as thei first GoDvernment. Jn -! srla over to do it,
has every yea-r, supplemrl-. e d heLcatn Mar-ket mn behalf 3f the
Staze Governments. WIe 1iovec. madeI the diffcer ence botween what
the lenders of money w% ould give the G-ov-ior. enIC.!, uthat was
needed for the vrorks pregrarme.
( Interjection) Ladlies and ~ lto t7u. sm ng et away f1-rm this. He
doesn't understand what I talkin6 about. But do, yrou do.
The fact is tha-t unlesS you can -get rid of an in'fia-tinary boom
theo prospects of aorr:) wiigir cq for Public works will -dir:ñ iJnish
year by year. N-ow,, nnybo'iy can understand that. A1nd under thec
system that we have had thais wuld riean tha,. t the Cmowat
itself wmuld find thrat groater mnd sreate r proportiuin ) f the
rioney for State work". s out of its Budget. And what heappons -then
is that the taxpayer of AustraiJe and that is probably every
grown-up person here to) ni gh and a lot nore has to find the
extra m. oney out of revenue fir tha,, t year. 
Does it strike you as reasonable that the taxpayers of
1961 should have to find, in cash, out of their annual o rnings
for that year the whole capital cost of works which will be
enjoyed by their children? I don't think so. I think it is a
fair thing that the burdens of these i. naters should be spread.
But the point that I want you to have in mind is that unless you
can got rid of inflationary boons, unless you can produce stability
in our econo. iy, then the ; works progranmes are going to represent,
overy year, increasing burdens on taxes and taxes will be steadily
increased year by year.
Now I'n not a theoretical econonist; I've been
entrusted by the people of ny country with these matters for a
long time, longer than anybody else ever was, and I've got to know
something about then. I'm not talking theory; I'n talking hard,
practical experionce on these matters.
Now, Sir, those are two illustrations of the enorous
practical inportance of dealing rwith an inflationary boon and
dealing with it strongly, firmly, not being afraid of a little
unpopularity over it.
You ray think, you know, that we are unpopular. I've
boon pretty unpopular with some regularity all through my life;
and I'm still here. And I don't mind being unpopular in a good
cause. Now, how have these policies of ours been rworking out?
Have we had the discnfort, have we had this tenporary phase of
some unemploynent not a great figure, but an undesirable figure
of course, a miserable figure from the point of view of the people
who are out of a job bave we had these results for nothing? Has
the policy produced positive results? Has it produced results so
positive that we can look forard to a period in the near future
in which evorything will get back on to its normal tracks, and we
will be going about our affairs in the ordinary way? I think the
answer to that is " Yes".
There are two or three matters that this policy of ours
was ained at. The first was to protect our overseas balances,
money built up overseas in order to pay for imports as they cone
in. The first thing was to protect those from running away. The
fact is that the policy has been so effective that at Juno
just the other day, the diminution of the balances that we had
feared back in November had not happened, because of the policies
and the neasures taken. I an happy to say that at the end of
June ( Interjection: Do we ha. ve to nport things? Can't vwe produce our
own? ( Well, unfortunately we can't)
( Intorjection: Why?)
( If you think that by a stroke even of your pen you
could produce in . ustralia tomncrrow œ 1 00Om. worth of goods now
imported, then you are the greatest optinist I over know in ny
life). I have no apologies to make about the developc-. nt of
Australian rmanufacturing during our torr of office. It has boon
phenomenal. I know that sonething is made, occasionally, of some
enterprise that has increased' i. ts o nloynont year by year by year
over the last 8 or 9 years, not being able to increase it this
tine, or even to reduce it a little. This is sinply one of those 
8.
things that happens in any economy. But the point that I an
getting at is that the balance of payments position in Australia
has been arrested in the nost dranatic fashion by the stops taken
by us. It was only today, as I was coning across to Tasmania,
that I was able to read in a loading article in the Financial
Tines of London, applauding what had boon done in Australia, and
this remarkable result.
What about land speculation? Did you like it? Did you
think it was a helpful thing? Did any serious married couple of
people in this hall, thinking about a house, not worry about the
prices that were being run-up for a block of land to put a house
on? The land speculation boon in Australia, in all its various
forms, was becoming a social menace. That boon has finished.
There are all sorts of other things: the activities in
the hire purchase field, adn irable up to a point, were reaching
such dimensions that people were acquiring liabilities on household
goods which they would not be able to discharge if there were
one breath of adversity in the family earnings. All this has been
quietoned down; brought back to a reasonable level. We are not
looking for a low-level of activity; we are looking for a high
steady level of activity. Therefore when I talk about quelling
the boon I talk about bringing matters back to that level at which
money, in other words incomno wages, salaries, whatever they nay
be, will maintain some steadiness of value, and enable people to
plan their future with some security.
Finally, I just want to say this to you: these are all
natters worth thinking about. They are matters, I agree, worth
explaining on behalf of the Governeont from time to time; but,
above all, I do want you to believe this simple truth, that 20 nen
don't go mad, all at the same tine, suddenly. If anybody had
talked, 12 months ago, about our policy we wouldn't have heard any
of these criticisms. People wo. uld have said, " Oh, things are going
along; in fact they are booming along. Everything in the garden
is lovely". And for 10 years, with one or two interludes in which
we have had to take stringent measures and they haven't been
extraordinarily popular at the time for all this period of time,
' 49, 59~ ' 5 8, you have voted for us. I don't think
many people have regretted that they did. I just want you to
understand that if we, in a few matters, take steps which you don't
like very much, or which may hurt somebody hero or there, we are
not taking then for fun.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I have talked long enough for
my good, if not for yours. I just want to say that I ua
delighted to be hero t. night, i really dicn't intend to become
involved in a political argumecnt; I thought I might have saved
that until the next election. But as my friend over there seemed
to believe that the next election won't be much good to me,
perhaps I was right to take the opportunity of talking about it
now. ( Applause)
l, 



61/ 041
LIBERAL PARTY RALLY, LAUNCESTON
_ Jthu ly, 1961
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Sir, Senators, members, prospective members, ladies and gentlemen:
I want to tell you that I really feel that I am here
under false pretences, Among the insinuating qualities bhat the
Chairman has is one of leading you on. When Icpencddmy sheet of
paper you know we always get a sheet of paper when we are
travelling I thought that we wjre going to stand around, and
that I was to speak for 10 minutes. However I will probably havo
to talk a little longer.
I think perhaps I ought to begin by saying that I have
a very soft spot in me for anybody who will undertake to win
. ilmot. I have never understood why we lost !! ilmot; I've never
understood why we haven't won ' Jilmot back; and now that I see two
candidates, and havo heard them, jointly and severally engaged in
the good work I begin to have hope that good judgment will come
back to . ilmo this ye: r. Because, really, Wilmot ought to be
represented by somebody of cons. quence. ( Applause)
As for Bass, well I take my hat off to Brownie
Marriott. ( Applause) You see this is a perfect example of
example being better than precept. Here he is, an eminently
respectable member of the Tasmanian Parliament, likely, under the
deep mysteries of the Hare-Clark voting system ( Laughter) to
remain a member of the Tasmanian Parliament forever, or so long as
life lasts: and he turns his back on this rather verdant prospect
and says, " I'll have a crack at Bass". And good luck to him.
( Applause) But if there is one thing that stings me a little it is
that it isn't so long ago that wo held four of those seats out of
five. iJe have, at one time or another, in imy period at Canberra,
held each of the five. Today we hold two. This is not good
enough. Do you know this really makes Tasmania a rather
backward State, the one State I say this to you quite frankly
in which the decline of our political fortun-s in the Federal
field has been so remarkable.
Now whose Cault is that? You can't say it's iay fault
entirely bccuse I'm the Prime Minister of all the States and it
hasn't happened in other places: it hasn't happened in
Queensland; it hasn't tappened in Victoria; it hasn't happened
in Jeostern Australia. It has happened hero. Perhaps the reason
for it is that in a smaller couunity we know each other so well
that we are mor. conscious of each other's faults, than we are of
the virtues of the other mane " Oh, so-and-so, I know him well; I
was at school with him. Oh, he's just an ordinary fellow, yes"
And having disposed of your own man on that basis you then vote
for somebody who is practically a half-wit' ( Laughter, applause)
And it won't do; it won't do. If there is one thing
I want to say tonight it is to seek to recall this State, this
favourite State of mine, as you know, in a personal way, to
recall this State to a sense of its own pride and responsibility.
It is your simple duty to give back, in the Federal Parliament,
Braddon, i-ilmot, Bass, to the Govcrnont. And it can be done if
everybody in this Hall tonight and there are not so many of us
said " This is my great objective for 1961". It co uld be done.
There is nothing that can't be done by enthusiastic supporters;
there is n. thing that can't be undone by feeble friends, the kind
of friends who say " Oh, yes, " Yus, but" won't put thesn 
boys, or oither of then, into Parliamnnt; " Yes, but" won't put
Brownie Marriott in as mr., bor for Bass. Of course not.
You can't have this qualifici support. This I believe
is an occasion, for reasons that Denhan Henty has mentioned, when
nothing but the warnest support will do, because if we can't win
our full quota of scats in the Sonate and we won't do that
unless we win in the Lower House then, although after the
Election we will still be in Office, I don't doubt it for a
morment, we will have the serious risks of having a Senate of which
we don't have coimand. What happens then? We are entering a
period of great economic troubles; oven more so we are entering
a period of im. onso international problems and complications, so
imnmoise that I hardly care to think about them except in private.
Fancy having a Government at Canberra, the Government of the
nation, the only Govornment that ropresents Australia in the
Councils of the , orld, rendered frustrated and futile by a hostile
Senate. I had this once you know, when you were first good
enough to send me back into Office at the end of 1949 we had a
big hostile majority in the Senate. And right through 1950, and
the first half of 1951, we were in trouble constantly. We
couldn't got a Bill through the Senate; we were always liable to
have . ny of our measurus just pushed asid,, made to look foolish;
we woro being rendured, in the public mind, futile not because
we woro futile, but because we didn't have a rmajority in the
Senate. Thereforo I began that now classical series of
movements which brought about the d. uble dissolution of 1951, a
double dissolution which the learned gentlemen of the Opposition,
including your famous ox-Tasnanian Sonator said c:) uld not be done.
But it was done. And we got a double dissolution. And we cane
back with a rLajority in both houses.
So that our real period, you know, of authoritative
Government didn't begin at the end of ' 49; it began, because of
these reasons, in the niddle of ' 51. That is why it is, in
reality, 10 years old, although by the end of this year the
Government itself will be 12 years old. Dut in trrms of
effective adinistrative authority and legislative corinand, and
an authoritative v-oice in the rest of the world, 10 years. But
it night h: ve been 11-.
Now I beg of you, don't let that happen again. You know
the business of th. e Governu-nt of a nation is troeendously
inportant. You have to ovtoe your days and nights to it, you
have to concentrate all the intelligence that can be marshalled in
order to deal with the oroblemr. s of a nati. on in this cormplox,
. odern world. A lot of your friends think you are righft;
even rore ny think you are wrong. But the fact is that you
ca! not ( do the job as it ought to be done if you are devoting your
attention to side issues, to the eochanics of staying in office,
to the mechanics of conducting a. anoeuvre so that the Senate
won't be able to frustrato y: ou. Look if you don't mind no
saying so, I speak with oxport knowledge on this mattor. I have
had more oxperience of this kind of thing than any other living
political loader. T can r.. neranbr when I -was first Prime
Minister, which will be beyond the memory of some of you, in 1939,
trying to conduct a Gov. rnront which was a minority Government
because the Country Party w. ulln't play, and sat on the crossbenchos.
' henover I went back to the L. d)* c on Friday evening
when the House was up, my wife would say " Joll how are things
going?" ind I w: uld say, " My dear, we arle safe until T1uesday".
( Laughter) Lo. kin. back on it, it sens funny doesn't it? But
living thr: ugh it it didn't soem funny because it rmeant thot
of your time was being devoted to political exorcises which no
Govornment in a tim! e of great national importance ought to be
roeuired to engago in. There is no m:-% re copletIo way in which 
you can avoid these unhappy results than by taking this wonderful
opportunity that now presents itself in Tasmania, or that will,
at the end of the year, to win back these throe seats all of
which ought to be ours, and to give us a majority in he Senate
which I believe we will need in this State if we are to have one
in the Senate as a whole.
Now having said that to you I just want to mention,
quite briefly, two or three other aspects of the affairs that we
have been odaling with. Mr. Thonas said, very rightly, that he
hoped that in this tine, the period of economic difficulties, the
position of the primary industries w:, uld not be overlooked. Now
of course, as he knows, we have been extraordinarily conscious of
this problen. I said something about it last night in speaking at
Burnie. What can be done for the primary industries in terns of
taxation measures, and so on, has long since been done by us, far
more than for any other aspect of industry. But we believe that
hard as inflation is upon oll people with fixed incomes, it bears
most cruelly on rural industry. They can't pass their costs onto
somebody else, unless they are very lucky and live in a little
closed market. The wool industry has been referred to. This is
the great industry of Australia, the industry of all industries
upon which our international solvency depends; which enables us
to buy from the rest of the world all the things that we need. I
wonder if I might put it to you in this way. If the wool industry
in Australia were blotted out tomorrow and we no longer had an
inco: me from woo, hardly a manufacturer in iAustralia would fail to
receive a violent blow. Because, of all the imports that cone
into Australia, 60, 70%, maybe more, are imports on behalf of
manufacturers raw materials, plant, all these things. And yet
of all the export income that we earn with which to pay for our
imports, a high percentage, perhaps 40%, sometimes 50% is earned
by the wool industry of Australia.' So all you have to do is to
abolish our wool income and you can write an end to our present
high and happy state of living, our high and happy state of
national development. These are important facts to h: ive in mind. WJe must
never lose sight of them. -de don't want to soc the wool industry
subsidised: this would be the crowning folly, wouldn't it, of
national economic history, to subsidise the wool industry? Who
subsidises whom? It will be a problem, won't it, in due course.
do don't want to be subsidising other primary industries which
produce, primarily, for export to the rest of the world. But if
we are not going to, then we must take groat pains to see that
their costs are not added to by a high and rising inflationary
pressure. The greatest sufferers in an inflationary boom in
Australia are the men who produce from the soil for export. Now I
say that as a member for a metropolitan seat. I haven't the
faintest doubt that this is the truth. But of course the moment
you begin to attack inflation then the fun begins. How do you
attack inflation? Nobody denies that in 1960, last year we had
an inflationary boom. I occasionally indulge myself in the luxury
of reading " Our Ecnomist", or something, in a newspaper or " Our
Financial Editor", in a newspaper, or " Our Commentator" in a
newspaper. I read them all for they are most readable most
readable. They usually disagree with each other by and lge; but
anyhow there is no harm done by reading them. Not one of them
denies that in 1960, this last calendar year, we were confronting
an inflationary boon, shortages of labour. People are always
willing to tell mo that there are a hundred thousand people
registered f) r employment, or whatever it nay be; and of course
I don't want that to happen. But they don't tell me that last
year the position was exactly the opp. site, that to get labour
you had to bid up, and pay oxt'a rates over the awards, you had 
to buy people's servicos by heav'y ovortdrae. t) uito rightly, when
people aro scaC2' ce in coi... paroison wJitht s tthiyi ~~ r pce
That is good priivate ent( riprise rnips. But i~ t doe), sn't reduce
the costs of pr-ocUIction in industry; it doesn't red-' uce the costs
of the man tt'h e land. i. J ho: n he finds that it cost-Is imr ano; ther
2d7 3d, 4+ d, 501. to produce a pound of wool he can't say to himself
" Mark it up to the public" to the sane extent, because he ca~ n't.
He sells his wool by auction; heo gets what the world will give
him. A" nd I want to make it qu-ite clear to you that wej live in a
world in wbhicl our grea&amp;, test nati.. nal or: oducts ' on tho wor-ld market
receive the s &gt;" cThey ma~ y be -roo. ll theyo nay be moat,
they maybe ase rnt,: 0s -incirensingly ip,-itant ut~ a
including thie no--ferz'eus :: Iotals b LIt -ih y reu2 tU .; 1K0 Vcorld
will give fo-r thrro,. I f You lift z ho. cost of10?. 2~ in o o
by having a rierry, inflationary hol41iday, theon yo.. u will end b
destroying the.
Now I an an old : oolitic-al sweat and qulte, franly I
have got to a stare of lifa Jhen I an-not4--AT to cry 7 a, f to
sloocp if somobod:. k,-icks me out. Ilve, bee,-b. r a. lrng to. Bat
I would resign rlmy job if I -didn't th. ink i hono) ujh guits in
no to stand up to-an inflati. inaW-probleii and, D htIto
was the right thh t d bot t ( dpplaase)
Xc~ w tK _ ro is sonoithin7 rat! ' or c. orortable about
inflation. It's -er-ofitabeI~ from, the oitof view. of somle
people. I u-a'dersC-nd that: more oolrigpic level, more
turnover theIse UThings have tho ir getatato; Btte
have no attiractio-n wha-IIIeor for pople vhoso iqe-Io-nes are
reatively fixocd, no attraction uhate. ver for people viho are
living on sup) re: -.-uati-Dn, or pension benefits, no attraction
whatever for po; ewho have pr. ovided for theimselves by
investments on f -ed rates of interest, as so rmanv people havo,
nco attractio) n wl) hatever for the holders of over f-l, OO0m, worta of
Savings Bank del) o: sits in i', ustralia. They don't want inflation.
ndin order to deoal with inflation you must hit it quite
violently on the heoad, yo-u mustn't be toe p) ollto about it, you
must bring it to a hajt, I notice thiat everybody now concedes
thiat we have, tL. tth..' bo-m has passe d ever, that land
sp culation has fallent back to a ver-7 remr.-.. kable de ree0 I don't
find many people who Idony TShat. But we st.. 1 ' have pe) ople who will
say to and no ' Dou:-ot say to y Ibrother candidates hare on the
platform in due course, th-. at the cause of all, tho, tro) uble is
" lthle crendit squeeze". It is o) ne of those beaut-iful uexpressions.
I don't thiink too -, any ople, except a few business men, know
what it -moans. But I will explain it to) yo) u in one paragraph.
You havo an inflatio--, nary b om: when there is miore money
av. oilable to be spent than there are goodr)( s and services available
to be bo-ught. 1When that hiapp-ens the-: price of everything ; OOJS LIP
thec price of labour, if it's labour that is short; the price
of m~ aterials, if it's matorials that are sho rt. ldhatovor it may
be, yoju can't halvo two people with the moneny in theair hands
competing for one lot of supply without seeoing the price go up.
Of course if you are dealing, with such a, situation yo) u are going
to m.-ake an coemy of one or other, or perhaps both, of the two
buyers. Theiy say, " This is terrible, this is terrible. You
should have allowed us to geo ahead in the ordinary way". You make
an enemy of the fello. w who has the , oods to sell beca. use he was
contemplating-: etting a fancy price for them in an inflated
market. I understand thant; I didn't conic Joivn_ in the la., st
showcr. But the interests of the ordIInary peep of Alustralia
a-cc pnramount. You vote, th-a Labour TParty O.. ffice at i-he end
of the year as I said t. uwill bn,, toa.,_ S y pi) lw you
-vio then-in and the infI ,--, nary iofn l9( 2D . they ~ aa
of thi-: ir pror. ises, lie n h gto thc fI'-, ncial õ . ateu
th,( at will ove,, rtake this couantry wlt , in six m MYUtis of theirL
arrival. 4. pplause) 
Now, Sir having said that I wonder if I could just
answer quite briefly, two points thai have been put to no and I
am sure have been put to some of my colleagues from tino to tino.
First, somebody will say to you, " Yes, well of course we know the
Govornment has this great probluem and we are great supporters of
the Governnent, you know, but why do you change your minds so
much? None of us knows what is going to happen next." Now that
is good Labour propaganda and I an surprised when I find any
Liberal falling for it. " Why do you change your minds so nuch?"
You know you would think that managing money and credit in a
cormmunity was child's play. , J11 you have to know is the seven
tines table and put a competent clerk on the job and leave it to
him. In Groat Britain which doesn't have a Federal system,
in which the central Governent has uninhibited power over any
subject that you care to mention, there is the Bank of England in
the middle of the structure, like our Reserve Bank, formerly the
Commonwealth Bank. But the Bank of England, lot's say, announces
tomorrow that the bank rate has boon changed, raised 1% or 1%,
the Bank discount rate on first class bills. The effect of that
right through the economy, right through the business centres of
London, right through the financial centres of Great Britain is
instant, and draatic. Wo have no such power in Australia. But
when the bank rate is raised in IMrch and l. wered in July, and
raised again in October, and lowered again in January I have never
yet heard anybody say in England " What a lot of boobies they are
at the Bank of England, they don't know their own minds, they are
always changing their minds". I would hate to go to sea with a
navigator in a rough sea who gave the helmsman the course and
said " I'm going to bed, that's fixed, because it would never do
for me to change my mind". That would be a horrible way of going
to King Island judging by what I saw of it the other day.
( Laughter) Any competent people must be prepared, not to change the
broad course; and our policy is quite simple: we want stability,
economically in Australia, and development on the basis of
stability. But when it comes to applying policy you would be
foolish if you ignored changes of wind, changes of the sea
particular storns that arise, particular circurstances that arise,
very few of which are created inside / iustralia but which affect
us for a very simpile reason, nuch overlooked, that we don't
happen to be the only country in the world. No are, in fact, a
very small country in terms of numbers. But we are a great
trading nation; and we are affected by the wild currents of world
economic events, and of wor. ld trading crises, and so on, just as
much as countries 10 tilns the size of ustralia. Therefore you
muEt expect some variations of application of policy as
circumstances change.
You know, of course, I am a very great admirer of the
newspaper press. It seldom gets what I say right ( Laughter) but
still, no doubt it has a part to play in these matters. They
always have in a newspaper office a gentlemen whose task it is to
write the headlines. Deliver me from head lines. You can make a
prosaic, simple statement of the kind that I characteristically
make and when you see the headline that is put on it you say,
" Did I say that?"
Now it happens that last November when we were
bringing down a few additional economic easur. s, all of which I
firmly believe were quite right and well justified, we gave
thought to whether we iight strengthen our overseas reserves. I
don't want to be too technical about this matter but the nation
has balances overseas which are the result, partly, of the sale
of exports, partly the result of borrowing overseas, or investments
by people overseas, and these overseas reserves of ours must, at 
any given timne, be ) retty subs tant-ial. I won't give it a
preciso. i~ r butl coer i-y e n offico. I , i-ve never been very
happy to have theo ove rso as r, s,; rvos loss than F. 400na. because that
represents no nero t. a. an albout ~ 5 non'trs'I purch:: se of imports. rf
we had someo sudden fiflnaflci, tro-uble, a fatal coillap,-.-in the wool
market, or a great drought in the wheat industry, or something
happening, in . Ie iieat industry, we wo'-uld, in -order to avoid
banrutc itoratonll, have to have reserves overseas on
which-impo) rters c) uld draw thkro3ugh1 their banks, in orcdhr to pay
for the p,-ods co,--ing-into L1
ustrailia., By land large we are so
poverty stricken in ' Lustralia that our eople between then Tianage
to buy œ l, 000Li. worth of : Lm. prts every year. Not bad for
million people in a state of incipient ba-_ nkruptcy, is it?
Therefore we must h-ave -ilequate o) verseas reserves. AnMd we said,
" Very well, in ordeor to avoid any suggestion o) f panic, or crisis,
we will, before theo overseas reserves 1fall t, 1o-far as they were
at -that tine by re-, ason of the boon ore will nake a drawi,, ing on
the int. ernati :) nal MontaPry Fund",
The Interinati: on-l 1' on; tiry FLa--d is Oo if thlose
rmysterious bodies like the ,: ati'L..' niI Jank fro7-, wdhich fellows
like me oil be ha1I o f oto~ people, boawmnyfro-rl time to
tine. We decidedf -, hat we 1.'. uld 1ahavj., a.? a po-: rf,-ct right to clo so,
make a drawing; on ti-e Intoernaiti-o nal VootryIund becaus we had
deposited 1--any rllasin it, like all the cother co) nsti,-; tuent
countries. Iesaid "' doll, we will draw e will tuck it
into our o) verso" as re1sorves. It prbal w!, rn't. be noedel but at
any rate it will prevent pepefrom ge:, tting, -n idea thcv there is
so-iel critical state affairs". Thea last thin,] to ha,. ve is this
miserable attitude of crisis, the loss -of c:) nfidonco, the
p) rophets of' gloom, tho peoplle whio create depre; ssions by advertising
their owrn troubles about TTihieenr. e fore we-made this drawing.
At the tineo we riade it we , DUt a statemeont in to the
International Monetary Fund. and my colleag-, ue, the Treasurer, Mr.
Holt, tabled it in the Huse, of Represenltatives with an
accompanyin stoteurent. P-rlianont approv( : d of the drawn and
the headline that nigwht in the" papulr was relaxati~ n in credit
squeeze until. June, 1962". Thor r-ust halve been afair number of
business. ien whio road tChat hoadlino and went ba, c k and said " Well
-that's the end of' it. Not until June, t62. 1rnother 12 months
with nothing. doneo to relieva tho pros. ent position". The headline
was, as a point of fact, completely falso, I b. rc,-u -ht with meo to
Tasmania the precise words of our st-atement to thLe Fund. I will
read them'. to you: they are not varr they arc completely
true, they are consistent with everything that tie have done;
and they are consistent vith the re~ narkable fact that between the
tinec whie. we prosiintc. this d-cumeont to the M-rne-tary Fund and
tuday, we have made two or thr-so iL. ajor relaxiations in the policy.
It is wo-rth remem: bering; that, bocause people who thought weM htad
contracted out of doing it must h3ove buoon surprised when we did
it, Here is the rclevant part of our statement:
" Economic c-. nditions in _ ustraia -r suJetorai
chan( e r * nnf luenced 1by a number of external factors
outside the Government's control. Poli -cy has thoreforo
frequently to be ad1ap) ted to meet a shift in conditions. The
declarations of policy riade here miust the-refco be undo rstoo) d
as applying, only to conditions as theoy now appe;-r. Sho) uld any
m~ ajor shi ft in the direction or emphaasis of policy become
necessary dluring the currency of the stand-by arrangem,):, ent, the
I . ustLralian Govcernmeint would, at th e request of thie Monaging
Dircctor, ready to co+ nsult wdth ' the Fun,,, nd, if nece3ssary,
reach now und ; rstanding ;: ofore any request -for a further
dra-wing+-under s nd-by, : 7rran-oii+ ent is made",.
Th-at doesn't s . und m-. uch like a cast-iron p ositio) n fo-r 12 monthls,
) os it? 
" Seasonal needs apart, however, the Monetary
authorities"
that's the Reserve Bank and ourselves
" intend to keep a firm control over the liquidity position of
the banks"
which I nay say the Banks would do themselves, anyhow, because
that is part of their great art and responsibility
" with a view to limiting during the year ending June ' 62 the
amount of outstanding bank advances to a total that would be
consistent with the maintenance of financial stability".
And on those words you wore told by some clown " No relaxation in
credit squeeze until June, 1962". The document as I have read it
to you makes it quite clear, now, as then, that our policy is to
maintain financial stability insofar as any Government of the
Cor. monwealth can do it; and by maintaining financial stability
encourage the development of Australian enterprise to the fullest
extent and the increase in the . ustralian population by
immigration and otherwise.
The last thing that I want to say to you, because I
have spoken much longer than I had any desire to do, is this.
Prophets, notoriously, have no honour in their own countries;
Governments have very little honour in their own countries. The
number of people I have met who could run the financial affairs of
Australia bettor than we could are le. ion. The pity is that they
don't go into Parliament.
But outside Australia there are hard-headed people who
want to invest in Australia people in the United States, in
Canada, in the United Kingdom which, with all its own profound
economic troubles, much more grave than ours at this monent, is
still the largest investor of private funds in ustralia
A few years back I used to say to my Treasury people,
" Tell ne, what do you estimate to be the inflow of private
capital investment into Australia, not public borrowing by
Governments but private capital investment, a company deciding to
start something, a company investing its money in sonmthing?"
And when the answer used to be, 10 years ago, 8 years ago, round
about œ 100m. I must say I used to rub ny hands and say " That's
wonderful, that's wonderful". ' nd so it was. Because
million people can't find all the capital that they need to
develop this enormous continent with its resources. By last year
that inflow had reached a figure roughly three times the size of
that of ten years ago.
Then along cane the blunderin~ Monzios Government and
wrecked the economy. I suppose that all these wise, shrewd
follows not philanthropists, I haven't encountered too many
philanthropists in the overseas money markets, though I have had
a groat deal to do with a great number of then, nice fellows, but
not philanthropists want to see the right investment, they want
to believe in the country that they are putting the money into,
they want to believe that it has stable Governmrent and sound and
stable ideas, and a future. And in this very year, just ended,
the financial year 1960-61 most of it disfigured, I'm told, by our
reckless policies, the amount that has cone into Australia for
private investment from outside ustralia is an all-time record.
( Applause) I don't feel happy if ny supporters are occasionally
doubtful, critical. You can't win elections, you can't maintain 
8.
Government on the basis of doubtful supporters, supporters who
leave, supporters who arc half-hearted. If you are half-hearted
about us then I want to say at once to my friends hero they
haven't a dog's hope of winning the next election, not a dog's
hope. Good as they are, they are not going to win their elections
if the cor. nnunity behind then has reservations about the Governnent
that they are going in to support. Therefore the first condition
of gotting these nen into Parliament House of Representatives
and Senate is to be able to go behind then with a full heart
and a satisfied nind, and a belief, which I say is a well-founded
belief, that there could be no greater disaster cone to Australia
than that the inconpetents whon I look at across the table in
Canberra should be entrusted with the affairs of this country.
( Applause) 



Z/ 0' a A
ANSWERS 13Y THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, TO QUESTIONS AT A CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
LUN CHEON
Launceston, 6th July. 1961
Could I ask the Prime Minister: If the Governw nt is opposed
to direct import control what steps will be used to curb the import of
non-essentials and thus maintain a favourable balance of payments?
Mr. Menzies: Mr. Chiairman this is a pretty comprehensive question, and
perhaps letsme in for a rather longer answer than you might want.
I first of all want to remind you that the quantitative
control of imports, such as by import licensing, is available to
Australia only to protect our balance of payments. We are a nation and
we are parties to international contracts; and we cannot face GATT,
we cannot face the International Monetary Fund, we cannot face any of
these bodies to which we are contractually engaged if we use
quantitative restrictions on imports except to protect the balance of
payments, to protect our overseas reserves.
And that, of course, is one of the dominating reasons why,
at a time when our overseas reserves were high and healthy, we did not
feel able to continue import licensing and said that we must revert to
the traditional and proper practice of tariffs to protect Australian
industry. Now what happened last year was this: that the volune of
imports continued at a very high level. Whenever we are well off in
Australia and if I may recall you to these happy events we have been
pretty well off haven't we, as a Nation? it reflects itself in the
buying of imports. Under those circumstances we had to decide whether
we were to deal with that problem, the problem of our overseas balances
by quantitatively restricting imports once more, or by pursuing
internal financial policies which would tend to reduce the demand for
imports. The first was really not lawfully available to us; the
second was. Now I have heard it said by a lot of people, quite a few
people, that if we wanted to do the right thing we would restore import
licensing, this vague, administrative pmtective policy, this
protection of Australian manufacturing industry at the whim of a
Minister, or an official. de could do that, it was said, and, at the
same time, loosen out on what I believe is known affectionately as
" the credit squeeze". The answer to that, quite simply, is you can't
do both. I want to-' have it plainly understood that confronted by a
boom in 1960 we had two weapons that we could employ one was to
increase the supply of goods to match the enormous purchasing power.
The other one was to back up the action of the central bank, the
Reserve Bank, in maintaining a control a close control, of the Banking
policy of the Banks. And we tried both. If we hadn't got rid of
import licensing I just want to tell you that credit restriction in
Australia would have needed to be much more severe than it was.
If you have two weapons to use in a fight against inflation,
and you abandon one, then of course, obviously, you must use the other
one more. We decided to use both; and to use both with discretion.
And, I think, both with some success. -Oecause in point of fact, Sir, 
what has happened about imports?. The domestic policies have not been,
you know, half as severe as people think the total of bank advances
today is higher than it was a year ago so don't let's exaggerate
these matters by some particular, personal experience. Imports
maintained themselves at a very high level in January, fell away a
little in February, fell avay a little not too much, not enough
perhaps, in March imports in May and June have come down from what?
from a little over œ lO00m. in January to œ 78m. in May, to œ. 74mn. I read
in the newspapers this morning, in June. The result of that is that
our overseas balances, our overseas reserves, are immeasurably more
healthy at the end of June than we ever expected them to be in
November of last year. So that for better or for worse, for richer
or for poorer, the policies, the domestic policies that have been
employed, have corrected the balance of payments problem.
I don't need to say to any banker here today, or to any
business man here today, that the state of our balances overseas has
the most direct impact on the liquidity of the banking structure in
Australia. All you need to do is to have your overseas balances come
down œ lO0m. a year, œ-150m. a year, and the Head Office of the Bank will
very soon be telling its Branches that " to protect our liquidity in
this state of affairs we must begin to call in overdrafts, we must begin
to be a little careful about making new advances".* These are, after
all, elementary considerations. And I am, myself, very satisfied about
the fact that in the last two months of this financial year results
have been achieved from this unpopular policy they tell me results
have been achieved which I am bound to tell you are better than I
myself hoped for. Of course the effect of that is that so long as we
behave sensibly, so long as we pursue moderate policies not terribly
severe policies, but moderate policies over the last 12 months I
would hope that in the next 12 months we would have no problem on our
overseas balances at all. That is one big factor in the economic
position which, under no circumstances, would be disposed of.
As for the re: st, well, we will see how it goes. I am not
going to tell any of you, because it wouldn't be true that we are
proposing to re-introduce import licensing; we're not, we're not. I
have never believed that import licensing ought to be a second line of
protection and I may look any manufacturer in Australia in the eye and
remind him that at least six times a year, for years and years, I have
publicly stated " This is not a line of protection; this is introduced
to protect our balances of payments and it is not to be regarded by
any industry as a sort of second protective tariff". And if people
don't believe you, well, that's jus'L too bad. It has been said time
after time, " I~ f you want good Government, if you want honest
administration" and of course you do " if you want Australian
manufacturing industry, which has achieved such magnificent results in
Australia over these years, to be healthy, to look forward and grow in
a state of health then let it depend on a protective tariff arrived at
through the proper machinery and don't let it depend on the goodwill of
a few politicians, or of a few civil servants".
Question: Mr. Chairman I would like to ask the Prime Minister, leaving
the domestic scene for the moment, to say something to us about the
implications to the West of the possible signing of a Peace Treaty
between Khrushchev and E~ ast Germany?
Mr. Menzies: Well, Sir, this is a very interesting question to me
because how long ago was it? about 9 months ago, 8 months ago, I
had a long private discussion with Khrushchev in New York. This was one
of the things we talked about. I wouldn't have you believe that
Khrushchev is not incapable of bluff he's the greatest master of it
in the modern world he's got a nice earthy sense of humour, rather
eaflant . n~ 
farm-yard sense of humour, if you simple Launcestonians understand, and
his favourite threat even then was " Well you know unless you are
prepared to abandon this position that you have about Berlin'I'm going
to sign a Treaty, a Peace Treaty, with East Germany; and I11ll invite
a" ltlh att hme eapneso polef wchoou rsfeo, u gPhrte saigdaeinnts, t Gtehratm anwye wiinl lt heb e lagteet twianrg" . a n Sion viIt astaiiodn,
for Australia to attend?" He said, " Yes, that's quite right, quite
right". -And I said " The idea will be to have a Treaty with East
Germany, and the making of a Treaty with East Germany will mean the
permanent recognition of the division of Germany, the partition of
Germany?" Yes, that's the position.
Now this is going to give rise to the most tremendous problems,
It is very hard for us to know what the Russian mind is: I've seen Old
you know, with the shoe off, beating on the desk with his shoe,
AUI this rather silly propaganda, which is designed to affect weakminded
people -and, therefore, I am happy to say, has no effect
whatever on us -all this kind of guff goes on. But I think that down
underneath it all the Russians are afraid of a unified Germany. And
of course we are pretty broad-minded people ourselves we forget and
we forgive but it is still true that twice in this century a powerful
Germany has set the world at war. Therefore one can understand this
feeling: they are afraid of a unified Germany.
The whole difficulty about it is that they prefer a disunited
Germany at the risk of a world war, to a united Germany with peace.
And that doesn't make much sense to me; nor indeetohrpolei
a position of leadership in the Western worldi. et te epei
Khrushchev, of course, when the time comes, will put this
thing very pleasantly. He will say, " Now we want Berlin to be a free
city. We are not claiming territorial rights over it. We want it to
be a free city. But there are to be no troops of Western communities
ensconsed in W4est Berlin. And we will make a 29aty with East Germany".
And of course a Treaty with East Germany, from the Soviet point of
view, will be like a Treaty with Poland: it willfinally incorporate
East Germany into the Soviet zone. And the result of that, even in
the balance in Europe, would be tremendous. But in the short run, I
want to remind you that it is only a few years ago that the Berlin
airlift incident occurred. I was in Berlin at that time and I saw it
going on an airlift by which the Western world challenged the Soviet
Union and succeeded by feeding and supplying WJest Berlin by air
over this forbidden zone. I think that Berlin is no longer to be
regarded just as a city, just as an ancient capital of Germany, or the
not so ancient, perhaps, but at any rate the capital of Germany; Berlin
has become a symbol. If Berlin passes into the hands of the Communist
group then this is their crowning triumph in Europe. And these people,
when they have a crowning triumph, don't stop there; they decide to
look for the next one. This is another great victory in the cold war
cold war meaning 4 war in which you get all you can without actually
discharging nuclear weapons.
In Great Britain I think that that is understood. I am
perfectly certain that in America It is well understood. There have
been such tremendous achievements of friendship between De Gaulle and
Adenauer, as I know as a result of discussions, myself, with each of
them, that France itself feels that Berlin is a symbol. And I think
we Just have to keep our fingers crossed, because I think that K. will
bluff and bluff and bluff up to the very point at which he feels
convinced that this means a nuclear war. I don't think he wants a
nuclear war. But if he finds that bluff pays off and that people will
retreat, he may ultimately become so excited by his own advance that he
takes the risk. If we reach New Year's Day 1962 with no explosion,
great or small, over Berlin, I will be among the happiest people here
present. 
Question: I would like to ask the Prime Minister what his opinion is of
the possibility of Great Britain joining the European Common Market and
the effect that that would have on the sale of our primary products in
Great Britain?
Mr. denzies: Well, Mr. Chairman, you must not tempt me too much on this
matter. When I leave here later this afternoon and go back to
Melbourne this Is a problem I am discussing with Mr. McEwen tonight,
and with Mr. Duncan Sandys tomorrow, and the following day. And of
course it is g tremendous problem, tremendous. It has political
implications, and it has economic implications, particularly for our own
primary industries; and even more for the primary industries of New
Zealand. For two years every time I have seen U. K. representatives
I have said, " WJe must be consulted before you take any steps". And
that has been long since agreed to. So the principle of consultation
has been established very plainly over the last two years, but so far
we haven't had any consultation. But consultation begins tomorrow
afternoon if I see the distance. ' Whether it will be consultation in
the real sense of getting down to brass tacks or not, I don't know,
But just so that you will see the general picture, here it is.
It may be that the United Kingdom should have joined the
Common Market before it began you know that is a bit Irish, but still
you know what I mean. When the six powers were negotiating the-. Treaty'
of Rome it may be that the Unitd Kingdom should have looked forward and
said, " Now we must be in this on the ground floor so that as one of the
original founders we can negotiate to protect the Commonwealth
interests". I think there is an awful lot to be said for that view.
But still that is water under the bridge. The fact is that they didn't.
the &amp; ropean Common Market has been established.
You all of course know, broadly, what it means: here you have
six powers each of them with varying industrial experiences. First,
West Germany, thanks to the German genius for work, tremendously
flourishing, France rather in the doldrums, Italy a bit each way; and
then, as a result of this organisation with free access to the raw
maturials of each other, with a free movement of labour from one area
to another, with, at the end of 12 years of which three have now gone,
or four have now gone, a' cominon barrier in customs against the rest of
the world, this to produce a community of people rather larger than the
United States of America. Wdith all these internal advantages, it is
a tremendous thing. The effect, so far, on the strength of the
European economy has been enormous. And it will grow, and grow.
And so Great Britain comes along now, rather at a
disadvantage, with Europe saying, "' Well if you care to join, all right;
but of course you sign on the dotted line". And if Great Britain says,
" Well we can't sign on the dotted line, we have enormous obligations
and advantages out of the Commonwealth structure. We have
preferences in Australia which are even more valuable to us than the
Australian preferenges into the United Kingdom". Because that is true.
But from our point of view what a calamitous state of affairs it would
be if the goods that we now sell into the United Kingdom, duty free,
had to be submitted to the Common External Customs barrier of the
European Common Market. So you might be paying 15 or 20% duty on
wheat, to take a simple example, into Great Britain.
And this, of course, is a tremendous problem. Can they go
into the Exropean Common Market without sacrificing Commonwealth
interests? Can they go into the &amp; iropean Common Market on terms which
the dther six countries don't accord to any other of their members? I
Would have thought it was rather improbable. 
That is why, in the economic field, I regard these
discussions, which will open with a few " sighting" shots in my office
tomorrow afternoon, economically, as perhaps the most important
discussions we have ever had; certainly the most important in my,
political lifetime. So that is one aspect of it. And I assure you
we are not going to surrender at the first blast, or the second, or the
third. I know what the interests of my own country are, and they wiii
be pursued and defended. I have the great advantage of knowing the
people with whom I am conducting the battle.
But there is a second aspect of this matter and I would like
you all to have it in mind; and that is the political aspect. This
Commonwealth of ours has suffered a few changes, hasn't it, in modern
times? I used to be regarded by people under the influence of a good
dinner as a great Commonwealth man. I've got to a stage when I wouldn't
be dogmatic about anything connected with the Commonwealth. I think we
made an awful blunder at London by butting in on the domestic affairs
of a Commonwealth country, a step from which there can be no retreat.
But now, what are we looking at?
The object of the Treaty of Rome is not only economic, but
political: to strengthen the political unity of Western Europe. Now
that is a very fine thing. President Kennedy has undoubtedly been
pressing this for political reasons: he wants to have Great Britain in
the European community politically, so as to exercise judgment and
wisdom and authority, and to maittain that community with an outwardlooking
eye, instead of being too domestic. There is no doubt about
what is in his mind on this matter. At any rate I know what is in his
mind on this matter.
But you know in the old Commonwealth if I may speak with a
certain amount of nostalgia one discussed matters with Great Britain,
these were family matters, you talked to Great Britain not to Great
Britain plus X Y Z, but to Great Britain. We knew their mind; they
knew our mind. We sat around with the other members of the family and
we might agree, or we might disagree; but we all knew in what capacity
we were talking to each other. But if the European Common Market is
to produce its political fruit, then the political fruit must be
political unity in Western Europe.
Unity is an ambiguous word. Italy, and I think Adenauer in
Germany, think of it in'terms of an integration of the Western European
world one great new Western European community. But Charles De Gaulle*
who is, of course, a great nationalist doesn't think of it in those
terms; he won't have integration. 3ut he does believe in
Confederation that an independent France and an independent Germany,
and an independent Great Britain will all be bound together in a sort
of Confederacy of States for the peace of the world.
Now gentlemen I am not pre-judging this matter. It may be a
very good thing. It may be that we are living in a twilight world, and
that this will be the new dawn. I don't know, I'm not automatically
against it. All I am saying to you is that when Great Britaih becomes
not Great Britain, a single home nation of the British Commonwealth, but
a member of a group of European nations with obligations to all the
other members of the group, then the character of the British Commonwealth
will have sustained its final change. 



EMBARGO! Not for u . blicition, broadcast, or cabling before
TTUL Jn AY, l1th July4 1961 P. 111. No. 33/ 1961
. COFMIT 1M,' EKE T
1. The Prime 1Minister of Australia, Mr. Menzies, and
other Australian Ministers have du, rin-g the last fed days had
discussions with the British Secretary of State for Commonwealth
Relations, Mr. Duncan Sandys.
2. Mr. Sandys explained the various considerationis whiich
had led the Britishi Government to re-examine its attitudo -towards
and realations'nip with the European ., Oconomic Commirunity ( thec
" Common M-arkt"), established by the 21roaty of Rome.
3. In tho courso 01 se) vera'L mee1tings, t ho po1litical and
ec;_ onomic impl ications of such a stop weefully discussod.
4. The iAustralian ! Q" ov~ rnmont considcred that, shiould
~ 3ritai1 join theo Europ'can _ Sconomic Comunity, it mighit . oll be
that sheo will become incru-' singly involved in not only theo
economic policies of th--e Cormmuni. ty but ,-1so in matters of an
intternationai -and political kind. Sandys emphasized that
the 3ritisa Governmeont wvas convinced that the obj.. ctivao of closer
unity in Europe wxras in no ra,-y incompatiblo with tema-intenance
. and further d, vclopmriat of Conmonw. ae, l th ties, which constitute a
valuable unifying influence: in a -, Uc'i divided wrorld" A. Aastr. alian
rMinistors pointLed ou~ t that they t!-ought thne ultimate political
implications of theo reaty of Teearo extrem-ly significant and
will tond to posse-ss a duvolo-oing c~ iaractor in the acnieveont of
soe k-ind of &amp;. ropean unity. Thoy sawl merit in such unity since
a continuing division, in rival economic groups would 00 a source
of dango-1 and weakne.-. ss, wileo a powerful_ and o:: periUncadU g'roup of
fr,--o European nf.. tions can do much -to pr,.! serve the world's peace.
Ho-icvor, they emphasized thait ai-thoDugh avoida. nce of J. divided
Wost._ rn Europe , as a desirable objuctive it should ne-t be--
accoim. plished at theo cost of d-i'vision within the Connearw.-alth or
elsoiwhere in tUhe world. Australian Minis-ters expressed thecir
concern at the weake.: ning effect they believe d thlis developiment
' joul h-a ve on thei-Ccxm:: on rul-1c1 i.'" n) sthh ip. So. n'dys stressed
theo importance theo United Kingdom-, a!, ttaches to naintaining thais
-1art i,) nship unirmpairud. Indeed'A,' t 4io : r i t is h Gucrnr:'ñ ent belie ved
tha: t a closur ,_-ssocia-tion of Britain r-ith the cnien f'erp
rfi~~ twelbe added s.-eurce: ) f strengthl not Only to I3ritain but
to t. 10 Ciemonwaltha as a wi-io-le:.
exch'-anges occurred in1 the e: conomic advanti-ges
and disadvanitfages which would censue if Britain were to accede
the Treaty ojf Riom. e and the, 1 po) ssiele e, ffOctS Of thlis on the
tr.: de e-. nd industry of Lnrdti Austr,, lia).. It w. a: s r(. cognisod
Thtthe issiu-oif * Britain's acccssi,) n to thec Treaty -f-I'oa was
primarily a mtter fo-r Britain a-nd was one_ which-the riis
Gev. c. rnricnt alan,.. could -decide. 
s 2.
But Australian Ministers explained the srious adverse
consequences for Australin producers and for the Australian
balance of payments which ould confront Australif if the
United Kingdom were to enter the Cormlmon Market on a basis which
failed to safoguard Australian trade interests for the future.
6. Mr. Sandys assured the Australian Government that the
British Government fully shared its concern to naint. in the
long-established flow of trade betoecn iheir two countries. If
nogotiations took place, the intention would be to secure special
arrangements to protect these imp: rtant trading inter,, sts.
7. Mr. Sandys mado it clear that he did not ask the
Australian Governiiont to express an opinion on the question
whether Britain sihould join the Cormon Market. The British
Government itself had as yet reached no decision on this issue.
The im ediate question was whether or not to open negotiations
with the European Economic Cormnunity.
F. As the whole qucstion is of naj. or importanco for Britaii
aind for decision by her, Australian Ministers did not feel
entitled to object to the opening of negotiations by the British
Government should it reach the conclusion that this was
desirable. But they made it clear that the absence of
objection should in the circumstances not be interp: rted as
implying approval. They further stressed that, as in any such
negotiations, varicus Australian export industries would be
materially involved, Australia should be in a position to
ne-otiate direct on Australia's behalf when details and
arrangements affecting items of Australian trade were being
discussed.
9. Mr. Sandys said he well understood the position of the
Australian Govermlont; and he appreciated its understanding of
Britain's problem. It was a: reed that these talks, which had been
conducted in a m., st helpful and constructive spirit on both
sides, had resulted in a more complete understanding of the
inportant and corplex issues involvod.
CANBERRA, 11th July, 1961. 



PRESS CONFEliNCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. 3. MENZIES, IN SYDNEY 4 P. M.
JULY. 12TH. 1961
PRIME MINISTER: I think it might perhaps be a good idea you have
all had the communique, or your principals have if I
just said something about the background of this matter;
in fact, if it does not sound too tedious, something
about the history of the matter, because it is some
years now since the Common Market was established in
Europe by the six powers, that is to say, Germany, France,
Italy and the Benelux powers we sometimes call it the
Treaty of Rome. But one of the essential elements in it
is that over a period of years they are aimed at internal
free trade and a common external customs tariff.
When the Common Market was established, when the
negotiations were in hand, Great Britain did not decide
to go in; she had remained out, as a matter of judgment
Since then she has established a European Free Trade
Association which includes six other European countries,
including the Scandinavian countries. Now, she has not
decided that was made clear to us by Mr. Sandys she
has not decided to , o in or to negotiate her way in, but
she has been rethinking the matter; and a decision as to
whether they should negotiate to go in will be taken one
way or the other after Mr. Sandys returns to London, and
after other Ministers who have been visiting other
Commonwealth countries have returned to London.
So the whole thing is quite tentative at the present
time. And I think it is proper to say, because there is
a little misunderstanding about it, that Mr. Sandys did
not come out to ask us to say " Yes" to go into the Common
Market, or to approve of Great Britain negotiating to go
into the Common Market, because Great Britain herself has
not yet taken a decision. What he was really doing was
informing us of the various considerntions that were
operating in the minds of the British Government. And we
welcomed this because although consultation in principle
has been accepted now for the last two or three years,
this was in fact the first occasion when we have had any
close ministerial discussion about the matter in principl
And we therefore welcomed his visit and we enjoyed it.
That would explain to you why, in the course of the
communique we have said " This is a matter for Great
Britain to decide", which it clearly is. It is Great
Britain that may or may not go into the Common Markot;
it is not Australia or New Zealand. Therefore a
decision for Great Britain. That being so we have no
status to object or to do anything else about it except
to exchange our ideas and do what we can to protect our
own interests. And a good deal of our discussion took
place in relation to the w. rays and means of protecting our
own interests should the United Kingdom decide to
negotiate for entry to the Conmon Market.
The reason for that is very clear, of course.
Suppose Great Britain . rent into the Common Market
unconditionally I mean on exactly the sane footing as
Germany or France or Italy or the rest then, in due
course, perhaps over a period of seven or eijht years,
there should be internal free trade. And if Great Britain
went in, it is reasonable to assuno some of the
Scandinavian countries : uald go in, including for
example, Denmark. And if Great Britain went in
unconditionally and I repeat, that is to say on the
same footing as the others then Danish butter would 
find free entry into the United Kingdom, but Australian
butter and Now Zealand butter would be net by the common
tariff barrier and would throfore pay duty, which would
seen to us to be rather an unhappy result for an industry
which is substantial in Australia but probably vital
in Now Zealand as an export industry.
And in the same way wheat from France, France being
a great wheat producer, woud move into England duty
free while wheat from Australia would lose its present
advantage of going in without duty.
Dried fruits very important in various areas of
Australia would lose their preferences, because they
would be all subject to the common tariff barrier. But
dried fruits from say Greece Greece having already
decided to be an associate member of the Common Market
would move in duty free.
These of course, are tremendously grave matters for
us, not natters to be disposed of merely in a sentimental
way. They have very grave implications for our own
business. And one of the things that we set out to do
was to establish that these particular interests were not
to be overlooked in any negotiations. That is why you
will have noticed in the course of the communique that
in any such negotiations various Australian export
industries would be involved and Australia should be in a
position to negotiate direct on Australia's ochalf when
dutails and arrangements affecting items of Australian
trade wore being discussed.
dhat that means is that we did not feel that the
case for our export primary industries could be put by
anybody as well as by Australia, because we are familiar
with the problem. Therefore it was not enoughi to be
consulted in the distance; it was essential thrt in case
the British Governiont decided to ne3otiate rnd I
repeat it has not yet decided in case it decided to
negotiate, then we would be, so to speak, in the room, and
taking a hand in the discussion when wheat woul. be
debated, or dried fruit, or butter, or whatever these
corumodities might be.
Of course the United Kingdom cannot guarantee that
that would be so because if it decides to negotiate it
will negotiate with the six nations of the Common Market
as a group, and if they say " No, nobody else is going to
be in the actual n. eootiation", then that, no doubt, will
be conclusive. But I am sure that so far as Great
Britain is concerned, if it does decide to negotiate, it
will do all it can to secure our presence and our
participation when those particular matters are under
consideration. That, I think, will explain why it is that we have
observed a fairly cautious position in these discussions,
not making ourselves a party to a decision it is not
our decision to make but doing all that we can to
protect our own loeitimate interests should the decision
be taken. And that, I an sure, is what the people of
Australia would expect us to do.
I do n-t think there is any trouble about that, so
far as our friends in the United Kingdom are concerned.
I think that represented in the long run a corinon and
cheerfully accepted view of the position. 
But there is one matter, difference of opinion
that enmrges that I would like to say sorething about,
and that is the difference on the political implications.
The Treaty of Rome is, in its torns, an economic treaty.
It covers a variety of matters. I have mentioned two of
the great ones, internal free trade and common external
tariff. It also provides for machinery for common
working standards, for social services. It really covers
a groat deal of the economic field in these countries;
and, of course, if Great Britain becomes a eomber it will
correspondingly cover a great deal of the same field in
Great Britain.
de think, and indeed we think that the Coimon Market
countries think, that the political implications of this
are very great. Indeed I think it is one of the proper
objects of the exercise. They did not engage in the
Treatu yf Rome just because of tariffs and trade;
but they were contenplating that as
time went on because of all this common ground, they
would become more and more of a political unity, not
necessarily one nation, not necessarily a fodeortion in
the sense that we understand it, but sonmthing of what I
will call broadly, a political unity, a get together
politically, with a growing tendency to have cormnon
policies, to thrash then out. So that in the result you
would have these European nations together constituting
more people than the United States of JAmrica and
therefore representing what might loosely be described as
a third power in the world.
That is a view strongly held by a number of
European statesmen. I offer no cormxent on it. But we
think that the political tendencies in the Conuon Market
must be in that direction. How far it will go is
anybody's guess.
And under those circumstancos we simply observe in
point of fact, that we do not think the position as
between Great Britain and the other Conmonwealth
countries in the political field remains unaltered. It
is very difficult for no to believe that Great Britain,
intimately involved in European politics, for the first
time this is not the old 19th century balance of power
business it is very hard to believe that her position
in relation to the Commonwalth countries, when we meet
at Prime Ministers' Conferences, would remain so
individual and detached as it is today.
Now I am not saying that is good, bad or
indifferent; neither my colleaguesnor I sit in judjient
on that matter. But we record our view that the
Commonwealth will not quite be the sane. Mr. Sandys
felt, and no do. ubt with groat conviction, that none of
these things would aff-ct the Conmonwealth relationship.
Well, we think it will.
Whether that is a good thing or a bad thing depends
on a choice th: at it is no) t for us to make the choice
between Great Britain effectively participating in a
powerful European group of nations in the international
political field, but with a looser association with the
Comonwealth, or a Great 3Britain refraining from the
European Association and ul intaining her full contact
with the Commonwalth. 
I see, and my colleagues see, great nerit,
politically, in a European association. We hardly need
to be persuaded that it has ; reat importance. But we
simply recird our view and we are bound to record that
view that this will lead to a loosening of the Conronwealth
relations. That nay be a price worth paying for
the European association; I an not endeavouring to sit
in judjnent on that. Indeed, only tine will provide an
answer to it.
So that the difference is a difference of opinion;
it does not represent any vital matter. Indeed, it is
very agreeable to me that in a natter in which Great
Britain has tremendous interest some of her people, at
any rate -without attributing a judl4ent to their Cabinetthought
that for Great Britain to be in the Cornon Market
representing an enlarged hone market of about 250 million
people, would greatly increase her copetitive position,
her competitive capacity in the world. That is a very
le,: itimate argument. Ther-are, of course, arguments
the other way, that British industry will be subject
before long, to the full blast of continental competition
in Great Britain itself. And I an relieved to know that
I certainly do not have to decide that matter.
But allowing for all these things, the remarkable
thing about the discussion and about the corm. unique is
not that it exhibits so many differences but that it
exhibits so few. The one difference that I have
referred to is the difference of opinion. And that is,
of course, a matter of historic judgiont. We are all
entitled to our own views on that. I used to think I
knew a lot about the Commonwealth I an not so sure now.
But all that is a matter of judgment. As for the rust,
it has been agreed by then that so far as they can bring
it about we will have every opportunity to defend these
interests of ours if they Jecide to go into the
negotiation. It has been a very interesting experienco. We have
had close debates, as you night have gathered, not from
the speculative stories that appear, but from the sheer
amount of time that we have occupied in the course of
them. Would anybody like to put a question ' o me? I
am sorry to have spoken so long.
QUESTION: Was there any indication of what the time-table
night be, the decision-making process?
PRIME MINISTER: I think only in this sense, that the six countries
of the Cormon Market have not yet net to discuss
agricultural policy and they are liable to * lo that
before the end of the year. A'nd I think tihre is a
German election in the next two or three months. If
negotiations were to be engaged in it r: ight be more
useful to engage in then before the aricultural policy
talks, while the whole thing is fluid. That is the one
thing that suggests that there will not be too much
delay before a decision is taken.
QUESTION: Can you tell us what present nati: ns in the Group,
if any, entered on a conditional basis?
PRIME MINISTER: The original six cmebers are all in under the pure
terns of the Treaty of Rome. There are two countries
that have either acceded or are about to, not as full
members but as associate members Greece and Turkey
and if they do, they will come in on conditions I do
Y 
not carry then in nind but they will be allowed to cone
in as associate ro. mbors because they are not highly
industrialised countries. But there is no possibility
of Great Britain coning in as an associate reomber
because she is a very highly industrialised country.
Therefore whatever conditions she might establish will
have to be established by way of derogation fron the
Treaty of Rome and securing the full agreement of the
other six nations.
QUESTION: What would you consider, yourself, to be the
biggest danger to Australia by Great Britain joining the
Common Market? Would it be a weakening of political
ties with Great Britain, or just hardship?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you have oversimplified that question.) uare
speaking of joining the Ccnmon Market without conditions?
PRESSMAN: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: If she joined the Conmon Market without conditions
that would represent a tremendous blow to our export
trade running into millions of pounds. It would
represent for Now Zealand I do not want to speak for
them here an almost fatal blow having regard to the
size of the dairy product industry throughout the
country. But whether it would mean the destruction of
this trade or the substantial nodification of it there
c. n be no doubt it would impose a great hardship before
very long on half a dozen of our priary industries of
some significance. That is assuming they went in
unconditionally. But I do not think they will o3 in
unconditionally. I think Great Britain is determined
to do overything she can to get conditions which will
give, at any rate, some measure of protection to the
ComLonwealth trade. It may not be 100 percent; but some
substantial measure. She has made that clear to us.
But she will then, of course, have an awkward docision
to make, because if, having gone into negotiations she
finds there is nothing doing, that it has to be
unconditional, then she nay feel compelled to withdraw
from the negotiations and abandon the whole thing, give
up what she otherwise feels to be economic advantages; or
alternatively, cone to the grin choice about our own
Cormonwealth trade. But we will not anticipate that yet.
QUESTION: You have explained that the A'ustralian Cabinet did
not think the case of Australian exports could be put by
anybody as well as ourselves. I wonder whether that
implies the British Government felt it would like to put
the case of our exports on our behalf?
PRIME MINISTER: No it does not imply that. The nmoment we raised
this matter they areeod at once that after all our own
people, whose business it is, whose interest it is,
naturally can put that case in the most c. mplete way.
There was no suggestion they wanted to put it on our
behalf.
QUESTION: Do you think there is a genuine risk to the present
political structure of the Coruaonwealth if Britain were
to join the Common Market unconditionally?
PRIME MINISTERI Yes, that is what we have s. id. This is not a risk
of break-up. But what we say is that it would represent
in our opinion in due course, a real modification in the
present Cornonwealth relations. 
QUESTION: What major effects do you think there would be on
the political economy?
PRIME MINISTER: I would not guess. All I say is there would be some.
QUESTION: Does the Australian Government intend to apply for
membership of the Common Market?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I an in enough trouble now with the
Australian manufacturers, but if you are going to suggest
Australia should get into a common free trade area I will
have to take to the bush.
QUESTION: You talk about the fact that some people in the
United Kingdom Cabinet look to their market for their
market for their produce and you suggested that there
mig. ht equally be the possibility of greater cnopetition
if the United Kingdom... Do you find any difforence betwea
the view that our own Government took about advantages
and disadvantages with the United Kingdom Government
econor. ically within the Common Market and what they were
thinking?
PRIME MINISTER: I do not think we were thinking along identical
lines, no. It is very hard to judge. We are dealing
with one Minister, although he is a very distinguished
visitor, a distinguished Minister. He, I think, was
* I hope I can say this without putting things into his
mouth pretty conscious of the economic advantages; we
on the other hand tended to think they night be overestimated
and the econorc dadvantages might turn out to
be rather greater. But we are not judging that from
this distance. They are pretty old, as a country; I
think that we will leave that decision to then.
QUESTION: Australia has insisted on the right to negotiate
direct with Common Market countries if Britain j; ins.
What form will those ne . otiations take and what would be
their objective?
PRIME MINISTER: I an sorry, I thought I had explained that. Before
Britain decides to enter the Co. mmon Market she will
negotiate. Thus there are two decisions to be made.
First, a decision to negotiate. W4hen she joos in to
noeotiation one of the things she will rant to discover
is what terms and conditions can be got in relation to
Comm: onwealth trade, the existing pattern of Co= nnonwealth
trade, and preferences.
It is at that stage when these matters are being
discussed that we would wish to be present to defend our
own interests or present our own interests. Whether we
can be, or not, will depend upon Great Britain,
If, when the negotiations are over, the osition is
such that Great Britain has to reconsider the : whole
matter she will then decide whether or not to go into the
Common Market on such terms as nay have boon arranged in
the noeotiation, or unconditionally, if no terms have
been arranged. That will be a major decision she will
have to take and she will take that after the stage of
no otiation has been concluded. And I dare say at the
time I am sure at that time when all the negotiations
are over I do not imagine for one monent that she
would arrive at that great crucial decision without some
form of consultation with the Cornonwealth, either
through a top level conference or otherwise. 
QUESTION: Having in nind the economic and political facts of
life in Europe do you entertain any real hope that we can
arrive at conditions that will be acceptable to Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I be to be excused from answering that question. I
feel all they want is the best chance they can get if
they decide to noctiate.
QUESTION: Whatever Britain does about the Cornnon Market do you
feel Australians will have to depend more on Asia in the
future for markets than Europe?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I would prefer to see this present exercise
through before raising ny sights too high.
QUESTION: The Australian Government has said that it is not
entitled to raise any objections to the opening of
negotiations but it does not approve of the opening of
negotiations.
PRIME MINISTER: Do not twist it in that way. What I said was we
were not entitled to object because this was a matter
for the decision of the United Kingdom, not for us; that
* this was not to be interpreted as an approval. That is
a different natter.
QUESTION: Sone people wonder why we could not approve of the
mere opening of nojotiations as distinct from deciding,
Ssince having detormined on the course negotiations w-uld
take the opening of it had to be rather explicitly said
to be not approved, by the phrasing of the connunique.
PRIME MINISTER: I have already given ny reasons for that. I would
not have thou.: ht there was ruch nysteiy about it. I an
not in the habit of objecting to something that is not
within my jurisdiction.
QUESTION: Having in nind the views stated about the effect on
Connonwealth trade do you think the effects to Australia
would be greater politically or econonically?
PRIME MINISTE: Both, if the contingency occurred. But I still say
that I do not think it will.
QUESTION: You said if Britain joined unconditionally it wuld
be a trenendous blow. The figure of œ 170n. has already
been quoted. Does the Governnont agree that that is the
maximun?
PRIME MINISTER: Do not ask nm about the figuros. My colleague Mr.
McEwen, has a press talk arranged on this matter ana will
be able to give precise figures in relation to precise
industries, because they were all to be under analysis.
I do not carry those in ny nind. But I know it is very
substantial and I know that overall that total has been
referred to.
QUESTION: Will you be puttin; in train any feelers to European
countries as to whether they would take Austialian products?
PRIME MINISTER: We will not feel inhibited fron doing wthat we would
normally do. The Trade Department normally has a few
discussions going on with various countries either to
renew trade treaties or something of that kind. I would
not regard the Department of Trade as being prohibited by
these discussions from following the course they would
otherwise follow on these natters.
CANBERRA, 13th July, 1961. 
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, IN SYDNEY 4 P. M.
JULY, 12TH, 1961
PRIME MINISTEi: I think it might perhaps be a good idea you have
all had the communique, or your principals have if I
just said something about the background of this matter;
in fact, if it does not sound too tedious, something
about the history of the matter, because it is some
years now since the Common Market was established in
Europe by the six powers, that is to say, Germany, France,
Italy and the Benelux powers we sometimes call it the
Treaty of Rome. But one of the essential elements in it
is that over a period of years they are aimed at internal
free trade and a common external customs tariff.
When the Common Market was established, when the
negotiations were in hand, Great Britain did not decide
to go in; she had remained out, as a matter of judgment
Since then she has established a European Free Trade
Association which includes six other European countries,
including the Scandinavian countries. Now, she has not
decided that was made clear to us by Mr. Sandys she
has not decided to -o in or to negotiate her way in, but
she has been rethinking the matter; and a decision as to
whether they should negotiate to go in will be taken one
way or the other after Mr. Sandys returns to London, and
after other Ministers who have been visiting other
Commonwealth countries have returned to London.
So the whole thing is quite tentative at the present
time. And I think it is proper to say, because there is
a little misunderstanding about it that Mr. Sandys did
not come out to ask us to say " Yes? to go into the Common
Market, or to approve of Great Britain negotiating to go
into the Common Market, because Great Britain herself has
not yet taken a decision. What he was really doing was
informing us of the various considerations that were
operating in the minds of the British Government. And we
welcomed this because although consultation in principle
has been accepted now for the last two or three years,
this was in fact the first occasion when we have had any
close ministerial discussion about the matter in principb.
And we therefore welcomed his visit and we enjoyed it.
That would explain to you why, in the course of the
communique we have said " This is a matter for Great
Britain to decide", which it clearly is. It is Great
Britain that may or may not go into the Common M4crkot;
it is not Australia or New Zealand. Therefore a
decision for Great Britain. That being so we have no
status to object or to do anything else about it except
to exchange our ideas and do what we can to protect our
own interests. And a good deal of our discussion took
place in relation to the . rays and means of protecting our
own interests should the United Kingdom decide to
negotiate for entry to the Cormmon Market.
The reason for that is very clear, of course.
Suppose Great Britain . rent into the Cormmon Market
unconditionally I mean on exactly the :; ame footing as
Germany or France or Italy or the rest then, in due
course, perhaps over a period of seven or eijht years,
there should be internal free trade. And if Groat Britain
wont in, it is reasonable to assume sone of the
Scandinavian countries w: ould go in, including for
example, Denmark. And if Great Britain wen in
unconditionally and I repeat, that is to say on the
same footing as the others then Danish butter would 
find free entry into the United Kingdom, but Australian
butter and Now Zealand butter would be met by the common
tariff barrier and would threfore pay duty, which would
seem to us to be rather an unhappy result for an industry
which is substantial in Australia but probably vital
in New Zealand as an export industry.
And in the same way wheat from France, France being
a groat wheat producer, wou. d move into England duty
free while wheat from Australia would lose its present
advantage of going in without duty.
Dried fruits very important in various areas of
Australia would lose their preferences, because they
would be all subject to the common tariff barrier. But
dried fruits from say Greece Greece having already
decided to be an associate member of the Common Market
would move in duty free.
These of course, are tremendously grave matters for
us, not natters to be disposed of merely in a sentimental
way. They have very grave implications for our own
business. And one of the things that we set out to do
was to establish that these particular interests were not
to be overlooked in any negotiations. That is why you
will have noticed in the course of the commuunique that
in any such negotiations various Australian axport
industries would be involved and Australia should be in a
position to negotiate direct on Australia's oehalf when
datails and arrangements affecting items of Australian
trade were being discussed.
dhat that means is that we did not feel that the
case for our export primary industries could be put by
anybody as well as by Australia, because we are familiar
with the problem. Therefore it was not enough to be
consulted in the distance; it was essential thi. t in case
the British Government decided to negotiate and I
repeat it has not yet decided in case it decided to
negotiate, then we would be, so to speak, in the room, and
taking a hand in the discussion when wheat wouli be
debated, or dried fruit, or butter, or whatever these
comrtodities might be.
Of course the United Kingdom cannot guarantee that
that would be so because if it decides to neootiate it
will negotiate with the six nations of the Common Market
as a group, and if they say " No, nobody else is going to
be in the actual negotiation", then that, no doubt, will
be conclusive. But I am sure that so far as Great
Britain is concerned, if it does decide to negotiate, it
will do all it can to secure our presence and our
participation when those particular matters are under
consideration. That, I think, will explain why it is that we have
observed a fairly cautious position in those discussions,
not making ourselves a party to a decision it is not
our decision to make but doing all that we can to
protect our own legitimate interests should the decision
be taken. And that, I am sure, is what the people of
Australia would expect us to do.
I do njt think there is any trouble about that, so
far as our friends in the United Kingdom are concerned.
I think that represented in the long run a common and
cheerfully accepted view of the position. 
But there is one matter, a difference of opinion
that enmrges, that I would like to say something abou,
and that is the difference on the political implications.
The Treaty of Rome is, in its torms, an economic treaty.
It covers a variety of natters. I have mentioned two of
the great ones, internal free trade and common external
trriff. It also provides for machinery for common
working standards, for social services. It really covers
a groat deal of the econonic field in these countries;
and, of course, if Great Britain becomes a nomber it will
correspondingly cover a great deal of the same field in
Great Britain.
ve think, and indeed we think that the Connon Market
countries think, that the political implications of this
are very great. Indeed I think it is one of the proper
objects of the exercise. They did not engage in the
Treatu yf Rone just because of tariffs and trade;
but they were contemplating that as
time went on because of all this comnon ground, they
would become more and more of a political unity, not
necessarily one nation, not necessarily a federation in
the sense that we understand it, but sonething of what I
will call broadly, a political unity, a get together
politically, with a growing tendency to have cornon
policies, to thrash then out. So that in the result you
would have these European nations togethor constituting
more people than the United States of A( orica and
therefore representing what night loosely be described as
a third power in the world.
That is a view strongly held by a nunber of
European statesmen. I offer no cor. mcnt on it. But we
think that the political tendencies in the Connon Market
must be in that diroetion. How far it will go is
anybody's guess.
And under those circumstancos we sirply observe in
point of fact, that we do not think the position as
between Great Britain and the other Connionwealth
countries in the political field remains unaltered. It
is very difficult f-r no to believe that Great Britain,
intimately involved in European politics, for the first
tine this is not the old 19th century balance of power
business it is very hard tj believe that her position
in relation to the Connonwalth countries, when we neet
at Prime Ministers' Conferences, would rem. ain so
individual and detached as it is today.
Now I an not saying that is good, bad or
indifferont; neither ny colleaguesnor I sit in judjnent
on that matter. But we record our view that the
Commonwealth will not quite be the sane. Mr. Sandys
felt, and no doubt with groat conviction that none of
these things would affect the Comnonwealth relationship.
Well, we think it will.
Whether that is a good thing or a bad thing depends
on a choice that it is n. t for us to make the choice
between Great Britain effJectively participating in a
powerful European group of nations in the international
political field, but with a looser association with the
C: o onweoalth, or a Gre. t Britain refraining fron the
European Association and maintaining her full contact
with the Crnononwealth. 
I see, and my colleagues see, great merit,
politically, in a European association. * Ve hardly need
to be persuaded that it has rreat importance. But we
simply record our view and we are bound to record that
view that this will lead to a loosening of the Commonwealth
relations. That nay be a price worth paying for
the European association; I an not endeavouring to sit
in judjgent on that. Indeed, only tine will provide an
answer to it.
So that the difference is a difference of opinion;
it does not represent any vital natter. Indeed, it is
very agreeable to ne that in a natter in which Great
Britain has troe. ondous interest some of her people, at
any rate without attributing a jud. pont to their Cabinctthought
that for Great Britain to be in the Connon Market
representing an enlarged home market of about 250 million
people, would greatly increase her competitive position,
her competitive capacity in the world. That is a very
legitimate argument. There. are, of course, arguments
the other way, that British industry will be subject
before long, to the full blast of continental competition
in Great Britain itself. And I an relieved to know that
I certainly do not have to decide that matter.
But allowing for all those things, the remarkable
thing about the discussion and about the cor. m-unique is
not that it exhibits so many differences but that it
exhibits so few. The one difference that I have
referred to is the difference of opinion. And that is,
of course, a matter of historic jud.. iont. We are all
entitled to our own views on that. I used to think I
knew a lot about the Commonwealth I an not so sure now.
But all that is a matter of judj ent. As for the rest,
it has been agreod by them that so far as they can bring
it about we will have every opportunity to defend these
interests of ours if they decide to go into the
negotiation. It has been a very intoresting experience. iWe have
had close debates, as you might have gathered, not from
the speculative stories that appear, but from the sheer
amount of time that we have occupied in the course of
them. Would anybody like to put a question ' o mn? I
am sorry to have spoken so long.
QUESTION: Was there any indication of what the time-table
night be, the decision-naking process?
PRIME MINISTER: I think only in this sense, that the six countries
of the Cormon Market have not yet met to discuss
agricultural policy and they are liable to Io that
before the end of the year. And I think there is a
German election in the next two or three months. If
nugotiations were to be engaged in it might be more
useful to engage in them before the aricultural policy
talks, while the whole thing is fluid. That is the one
thing that suggests that there will not be too much
delay before a decision is taken.
QUESTION: Can you tell us what present nations in the Group,
if any, entered on a conditional basis?
PRIME MINISTER: The original six members are all in under the pure
terns of the Treaty of Rome. There are two countries
that have either acceded or are about to, not as full
members but as associate members Greece and Turkey
and if they do, they will come in on conditions I do 
not carry them in nind but they will be allowed to cone
in as associate members because they are not highly
industrialisod countries. But there is no possibility
of Great Britain coning in as an associate aomber
because she is a very highly industrialised country.
Therefore whatever conditions she might establish will
have to be established by way of derogation from the
Treaty of Rome and securing the full agreement of the
other six nations.
QUESTION: What would you consider, yourself, to be the
biggest danger to Australia by Great Britain joining the
Common Market? Would it be a weakening of political
ties with Great Britain, or just hardship?
PRIME MINISTER: I think you have oversimplified that question. ouare
speaking of joining the Ccmron Market without conditions?
PRESSMAN: Yes.
PRIME MINISTER: If she joined the Corlnon Market without conditions
that would represent a tremendous blow to our export
trade running into millions of pounds. It would
represent for New Zealand I do not want to speak for
them here an almost fatal blow having regard to the
size of the dairy product industry throughout the
country. But whether it would mean the destruction of
this trade or the substantial modification of it there
cp. n be no doubt it would impose a great hardship before
very long on half a dozen of our primary industries of
some significance. That is assuming they went in
unconditionally. But I do not think they will go in
unconditionally. I think Great Britain is determined
to do everything she can to get conditions which will
give, at any rate, sone measure of protection to the
Commonwealth trade. It may not be 100 percent; but some
substantial measure. She has made that clear to us.
But she will then, of course, have an awkward decision
to make, because if, having gone into negotiations she
finds there is nothing doing, that it has to be
unconditional, then she may feel compelled to withdraw
from the no tiations and abandon the whole thing, give
up what she otherwise feels to be economic advantages; or
alternatively, cone to the grin choice about our own
Conmonwealth trade. But we will not anticipate that yet.
QUESTION: You have explained that the Australian Cabinet did
not think the case of Australian exports could be put by
anybody as well as ourselves. I wonder whether that
implies the British Govecrnment felt it would like to put
the case of our exports on our behalf?
PRIME MINISTER: No, it does not imply that. The moment we raised
this matter they agreed at once that after all our own
people, whose business it is, whose interest it is,
naturally can put that case in the most c) i: pletc way.
There was no suggestion they wanted to put it on our
behalf.
QUESTION: Do you think there is a genuine risk to the present
political structure of the Cor-u-nonwealth if Britain were
to join the Common Market unconditionally?
PRIME MINISTERi Yes, that is what wo have said. This is not a risk
of break-up. But what we say is that it would represent
in our opinion in due course, a real nodification in the
present Corronwealth relations. 
QUESTION: What major effects do you think there would be on
the political econony?
PRIME MINISTER: I would not guess. All I say is there would be some.
QUESTION: Does the Australian Government intend to apply for
membership of the Comnon Market?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I an in enough trouble now with the
Australian manufacturers, but if you are going to suggest
Australia should get into a cormon free trade area I will
have to take to the bush.
QUESTION: You talk about the fact that sone people in the
United Kingdom Cabinet look to their market for their
market for their produce and you suggested that there
night equally be the possibility of greater cnlpetition
if the United Kingdom.. Do you find any difforence betwem
the view that our own Governrent took about advantages
and disadvantages with the United Kingdom Government
economically within the Conmon Market and what they were
thinking?
* PRIME MINISTER: I do not think we were thinking along identical
lines, no. It is very hard to judge. We are dealing
with one Minister, although he is a very distinguished
visitor, a distinguished Minister. He, I think, was
I hope I can say this without putting things into his
mouth pretty conscious of the economic advantages; we
on the other hand tended to think they might be overestimated
and the econonrdc dvantages might turn out to
be rather greater. But we are not judging that from
this distance. They are pretty old, as a country; I
think that we will leave that decision to then.
QUESTION: Australia has insisted on the right to negotiate
direct with Conrmon Market countries if Britain joins.
What form will those ne ; otiations take and what would be
their objective?
PRIME MINISTER: I am sorry, I thought I had explained that. Before
Britain decides to enter the Common Market she will
neootiate. Thus there are two decisions to be made.
First, a decision to negotiate. LJhen she _ oes in to
neootiation one of the things she will rant to discover
is what terms and conditions can be got in relation to
Commonwealth trade, the existing patteon of Commonwealth
trade, and preferences.
It is at that stage when these matters are being
discussed that we would wish to be present to defend our
owm interestsor prosent our own interests. Whcther we
can be, or not, will depend upon Great Britaino
If, when the negotiations are over, the -sition is
such that Great Britain has to reconsider the whole
matter she will then decide whether or not to go into the
Common Market on such terns as may have been arranged in
the negotiation, or unconditionally, if no torms have
been arranged. That will be a major decision she will
have to take and she will take that after the stage of
negotiation has been concluded. And I dare say at the
time I am sure at that time when all the negotiations
are over I do not imagine for one morent that she
would arrive at that great crucial decision without some
form of consultation with the Commonwealth, either
through a top level conference or otherwise. 
QUESTION: Having in nind the economic and political facts of
life in Europe do you entertain any real hope that we can
arrive at condi'tions that will be acceptable to Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I boeg to be excused from answering that question. I
feel all they want is the best chance they can get if
they decide to negotiate.
QUESTION: Whatever Britain does about the Cor. non Market do you
feel Australians will have to depend more on Asia in the
future for markets than Europe?
PRIME MINISTER: I think I would prefer to see this present exorcise
through before raising ry sights too high.
QUESTION: The Australian Government has said that it is not
entitled to raise any objections to the opening of
negotiations but it does not approve of the opening of
negotiations.
PRIME MINISTER: Do not twist it in that way. What I said was we
were not entitled to object because this was a matter
for the decision of the United Kingdom, not for us; that
this was not to be interpreted as an approval. That is
a different matter.
QUESTION: Sone people wonder why we could not approve of the
mere opening of njotiations as distinct fron deciding,
since having determined on the course negotiations would
take the opening of it had to be rather explicitly said
to be not approved, by the phrasing of the cormunique.
PRIME MINISTER: I have already given ny reasons for that. I would
not have thought there was much nystery about it. I am
not in the habit of objecting to sonething that is not
within my jurisdiction.
QUESTION: Having in nind the views stated about the effect on
Cornonwealth trade do you think the effects to Australia
would be greater politically or econonically?
PRIME MINISTEiR: Both, if the contingency occurred. But I still say
that I do not think it will.
QUESTION: You said if Britain joined unconditionally it wuld
be a tremendous blow. The figure of œ 170m. has already
been quoted. Does the Governnent agree that that is the
naximun?
PRIME MINISTER: Do not ask me about the figures. My colleague Mr.
McEwen, has a press talk arranged on this natter and will
be able to give precise figures in relation to precise
industries, because they were all to be under analysis.
I do not carry those in ny nind. But I know it is very
substantial and I know that overall that total has been
referred to.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE
CANBERR, Will you be putting in train any feelers ' o European
countries as to whether they would take Austialian products?
ER: We will not fool inhibited fron doing what we would
normally do. The Trade Department normally has a few
discussions going on with various countries either to
renew trade treaties or something of that kind. I would
not regard the Department of Trade as being prohibited by
these discussions from following the course they would
otherwise follow on these matters.
13th July, 1961. 



theh ~ iis 12" m 1th e R-t. don
SirYou GrcegChief Justioe, Your œ xaellency and laies and
I think this is orbeof thoe. occasions when,, as an ertirely
lofl-oontntiouls person ( Ldaughter-) devoted to nothing more dopl; 3y then
to a quiet life, I ought to make a few points about some of the
people who are sitting at Lho top table* ( I'll say something, about
or,, 4hite later on and I hasten to say entirely In his fa. votxr)
( Laughter) But I do want to tell you ws crts of~ the charnel-house
knowing that tiny won't io a" y Aurther. ( LaughterJ
dhe. I accepted my Invitation to cam ho: e the fish at
last A--4 you know I did so under the f'ir Impression1 that,, like
so mayof you I would wear . a nice soft shirt and black tie and be at
home &amp; nd comfortable. Then Mr, President forzston niaid nio no,
Reialorcad concrete is the order of the day". ( Laughter)' I
protested und my secretary protested and the President ive all the
initation that a man of his typ~ e can of being the injured innocents
" kit xW dear fellow, Sir you kriov, we can't, you know.. 3o .1
devoted, or rather my wil. did, U l1a&amp; theo r this a eraiuoa to
, dotting to o:. cased in ooncrete. Arid when I arived 4areo t~ on-ight and
met Yaorton 1 rapped hiu on z-hu chtilf and&amp; I said 111? y dear bay you
are ieurinj a sami-stifi shirt". ( Laughter,, ajptfalse)
1Ito ofours. delighted I don't need to tell you to
arrive here tonight and see ' Uis 4ruce the Archibishop. kno there
is rjthing that urings sjah balm to he spirit of a man ohto is
occ; Asij! nally In trouable hiias&amp; f ( Lau. ghter) Well I don't need to
finish my : sentence do 11 Therefore i want to ; a~ y to Aj ruce the
. irohisbop " Thank you, 3' 4r thank you fbe hauIin been 30 onfsiderate
to ai mere Presbytei-ian, M. brins the union of the Chirches closer
and closer and closer." W ( Lau ghter) ( Applause)
Mind you Sir this Is not as irrelevunt. as you rway think
beciano after all the ohject of this magnificent associ itI ~ ri Is unity,
bringing us topther. aid I tell you that I ifouldn't be a tit
O sP. raerpsbriybteedr iaanf teCrh urthchis , g ettoti nfg'i ndto atheeth e4rh urchI ' voer nAlon ldaozudb t untod tthtee enormous
advtaU;_ of the ? resbyterian Church. G'-auehter) Juit anyhow we shall
see0 Then, of course, i have a particular pleasure In seeing here
a nan whom I may almost regard by nov asi an old friend -the very
disting~ ished Chief Justice of the Uited 3tates. ( Applause) 11e and
I have you will be surprised to know a certain amount in comn
because some years back we rlew together from Washington to [ allas,
You tier. then, Sir* Joyornor of California, a tremndous dignitary and
you rers oin., to a 3over ors' OCPnfereiiao 4 art t ne~ t ca other
and you vw re :' rightftli kind to me. I was deli.; hted, of ( xtrseq to
aee At that tim you, hav; ing been u lawyor, had tjOMQo a
deplorable politician and I, havine. been. a lavyer had Inecam a
deplorable politician. You havre the advantae of we beaine having
beom* a deplorable politician you rnot long theroaftor revert od to
your leial character ( Laughter) &amp; uid became u distingiisied Oxief
Justice something that thw e aJ profession in : tuzstr&amp;. tAi is
delighted to know Al11 never hiappen to me. (.:. au,; hterJ
fou know I can't InuAine a happier conjunction of the
plansts tian that Chief Justice 4arra should be here In kw 4alia,
not only because there is a great legal ooiiVertian but bec use there
is this 25th birthday party of tie Australian-Arwerican ' ssociz tion.
I have had the great opportunity and pleasure, now,, year by year, of 
eating at the expense of the Supreme Court of the United State s
havnA unch iith the Justices, may of them very great and lose
frinii ofmine and if i my say so Chief justice, nobody waud
axwoIfy in h Masell,* more than YOU do, all the qualities that we In
Australia think that w share with the United -ta tes of Amrica.
( Applause) As a matter of fact he oo4d pass ctf an an W~ stwellian.
rook at hsm6 dhat a wonderful leader of the Opposition he vould
make&amp; ( Laughter) Sir, as couldn' t be more delighted taan ' in . re to
see you here. AmV I know that it is the fashion to make speIvas on these
occasions in which all Is sweetness and light. All we fL-Ai t-o do is
to have a jolly gpod dinner* reaffirm our belief that we are exactly
the same as each other and po awy in a slightly mellow ' inse of
sentlmnt. 1 don't tink that is quite true. I huve bermn reminded
b~ V -tz. Yorstcui that I1 have, on quit* a few occusiorks spok. on to the
Anoriokn.. Autrallan ;. 4so01dtiun in Nov Ytork first 01' all imder my
frind ktobinss as Chairmant and then und.. r œ he auspices of that
taciturn friend of ours, Floyd Mli. And the only tim T ever omild
get Wing eff.-ctively was when Danny Weay was kind enaugh to em. w
Fro the mo~ ont I stood up he Interjaoted and -is had a aonfliet in
ihich I was so tolerably suossst-iJ. that he offurad ne a pisos in his
troupe. ( Laughter) B3ut there is a disposition to believe that thie 3ritishq the
Ameriftnsp thte Aastralians, the &amp;' ev4" ~ aandw-s vloever taey may be,
are bound to think the hae wy tweause they, uody speak then same
lan eaap. There are certaink dialectical difleranoes and certain
dl ftoiveces of dialect. Jut at; an rate, yes,, undersatand each
othar; we understand what the other mans is sain&amp;. ier'iaps V~ at Is
one o5 our dangers. It is easier to quaarrel with one -ithor : in a
ooimn~* languaip thun It Is to quarrel through an intarpretaro
( Applause) I know th; at b*,-ause I had an hour a~ nd a quarter with
Khra4shchev lcsz Rovember In Saw York and we ha4 an Interpreter and
we v'! re almost Imater" at the end of the tim. kkat that was because
the Interpreter took the crackle out of It, kJt of course you am
quarrel readily with people in your own langua gi; and of cnirse wie
have differences. The grea test thing that any '. ustraiian--i-~ -rican
Association, or American-. Autralian Assoclation, or Azaglom'werican
Association, has to discover and to preach is that we have masses of
differenoes* Your job * and my job and the job of every other person
of Sood wll and intelligence, is to bridle the difforeaoes, to ake
t'Veu Intelligible on eaOh side*
It is quite foolish for people to saf as 1 have Ieard then
saY " at of course we are bound to be friends becaiuse oa have the
samae system of Jovernment, . e haven't. Oe have utterly different
systems of jovrret. They say we must be friends because we have
the sawe history. Well. up to a point, we had the same history; up
to thew late part of the 18th oentury we had the samte history4 hut It
then becme a little abruptly divided into two streams. it do we
have the system of' Jovornmentt
I rind that I have had an iwense experieonce aov r f these
things around the world, and I also find that so many peopies for
example in Oreat BrItain, don't understayid thut vhat a . oaretary of
in' tatthee mpasyr esasye et oo af tChoen gPrreessssi, o natsl nCootc mtoit tebee tuankdeenr acsr osths-ee xraiinnaal~ tviioenw
of the Governument of the United States. Weg don' t have this kind of
thing. w not suimoned beftre Cmittees. and put on oath d told to
explain to them bow y mind Is working. Dear me,, tha, vouild be a
tasks wouldn't itT That would be to explore the 4nknown with a
venommnee 46 wait, under our system, until im have had discussions
in &amp; bine-t and then we announoe to some appropriate vehicle whiat the
polfi7 is.. But in the United States the whole business -I not
quarrelling about this; this is a system that thwy havre dovised and
that they understand -is to have these things thrashed outp to have
a man ao before a Comittee, to have him unsver, to have his, If you
likes think aloud about it* 
Ultimately bF this process, vbhich, frm the point of viev
of ow AMrican friends Is a superlatively ceoratic onat of
thrashing out pol icy, the result emrips and that Is dootrine fr the
United States. And Indods v4hen It amerjes, hov many times it has
beena so wonderful for the world* But under our system things are
done diff) rently. that is why when~ I an in Angland and I meet some
man idhm I know, soas W&amp; mit aed man, 9 he will soy to me * Did
you see what aoamidn utsh o r day In America? to. i kn o
can't trust those, fellovo. Heally that's too ridiculous old boy.
And Ttv to say " jut that is not his finalvword** I havebhad to
explain once or tvice Chief Justice, and I hope you will c, 3nfimu my
recollection on this, that If a 3earetary of State for exa--pl* is up
boebre a CnwItte. and somebody pruts a question and he says ' Wll,
perhapov I thin2k ythat might be the answer to thatst the
gontlemima from Vw Ndcahoma walumderbus' writes that doun and whIps
It outs that's In line vkh his policy. Ten mits later the man
b . fbrci the Comittee may be saying exoa tly the opposite -Is we all
do ewin we are thinking to oursolves and this produces in the other
parts of the &amp; igiish. speaing world u~ sort of confusion bocause we
just don't understa-or most of us don't. that we are dealing with
a differe* nt system of ( Ioverninnto
Now I do beg of all Australians, and of all z; hgl sh-5Man to
understand that the diffrerences in syatms of ; Iovor o : t can sasil
give rise to hostiles. where none ne" edmr at uli. 4ocaiuse of
all this I have had friends in the United : 3tatesq In 1asAIlgtcn wo
having read the remarks judo by a prominent private somber of tVW
House of Commns say OAh, that is what they iire thinking'. Whereas
of course,, if I mziy speak as an export as a~ former Leado.-of the
Opposition, what a member of the Opposition Was isn't vht the people
are ti-inking at all. ( Laughter, applause)
$ up SIr really what I want to smy to you ins let -as
recolpise our &amp; tfI~ erencs iet usovercome our diffe.-anose so that
the restating ste gill be al th grae. Jcauseunes
b,, tien the " Juited States and rho rest of our world, there ine
undarstariding, a knoviedse of differonces, a villingness to overom
them$ a ooncentration upon all the .; roat matters of unity, unless
this happens nobody will be atte. ading the 50th Anniversary of this
A" ssoo ition. Let us make no mistake about it. 4e are In a -mtld in which
all the forces that are hostile to our way of living are on the march,
They will never be not and defeated bF disunited peoplu. Jo. imr was
ever , on by disuni~ ted foroes, it Is our groat moral respxisibllity,,
not to be too clover, but to be unilted, to Ot topther, to say ' We
most ' 11u-e unity we must undorstand our areat urmoe". -And our
peat puarpose, sir, Is not one of ag rndsoment ( Jod kcnows it has
nothing to do with agprandisoemt our groat pirpose is to be
allowied to live as vs now live , as you now live In your country, freely,
happily* or unhappily, but to live ourz own lives. This is t great
Ii* In the wrd. And 1 would abandon proposition afteropasition,
myself I would concede point after point In ai disssion,
so Ion~ as I felt œ hat at the ultimate point we, and the inited
3ta tere# all the L'Oaflishmspoaking free, people around the 4orld, were
at ,~.( Applaue Sir$ the last thinj I want to say is this. This
Ass~ iation was established 25 years a~ p by m~ y Wrend itog a
man of enormous integrity of character and driving ability and
enthusiasm* ( Applause) I an perfeatly certain that when it bopn in
thoe days before the ~ ar, wen the United States didn't irnov so much
about us mid., to tell the truth we didn't know so nuch about the
United States -when it belan in 1936 1 am sure, that -9 hite was
sustained by his enthusiasm rather than by any cocrete -opeo He
has seen It pro-imr, during the war, something that made sich an
enormus difference to our relationships with the United -J1tates
postwar* where we find ourselves almost an favourite, neplawso I thiz* 
that is true in the Amerioan ind. And as you look baoN' omr
years of this I am sure that you, liko se, wiii &amp; Lv. immnee credit
to the man whose imagination foundbd it, and whose ability -zid iriwo
urougbt It on into its zatarity. ( A1ppla-Ase)
You are now 1going to here Mr. ",: mbassador !* bald and Ohn you
have liard him tw Is ur man tell vorth listening to, thioni rith his
peraission I ; WtI stand up a second time and ive you the toast of
the Issoci4tion. ( Applause) 



isCaI ay rim~ iHim1n miIIñ..% THE~ RT* HON. R* 0.
140-. rmlA2 OFFICIAL OsAk. N2 OF 'ñ Cli, SLOK9
ST. JQU3Hk' 1 COLA-; U4 SYNEY
Y( our Eminence ' Rev* Sro. Provincial, 3ro. Othmar, dir Jot'vi ( McCauley)
anid !.-dies anA p~ zitlement
I thiunk iI&amp; Iat to beoin by tolling you that the tory that
t~ le Wji. ro. krovincial, told about somebody fallin, ti'o ihh the
floor and thus JustifY'ing a now laboratory woke an echo i'i my Mind
beea-auo I onae had a Minister :~ or ,. he Army who ame along to me one
afternoon and put up a most unpassonod plea for a ne-r e: areantal
Hess at Duntroon. I was in a bad mood and I said " Hubjishi
! ioasensoi They can pt a lonig with the old one. " his is not a time
to3e ipendinj all this xonoyW Youz knw, the sort of thiinZ that
Primue ' inisters have to dio occasionally. ' hat night the old
.; jr. oants' Hess -* as burnt loidn. ( Laught.%: r) 1, sent for the Minister
the next mornine, and complimented him on a turn of speed that I hadn't
credited him jit-h. No4 I say no more than at; othe&amp;, riso It might
be woomnonly defama tory.
0 freeze ShNeo wo nI lyan timteer riIb lhya ves oerrvye r thstartu~ c yko u a hcaor ld Iotoi ay: A iitn caJyt dnehye ra aanndd
I will help you, if I may, by being tolerably brie r.
There are two things about this 3chool that 1 x i"--est we
sho-aid all have in = Ind. One of them consists of the C'atjju st
re+ 4erred to by 31r John, that ihon this school was established
years aio It was built and ostablished for far nore boys than then
appa-u-vd to be in sight for the sichool. I discovered i-ith ; reat
intercst this afternoon that this Is, today, the biggest boarding
schtool in the whole of husralia. N4ow this meanxs tliat 3) years alp
t. ere weore poopi. e who had couraj. 9t vision,, and izma? intin, who d
thians in a big way, who accepted the chance of failure -Ao cidnt
under-provide for the service of a sahool, but at iLhat 11me overprovided
ifor it, This is exactly the 3amI spirit as tVie spirit that
has set up in some of he old ajuntries of Surope maificent
cathedrals, wonderful structures 14roviding pluas of worship built at
a time wihen a moe'e handful of people were res.. onsible -2* r :~ eThis,
I . hIn,-c Is a atimulating thing.
It would not ha4e luappened if it had not ijen Zor the
profound belie f in the minds of the rounders of this sC. icol that . hey
were dealin,; with matters of eternal importance. The we o not just
providing a oartain amount. of instruction; they wore praviding
something that would be built into he character off every bo4 who ient
through the school. That was a ireat vision; and it was a vision
fall of a remarkably clear perception of the great truths of education.
I had occasion re -ently, to deliver a speech on broad
subjet of education in Adelaide before a learned body -nd In the
course of preparin for it i awo across one observa. tion thich I will
take leave to quote to you and I do this with all themw. r acooptance,
no 3. oabt, on your pa. t when I tell you these words : ell œ' rtn the lips
of father 31eson who Aad attended a Confer ' noe vftoh initiated the
movement that I was addrossia. Thuse are superb wordas " All
kn~ ovledp Is jrist to the mill of the educator; but unless he concerns
himself with his pupils' character he remains an infourmer, a source
of fr--t) s piled upon one another and imparted to a mind bot1i= ature
and untrained in their propdr use",
This Is the ; reat choice In educaition -the Vi~ ing of
infftmation the acquiring of a stock of facts,, the acquiri S, perhaps,
of some pross tonial skill1 some technical knowledje, Tha on the
one side,, by itself. And on the othei' side ' all that, and lioeiven too'. 
2.
All Mthat and the truiil Z In character Ahich, ofh u~ l sa~ xooLs 1 , reat
Church foundations like this are best qualified to provida. This Is,
I think, the jroat truth.
dhen wie iere bein~, told by the kl'ovincial abo : t the" e
dreadful, modern, yet historic episodes it kept oomind back irnto my
minJ -all the time NVh do these things happen?" Not be--uso in those
very eountries uen hadn't been to school, not because there Weret not
people or trained Intelligence on the iron&amp; side but be:!! use they
had rnot learned that civilization is in the heart and in Lhe soul,
they had not learned the ethical iraluea which are involved in
educatioun, That is why poopl trained In ethics bellorers in
relIiin believers in the Aliglty, have been ruthlessly aticked by
people Uwsaw in the. more reactionaries as if It coid be
reactionary to omsidr, t~ o study, to ponder ete~ rnal things. 1 an
as probably you knowl a tremendous believer In Church Schools. I donit
criticise any other kind of schod It Is not ovorybody who cain jo to
a school like this. I myself have had a variety or' expe1ri-noes in the
course of being educationally A4ragpd up In some fashion a kltate
school In a little country village# a Atate school in a bigj-er
provincial town, and a great Church school In a 0, 4at city and the
tlnIveralty, and so on . so that I have looked at this thing from the
inside* The more I look at it, and the, older I become, e more
conscious I an that the problemus of tho world today are prolems of
character more than of anything else, and the so" e thankful I am that
schools lik, this have been established and have flourishod anid are
making such a great contribution to the world.
There are very zmn people, clever people, I sappose, who
thi-ti -hat we are living In the golden age of eiviliztion. ' Why?
Jecause we can rzove through the air at speeds that nobody onoe thought
of; beaaus* vs can stand In frout of a thousand or two thousand
people bnd be heard comfortably ovor a public address sy ; tem; because
we can look at the television, or go back home in a car; 4 cause ye
can enjoy all thes thinp Ahich have all come, In ry owrn lifetime,
And this we are told, is the jolden ade of civilization. Firing a
man to Re. moon which no doubt will be the next piece of lunacy;
putting people into orbit* All this is great stuff dcver stuff,
no doubt very important stuff* iBut the odd thing, the thiing to
remember is that In this century, easily the cleverest corutury In
his tory In teohnoloar and In some aspects of science, wa have seen
more hatred and bitterness more war, more injustice, more, brutality,
than p. orhaps any oth-3r centZr in history was able to witness.* And
why? Because we have failed, broadly, to understand that the two
great tasks In lifo, the two ; reat tasks of civiliation, which, If
performed are the, proof of civilization, is that men should got to
understaa each other and value each other and be just to each other,
and tliat they should be united In a brotherhood which is the
inevitable result of the fatherhood of God. These ure, th e wat
eleamts In civilization; and Air I wou'd like to oon swato you
on We. nt, a director of a a~ ebool, which lives by these pri~ noiples, and
has put them Into practice, and has so, I believe, made 3 re
contribution to our country, 



P. Ii. r3 3~-j961
COMMONWEALTH CONTRIBUTION TO EMPIRE GAMES
Statement by thc! Prime Ministor, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Monzics
The Prie cMinisto-l', Mr. Menzies, has announced that
he has forwarded a cheque for Z100,000 to the Lord Mayor of
Perth, Sir Henry Howard, this being the Cofonwa-th
Govorn.-int's contribution towards the . xpensos of
conducting the British Empire and Corimonwealth Gcmos which
are to be held in Parth in November, 1962.
Mr. Mcnzios recalled that in l98 the Goverrmiont
had offered to roako this grant, prior to the selection of
Prth as the ve~ nue for the GanUIos.
C N3ESiRA
18th July, 1961.
sh.-



OFFICIAL OPENING OF GOODWJIN HOMS
CANBERRA, 22ND JULY, 1961
Speech by the Prime MinisterI the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. Freeth, Your Excellencies and ladies and gentlemen:
This is, I think, a very remarkable community effort. There
is a lot of self-help fi this matter; and there is some help by the
Government. Now that is as it should be. W~ e must marry these two
elements together. I ought to tell you, as I have told other people
on similar occasions, how this practice arose of the Government
subsidising such enterprises first œ E for and later on for œ 1.
We were approaching a Budget Session of the Cabinet, quite a
few years ago, and my wife had a very cold look in the eye at the
dinner table which is not unusual for wives but this time it had
a particular sort of frigidity about it. She was looking at me as
much as to say, " Well I can't ask you what you are doing about the
Budget, but I would like to say something". Understanding this I said,
" Now what have you got on your mind?" She said, " Do you know the
greatest problem, socially, that you have?" She paused for an answer.
I wasn't game to make one. Then she said, " The greatest problem is
the problem of housing people who are now old, who ought to be looked
after in circumstances that make them feel that they are living in a
home of their own". This was, I thought, a magnificent sugagestion. It
was translated into cold, financial terms; and so the Act was
introduced and the scheme has gone on. As you know the contribution
by the Government has been doubled.
What I like about it is this: when I was a schoolboy in
Ballarat I lived with an old and rather dour Scots grandmother, in a
house in which the only two books available for my consumption, apart
from such as I might smuggle in at the ripe age of about 13 or 14+, were
the Bible and Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress. Not a bad library if I may
say so, not at all bad. On the other side of the road, enclosed in a
corrugated iron fence, and housed in the most gloomy horrible looking
building was what was then called " the Benevolent Asylum". Even as a
boy it gave me the horrors. It was so " institutional" as we now say;
ihad a rusty look, and a rusty flavour about it. There were old
men, elderly men, and old women or elderly women who sort of sat around.
Such a condescension on the part of the communityl
Those days, I am delighted to know, have gone. All of a
sudden we have discovered that after all it isn't a crime to reach the
age of 65 I'm $ 6 myself and Iregard that as the smallest of my
crimes. But it is not given to everybody to be able to live in the
old family home, to live with the family in normal circumstances.
This is not easy. To be able to go, not into a sort of conglomerate
mass in which everybody feels organised, but to go into a place which
is one's own home there it is, the bedroom, the little sitting room,
the kitchenette, the garden outside this is of the essence of human
dignity. And I believe that one of the great things that our
generation has done and it has done dome pretty silly things in one
way or another has been to realise that you have to produce
circumstances in which people feel that they are living in their own
home, under their " own vine and fig-tree", in the old phrase, able to
live to themselves when they want to, able to move around and entertain,
or be entertained by their friends when they want to be. This, I
think, is magnificent. I have no doubt that in another 50 years time
what is being done in places like this will have been far excelled in a
thousand places all around Australia.
It is a very, very happy occasion for my wife who, as I say,
gave the initial -the word is " nudge" the initial nudge on this
matter some time ago. It is a * great pleasure for us to go around and
see places that strike one as not being the least that can be done, but
as the best that can b~ e done. There is such a difference, isn't there,
of atmosphere in all this? Not something done grudgingly, but
something done with a full understanding of human beings, and of human
values, 
Nov the last thing I want to say to you is this. References
have been made to the Department of the Interior which has done
magnificent work, and the Department of Works, to my expensive friend
Mr. Overall, the Chairman of the Commission Oh, by the way I wilil
interrupt myself. I must tell you something about Mr. Overall, do you
mind? Occasionally if you say to a Minister, or to a Department, * Yes,
we'll approve of that", nothing much happens for a month or two. But
when Mr. Overall has some proposal up, and it is usually a very
expensive one, before the Government and he knows it has been considered
in Cabinet that day, he will ring up the secretary to the Cabinet before
midnight and say, " How did my proposal get oh?" If the answer is " It
was approved", he has the bulldozers on the site at 8 o'clock next
morning. ( Applause) This dynamic drive has meant a great deal to
Canberra, and I am sure has meant a great deal to you.
But you may talk about the Department of the Interior you
may talk about Government policy, you may talk about the Capital
Commission, but there is no Government Department that administers
humanity. There is no DepartW nt of Humanity. There can't be. You
can't deal with kindness and goodwill and human understanding by
regulations or rules, or by a Department. Wihat you need to convert to
a place like this from being a collection of bricks and mortar, into
being a collection of individual homes is human understanding. And it
is on that side that those for whom Mr. Sautelle speaks matter so much:
people who have maintained their interest. I see a dozen of them here
this afternoon who as I know, have devoted a lot of their time and a
lot of their atteniion to this matter. This is where humanity comes
in, and escapes through the red tape , escapes through the specifications
escapes through the Statutes or regulations, and converts the whole
place into your home, somebody' else's home, the home of your friend,
in which you are not ordered about, but are assisted to live your own
lives in the happiest possible fashion.
Sir, it is because of all these things that I have the
greatest pleasure in the world in declaring the building Open. 


Sir, Your Excellency, and ladies and gentlemen, and fellow students:
&nbsp;I want to tell you that I have a hat here which it is considered correct to put on. (Laughter) Like that. (Laughter) And once one has put it on and lifted it with due reverence in the right quarters, one takes it off and gives it to an innocent bystander. (Laughter)&nbsp;
I was tremendously interested in the cable from Harvey, (Laughter) There was one thing missing in the cable: I would have expected that it would have ended up "Collect" (Laughter) I don't know what makes me think of that except that I am in Western Australia. ( Laughter) You have been reminded by the Chairman, with some difficulty I gathered, that I am Prime Minister (Laughter) and I very well remember that when I was first Prime Minister, many many years ago (Laughter) I had a telegram from Western Australia, from a representative of the wheat-growers who, as some of you, the more literate among you, may know produce a political commodity called " wheat. This telegram said to me that unless something was done for the Western Australian wheat growers all would fail, all would come to an end and confusion. At the end of this long, argumentative and costly telegram, he ended up by saying "Our position is so doubtful, so dangerous that I am sending this telegram "collect". (Laughter) I'm not going to be disingenuous enough to say that I paid for it personally; but we did, in the office. And later on the wretched man came into Parliament. (Laughter)&nbsp;
Now what I really want to say to you is that I think this is about as remarkable an event as I've ever been invited to take part in because I am not unaccustomed - even my friend the Premier could tell you this - to having cases put to me which involve some finding of money from the inexhaustible purse of the Commonwealth. Indeed in the university field it has been my own great pleasure and great privilege to have something to do with the remarkable development in Universities in the last few years, something that I hope I will, be permitted to be proud of and which has involved an enormous co-operative effort between Commonwealth Government, State Governments and a mass of people interested in higher education in Australia. But this I think, Sir, is the first occasion on which I have been invited to open a fine building, a costly building, paid for by the personal sacrifice and efforts of undergraduates. I think this is a remarkable event. (Applause)&nbsp;
I don't want to flatter you unruly characters (Laughter) unduly but I am bound to say that this is the most spectacular piece of self-help that I have seen in this field. This is a wonderful performance and I would like to congratulate everybody who has been connected with it.
I think it is particularly appropriate that it should take the form that it does for residential and what I will call in a broad way, social purposes. Things have moved on a lot in modern times. When I was at the University of Melbourne and it may shock some of you to know that I was once at a University, (Laughter) the amenities, if I may call then such, for students were very sketchy. I don't know that we had very much enterprise in those days; or perhaps we weren't as rich as you are now. But certainly we didn't dream of things like this. It is terribly important that they should have been dreamed of and brought to performance here because it helps to remind us of the true character of a university education.&nbsp;
The University stands for not simply the provision of the means of instruction, the means of teaching, though they are, of course, essential. Every University today knows that it has great problems about the number of staff compared to the ever-rising number of people who want University training, or tertiary education of one kind or another. This is an enormous problem, not only of money, but a great problem of training, and procuring the necessary standards of staff. This is a problem that I think will be a teasing one over the next five or six years than perhaps any other problem we have had.&nbsp;
But all that relates to instruction, to teaching. It includes the provision of equipment - equipment which, today, if it is to be of the proper standard is infinitely more complex, infinitely more expensive than it ever was before.&nbsp;
But a University doesn't exist just for some to teach, or for others to be taught. It is not an undesirable thing that in addition to sitting in lectures, one should do a little study, teaching one thing, studying another. But when we have considered teaching itself with all the calls that it makes on people of great skill and great dedication, and we add to that the study that a student must put in on his own account if he is to reap the full harvest of being at a great University, we should then add to those the third element of University education, by no means the least, which is contact with students, the learning to live in a students' society, the subtle indefinable, educational quality of rubbing shoulders with people, people who are in other faculties (Laughter) Yes, I know... I might have known somebody would be ahead of me. (Laughter) But you know I think that a lot of people who are not directly concerned with universities sometimes fail to realise that what seems to some of the more dour among them to be a waste of time -the social life that exists in a place like this, the life of the playing fields, the arguments that go on of a highly speculative, and sometimes violent kind, the infinite superiority of the second year medical student over the poor humble final year law student -(Laughter) are all splendid things because they mean that in a strange way, such is the wisdom of providence, the students are educating each other.&nbsp;
Now that is the great point about a university, that is the great point about bringing people together in a place like this, the great point about them having some social existence in the student body, of having contact with other minds and other disciplines. The great value of this is that it broadens the mind and sends out not merely a highly skilled graduate in a technical way, but a developed human being who can be a good citizen and a wise man or a wise woman.&nbsp;
Therefore I approve - if that means anything - I approve warmly of what has been done here, not only because it is a magnificent example of self-help, but because, I believe that this kind of thing is of the essence of a university. My own approach to the financial problem of universities for the last ten years has been from the very beginning that it isn't enough just to provide the minimum classrooms. I have always believed it goes far beyond these things. Early in dealing with this matter the question cropped up, for example, about residential colleges and my first committee wasn't very interested in doing anything about them. I said "You must include some recommendation about residential colleges even small ones, but we must have some". And the answer, quite common at that time was "But these are frills, residential colleges are frills; halls of residence are frills; union houses are frills". This is a pretty stark outlook on university training and from beginning to end I have said "I won't have this. A University must be a body which is a comprehensive affair, which caters not only for the bare minima of teaching, the bare minima of accommodation, libraries and so on, but provides also for the ultimate production of men and women of consequence".&nbsp;
I want to say quite seriously to all of you that the future of Australia, the wisdom of this country, the true standing of this country, the true level of civilisation in this country will depend far more upon those who are now undergraduates and who are getting the advantage of these things, and the responsibility of these things, than they will upon people like myself who have grown, or are growing old in the service of the country.&nbsp;
However there it is, it is in a real sense in your hands; and the measure of the success of this university, this relatively young university, will in the long run be the kind of people it sends out and has sent out not only into Western Australia but into Australia and the world, their quality and their contribution.&nbsp;
And this is really, all joking apart, a splendid example of imagination on the part of the undergraduate body, not only self-sacrifice in a monetary way, but of imagination and foresight.
Sir, for all those reasons I am delighted to be here even though it does involve me putting on a gown. I ought to explain this gown to you: I have been made an honorary graduate of a great number of universities for some reason or other - I got them much more easily than I got my own degree in Melbourne in my own time - but the only time I was ever given the gown to keep (Laughter) was in Brisbane the other day. And this is it: My wife thinks it is a villainous combination of colours (Laughter) all I know about it is, and this appeals to me, I got it for nothing. (Laughter)&nbsp;
Sir, I thank you for the opportunity of being here and I have the greatest pleasure in the world in declaring the building Open. (Applause)



I. SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
AT NATURALISATION CEREMONY, PERTH, ON 24TH JULI, 9Q6l.
Sir, Parliamentary colleagues, and ladies and gentlemen:
I want to say a few words to those who are, tonight, taking a step
which in the life of any human being is a very, very important one. Those of us
who have had the good fortune to be born in a country, to live in it, to-enjoy
its life, to take our citizenship for granted, can't know very much about what is
involved in pulling up the roots of the family and moving into another country,
moving right across the world and entering into a new life, and a new
citizenship. This is a very remarkable event.
Whenever I think about it I say to myself " What does persuadq people
to move from one country to another?" I might ask you ladies and gentlem3n
tonight, " What was it that persuaded you to leave your ancient home, and to come
here?" There have been times in the world's history when people loft their own
country because they were, in effect, driven out of it we have seen something
of that in the modern world; we have seen something of that in the last
thirty years of human history people being compelled to leave hone, so to
speak, because home was no longer home, no longer the kind of home they wanted
to live in. These are the tragic events of modern history. And when that
event happens to anybody there must be one passion in the heart, and that is to
go to the country where those things can't happen to you, to come out of a
country whoa~ freedom has been snatched away from it, and to come to a country
where freedom will be defended by everybody, whatever political party he may
belong to,. whatever religion he may profess, where everybody is agreed that we
are free people, free, as Mr. Cash says, to pray as we want to pray, to speak awe
want to speak, to assemble as we want to assemble.
Well, of course, there have been other movements in the world's recent
history or modern history in which people left and came to another country
because they saw in that'new country an opportunity which they didn't see at
home: not driven out, but drawn out by the prospect of a new life.
In case any of you who are being naturalised tonight think that we
political fellows here on the platform are tr-ating you as if you were scanething
apart, let me say this to you: there is not a man on this platform, and not a
woman on this platform, who didn't have a grandfather, or a great-grandfather,
who came to Australia he might not have been called at that time a " migrant",
or a " new Australian" ( Laughter, applause) so you know we are all the same,
aren't we? Don't let yourself feel that you are a sort of something apart,
something odd in the Australian community, because you are not. Let me tell you-
I'll speak only for myself: on my father's side, my grandfather and my
grandmother came to Australia from Scotland. Now any Scot here tonight would say
" What a mistake". ( Laughter) " To leave Scotland to come here'." But they came
here and looking back on it I've no doubt they said, " A very good country to go
to, Australia, because although we will be ' new Australians' when we get there,
our grandson will be Prime Minister"' ( Laughtor, applause) You make a note of
that. Put little Willy's name down. ( Laughter) Stranger things have
happened. On my mother's side my grandparents came out because my
grandfather on her side thought that there was gold in Australia. Instead of
looking for it in Kalgoorlie, which might have been a rather successful thing to
do, he looked for it in vain in another part, in the State of Victoria. He was,
I suppose, a new Australian. I don'-t know.
You see the point I am getting at? Your grandchildren will be as much
old native-born Australians as I am today. ( Applause) And so I want to say to
you: don't feel odd, Some of you may face language difficulties, although I am
staggered at the skill and speed with which people learn to speak, not only
English, but Australian ( Laughter) you know, a slight complication upon
standard English. But don't be worried if you think that you speak our
language indifferently. I remember I had a colleague, once, a genial character,
rather rough and ready, to use our idiom, who had to receive a French football
team. They arrived and the leader of the team said to my colleague, " Excuse,
please, I don't speak English very well" and my colleague, with a flash of
candour said, " Don't worry about that, old boy, neither do ( Loughter) 
But all those things are passing phases. It is quite true that many
of us had grandparents who came here from what we call the " old country", from
England, from Scotland, Wales, from Ireland, wherever it might be, and so there
were none of these problems of language, although even there there were some
some. And many of you have come from ancient countries in Europe and you have
different tongues, different backgrounds, marvellous histories, marvellous
literature, marvellous music. You carry with you an enormous store in the mind
and in the heart. These are tremendous contributions to Australia. It was said
a little while ago that migration has meant something tremendous to Australia in
the post-war years and I want to repeat it. It is tremendously true.
I go around Australia a good deal in order to have the pleasure of
having one man out of ten say " Good on you" do you know that idiom? a:. d the
other ten saying " Baaa'" All this, of course, is the veryproof of freedom in
Australia. Prime Ministers here don't go around with a posse of police around
them: they just go around. Sometimes people are friendly; and sometimes they
are not. And the Prime Minister hopes for the best, being by nature and
experience a good high-spirited fellow, you see.
But when I look around this country, for whose political leadership,
rightly or wrongly, I have been responsible for a long, long time, I can't
imagine that Australia would be as prosperous, as happy, as forward looking,
today, if it hadn't been for this remarkable inflow of good people into
Australia. ( Applause)
It has been a wonderful thing for us and I want every one of you who
will be naturalised tonight to realise that this is not all one way. We are not
just being nice to you: we are grateful to you. And you are not just to be
grateful to us for having received you: I want you to feel a proper pride in
what you find yourselves able to do in Australia. In some of the greatest
. ndustries that I know of in Australia the progress would have been a mere
fraction of what it is today if it hadn't been for hundreds of thousands cf
people coming in willing to work, willing to contribute, willing to become good
contributing citizens of Australia. Anybody who knows anything about our great
industries will realise at once that what we call the great migration programme
has been of immeasurable benefit.
So I just want to say to you: don't be nervous, as if you were in a
strange land, because, as I explained to you before, your grandsons willbe on
the same footing as I am tonight. There is no occasion to feel nervous or
strange. Don't feel that any man's hand is against you. Because the only really
unpopular people in Australia are politicians and football umpires. ( Laughter)
It is a great thing, a difficult thing for you, the parents, a
difficult thing; a difficult thing for you who, having reached mature years have
had to make this great change, I know, a tremendously difficult decision to make.
But for your children, for your children, this is the land of opportunity., I am
perfectly certain that nobody who looks at it along these lines will ever doubt
that it was a great thing tc come here. We are a friendlypeople. We are not
stuffy. We are not consumed by snobberies of class, or some of this nonsense
that has beset some of the older countries of the world. You are in an
essentially democratic country where every man has a chance to stand on his own
feet, and every woman, and to be taken at his or her own true value by other
people. Nothing could be better than that: to be free, to feel that there is no
shadow over you, to feel that there is none of the paraphernalia of dictatorship
in this country, that we are, in the truest sense, a friendly community, a
brotherhood, and a sisterhood of people.
And so we are, in Australia where any boyor girl has a vi: ta of
opportunity which can be marched along provided there is ability and character
and courage and determination a country of freedom, of equality before -the law,
a country which governs itself at its own will, through the people it chooses,
without compulsion of anybody else, to serve it in Parliament or municipal life.
This is, I am proud to say, in ray opinion the freest country in the worl.
h. egihgth tandA nds aiyt . iins 7 fosor r a-llothfope aronirseiansogn s waIt. at t " tell don'yto u look ! Aoow okn a-r. ear n. rewa t-po ml
o a bt no blt. o -naene r . nh her was. aKe no m ake abou
that, An. I i. l be surprised ii. ou of this . eneration of meople who ' iave come
to Australia from the oh couwtntries of he worl we don't fin P ime inisters
and Premiers and Judges and Chief Justices.. peple of gret, dis/ inctin
serving Australia. . id t-nat,. prosoe very , i rac; ive I -ope . oup find
it very attractive Therefore I say'to you ie6come'" I am ae2. ghted . t you
have taken this decioion, am sure that it good to-yout an I am
positively certain that it is cod for Australia, ( Applause) 



EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before
JULY 25th, i. e. morning release JULY 26th
DR. P. L. BAZELEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
On 18th May, 1961 the Director-General of Health, Dr.
W. D. Refshauge, acting under Section 56 of the Public Service
Act, charged Dr. P. L. Bazeley, Director of the Commonwealth
Serum Laboratories as following
" That the said Percival Landon Bazeley between the
tenth and seventeenth days of May, 1961 was guilty of
improper conduct in his official capacity in that he,
being an officer of the Public Service, made statements
to the public press in criticism of, and attempted to
promote opposition to, the Commonwealth Serum
Laboratories Bill introduced in the Parliament by the
Government".
The Director-General of Health suspended Dr. Bazeley as from
the close of business on 19th May, 1961.
The charge against Dr. Bazeley and his suspension were
notified to the Public Service Board on 18th May, 1961 and as no
recommendation was made by the Director-General of Health that
salary should not be paid to Dr. Bazeley during his suspension,
the Board did not make an order under sub-section of section
of the Public Service Act 1922-1960, depriving Dr. Bazeley of
his salary during suspension.
On 26th May, 1961, Dr. Bazeley, in writing, denied the
truth of the charge.
The Public Service Board therefore, on 7th June, 1961,
appointed a Board of Inquiry consisting of
The Honourable Mr. Justice Richard Moulton Eggleston,
Judge of the Commonwealth Industrial Court, Melbourne,
Chairman of the Board of Inquiry,
Sir Patrick Silvesta McGovern, and
Francis Patrick O'Grady, Esq., Deputy Director-General
of Posts and Telegraphs, Postmaster-General's
Department, Melbourne,
to inquire into the truth of the charge and to report to the
Public Service Board its opinion thereon.
After two full days of evidence had been -iven before
the Board of Inquiry, Dr. Bazeley admitted the truth of the
charge and the Board of Inquiry, on 21st June, 1961, reported
that, having regard to this admission and to the other evidence
tendered, it found the charge to be proved.
The Board of Inquiry annexed to its report, at the
request of Dr. Bazeley's Counsel, certain statements for the
consideration of the Public Service Board. The Board of Inquiry
said that it had not considered these statements in any way and
was merely passing them on to the Public Service Board.
At the request of Dr. Bazeley the Public Service
Bord on 3rd July, 1961 received from Dr. Bazeley and his
solicitor, oral and written representations which the Public
Service Board might take into consideration when preparing the
A-9 
A 2.
recommendation it was required to make under the Public Service
Act, to the Governor-General. Similarly on 6th July the
Director-General of Health was given an opportunity to put his
views to the Public Service Board on matters relevant to the
Board's recommendation to the Governor-General.
The Public Service Board has now reported to the
Administrator of the Commonwealth, Sir Dallas Brooks, that it is
of the opinion that the improper conduct proved in the case of
Dr. Bazeley was a serious breach of a duty required of officers
in a non-political career Public Service in the British and.
Australian tradition.
The Board recommended to the Administrator that Dr.
Bazeley be removed from the Office of Director, Commonwealth
Serum Laboratories and be reduced to an office in the Commonwealth
Serum Laboratories having the designation of Senior Medical
Officer, Grade 3, with effect on and from the date of the Order
made by the Administrator in Executive Council.
The Administrator in Executive Council on 24th July
made an order giving effect to the Public Service Board's
recommendation. The contents of the Order have been conveyed to
1the Director-General of the Department of Health and through him
to Dr. Bazeley. In its consideration of the matter the Public Service
Board has noted that at no time was there any suggestion that Dr.
Bazeley had been guilty of misconduct in his professional
capacity as a qualified medical or veterinary practitioner.
CANBERRA, July, 1961.
7-



EMBARGO: For use only after receipt of Macmillan's speech
P. M. No 39/ l961
UNITED KINGDOM AND EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. ienzies
The British Government has now made a momentous decision
to enter into negotiations with the Members of the European
Economic Community with a view to joining the Community if
satisfactory arrangements can be made to meet the special needs
of the United Kingdom, of the Commonwealth, and of the European
Free Trade Association. A second, and more momentous decision
will become necessary when the negotiations conclude and further
consultation takes place, as it no doubt will, with the other
Commonwealth countries.
I had been madc aware, through messages from the British
Prime Minister, of thl decision of the British Government prior
to the announcement in the House of Commons. Mr. Macmillan's
messages to me covered both the terms of his Governniontts
decision and also the considerations which led his Government to
it. The issues for Australia are pressing and real. We will,
I hope, with the assistance of Great Britain be participants
in a series of negotiations which I believe to be the most
important, in time of peace, in my lifetime. They will demand
of us both wisdor and patience and our constant vigilance,
On the commercial side we have taken the view and have
expressed it strongly, that in the negotiations which will now
take place arrangements to protect our export trade and
commercial interests must be secured. To this end further
consultations of a detailed character on trade and commodity
questions will take place between the United Kingdom and
Commionwealth countries, including Australia, before substantive
negotiations with the European Economic Community begin. When
I those substantive negotiations do begin we will persist in the
presentation of our view that nobody can argue the case for our
export industries half so ioell as we can ourselves.
One of the things Great Britain had to decide is whether
in fact her membership of the Co: mron iMarket would strengthen her
own economy. It is tremendously important to us that her economy
should be strengthened, because if it weakens our own British
ma-rket will suffer.
With respect to preferences we have special arrangements
which are of ii. mense value to us and we regard ourselves as the
Australian Government as having a primary duty to protect those
interests. Therefore we have devoted much time to discussing
them and to pointing out that you cannot turn a preferontial
system upside down without exposing our export indust:. ios such as
wheat, butter, dried fruits etc. to very great danger.
JW have also felt that if the United Kingdom were to
join the Cozmunity it would not be without effect on the close
and individual political relations which characterize the
Commonwealth. The European Economic Community, besides being a
commercial arrangement, is also a great political conception,
working towards something resembling a common political organismn
It could be a tremendous thing for the world to have a cohesive
Europe, but if this common European policy develops with United
Kingdom participation one could hardly say that the Co; monwealth
would remain quite the same. I hope that I may be wrong, but so
it seens to me. 
2,
Iwill make a statem~ ent to the Parliament as soon as
possible after it assoribles on Aug-ust 13-th. An opportunity will
be given at that time to debate, these important issues in terms
of Commonwoalth relations and in torms of our trade and econormic
interests. CANBERRA, 31st July, 1961. 



ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF FARMERS' SETTLERS? ASSOCIATION
SYDNEY, 31ST JUL; Y, . l
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Men&amp; ze
Mr. President, and ladies and gentlemen:
If, technically, my job this afternoon is to declare
the Conference " Open" at the end of my speech I think it might be
a wise precaution if I declared it open now ( Laughter) which I
do, Sir, with great goodwill.
This afternoon I don't want to talk too much about
things that you will talk about later on. One of them, for
example, is the recent change in the basic wage. Now I am not
going to debate that unduly because, like you, we take these
things, if we can, as they come. But there are two aspects of
the basic wage inquiry that I would like to mention very briefly.
The first of them is that the thing that troubles me
most about the last decision is that it seems to contemplate an
annual adjustment of the basic wage on the basis of the changes
i. n the Consumer Price Index. Now I don't say that it literally
said that; but it appears to contemplate something in the nature
of an annual adjustment on the basis of an Index figure. For
myself, and speaking with great respect to the Commission which I
am sure considered these matters with great care, I don't like
this business of adjusting things on the basis of an Index
figure, and above all, the great mass of wages in the country,
because this means that overy time there is an increase the
tendency will be for it to produce in the following year another
increase. Consumer price indexes tend to respond, pretty
accurately, to the cost level. I don't like that very much. I
think that we ought always to be in a position to have the basic
elements ii costs determined from time to time on a perfectly
independent investigation, and on an independent footing.
There are a lot of people in Australia, there may be
many of them in thiscity, who don't nind if these items keep
rising because, let's face up to it, there are quite a few people
in Australia who have a vested interest in a degree of inflation.
But you haven't. From the point of view of the man on the Land,
whatever he may be producing, inflation is enemy 110o 1; and any
policies that are taken to restrain inflation are of most vital
importance to the great primary industries of Australia.
Therefore I don't look very happily at anything that suggests
that there will be automatic changes, or that we have reconciled
ourselves to going up, and Iup. Speaking on behalf of the
Government that has recently, I'm iold, made itself a little
unpopular ( Laughter) with anti-inflationary measures, I repeat
here what I have said time after time elsewhere that some people
can pass on the cost of inflation, But the primary industries
can't. Therefore I am not surprised, and you won't be surprised,
when I tell you that although I have found in Sydney or
Melbourne a few rather acid remarks being dropped w. ith great
courtesy into my ear., ha~ en't found it in
been recently in uoeensland, Jestcrn Aastralia. Tha mania,
moving around here and there and I find, as I expected to find,
a very profound belief in the minds of those who conduct rural
industry that stability in prices and costs is of tremendous
importance, to them; and therefore of trcmendous importance to
the Australian nation.
There are two groat organisms in Australia which have
much to do with economic policy now get out of your minds this
old idea that Canberra has all the econom. ic powers, and that
Canberra can do what it wants to do, because of course it has 
extremely limited authority but two great organisms have very
great authority. One is the Tariff Board, a much respected
institution, which is at the very basis of our tariff policy,
and of all parties' tariff policy; and the other is the
Arbitration Commission which is at the very basis of wage-fixing.
I will take the second to illustrate what I have in
mind. Frankly I don't think that the primary industries have yet
taken sufficiently seriously the immense authority of the
Arbitration Commission. There is, for instance, a claim by
some Industrial Union, there is a response by a series of people
in the manufacturing world, Counsel for the Union gets up and
quotes balance sheets, profit and loss accounts, demonstrates
that a great number of leading companies are doing very well
indeed as they are and I want to know why it is that on these
occasions there is not, regularly, a formidable presentation of
the case for the primary industries. Nobody can do it for you.
My experience in life is that if yot want something done
powerfully, from your own point of view, you jolly well do it
yourself. Nobody else will do it for you. There was a tinm
when wage fixing did not have a direct impact on many rural
industries but today it does. And I would think that the
Arbitration Commission itself would welcome a powerful presentation
by the primary industries of the impact of whatever claim
is being made on their industries, and therefore, on the export
business of Australia as a whole.
I have mentioned this to individual friends of mine who
are farmers and graziers and they look at mo, they detect in me
the horrible signs of a former lawyer ( Laughter) and they say,
" You know, very expensive; you lawyers are very expensive"
although, mind you, they are very much more expensive now than
they were in my time.( Laughter) And my reply to this is,
" Well, that's all right. Suppose it costs a few thousands
pounds to out a case to the great wage-fixing tribunal of
Australia; what is that compared to the many, many millions of
pounds involved, or possibly involved, in a decision?"
Now I just throw that out to you not because I am
advocating the interests of a profession to which no doubt I
shall not return ( Laughter) much to my sorrow but because I
seriously think that this is a matter that deserves constant
thought. We cannot afford to have great industrial issues
determined on a narrow basis; they ought to be determined on
the broad national basis. They can't be, unless people like
yourselves take a hand in the game.
Now that is all I want to say on that matter. What I
really wanted to do, Sir, in opening your Conference, which I
have already done, was to say something to you about a matter
which is, I suppose, on the lips of all of you today the
possible entrance of the United Kingdom into the European Common
Market. I understand that some announcement al be made on this
matter one way or the other by the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, at about 1 o'clock in the morning, our time that is to
say just before the tea adjournment at the Test match. ( Laughter)
I won't presume to anticipate what may or may not be said. All
I know is that this decision is one of the most momentous
decisions that the United Kingdom has had to take, in time of
peace, in my lifetime, a tremendously significant decision. If
the decision is to go into negotiations then of course when the
negotiations have been completed and the United Kingdom knows
the best turns on which it can go into the Common Market, there
will be another decision, even more momentous, and that will be
the decision whether to go in on the negotiated terms. So here
we have an epoch-making ratter, a matter which has been in the 
air now for a couple of years, a matter on which Imysolf have
had discussions over the last two years with Chancellor
Adonauer of Germany, with General De Gaulle, the President cf
France, and of course with Ministers in Groat Britain. And the
other day the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations, Mr.
Duncan Sandys, came out hero and he had discussions with us,
having had discussions in Now Zealand. And having had talks
with us he went on to Canada and had discussions thereo
In the first place, we have had general talks about, this
matter for a long time past. This was the first time on which
we had had specific talks and had got down to what you might.
call some of the brass tacks of the problem. Because this will
be very much, no doubt, in the press in the neal future, it might
help you if I tried to explain to you what the various aspects of
this matter are that concern us, that concern you and rn,
Nobody in Australia can be dogatic at this time because
half of the questions that arise are not yet capable of answer.
Don't write me down as being violently opposed to something, or
in support of something: I'm just going to tell you what I
believe to be the issues, and how we ought to approach them.
First let us have in mind that the Treaty of Rome was
executed years ago there are six countries in it, France
Germany, Italy, and what we call the Bonelux countries, Belgium,
the Netherlands and Luxembourg. The object of the exercise was
that over a period of years 10 years in the first place I
think it was, now lookihg rather more like 8 or 7, or perhaps 6,
they would gradually develop a Common External Tariff so that
there would be a uniform customs duty right round this area. as
against the rest of the world. There are one or two exceptions
like tropical colonies, but I won't complicate the matter by
dealing with them.
At the same time as they achieved a conmon external
customs barrier, they were to develop internal free trade, so
that in due course the products of Germany would enter France
free of duty, the products of France enter Germany free of duty,
and so on. Therefore if Great Britain were to go into that
schere now, unconditionally, as the other six have, the position
would be that French wheat would go into England free of duty,
and that Australian wheat would pay a duty to go in. This would
be preference in reovrso; this would mean a complete internal
preferential free trade area in Europe, including Great Britain,
and a common customs barrier against the rest of the world,
including countries like our own.
Now that is if they went in unconditionally. I've no
reason to suppose that they will. But the other six have all
gone in unconditionally and they are working towards that
conclusion. If Great Britain wont in unconditionally then I have
no doubt that the Scandinavian countries would; and if that
turned out to be right, as I am sure it would, then the position
would be that Danish butter would pass in free of duty into the
United Kingdom market whereas Australian buttor, and Now Zea. land
butter because butter is an enormous item in that country
would be up against a tariff barrier. These are obviously very
grave considerations for us.
But it isn't fer us to tell Great Britain how to run her
business. IJe can offer our views I got almost hoarse offering
mine in the course of our negotiations with my friend Duncan
Sandys we can offer our views, we are not without them. But in
the long run, as we emphasised at all stages, the United Kingdon
will determine for itself what it is going to do. No doubt it
will pay great attention to what has been said in the
Commonwealth countries. 
4.
One of the things that Great Britain has to answer and
I don't know the answer to this is whether in fact her memborship
of the Connon Market would strengthen her own economy. Now
it is tremendously important to us that her oconomy should be
strengthened, because if it weakens, and ieakens and weakens
our own direct market will weaken and weaken and weaken. We have
a great commercial, material interest in the non-weakening of the
United Kingdom oconomy. Some United Kingdom lead*, rs, no doubt,
believe that if they o into the Cor. on Market they will have a
big hone market, 200, 250 million people, bigger than the United
States of Aeorica and that this will, by extending their home
market, increase their competitive position in the world. That
is a very intelligible argument.
But of course, on the other hand, countries like
Germany which, having had their heavy industries wiped out during
the war now have completely modern heavy industries, may find
thor: 3elves able to compete in Great Britain itself at a position
of gireat advantage, compared with s,. me of the older heavy
industries in the old country. iell these are great
considerations. Weo nust all hope that no error will be made in
the conclusion that is arrived at bec-use we have a very large
indirect interest in the wisdom of any decision that is taken.
Now I say no more about that; I just turn to our own particular
interests. We have benefiting from Commonw-alth referenco, or from
special agreements, wheat, butter, dairy products of one kind and
another, moat, sugar, dried fruits, I needn't go through the
whole list, as distinguished from wool whica com. mands its own
world market. With these products we have special arrangements
which are of irmmense value to us. We regard ourselves, as the
Australian Government, as having a primary duty, a primary duty
to protect those interests. Therefore we devoted a good deal
of time to discussing then, to pointing out that you can't simply
turn a preferential system upside down without exposing our
export industries in these fields to very great danger. We have
teen told by the United Kingdom representative that not only will
we be, of course closely consulted on these matters, but, as we
ourselves requested, they will do their best to see that when
they come, in the course of negotiaticns, to deal with our
products, wheat, meat, whatever they r. ay be, Australia, if they
have their way, will be represented in the negotiations
themselves. Now that, of course, depends not merely on the
goodwill of the old country, but it depends on the attitude of
the Six, all of whom are getting stronger and stronger under the
Common Market system. But we will persist in our view that
nobody can argue the case for our export industries half so well
as we can ourselves; that we are not willing, or not happy, to
have these things dealt with by deputies. We must, ourselves,
have the opportunity of beingpresent, and presenting the view
that we want to present about the industries that I have been
referring to. I am sure that the British Government will do its
best to produce that result.
It may well be that if negotiations started next month
it ,.. ould be months before any conclusion had been reached; but
the day will come, perhaps in the first half of next year, I
wouldn't think before, when the whole negotiation having been
thrashed out, the Government of the United Kingdom will know what
terms it can get for a modified accession to the Treaty of Rcme,
to the Cor. on Market. Then we will have one of the great and.
climactic decisions of modern history. Because if the decision
fell -against the interlests of the Cormonwealth countries if the
decision meant that our preferences that we now enjoy either were
very heavily modified or disappe. red, then of course it would.
mean the beginning of the und of the whole preferential trade
texture that has characterised the British Commonwealth almost
since its boeinning. So that is a great, historic event.
I 
And from our point of view more than an historic event
because it would imean that we would be forced by circunstances
to develop new markets we are always looking for tho of
course but the heat would be on to develop now markets, to try
to repair the partial loss of the old. No doubt Great Britain
herself would be forced to realise that preferential trade is a
two-way trade and this, therefore, might have enormous
significance to the business that the United Kingdom writes in
Australia. I don't know; we haven't worked that one out; we
prefer to look at that if, and when, the occasion arises.
Now all that is on the economic side. All I want to say
to you gentlemen is that nobody could be more clearly seized than
we are of the vital importance of protecting ou positions in
these respects. I already had a cormmittee of officials working
in London before Mr. Sandys came out here. There will no d-' ubt
be further conferences, either official or unofficial, in the
course of the next month or two. It all depends on whether the
British Government decides to neotiate; and we will know that
by tomorrow morning. But on top of all that and this is
going to , ive us a tremendous task on behalf of the export
industry on behalf of industries that are vital to the
development of Australia, l-t's make no error about it the
decision here can have a very big impact on the whole Commonwealth
structure. You know this thing we used to call the British Empire
has g.. ne through some strange changes in my own political
lifetime. It bucame D Comm. irnwealth and nov it has changed; it
has a wider membership, it has less cohesion; its members
disagree with one another more than they over did before. True,
Canada, Auralia, New Zealand stand in the allegiance to the
Throne that groat subtle element that charact. rises the old
British Empire but the rest. Republics, one thing and another,
are not in the allegiance to the Throno. They a: re now countries,
they are not as familiar as we are with our systems of Governn~
nt, or our instinctive feelings about Governront. ie have an
immense variety of nations in the Commonwealth and they grow
every day. ioll that is a metaphorical expression: there are
two or three recently in each year. It is very important
therefore to consider from our point of view whether the
relationship, the Commonwealth relationship, that exists between
a country like Australia and the old country remains intact;
whether, when I go, if I'n still Prime Minister, which they tell
me is improLable, whether when I go to London to have a
conference, I can still talk to the Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom as the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, not as
something else, but as the head of another Government in
another great Commonwealth country. Now this seems to me to be
tremendously important because it is those contacts and these
discussions which now contain, I think, the true essence of the
Commonwealth. Suppose, on some terms or another, Great Britain goes
into the Common Market. The Com-mon Market is not only an
economic device, not , merly something designed to build up the
industrial strength of the European nations, it is a great
political conception. I r. ade rather a point of that when Mr.
Sandys was out here and I saw it strongly confirmed a few days
ago when the Six had a meeting, and issued a communique in which
they said that the political aspects were tremendously important
and that they were going to work towards coinmon political
organisms, towards cor-aon policies. l" ow this may be a very
great thing for the world I don't sit in jud eint, becausa I
don't know how it is going to be worked out.-it may be that it
will be a tremendous thing for the world to have a cohesive
Europe so that you have, in effect, a third great world power,
and one on the free side. That has iimense and exciting
possibilities. 
6.
All I do is to say this: I record the fact that if that
happens and Europe, including Great Britain, develops these new
political organisms, common policies, integrated policies then
you can hardly say that the British Cor. m-onwealth remains the
sane. Because then a Priue Minister of Australia would be
dealing with the Prime Minister of Grcat Britain, not as the
Prime Minister of Great Britain, but as a very influential member
of a European association which had, perhaps, overwhelming
importance and very naturally in the mind of London, Now
rwhether that is good or bad don't ask me to say. I used to be
accused of being an old-fashioned Imperialist; I have even been
referred to, quite courteoa sly, as a great Cormonwealth man; I
achit that I am almost lost in a lot of these modern dovelopnents
almost lost. But I don't think that it is sensible to pretend
that something is the sane, wlhen it has changed. Therefore
think we must make up our minds that if there is a ne otiation,
and if the negotiation succeeds on torms which may not be
entirely satisfactory to us, then the new set-up, not only
economically, but politically, will tend to direct the attention
of Great Britain to Europe, and to that extent, away from some
other parts of the world.
Sir, that is not a very cheerful reflection; but it is
one that is in my mind and that is in the minds of all my
colleagues and I sincerely hope that we are wrong. We may well
be. There have been people unkind enough before today to say
that wje were wrong about somethings once or twice between you
and me I hazve thought we wore. ( Laughter) I hope we are wrong on
this natter. But what I have been saying to you is not designed -o
represent a series of do;~ atic views but to illustrate to you
that if the decision is taken to negotiate we are going to be
onlookers, and I hope participants, so far as the Government is
concerned, in a series of economic and political negotiations,
which I believe will be the most important that we have been
involved in in ry lifetime. Therefore we must hope for
wisdom; we must have patience; we must not rush, unduly, to
conclusions. But the price of our maintaining our position as a
nation will be eternal vigilance. And all I promise to you on
behalf of my own Governmeont is that we will be vigilant, we will
be persistent, we will be getting in the back door from tine to
time if we can't get in the front; we are determined that on all
these matters the interests of our own country shall never be
overlooked. 



LIBERAL PARTY RALLY. SYDNEY TOWAN HALL
Speech by the Prime Ministe. he Rt. Hon. R. G. Mnzs
Mr. Cha-2man, parliamentary colleagues, ladies and gentlemen:
Tonight I propose to confine myself to matters that I know
are vexing your minds. I won't tal~ k about international affairs
in the broad tonight, though I have no doubt that on some other
occasion 1 will have something to say about them. But I do want
to talk about the more m~ aterial aspects of our life as affected
by what goes on here, and by what goes on overseas.
I think it is proper to do that because there have beer.
times only a few but there have been times when I felt
frightfully popular. ( Laughter) And I must say that on those
rare occasions I have enjoyed it being like anybody else. And
thiere have been times when I have b~ on frightfully unpopular
and on the whole I haven't lacked some enjoyment of those.
Other times represent a sort of middle course.
But the fact is that last year, and particularly in
Novembar of last year, the Govcrnment, your Government, the
Government which all of you support and have helped to put in,
had to take some pretty stringent measures to deal with an
inflationary boom in Australia. Although inflation is properly
unpopular with many people, and with me, it is not unpopular with
some others who find in it the exhilaration of going out on a
booming market, and leaving the casualtius to look after
themselves. Interestingly enough since we adopted our course the same
problem has come to the top in Great Britain. lie live, of
course, all the great things in tho world in common with Groat
Britain. But it was only the other day, metaphorically, that
the Government of the United Kingdom had to bring down a "' little
Budget". Having brought down one or two " little Budgets" in my
own time I know that this is not necessarily a term of affection.
( Laughter) But they had to bring down a " little Budget" out of
the ordinary time for a Budget; and they had to bring it dIoxm,
may I remind you, for reasons not dissimilar to those for which
we brought down our economic measures in November last. They
found themsclves with a high measure of inflation at home; with
their trade balances getting a little bit weak, a little bit bad,
a little bit sick, worred about their exports and worried about
their imports, worried about the strength of their currency.
This is a pretty good short description of the kind of
thing that wo were experiencing in our own country, though, of
course, naturally, on a slightly smaller scale. iW~ hon I noticed
that the Chancellor of the Exchequer, M4r. Selwyn Lloyd, had
brought down a little Bqdget in which ho had incroasod sales
taxes, which they call purchase tax in England, in which he had
frozen wages and dividands, in which he had raised the bank rate',
as they call it there, the discount rate, which dominates the
interest structure of Great Britain, from to that he had
gone to the International Menetpry Fund to make a drawing to
protect his currency abroad except that he drew 1892m. and we
drew a beggarly 178Mf.; when I saw all these things I thought
" Well now, he'll be in trouble". ( Laughter) You know it is
one of the great tOuths of life that no; thing so takes your mind
off your own troublos as to sae another man in his. ( Laughter)
"' Well", I thought, " poor Selwyn, he's in trouble". And I
expected that some of my clos-c admirers in the newspaper world
would have made na~ sty remarks a~ bout him, but they didn't. They
seem~ ed to thinl: that what was right in Great Britain must be
wrong in Austra*-a. 
2.
Now I mention those facts to you because if you find great
problems being dealt with in other great countries along similar
lines, then there is probably something to be said for what we
have been doing in our own country. And may I remind you on that
point that we did it first. ( Applause)
Now, you all know the kind of thing that we found it
necessary to do, the steps that we found it necessary to take.
You are no doubt very familiar with the criticisms which I don't
resent at all and no doubt you yourselves have made themo, or
heard thom. Therefore tonight I think I would like to show you,
if I may, that we are not unaware of these criticisms; and I,
for one, would like to help you to answer them, fairly and fully.
. Was the policy that we pursued, starting at the beginning of
last year, intensified, ultinately, in November of last year, a
pig-headed policy, a policy dictated by theorists? Or was it
not? And the second question is: Have we pig-headedly pursued
this policy after it was no longer nceded? Now I think those
are two questions that you have hoard and that I would like to
say something about.
I have the great pleasure of having on this platform half a
dozen of my colleagues in the Government at Canberra. I don't
think any one of them was ever accused of being a theoretical
man: all are men of wide experiences of one kind or another,
not at all the kind of people who want to got a University
professor to write them an essay and they say, " That goes for
me". Not at all. I have had a lot more practical experience
in dealing with the economics of Australia than any of then not
my colleagues, but any of the theorists and I take leave to
tell you that whenever I have expressed a view on behalf of the
Government it has represented a view which stoes from my own
experience and my own judjment, a view that I am prepared to
stand up to, as you would wish me to stand up to it.
There was a boom roaring along in 1960. I have mot many
people, some of then politely and some of thym impolitely,
critical; I have never yet not one who didn t admit that there
was a boom blowing up in 1960, a boon in which the demand on our
resources, the demand on manpower and materials and everything
else was so tremendous that prices were rising fast, that the
cost of getting things done was rising fast. If you have a
boom like that what do you do about it? In the short run it is
popular to do nothing about it. There are a lot of people who
say, " What is wrong with a boom?" We have had plenty of, those in
the world and of course those who speculate in money don't mind a
boom because they chase it along. But from the point of view of
a sound colmunity like Australia, a boon is every bit as anathema
as a great depression; and every bit as dangerous.
You know, I sometimes wonder whether our memories are as
good as thuy should be. Jo are not going to have, in my lifetime
or in anybody else's, a depression of the kind that we knew in
the early 30' s. The day has gone by for that. People know too
much today to have that happen, But it is perhaps worthwhile
recalling to ourselves how that one happened: a depression,
which in Australia at the beginning of 1932 exhibited 25 to
unemployment. It didn't come about for reasons peculiar to
Australia. I know that my poor predecessor Stanley Bruce was blamed for
it. Prime Ministers are always blamed for something. It is
fair enough because they are given credit sometimes for things
that they didn't do. So I don't mind.
I/ 
But the origin of that boom, and that burst, that
depression, was -to be found,, above all places, in the United
States of America whichi came out of the first world war for the
first time in its history, a great creditor country and had
millions invested all round the world, On the strength of these
invest,_ its the United States had an enormous credit structure.
You mustn't suppose that all these fine-spun credit schemes that
vre are so familiar with recently are new. There they rere after
the first world war in the United States of America, with the
Stock Exchange booming, people gambling on margins on the
Exchange, millions being won and millions being lost, because
it usually works out that way.
But what they hadn't realised was that it is no use having
thousands of millions invested in other countries unless you can
get the fruit of your investment. They found they couldn't get
the fruit of thneir investment because they wanted to be a great
creditor country and, at the same time, have the highest tariff
in the world. So they shut out the goods of the countries where
thiey had invested their money. By the time all the gold had
come in and was parked away in Fort Knox they found that their
investments w;: re fruitless.
And yet on the strength of those investments, in the
atmosphere of boom in the middle of the late 201s, they had this
enormous structure of success in their own country. When their
overseas investments became sterile, became unprofitable, then
the whole structure began to collapse on itself. That is the
simplest and truest explanation of what went on at that time.
So, almost overnight, the great boom became the great smash,
and the great depression, and this, of course, influenced
countries and people all round the world, It came to Australia
to impose the most enormous suffering on Australian people.
Now we are not going to have that again. I, for one,
decline to allow a boom in Australia to go to the point of burst
and depression. And * that goes for my colleogues. This is our
duty; and even in politics your duty must be the prevailing
element in your mind. ( Applause)
Suppose we had said as I have heard some people say
". lell what is wrong with inflation" ldhat is wrong withi a boom?
It~ just a sign of health in a g'rowing country". Itve even
read some economists credited withi such remarks. Let me answer
them. Inflation running, running, growing, growing, as it was in
1960, is the complete enemy of social advancement not it's
friend, it's enemy. You just consider: if we have inflation,
if we have price levels rising and rising at a rapid rate, who
wants to put money into anything at a fixed interest rate? Who
wants to buy Commonwealth Bonds, or Bonds for one of the great
public utilities in a State, if he believes that the value of
his investment is going to be whittled away with great speed by
inflation, by a fall in the -value of money? We have found, in
the past, ' that when you have an inflationary boom, or even the
beginnings of one, the loan marlrct becomes sick,
11Now, when I talk to you about the loan market you may say,
I'm not intere sted in the loan market". But you are. You
may never have bought a loan bond in your life, but you are
interested in the loan market. And I will tell you why: because
the great public w.. orks programmies of Australia have to be paid
for out of loan money; or out of revenue from taxation. The
smaller the amount raised by loan, the greater the taxation and
we are all interested in that. 
What are these works programmes? You know I occasionally
hear men talk about public works as if they were some horrible
competitor with private enterprise. On the contrary! Private
enterprise, to which I am devoted, couldn't advance without
public works. Public works cover all sorts of things: roads,
bridges, power production, the great Snowy Mountains enterprise,
school. hospitals, transport of all kinds, water supply. Look,
you could go through the whole gamut of public works and when
you add them up they are all things that we are demanding as a
people; and they are all things without wlich industrial
advancement in Australia would be impossible.
Who would dream of establishing a new factory, a great
enterprise, unless he felt that there was going to be housing and
roads and streets and schools and all the things that would
enable him to get employees to live in a happy community? The
thing doesn't need to be laboured.
I just say to you that if you have an inflationary boom
unchecked you will still need to have these public works. True
they will cost fabulously more money because as inflationary
booms go on up goes the cost of everything. And the money will
more and more come out of your taxes which, of course, will be
increased accordingly; and less and less out of the normal
processes of borrowing capital on the public market.
I could give you a dozen illustrations of what I mean by the
effect of a boom on the country. ! oe saw it going on and we
decided that we must '; heck it. Now you don't check a boom by
going to it and saying, courteously, " Would you mind quieterLing
down a little?" On the contrary. If you are dealing with boom
conditions you must be resolute, you must be prepared to take
measures which, of course, nobody will like very much and some
people will dislike very bitterly because those who profit from
a boom don't want to have it checked. If you analyse the boom
and you find that in certain industries there is an over-demand
and that this is causing a boom, then of course you are going to
have objections. I will give you one simple illustration, and that is the
motor vehicle industry. Now let us speak quite plainly about
this. I know that there are one or two great motor car
enterprises in Australia which feel the pinch of poverty at the
present time. But let's face up to it: do you know that by the
time we took these last measures of ours in November, 1960
roughly a thousand motor vehicles a day were being produced and
sold in Australia; Australia, with 10 million people and
350,000 motor vehicles coming out in the course of the year.
So great was the demand on labour, so great was the demand
on materials in this industry that everybody was competing with
the other man for the labour that he needed: bidding up on pay,
conpetition for supplies of raw materials and half-finished
materials. If over there was one particular industry that was
contributing to inflationary conditions in Australia it was the
motor vehicle industry.
It seems odd to say that because it is a great industry, a
useful industry. It has given enormous employment in Australia
and, so long as it doesn't eot entirely out of hand, it is vital
to the economic existence of Australia. I grant you all that.
But it was going too fast and too far. Therefore we had to
check it. And we checked it, partly by what is now callod the
" credit squeeze" though I will say something to you about that
a little later on partly by the provisions we introduced to
render non-deductible certain payments of interest made by
companies, and partly by a 10 per cent increased sales tax on
motor vehicles. So the general policy and the particular policy
were directed, among other things, to the motor car industry. 
It is quite true that the impact of this has been that the
motor vehicle industry is not producing as many vehicles. I want
to say to you in plain, blunt, homely terns, that if it were, our
policy would have failed. Do you see? It was bound to be
producing less unless our policy was a fiasco. And if it
produce less, so nany less, then it will enploy so many less
people. Now this is one of the facts that I want you all to
face up to. You can't reduce the pressure of the motor vehicle
industry without reducing, for a tine, its production; and you
can't reduce its production for a tine without having some impact
on the employment that it gies. Therefore there were bound to be
some people, through no fault of their own, who would cease to be
employed in the motor vehicle industry and would, in due course,
be employed in some other.
You know there are a lot of people who credit themselves
with a spurious sort of logic, who will say to you, " Ah, so you
intended to put people out of work. What a monster you are".
A monster I may be I don't think so. But how do you reduce
even to a small degree, the activities of a great industry in the
interests of the overall stable economy of the country without
touching the affairs of a number of worthy individuals? It can't
be done. If somebody had said to me when we were devising our
programme, " Look old boy, you can't do that because General
Motors, or somebody else, will employ less people" and I had said
" Oh, well, of course I can't face up to that", and my colleagues
had adopted the sane weak-need attitude we would still have a
boom; and before long we would have the smash of a quarter of a
century. We are not going to have it. Our duty is to this country,
not to somebody else, on these matters, but to our own country.
And our duty in this country is to all the elements of
stability, that solid foundation for a country which alone can
enable a great edifice to be built on it. hfe have a very lively
interest in my Government, in the future of Australia. We
foresee in our own country, in the next ten years, a degree of
development, of growth, of strength, which will surpass the
record of the last ten years. But we are not so crazy as to
believe that we can move confidently into that decade if, in the
meantime, we have allowed the foundations to be broken by a boon
and a smash
There is one other reason why we had to deal with this
matter. I refer to it with some hesitation, but really it is
very important. It is that Australia lives to a very large
extent by trading with the world. Don't let us get into our
minds the idea that we can live comfortably in Australia by
taking in each other's washing at a premiur rate and that
everything . ill be right. Not at all. Je are a great trading
nation. Ten million people we nay be, wretched Government we may
have, but Itell you, with pride, that this Australia of ours is,
in actual intrinsic terms, one of the great ten trading nations
in the world. ( Applause) That means, of course, that we sell
to the world; and we buy from it. Because it is one of the
oddities of life that if you don't buy you will soon be out of
the business of selling. Trade happens to be like that: it runs
both ways. As our wool is sold, as our wheat is sold, as our moat is
sold, as our sugar, and some manufactured exports, and so on, are
sold so we., as a nation, acquire funds in the rest of the world.
Then as we buy things from the rest of the world I don't mean
the Government, but John Smith, or John Jones Ltd., or whatever
it may be so there is a drawing made onthe funds that we have
in the rest of the world. The balance that we have at any given
moment we call our overseas reserves, our balance of payments
producing our overseas reserve. 
Well I must tell you that in November of last year we found
that our overseas balances were running down quite steadily and
we had to think about that a groat deal because if you start off
with so many millions in your overseas funds and they are runming
dcwn, month by month, y~ u got to a point where they look as if
they might disappear. I want to toll every importer in the
country though they know it already that if overseas funds
disappe they will never import anything because there won't be
any money to pay for the imports.
The whole existence of our international trade dopends upon
us maintaining, as a nation, outside Australia, chiefly with the
Bank of England, reserves which will enable us, even though we
may have a failure of a harvest, or a grievous fall in the price
of wool, to pay our way in relation to the things that cone into
Australia, so that we won't dufault, so that we won't be
internationally bankrupt. We found that these precious funds
were running down.
That was another reason why we imposed those stringent
measures. We believed that if we did have, call it what you
like, a " credit squeeze", a restriction in Australia, less and
less money would be available to be spent on imports and
therefore our overseas funds would not run down ony longer. So
that you won't think that we have been theorising about this
matter, I tell you with groat satisfaction, that putting on one
side all the money that we arranged to get from the International
Monetary Fund, our overseas reserves, as a result of the
policies pursued by your Governpent, are today just on 1lOOm.
more than they were at the end of January of this year. ( Applause)
And just as it is a very good thing for a human being to remain
solvent if he can, so it is an essential thing for a nation to
remain solvent, if it can.
I was told, and no doubt some of my colleagues have been
told, that we had made a mess of all this in Australia. We,
this wretched Government who, by some accident have really
managed the country tolerably well for 10 or 11 years, have made
such a mess of it in the llth year that everybody would lose
confidence in us. I thought, " ell0, there will be a very
interesting way to test this because a great deal of our
internationi solvency has been based upon the fact that with all
our errors, with all our defects, with all our follies, we are
the most popular country for investment in the world."
Now I wonder how that happened? Did that happen because you
had a Government that would seek popularity at all costs? Or
because you had a Government that would do what it thought was
right and set out to have stability and security in this country?
I say we are the most popular country for investment purposes in
the world and I confirm that to you tonight.
Last year, 1959/ 60, going back to June of last year, we had
a very large inflow of private capital. I don't mean money
borrowed by governments; I mean capital brought in here by hardheaded
people who see in Australia a great future. They are the
people we want: the people who have some imagination about the
future of Australia, the people who say to themselves, " That's
the country to go to", just as on one occasicn, if the
circumstances had arisen, they would have been saying that the
United States, in its beginnings of expansion, was the country to
go to. These are hard-headed people. They are not philanthropists.
I hoven't met many philanthropists in my life. There are few, far
example, in V-all Street in New York. Yet this year, this
financial year that has just ended, the flow of private
investment capital for business and development in Australia has
boon much higher than it was last year and in fact is an all-time
record for Australia. ( Applause) 
Of course you see what that means? When one opens the paper
and sees that some gr-at enterprise has a development progranne
of œ ifm. or œ 20n. and I have seen several of those in the last
few weeks that doesn't noan that something is going to happen
next week, because things have to be got going. But it does
mean that with all the impact of this enormous investment, with
the de-opment that it produces, with the demand that it sets
up, 1962 is going to be a very great year of prosperity in the
history of Australia. ( Applause)
Now perhaps I night refer to a particular criticismL which
sone of you, ry friends, must have encountered. Every now and
then somebody will say, " Ah, yes, well the Government r: ay be
right, but it keeps on changing its mind". " Stop and go", I thirk
is the operative phrase.
It is quite true that we have modified our measures from
time to time; it is much more inportantly true that our policy
has never changed at all. Our policy is stability and
development. You can sum it up in that way. The economic
stability of the country and the development of the country on
that sound foundation, We have never lost sight of either of
them. We know we can't have perfect stability. I don't want to
be academic about that but we do know that unless you have some
reasonable stability that gives people some confidence in what
they have, then your development is going to be modified in
consequence. So, stability and development.
Our policies of last year, our policies in March, our
policies in the Budget last yoer, our policies last November were
all designed to produce stability and encourage development. You
remember, in the broad, what they were.
But, of course, we have changed some of the things we did.
'. hat sort of fools would we be to start at the beginning of a
year and say, " Well those are the measures for the year and
whatever happens we are not going to change them"? h', at sort of
noodles, to use a good old fashioned word, would we be to go on
in that pig-headed sort of fashion? I wouldn't hesitate tomorrow
to change some measure that we had introduced if I thought it had
outlived its usefulness, if I thought that so far from doing good
it was beginning to do some harm. What do you expect? I don't
know why all these charges of insanity should be concentrated on
our unhappy heads in Australia because all over the world this
is done. Nobody complains if the Chancellor of the Exchequer in
England raises the bank rate from 3J% to and reduces it to 4%
six weeks later; and pushes it up to and then reduces it to
six weeks later. He knows that this is a flexible instrument
for dealing with the economy. ' e don't have it. We have to
choose rather broader methods. Nobody says of the Chancellor,
" The poor fellow doesn't know his own mind". If he didn't move
the bank rate around people who knew what it was about would say
he wasn't fit for the job.
So this charge that we change front, let me answer it
specifically. We wanted to reduce the pressure of the motor car
industry I've told you about that so the general policy
applied which touched hire purchase, which touched a number of
financial dealers, money dealers, which touched bank credit; and
we also put on an extra 10% sales tax.
When we looked at the matter a few months later, early this
ye'. r, we said, " Well, we are having an effect on the motor car
industry, but it is going too far because there are quite a few
people who say, ' IWell they couldn't koop that extra sales tax on
in the Budget, in an election year' you know what people think
of us politicians ' therefore wo will hold off buying the new
car until the Budget'". Therefore we thought that we were 
inflicting, ' nadvertently in that way, a double disability on
the motor car industry, and so we abandoned the extra 10% sales
tax. Was this sensible? Was this a proof that we didn't know
our own minds? You can take your choice. I think it was
thoroughly sensible. If we had been unwilling to do it we would
have needed to be ashamed of ourselves.
Wu found that in some places, and in some ways, there was
what shall I call it politely? a little bit of a racket going
on in the great financial world by the borrowing of money at
fancy rates of interest, and then being able to deduct the whole
of the interest before you worked out your taxable profit. A
very agreeable device, one that no doubt is faniliar to every
accountant in the audience; a very agreeable device from the
point of view of the taxpayer because it meant that he saved tax
equivalent to about half the interest, or about in the
This was, of course, extraordinarily popular. We came down with
a wallop on this. We introduced a provision about the
deductibility of interest before you assessed your taxable income
that was a bit of a crippler, a bit of a wallop, to put it in
those terms. It achieved results. I tell you that if the
speculative boom in land for which there are probably many people
in this audience who have had to pay, had been allowed to go on
the cost of houses, the cost of homes, would have risen more and
more every year because of the fabulous amounts of money in a
speculative market that had to be paid for a home site. Under
those circumstances you hit, and you hit hard. Today most people
would agree with you that that speculative boon has been quelled,
that there is a great deal more sobriety in these matters than
there was. When we found that we said, " Very well, to make this
rather rough and violent measure of ours permanent would be
unfair to legitimate business". So we dropped it. Do you see
what I mean? All these changes that you have hea d about have
been changes in the direction of mitigating the severity of the
measures that were taken.
There was a considerable boom in the building industry and
nobody gets very happy about doing anything about that
unncossarily, because hc-sing is one of the great problems of the
nation, and one of the great human problems in Australia. But it
was affected by the measures that we took. We found that the
measures were going too far. Therefore without any hesitation we
modified their impact; and, in modifying the impact we provided,
or arranged for, very substantial additional finance for housing.
Earlier this year after all these measures of ours had
been taken the Reserve Bank asked the Savings Banks to
increase their rate of lending. The Trading Banks also
increased their lending for housing. In May we arranged, as a
special move, that the Commnonwealth Savings Bank should provide
an additional œ 5m. during the ensuing few months. At the sane
time in May my colleague, the Minister for National Developnont,
who administers War Service Homes, was able to announce a special
arrangement to eliminate waiting time for now homes under the
War Service Homes Scheme. In June a very large sum of money was
allocated in the defence vote for the building of , dfence hones
in Queensland. In other words great additional provision was made in order
to cunteract any undue fall in the rate of housing. And at the
same time, in the Loan Council this year, in June, we, the
Corronwealth, agreed to support a borrowing programme and
" support a borrowing programme" means putting a good deal of it
on our Budget by way of taxes a borrowing progra~ me of œ 240m.
for State works and housing that is œ lOm. more than the
previous year. The allocation for housing, agreed to by the
States, was set at œ 42.9m. call it œ 43m. which is very
nearly œ 6m. more than in 1960/ 61. And in order to encourage the 
rapid attack upon housin&amp; schemes, we offered, as the
Cormonwealth, to provide the State G: Dvornments with these
housing funds at an accoloratod rate during the first half of
the year. Now, Sir, I won't labour that. All those things indicate
what I ' ve been saying to you: that whare it has becorac
necessary to make a change In the sanse of modifying the
severity of some measure already taken we have done so. I am
happy to say that in the field of housing, whure, a few years
ago, we used to talk about 65-70,000 houses as a prot.; large
annual programme in Australia, the figures already in this
calendar year suggest a total of something like 78-80,000 houses
for the year. Now this I regard as a remarkably good state of
affairs. You have heard a lot about the " credit squeeze". It has
almost become like the-blessed word " Mesopotamia". Wherever you
go somebody says " I have been knocked about by the credit
squeeze" and some people have. Some people, of course I have
bcen knocked about by unwise trading on their own account, but
only some. There are others who have felt the stringency of
these matters; just as they enjoyed the advantages of the
inflationary boon conditions when they existed.
But today what is the " credit squeeze"? I hope I tuon't be
haunted to my grave by ghosts coming out of the corner and
talking about the credit squecze to me because I want to tell you
in plain terms that the credit squeeze, as people understood it,
nine months ago is not with us today. I ea. quired only yesterday
as to what the last directive was from the Reserve Bank, because
the Reserve Bank has the supremely important task of trying to
regulate the monetary supply in Australia, and banking policy,
and banking interest rates. Well the Governor of the Bank
announced publicly at the end of June, five weeks ago, that in
recent months the banks have been encouraged to increase their
new lending in selective fields, in particular for housing and
for primary production.
The reduction of inflationary pressures in the economy has
now enabled the Reserve Bank to restore to Trading Banks greater
discretion in the allocation of loans. They have been asked to
ensure that appropriate bank finance should continue to be
available for housing and for export production in riaC mniirf
and manufacturing industries. And within the limits of a
modorate increase in their new lending, they may grant additional
accommodation on the basis of normal banking tests, subject -to
continued observance of two broad principles this is all that
remains of the credit squee) ze first, existing restraints
should continue to be exercised in providing credit to finance
imports and for hire purchase and instalment selling; and
second, finance should not be provided directly, or indirectly,
for speculative activities.
Now that is what is left of the credit squeeze. In the last
few months the better part of œ-90m. has been released from special
reserves to the Trading Banks and I am happy to say that the
Trading Banks today have a position of liquidity which is
substantially above the normal ralnimum and, in fact, is
substantially higher than it was in June of 1960.
The re3al trouble this perhaps is the only other thing that
I have time to t alk about the real trouble is not a credit
squeeze, it is not bank policy, it is not the unwillingness of
banks to lend, because in may recent experience they all exhibit
willingness to lend, on a proper proposal. The real trouble is
this: there have beaen too many calamity howlers in this country. 
I am shocked, occasionally, when I see, as I did in my own State
recently, people publishing advertisements to encourage in the
minds of employees the idea that their job is coning to an end
tomorrow. If I ran a business I don't think I would run it that
way. S. primarily, is there some unemployment? Of course there
has been a great stocking up from the past and it takes a while
for stocks to be sold off. But basically the trouble is that the
calamity howlers, and I want you to go out and deal with the: n,
are always trying to persuade people that the worst is yet to
cone, that there is some frightful calamity around the corner.
My political opponents, and yours, thrive on this, live on it.
Well, what is the fact? The fact is that in Australia,
unlike the United States or Canada, where they would regard our
position as most envirble, it is quite true that out of every
100 people willing and able to work 97 have a job and are
working at it. That is making a liberal estimate of what
unemployment may be today. I am not defending une mployment; I
hate unemployment. I think that the great responsibility that
we have to restore stability and security to Australia involves
getting rid of unemployment. But there are 97people out of
every hundred at work. And if they went along and lived in the
ordinary way, and bought what they wanted to buy, I will
undertake to say that the position in trade, right back to
manufacturing in Australia, would improve steadily week by week.
But they have people saying to them, " Oh, no, you might be the
next to go; you are one of 97, but perhaps you are the one to
go". And so the whole 97 button up and I don'L blame them
if they listen to these false prophets who are so plentiful.
What we have to do is to make it clear to people that this
policy has worked, has produced the most magnificent results in
the broad, has saved our international balances, has steadied
down the increase in prices. It has achieved all these results
superbly well.
From now on what we need is a steady state of affairs in
which people go about their work in the ordinary way, do their
buying in the ordinary way, and the retail stores are able to
clear their stocks and pay their bills to the wholesalers, and
the wholesalers to the manufactures, and the manufacturers set
about replenishing their own stocks by manufacturing processes
and employment. All this is a simple enough thing to say. But
the process doesn't begin if you have people in Australia who are
undermining the confidence of the 97 people in 100.
This is a , reat task, a great task, and it is a task for all
of us. I am myself an unlimited optimist about the future. I
know that somebody may say that over the next month or two months
things may not be very satisfactory. I don't expect things to
happen overnight. But I believe in my bones that by this time
next year many of us will be wondering what the argument was
about; and most, if not all, of the 97 will be wondering what the
argument was about. And the other three working alongside of
them will have occasion to be glad for what has been done.
This is not a crisis in the economy. The economy of
Australia has never been stronger. Anybody who looks at it with
any detachment and even I can do that occasionally will say,
as the people looking at us from around the world will say, that
the economy of our country has never been in a sounder position;
and that the measures that have booeen taken have been good, and
sensible, and profitable measures from the point of view of
Australia. 
11.
The only crisis that exists, and I admit its existence and
call on you to join with me in destroying it is a crisis of
confidence. Isn't it a romarkable thing that a people like us in
Australia so rich in material things, so high in our living
standards, so possessed of advantages that most of the countries
in the world envy beyond words, should even begin to think of
undermn -ng our own strength by losing confidence in ourselves?
I had always thought that the people of Australia had irmmuense
confidence in themselves. I know that when I go abroad from time
to time to represent this country in the councils of the world I
find myself able to speak with confidence because I speak for a
confident country. And this is no bad thing for us. ( Applause)
Sir, that is really half of what I intended to say to you
but it is, perhaps, all that I needed to say to you that had
importance. This is a splendid opportunity, tonight, to have
this great meeting of people who work, of people who are
supporters, who have loyalty and zeal, a great opportunity to say
to you " Don't you lose any confidence yourselves; don't you
become weakened in your resolution". Because if there is one
thing about which I have taken a private vow, and now take a
* public one, it is that Ipropose once more at the next election,
to lead this party to victory. ( Applause3 



N SPEECH BY iHE PRIME MINISTEi, THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES AT' MAITLAND TO. IN HALL, ON
TUESAY 8 1 AUGUSL1961
Mr. M1' ayor, Mr. Fairhall, parliamentary colleagues and ladies and
gentlemen: I have spoken in this hall a fair number of times and I
don't remember a meeting like this beKore: on other occasions it
has been rather exciting. ( Laughter) YouI know it usually has
boon at election time and oddly enotgh at election time I
encounter quite a number of people who don't sooeem to care for me
very much. My mind goes back to one time oh, this mooting is
not like it when we wore having a moeting here in Decumber and
it was very hot and we had had a long hot day. I was being
" cartod around" if I may put it that -ay, by Allen Fairhall: we
had mado speeches here and theiro; we had fought with wild
beasts at Ephesus if I may put it in that fashion; and we
ended up with a very spirited meeting here. Uhon it was all over
I was so hot that I was about to melt and I had to get out into a
little economical car that he was driving and be driven to
Newcastle and the choice w-as between being stifled and getting
pneumonia. I opened the window and got pneumonia. ( Laughter)
It's as simole as that. I wasn't able to go on in the campaign
for another four or five days. And the result, I don't need to
.6ell you was that we had a record majority. ( Laughter)
But tonight is something of an experiment ' bcause I
suppose that six months Qgo a great number of people in
Australia had never heard the blessed words " the Coixion Market";
and as I have had something to do with thera over a fai yea. rs now,-
nd as tohe matter now begins to como to a head, I thought that it
night be an extremonly useful thing to say to thos. e who are
affectod by those matters, something of what they are about. So
I warn you this is not . oing to be a very controversial
political spooch. If you foel that it is bocoming a litlo dull,
you have my perfect permission to make a rude interjection.
( Laughter) Then we will got back again.
The words " Conmon 1Marke) t" are now filiar in our mouths.
They are obviously not very oll unde: rstood by e.. verybody because
I have heard in the last wouk or two earnest people 1Jhy
don't we h-vo an Asian Coin'en Mrket?" or " dhy don't we have a
Pacific Common Market?", . s a sort of counter-blast to a
European Common Market. Therofo:. thin, perhaps I ought to
begin by getting ri ght down to brass tacks on this matter ) nd
saying what a European Cnomon Markot neans. Life bucones a little
complex at this point because some people will talk about the
European Coummn Market and s: enc, with equal accuracy, about the
European Economic Comunity, and sone about the Meossina powers,
and some about the Treaty of Rome. All the szeo thins, you will
be happy to know.
that happened was that in March, 1957, six European
nations signed a T1reaty . with each other at Roiie hence the
Treaty of Rome. And the six wero Gnrany, France, Italy and what
we call the Benelux countries, BoiunL the Netherlands and
Luxobourg. A group of fairly small nations on the ust coast of
Europe and France, Ger:. any and Italy. And at that ti. o the
United Kingdor. declined to be in the party. Argunoents woere put
to and fro -s to , rhethe:-perhaps Greunt Britain shi-uldn't be one
of what would then be sjvon; whcther she shouldn't comne in on
the around floor, and negotiate herself for a Troaty whether
that turned out to be the 2reaty of RoEi or not. œ he British
Governo: ont of the clay decidod not to. dell today, soine four
yVars latu four and a half years later, they have decided to
no gtiato to go in. But what I want you to recebor is that at
that time they decided to stay out. 
Now what was the object of this Treaty of Romn? It is a
very ronarkable story because at the beoginning of 1957 France was
in very poor shape, ocononically and politically. o, perhaps,
have forgotten that until Dc Gaullo ca: noe long as President and
gave stability to French governomnt they used to change their
Prime Ministers every six weoks or at the outside, every six
months. I know riany of you would think that an admirable idea.
( Laughter) Sometimes I think so myseif. But it wasn't until De
Gaulle came along that they had stability of Government.
xeonomically they were in a very poor way in 1956. Germany was
strong, not as strong as she is now, but had groim strong in the
years that had occurred since the war. And the six of thon got
together for reasons that I want you to have very clearly in
nind, and they made a Treaty about it it's a large thick
docunent. But it repays a lot of exarination. I am just going
to toll you the essence of it.
They decided that they would establish a Common Market,
moaning by that that after a period of years which boean by being
12 and right be a little more, but looks like being a little
less, but over a ' eriod of years, a short period of yoers, they
would achieve, as between thenselves, complete internal free
trade; and as between all of then and the rest of the world a
con.: on external customs barrier.
Now you see what this means? This cmans that the six
nations in Europe were setting out to put themselves in a
position, in relation to Europe, similar to that which is
occupied by the United States of America in its own country:
internal free trade and a common external custor. s barrier. And
the advantages that they saw in this, of course, were very great.
It meant that overy nation, Germany, France, Italy, whatever it
night be, would have unrestricted access to the raw naterials of
the others; it meant that France, which is a great wheat
producing country, could sell wheat into any of the other
countries without duty; it meant that raw materials for
manufacturing could be moved without duty from one country to
another; it meant a completely free interchange of labour, and a
completely free movement of capital. In other words these six
nations, including within themselves, many scors of millions of
people, an enormous industrial and agricultural strength, were to
become, cconorically, one co: nunity.
Now the moi: mnt that happened we became extremely
interested in Australia. I will develop for you, in a moment, the
reasons why. But before I do I just want to elaborate on this
Common Market, this economic corimunity, because if, and when
Great Britain joins it, no doubt the Scandinavian countries would
then join also, and you must realise that this is going to
represent an economic cormmunity of 250 million people, much
greater than the United States, greater than the Soviet Union,
And not a weak coumunity, in economic terms, because it contains
some of the groatest industrial power anywhere in the world.
So the first thing to aim at was a customs union with,
in due course, internal free trade. The second was to try to
have a cmmon agricultural policy. All those are set out in the
Treaty. They haven't yet worked out their comi: mon agricultural
policy. They were cdue to have a meeting about it beforc the end
of this year. And I think that one of the reasons why the
British Government has announced its intention to noeotiate is
that it wants to be in a p: sition to negotiate about the cormon
agricultural policy and I think that is v. y good, very good.
Beoc. use if the six negotiate a common agricultural policy I would
be fearful, myself, as to . what the results night be. In these
European countries, for rasons that one can understand,
historically, reasons of war and threatened starvation in tine of
war, they have adopted a policy of agricultural protectionism, 
bolstering up the production from their own soil by subsidies,,
by certain price arrangements, by whatever it nay be, in order
that they ray provide as much of their own foodstuffs as they can
In point of view of world economics, not a very good thing; and
fron our point of view not a vry good thing. But that is what
they were aiming at in the Treaty of Rome when they established
the Conmon Market.
Now as to the present position in Europe let us
consider, for example, the question of wheat. In Germany they
produce wheat in the mst inofficio.. t fashion. You know we are
rather accustomed to think that the Germans are the model of
efficiency for everything. But they are not. They grow wheat
in little plots; their methods of wheat agriculture would make
any wheat farmor in Australia snile. But they do it in order to
produce as much cf their own food as they can. And in France
they have so encouraged the production of wheat that at this very
moment they have an exportable surplus. They look across the
Channel to Great Britain and they see there a market for their
own type of wheat, for their surplus of their own type of wheat.
Again if Great Britain goes into this Common Market, Denmark
will go in and Denmark is a groat producer of dairy products, a
magnificent producer of butter. It would seoo rather ironical,
wouldn't it, if we and Now Zoiland who, under a system of
Commonwealth preference, have had a preferred market in the old
country, found that the position was reversed: that we had to
pay a duty and that Danish butter went in free the complete
reversal of Commonwealth preferences. This is the kind of thing
that exercises our rinds and that exercises yours,
But one of the things in this Treaty of Rome is to work
out a cormmon agricultural policy, aimed at increasing production
that is one of the things said in the Treaty and at the
organisation of markots. I have r. ntioned to you that there is
to be a free movement of workers; I think I have mentioned to
you that there can be a free establishment of capital enterprises
from one of the European countries in another; there is to be
a European Investment Bank. And they have institutions, quite
formidable already, including an assembly of 142 people, a
Council of six, and a Commission which is a sort of executive
body, of nine. On top of all this there is to be a Court of
Justice to deal with the enforcement of the Treaty.
Now, Sir, it will be seen at once that these
arrangements of an economic kind will lead, inevitably, to
closer and closer industrial and economic association between the
European powers. And if Great Britain goes in I'll come later
on to the terms and conditions but if she , oes in, then of
course she will become more and more closely associated with then
in these fields.
Any amendment to the Treaty and this Treaty was nade
in March, 197, and a lot of water has gone under the bridge,
and a lot of advance has been rade in both Germany and France:,
economically, any amendment to the Treaty requires the
unanimous approval of all the Six. If any country wants to join
and Great Britain is now going to negotiate then she must
make an agreement with the Six, not with some of them, not with
most of ther., but with all of thor. Therefore any one European
power out of the Six can, by digging its hels in, insist on
terms completely unacceptable to Great Britain and the matter
will come to an end.
Now that, broadly, is the nature of the Cormm. on Market,
the Treaty of Rome, and it has, in the economic field, succeeded
enormously. I would just like to say to you that before the
Treaty of Rome was ever executed I had the great opportunity of
having long conversations with Chancellor Adonauer in Germany, 
and with the then Prine Minister of France and there wore
different views expressed then from the ones that you will hear
now, because at that tir. o France was the weak nation, cconomicay,
and people said, " Oh, you must give France tine to recapture her
strength before you discuss anybody coning into the CDnmon Markct'.
Two years ago talking again to Adonauer, and talking, this time,
to De Gaulle in Paris, I found a conplete change in the
circumstances. Because France had become strong; and so strong
that I rather feel that she is not in a very groat hurry to admit
Groat Britain to this party. I don't know, but that is rather
the impression that I got.
Now there are two aspects of this matter, as to whether
Great Britain, the central nation in our Cormonwealth, the most
significant overseas nation in our economy, should seek to go in?
And if so, on what tcrms? Now I ar not going to endeavour to
answer the question " Should she go in?" I an not here to
pronounce any dogmas; and I'm not here to decide a problem for
Great Britain which Great Britain is immeasurably more competent
to solve for herself. After all people in London are not fools:
they know the people of Great Britain are not fools. They have
an enormous tradition of wisdom and good judgment. And they have
to thrash these matters out. All we can do from our end is to
say what we think, as Australians, and to carry out our simple
duty as a Government, which is to do the best thing that we can
for our own country and for our own people.
Quite obviously there are two aspects of this matter.
One is the economic aspect. What is going to happen to our
overseas trade? What do we suppose will happen to dairy products
and meat, and wheat, and sugar, and dried fruits, the whole gamut
of our primary exports, Uihich, apart from wool, represent of
course, our great contribution to international trade and
Australian solvency. We are concerned to see what happens to
those. That is the economic problem.
But there is another problem which is the political one.
I wonder if I could just say a few words to you about the
political aspect of this matter before I deal a little more
fully with the other.
There is nobody here, and least of all myself, who isn't
a great believer in the British Cormonwealth and in what it
stands for. We want to see it continue, we want to see it
strengthened, we want to see its voice in the world nore
powerful, and more and more respected. But we must face up to
this: that the Treaty of Rome is not just a merchant's bargain,
the Treaty of Rome has enormous political significance. You
can't have six nations trading together with no customs barriers
between then, a cormon external tariff, common industrial rules
existing, a Court to enforce then, you can't have all these
things without those countries becoming more and more united;
and as they become more and more united so they will more and
nore want to have a common foriegn policy to defend their cormon
domestic policy. This seems to me to be simple, and indeed,
almost elementary. That has not yet been fully conceded but I
firly believe it myself.
I was very interested to find that not long after I had
expressed these views in almost these terms to the
representative of the United Kingdom, the heads of State of the
six powers I will call then the Six had a meeting and issued
a communique. This is a rnarkable coranunique in my experience
because it said something. ( Laughter) I am an old hand at
communiques ( Laughter) I have had a finger in the pie about
dozens of then, both here and ovdrseas: this is the first one I
over knew that said something. I only need to tell you that I
had nothing to do with drafting it. But the communique stated, 
on the 18th July, that the Heads of States and Governments were
convinced that only a united Europe is in a position, allied with
the United States and other free people, to neet the dangers of
the free world; that they wure deternined to develop their
political co-operation with the aim of European unification, For
this purpose they proposed to have regular meetings in order to
bring their policy into line and reach agreed views.
Now that, I confess, didn't surprise oe. It has always
soomed to ne to be inevitable that a close, intimate, economic
association of this kind must ultimately produce cormon political
institutions and comon political policies. That is tremendously
important. It is probably enormously important for the world.
If you had a united Europe with all these nations in it, with a
cor. mxon policy, a canon voice, and that great European power
stood against the fr-ces of Cor. mLuniJm, this would give a balance
of safety to the world that it now doesn't possess. This would
be of tremendous significance to everybody. Therefore at this
point I make no comnent on it except to say that it would
involve great strength for the free world.
But, Sir, the question then arises as to what happens to
Great Britain in relation to the Cormnonwealth if Groat Britain
goes into that new union? After all, as I have said domestic
policies to which she would become party must be protected by
some comnon external policies. If the old country goes into the
European Cormnon Market, the European Community then I believe
that she will increasingly becone absorbed in the international
politics, the international views, the significance in the world
of this new union or new agglomeration of power in Europe, of
which she would form part.
I wouldn't have you believe that I think that because of
that the matter becomes unthinkable. All I have ever said about
it and I repeat it here is that I will take a lot of
persuading that the Conm onwealth will romain the sane if the
chief country in the Cor. monwealth is . bscroed into a European
political union. It may be a good thing that she should be; but
don't ask me to believe that the Conrm. onwealth will remain the
same. Because what happens now when you have a Cormonwealth
Prime Ministers' Conference? You go along and you agree or
disagree I seemed to have a lot of disagreements on my hands
last time but we meet and we talk to each other and we
represent our countries and the voice of Great Britain is the
voice of Great Britain, uninhibited by anybody else. When it
becomes, in a sense, the voice of Europe, well the position won't
be quite the same, will it?
You know, ladies and gentlemen, it is worth remoembering
that the secret of British history in relation to Europe was for
a long, long time this: she had a small country in the days,
the great days of the first Elizabeth a population of less than
half of what we hove in Australia today; she was a country of
great seafarers, a fertile country, a sober sensible country.
She maintained a position of dominance in the world right through
the 19th century after the Napoleonic wars by pursuing the policy
known as the " balance of power". And what was the " balance of
power"? The " balance of power" involved Great Britain keeping
out of entanglements in Europe, but putting her hand in when
necessary to prevent one nation from becoming overwhoelingly
strong. So she was able to rectify the balance in Europe.
Right through the 19th century, the greatest period of British
expansion in reality, the century of optimism, the century of
imperial growth, the balance of power was the policy.
Now the question has arisen, for decision, as to
whether Great Britain should abandon that policy, abandon it and
go in to Europe herself as one of the factors to be balanced 
not as somebody from outside intervening when wise, here or
there, but as one of the Seven, as it would be then, all of thon
working together, arriving at their decisions and pronouncing
cormon conclusions. In the history of British foreign policy this will be
the most historic event for at least a century and a half. It
may be that it is right. I would * ive a lot, myself, to see a
united Europe, strong and cohesive, in the present state of the
world. But when I put to you the political implications you . ill
at once see how right it is for me to say, and feo other people
to say that the decision that will ultimately be taken on this
matter will be the most important decision ever taken by any
British country, except in time of war, a tremendous decision,
with far flung political consequences, international consequences;
and of course the economic consequences to which I propose to
turn. Now before I leave that aspect I ought to say to you we
have a lively interest in having a powerful Europe; we have a
lively interest in doing something to prevent the spread, the
incessant and insidious sproed of communist power in th, world
a very lively interest. All I say about the effoct, -:. o.: tically,
on the Cormmonwealth is that I have never soon any particular
virtue in shutting your eyes to something and protending that it
isn't happening. I am quite certain myself that the B:. itish
Co1mmonwealth will be something different, if this event happens,
from what it is today.
I think at this stage I ought to say this to you. The
other day Mr. Macmillan, announced that the Government of Great
Britain was going to negotiate with a view to entering the
Cormon Market. That negotiation, of course, won't take place
next Tuesday. Things don't happen that way. The most
optimistic ostimate that I have heard as to the amount of tine
that would be occupied in the negotiations was eight ronths; and
when I pulled down out of the shelves the full text and annexuros
of the Treaty of Rome I car. e to the conclusion that negotiating
all of then might take a lot longer than eight months. But
anyhow that means that some tine next year, April, May, whatever
it may be, this matter will fall for decision.
We are interested fron the point of view of negotiation
in twto ways. In the first place a lot of these negotiations must
affect our export industries. There will be negotiations about
whether for example some Australian product is to pay a duty
while a European product runs free. In other words whether the
preferences that we have enjoyed are to be capsized and operated
in favour of a European country. These are great questions. And
we think, in Australia, that we in Australia are the only people
who are competent to argue about them. We know our industries.
And we have made it quite plain that we are not prepared to
leave to somebody else the defence of Australian dairy exports,
or of Australian cereal exports, or of Australian neat exports,
or sugar, or whatever it nay be. They are our lively concern.
The first duty of an Australian Government and it will
certainly be carried out by no is to defend the interests of
our own industries and to preserve the future of our own
country. ( Applause)
Well there will be several phases of this. Officials
have already been in consultation. There will no doubt be
further consultations on that, or some other level, before 1961
is out. There will undoubtedly be interventions by us in the
course of negotiations. Whether we are allowed to get -ito the
in.. or room or not is not something we can determine; but: we
will make an awful noise at the door, I can assure you, And we
will be there with horse fo) ot and artillery, meaning by ' horse"
a Minister or two, moaning by " foot" a couple of Heads of 
Departments, and meaning by " artillery", as many competent people
representing industry as we can put our hands on.
But in due course the tine will cone when we will know
what are the best terms on which Great Britain can entor. And I
ronind you again: don't be too surprised about what happens
because unanimity is required on the part of the Six. If any one
of then says " You can't cone in and protect so-and-so's interest",
then Great Britain can't cone in. This is a natter of making a
negotiation with six nations all of whon have to agroe with each
other on everything before the negotiation cones to a happy
conclusion. When the negotiation has finished and Great Britain is
in a position to say " Well we have been able to do this about
neat", or " We have been able to do this about wheat", or " We have
been able to do this about butter" or whatever it iay be, then
no doubt at all, they will call a Conference of Connonwealth
Prime Ministers to come along to say " Yos", or Not that I
suppose if we all said " N1o" it would necessarily conclude the
natter; but I an perfectly certain that the weight of opinion in
Commonwealth countries would then be formidably felt.
Now we in iAustralia are a little rmre fortunate than
some; we have a broader oconomy. We can, in Austrqlia, take a
shock or two occasionally because the econony of this country
stands now, squarely on both fooG and we are really strong in the
economic world. But poor New Zeqland, to whom the export of
butter and dairy products is as important a-the export of wool
to us, stands at enormous risk in these matters; and I an
perfectly certain that Great Britain won't overlook that problem
because it is one of overwhelming importance to our sister
country. In the case of Canada, well Canada exports wheat and
therefore has a lively interest in that natter; Canada also
exports manuf::-ctured goods to the United Kingdon in large
quantities. I don't know what the answer to that problem is
going to be. Because one of the great objects of the European
Common Market is to develop European manufactures in order to
increase the competitive powers that they have in the world.
So fron our direct noint of view, we have interests in
certain export industries. have stated them categorically to
the Government of the United Kingdom; we expounded then to Mr.
Sandys when he was out here representing the Prine Minister for
this purpose; he knows exactly how we feel about these natters;
and he knows that so far as we are concerned we are not giving up
without a powerful struggle the preferential system of Conmonwealth
trade which h,; s meant so much to us, and I venture to
say has neant even r: oro to Great Britain. ( Applause)
But, of course, there is another interest that we have.
Great Britain happens to be a great market for us as you know.
The United Kingdon last year, 1960 I'r putting this in terms of
sterling sold to Australia œ 259m. worth of goods. It is worth
remembering that Australia is at present the greatest market for
British goods outside the United States of America. But in
Co. nonwealth terms we are the greatest customer, œ 259mf worth.
' We too:' 7% of all the United Kingdom sales abroad in 1960. And
the Connonwealth c: untrios, including Australia, took 42% of all
the British sales; and the six countries of the Common Market
took 14%. I will put that into . oro r . nm.. berablo terms: what
Great Britain sold to the Conmonwealth, including Australia, in
1960 was three times w. hat she sold to Germany, France, Italy,
Blgiun, the Netherlands and Luxeobourg the Six. That ! oeans,
of course, and Great Britain well understands this, that she has
enjoyed a Commonwealth iarket inmeasurably more important to her
than the market in Europe has been. 
Well, suppose she . oes in. She will go in for one
cornanding oconomic reason and that is that it would give her
access to a hone market without tariffs intervening, a home
narket of 250 nillion people. This I can see quite plainly is
an argunent that has had groat cmpulsion on the ninds of my
friends in London: " To get into this hone market; to be able to
develop our export industry on the basis of this home market:; it
will put us in a position competitive with the United States of
America". But why can the United States of Auerica outsell
people around the world? Because she has a hone market with
internal free trade of 180 million people and access to all -he
raw naterials of a continent. Therefore I am sure they say
" This is the dominating factor; let us have the hone market and
everything will be well. Jo are in great econoric difficulties"
as indeed they are at present, as you know, -" let's get in to
this thing". Jell of course there is another side to the coin. If
they can sell free of duty to Gernany, Germany can sell, free of
duty, to then. That is thj essence of an internal free trade
system. And I have been wondering for r: yself I speak only for
ryself on this natter I have boon wondering whether some of
the industries in the United Kingdo could stand free trade
copetition by sooe of the industries on the continent.
You know, ladies and gentlemen, it is one of the
ironies of life you have all observed them that one of the
ways to get a completely up to date industrial establishment is
to be beaten in a -war. In the case of W. aest Gernany the Ruhr was
devastated, her heavy industries blasted practically out of
existence; and with the rcnarkable skill and enorgy and hard
work of the Gerrans they have cone back and all their iron and
steel works are quite modern, many of them erected with foreign
aid. With an iron and steel industry that is completely modern
I think they are going to be at some competitive advantage with
an iron and steel industry in the old country which is certainly
not modern for the most part, modern only in parts.
Well they have thought about that, I've no doubt. I'm
not going to have you believe for one moment that they are
incompetent to work these problems out for themselves they are
extraordinarily competent; they know far rore about then than I
do. All I want to point out to you is that there must have been
great questions to be answered in their own minds about these
matters before they decided to take the first step and
negotiate. Because if they are right, if the home market does
it, if their industries prosper, if their export capacity grows,
if their purchasing power increases, we will got the benefit
because as European purchasing strength, including that of Great
Britain, improves, we will have a better market than before. But
if they are wrong, well, it is not the kind of thing, I think,
in which you can make one error and then another and then oet
back. This is a tremendous and grave decision that will have
to be taken. One of the things that I want to make clear to you
is that they have not taken it yet. What they have decided to
do is to negotiate, to test out the ground, to see i'hat the
terms and conditions may be, to see how far they can protect
your interests and mine, the interests of Australia, Now Zealand
Canada, the British countries around the world. That is what
they are going to find out. But I thought that it would be very
necessary to tell you that we don't approach this problem, we,
your Government, in some sirple fashion and say, " Well, whatever
you say, that's all right". Jo approach this natter strong in
our omw dofence, strnmg in our own interests, strong to protect
Australia and its growth because if it turned out that some
decision was taken, adversely to our will or our desires, and 
this affected one or two or three of our export industries, it
would be Australia that wuld have to pay the price.
I have told you that this is gJing to be quite a time
yet. If I survive the next election and I have already met
three people who think I will ( Laughter) if I survive the
next election and I am in rude health and strength, I nay be
there in the riddle of this argument. I just thought I would
like to let you know that I am not going along to any argunent of
this kind to be a " yes" man; I'm going along carrying the
greatest brief I Jver had in ny life, a brief for the export
industries of Australia. ( Applause)
Sir, while all that goes on we nust continue to do what
we have been doing, more and more actively as tine goes on,
seeking to expand our markets so that we won't have too many of
our eggs in one basket. There are perhaps great markets in the
world to be found, not only for Australian manufacturing, not
only for Australian primary industry, not only for Australian
mining, but for all of them, for every productive activity in the
country. I have a number of reasons for boin happy to come along
to Maitland but one of than was that you represent, in a sense,
a combination of all these matters: you are cheek by jowl with
one of the great stoel works of the world, one of the great basic
industrial undertakings of the world; you are in the middle of a
famous area for the production of primary product; I hope you
remember, from time to time, at dinner tine, that you are
sitting just below the most celebrated wine area in Australia;
and you are sitting alongside one of the great coal measures of
the country. We have been looking at all these matters in order
to stimulate markets. I am very glad to see that my colleague,
the Minister for National Dovelopment, Senator Spooner, is here
because he is all tangled up in this coal business. But the
business of exporting coal from Australia is one, I believe,
that can be developed out of all sight. In fact we know it can
and we are at this very moment in negotiation with the Government
of New South Wales to facilitate this through coal ports.
If it becomes necessary for us to go out nore and more
and to scour the world for people who will buy what we produce,
we shall go out and scour the world. But you know wo are old
fashioned people most of us, we have it in the blood: I would
fool terribly sad if anything happened to prevent us from trading
to that extent, at any rate, with the old country, along the old
preferential routes, to our mutual advantage and to the continued
good of the world. ( Applause) 
4 Question Could we sell primary products to Asian countries below
cost by subsidising the producers?
Mr. Menzies Well, Sir, we would get into a great deal of international
trouble if we began to subsidise our exports, whether of
primary products or otherwise. One of our great problems, of
course, as you know is that we strongly suspect that there are
countries that do it now and that some of the goods that we get
into Australia are dumped at prices lower than the cost of
production. We have anti-dumping laws, but it is not always
easy to prove that they have boon dumped at below the cost of
production. But there is no future, if I may say so, in getting
into the copetition in the world for subsidising exports because
the greater the country the more successfully it can play that
game, and the more rapidly will the small one go to the wall.
( Applause).
Question If Groat Britain joined the Common Market adhered to
the Treaty of Rome without reservation, what would be the immediate
effect on our exports?
Mr. Menz es
Now that sounds like a simple question but it isn't
in reality. Where we have no current contract the irmmediate
effect on our exports would be very considerable. We would come
up against the customs barrier which would then extend to the
United Kingdom as well as to Europe and that would tend to damp
dovm the flow of our goods into Great Britain. In one or two
matters, of course we have current contracts. And when you say
" unconditionally" Air, do you mean abandoning current agreements
or allowing them to run out? Do you see what I mean? We have a
neat agreement. Well it has some years to go. It may be
that they would get an unconditional entry provided that that
contract was allowed to work its time. Well the immediate effect
on us then would perhaps not be very great. We have a sugar
agreement in cormmon with other Cormonwealth sugar producers and
that has some time to run. If Great Britain said " Well we will
go in unconditionally, but the sugar agreement must be allowed
to run its course" then for that time our export of sugar might
be maintained, although of course we would know that there was
a bad time coming in the future. We have a trade agreement with
the United Kingdom, but in most respects it can be terminated on
six months' notice. Well they might have to give six monthst
notice. You see what I am getting at is this: that where we have
no benefit of contract an unconditional adheience to the Treaty
of Rome would be immediate and damaging in its impact on our
exports. In certain other cases it might be a postponed impact
while contracts ran out. But although I answered that question
I am bound to tell you this that I do not think for one moment
that Great Britain will adhere to the Treaty of Rome unconditionally.
( Applause)
Question Mr. Prime Minister if B-itain accepts all the implications
of the Coion Market what would happen with the general
agreement on trades and tariff that now exists? 
Mr. Menzies Well, Sir, if I may say so it is a very good question
and it is one that we have been putting to ourselves, because it
takes a lot of working out as to how to reconcile the general.
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade GITT, as we call it, in a familiar
fashion it takes a lot of working out to reconcile GATT
with all its rules for international trade with this new complex.
Theref'ore I have no dogmatic answer but it is one of those things
that we are certainly having vory much in mind. There are va~ rious
aspects of this: there is GATT: there is the position of'
sterling and the sterling area: there is the position of our own
sterling holdings. All these things are merely thought about; in
the general at present: that they have to be got down to and
given close study, close examination. We will find in due course,
over the next few months, that there are aspects of this matter
that so far ia have not thought of that ought to be thought of'
and worked out. And you do very well to draw attention to that
one, ( Applause)
Question if Britain accepts all the implications of the Cormon
Market what becomes of the policy of preforential trade within
tUhe &amp;-pire?
Mr. Menzies The question is: ' If Great Britain accept, 3 all the
implications of the Comm. on Market' you mean goes mn unconditionally
? what becomes of preferential trade within the Corironwealth'.*
Well I would thinkc that we would have to talk about it
from then on the in the past tense, because it is quite clear to
me that if our preferences, which have given us our market, for,
our primary products in Great Britain, disappeared and were
converted, on the contrary, into preferences for European countries,
our competitors, then I don't think anybody would suppose
for one moment that the British preferential tariff in our
customs schedule would continue to exist.
2uestion If Britain does eventually join the Common Market could
we join?
Mr. Menzies The question this tim~ i is whether we could join thae
Common Market. Now I just want to say this to you: I asm not un~-
willing to take on a few unpopular causes fromi time to time but
I would hate to have to say to the Australian secondary industries
that I had entered into a Commion Market which gave every
European industrial power free trade entry into Australia with
its manufactured goods. I would not only be kicked out, but I
would have to catch a new ship out of the country as fast as I
could. ( Laughter, applause)..
Question Would a threat by all the members of the Commonwealthi
to withdraw from the sterling area carry any weight with Britain
as a lever to get her to stand by us?
Mr. Menzies Well, frankly, Sir, I don't think so, I don't think so.
It is very, very complex question this question of the relationship
between the sterling area anl the non-sterling area and as
you already know probably, there are quite special rules that 
apply to British sterling held in European countries in terms
of convertibility into dollars. It is a very complex problem.
But first I don't think you could get any such general request:
second I an not at all sure that I would be interested in making
one; third I don't think that even the hint of such a thing
would materially affect these negotiations. ( Applause)
2Question If Great Britain went in to the Commaon Market whiat
would be the circumstances that would enable her to withdrawi?
Mr. Menzies I can't really tell you the answer to that off hand. I
htavo been a little puzzled about it myself. But if it takes
unanimity of agreement to become a riember, then it may well be
it would take unanimity of decision for one member to leave. But
I have not worked it out. All I know is that in these great
affairs you ca' go into a great organisation and say to
yourself " Well if I don't like it I'll leave", 9 because in cold
practical fact it is too late to leave then. You have entered'
into a lot of arrangements; you have had your industries adjusted
to the new state of affairs; you have become accustomed to
conducting your trade battles in a certain fashion. It not
very easy to reverse course under those circumstances. But if
you will allow me to say so on that particular point I really
can't give you a definite reply.
2uestion I would like to know whether Britain's entry into the
Common Market would have the effect of speeding up her changeover
to the decimal currency?
Mr. Menzies To bo perfectly frank I hiaven't the slightest idea. But
I don't imagine that it would, I don't imagine that it would.
After all if Britain goes into the Common Market she is going; to
have a nest of problems, matters to accommodate herself to and
I don't imagine that decimal currency would come very high on the
list. We have had a committee looking into it in Australia
everybody is in favour of decimal currency until you tell them
the size of the bill. ( Laughter) Then they say " Well that's
all right; you boys can pay it". And when I say that to the
Treasurer, he faints. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Qustion What value would be the exports of primary products frorm
Australia to other countries than Great Britain? And what would
be the value of such exports to Great Britain.
Mr. Menzies Well, Sir, I am sorry I don't carry these figures in my
mind as I am sure you wouldn't expect me to. We have of course
substantial exports of primary products to other countries; and
of course very substantial ones to the United Kin[ gdomi. You are
right in saying that in any event we would need to expand our
narket-f for our primary industries around the world. And we will
do that anyhow because there is a limit, having regard to our
growth and development in Australia, there is a limit to the
extent to which we can find armaa2ket in one country and not in
others. We are actively pursuing m~ arkets in other countries. We
have a very elaborate Trade Cormmissionor service which is constantly
looking for markets and, as you know we have had trade
missions of a variety of kinds g~ oing arounl to different countries
in the world, not without success. I here that more and more
we will diversify the markets for our -oods. ( Applause) 



AUSTRALIA AND THE COMMON MARKET
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES,
in the
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WEDNESDAY, 16th AUGUST, 1961 
STATEMENT* BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES)
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WEDNESDAY, 16th AUGUST, 1961
AUSTRALIA AND THE COMMON MARKET
The decision of the Government of Great Britain to negotiate
for admission to the European Economic Community is one of enormous political,
economic and historic importance for Great Britain herself, for Europe, for
the Commonwealth in general and Australia in particular, and for the world.
It is therefore essential that, at this first opportunity after the
visit of the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations ( Mr. Duncan Sandys)
and after Mr. Macmillan's announcement in the House of Commons. I should, on
behalf of the Australian Government, set out in this Parliament the nature of
the action proposed or taken, and of the issues involved.
But before I do that, there are some matters of history to be
recorded. Not long after the War, movements began for strengthening
Western Europe, economically and politically, against new threats to freedom
and progress. These took a particular practical form when, in 1950, the
European Coal and Steel community was promoted by M. Schumann of France.
This was a marked success, and paved the way for the later development of the
Common Market. In 1957 the Atomic Energy Community, known as " EURATOM", was set
up. Concurrently, on March 25th 1957 the Treaty of Rome was signed,
establishing the European Economic Community, sometimes known as " the Common
Market" or " The Six". The parties to the Treaty were France, Germany, Italy,
Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. While this Treaty was being negotiated,
Great Britain made her first decision, which was not to participate. At that
time, she felt that, although she approved of the idea of European unity, she
could not go in as a party because of her Commonwealth commitments, her own
system of protecting British agriculture and ( as I have always supposed)
because she did not choose to accept any abatement of her own sovereignty.
But she still took active steps. Her second decision was to
propose an Industrial Free Trade Area for the whole of Western Europe,
including The Six. This proposal would have met the agricultural and ( for
the greater part) the Commonwealth considerations which had previously 
deterred her. But " The Six" did not favour the proposals, and they failed.
A third decision was then taken. Great Britain formed the
European Free Trade Association with Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Austria,
Portugal and Switzerland. This group became known, and I shall refer to it,
as The Seven. Subsequently, attempts were made to bring about an association
between The Seven and The Six but without success.
I mention these matters of history because they will remind us that
the decision now taken is the fourth, and that as it involves detailed negotiations
with The Six on items some of which concern Australia very greatly, we
have now reached a period in which we must all clarify our attitudes on
identifiable matters of great practical moment.
It is now necessary to turn to the Treaty of Rome itself, to
discover the broad structure and mutual obligations of the economic community
which Great Britain will now negotiate to enter.
The preamble to the Treaty stated that the signatories were
" determined to establish the foundations of an ever-closer union among
European peoples." Under the Treaty, the " Common Market" will be progressively
established during a transitional period of somewhere between ten and fifteen
years. This involves the progressive elimination of Customs duties
and quantitative restrictions on trade between member States, and the establishment
of a common external tariff.
There is to be a common agricultural policy, providing for such
matters as increased production and organised marketing. Subject to the
negotiations, which will be put in hand, probably by about October, 1961,
The Six were due to meet before the end of this year to work out the agric-
Sultural policy. This is clearly one reason for the decision by Great Britain
at this time. She will, having regard to the Commonwealth position, need
to negotiate on agricultural matters before the final policy of The Six
has been settled. There is to be free movement of workers between the Member States.
Nationals may freely ( whether individuals or companies) establish themselves
in the territory of another Member State.
There are to be set up common provisions for conditions of trade
within the Common Market, co-ordination of economic policies, and the
harmonisation of social policies. One of the express purposes of Article 118
is to promote close collaboration between Member States in the Social field,
particularly in employment, labour legislation and working conditions,
training, and social security. 
The Treaty further provides for the establishment of a European
Investment Bank. Institutions are provided for; an Assembly of 142, a Council of
six, an Executive Commission of nine, and a Court of Justice to deal with the
interpretation and enforcement of the Treaty.
Under Article 237, any European nation may apply for full membership
in which case the agreement must be made by the unanimous act of the
existing members at present The Six.
Under Article 238 a nation may become an Associate Member, as
Greece recently has; but it is understood that such a course is not favoured in
the case of a substantially developed manufacturing nation.
The Treaty is, by Article 240, concluded " for an unlimited period".
There is no provision for withdrawal, at the option of the member concerned.
It would therefore appear that a Member can withdraw only with the consent of
all the others; the decision being in effect an amendment to the Treaty.
Any amendments to the Treaty will require ratification by all
Member States. Clearly, this is a formidable and far-reaching organism, of
profound economic significance, and with political objectives to which I
shall refer later. I will first endeavour, with as much brevity as possible, to
explain the nature of the economic interests involved in a negotiation by
Great Britain for membership.
Great Britain herself has, of course, enormous interests at stake.
Her decision to negotiate could not have been easy, and we may be sure that it
has been arrived at in the light of her immense experience and ripe judgment.
It would not be for us to substitute some opinion of our own, even if we had
formed one. For we are in no position to assess the elements in the British
economy, or the economic arguments this way and that concerning the effect
upon her of an achieved membership. We have, of course, a lively interest in
the accuracy of her final decision, for we want to see a powerful and
prosperous Great Britain, for the good of Australia in all aspects of our national
and international life and for the good of the whole free world.
She herself, as Mr. Sandys was careful to explain to us in the
course of our frank and helpful exchanges, is impressed by the competitive
advantages for her own exports and necessary trade balances which she
believes would derive from free access to a " Home Market" of over 250,000,000
people. This is a larger population than that of the whose own large
internal free trade home market with free access to enormous supplies of power
and materials, has given her great strength in the markets of the world. 
On the other hand, of course, Great Britain's entry into a
European free trade area will mean that her own industries will meet the full
blast of European competition, including that from countries like Germany
which has a longer working week, a less extensive system of social services,
and a high proportion of modern plant erected since the War-time destruction.
It is said that such competition will lead to greater efficiency, and no doubt,
given sufficient time, it will. In any case this aspect of the matter has
beyond question been fully weighed and considered. We ourselves see great
scope for an increase, by increased efficiency, in the Commonwealth Market.
Commonwealth countries to-day take 42/ of British exports, while The Six
take 14.5%. While Great Britain clearly hopes that, as a member of the
Common Market, she will increase her exports to Europe which would be a
great thing for her economy we simply direct attention to the undoubted fact
that her Commonwealth market must continue and grow if her overall strength
is to increase. But the Commonwealth market cannot grow if any conditions of
European membership inflict material damage upon the export earnings of
Commonwealth countries. That, of course, is the great matter to which we
will direct a close and studied attention before and during the negotiations,
until the final decision is taken.
There is another aspect of this great matter. We have throughout
felt that the Common Market, as it now stands, whatever effect it might
have on any individual country, would tend to increase the total prosperity
and purchasing power of The Six, and that Australia, among others, might hope to
find a growing market in Europe. As I will show later, we have for some time
been actively seeking to develop that market. Undoubtedly, the European
Economic Community has been succeeding. The economic recovery of France in
recent years has contributed to this. Trade exchanges between them have
increased 5/ o since the Treaty of Rome. They have accumulated massive
international reserves.
Yet the prospect of Australian benefit from this improvement will
depend very importantly upon the internal policies adopted by the Common
Market Countries in relation to their own agriculture. If, and there have
been suggestions of it, agricultural protectionism prevails, the entry of
foodstuffs, from e. g. Australia, will become more difficult. The pricing
policy adopted by the E. E. C. for its agricultural products will largely
determine the size of the European market for imported agricultural products
and the extent to which surpluses in given European countries can be exported,
Price stabilisation at the high levels now current in some Member States will
tend to increase production in the Community area. Under the encouragement
of high domestic prices, France is already developing an export surplus in
wheat. These matters will be dealt with by my colleague, the Minister for
Trade. It is sufficient for me to say that the advantages or disadvantages
to Australia, economically speaking, from the success of the Common Market will
be largely determined by policies worked out in Europe. 
It is difficult to assess the prospects:' For example, wool
is to enjoy free entry under the common external tariff. But it does not
automatically follow that European economic growth will correspondin gly
increase the demand for wool. We hope that it will, but the fact is that
although industrial production in The Six has been rising rapidly since 1957,
there has so far been no increase in thd volume of our exports of wool to
these countries. Our most definable interest arises in relation to our exports
to Great Britain; wheat, meat, dairy products, base metals, sugar, dried fruits,
fresh fruit and processed fruits. These constitute the great bulk of our
current exports to Great Britain of 1198m. Stg. They enjoy a preferred entry
into the British market, while meat and sugar are the subjects of special
long-term agreements. ' In exldhange. for-these preftences, Gi-eat'Britafin
enjoys preferential rates in our Customs Tariff and currenly ' exports goods to
the value of œ 259m. Stg. to Australia.
0 Clearly, this mutual preferential structure comes into the arena
of Great Britain's negotiations with The Six. Should the other members of the
European Free Trade Association decide also to apply for membership 6f the
Common Market ( which seems probable) there will be further important problems
to be decided. If, to take a good example, Denmark acceded, and Great Britain
acceded without securing a special position for Australian dairy products, the
preference now enjoyed by Australia inGreat. Britain would be reversed into
a preferentialt becauee duty free, entry for the Danish products.
I will not, In this general survey, go into the details of our
exports which are involved. But I think it most desirable that I should point
out to all the negotiators that if they want ( as I am sure they do) a strong and
growing Australia, they must recognise the peculiar Australian significance of
the relevant industries.
The development and populating of the North of Australia, from the
WKimberleys in Western Australia through the Northern Territory to North
Queensland depends primarily on beef cattle, minerals and sugar. The British
market has been of commanding importance in all three. Wheat stands next
to wool as our export staple; the welfare of at least two states is bound
up in its success. The intensive settlement in the irrigated areas of the
Murray and Murrumbidgee regions has been built up on dried vine fruits,
processed fruits, and the production of fat lambs. Not one of these industries
could exist on its present scale without large exports. In the case of dried
fruits and fat lambs, the British market is vital; for processed fruit it
is important. Our great mineral resources, in relation to which great expansion
is in sight, tend to be found in areas remote from the industrial cities
and the agricultural areas. They come, when developed, to sustain large
communities whose very existence depends upon a growing export for the products. 
of the mines, refineries and smelters.
It follows from all this, and I take leave to emphasise this
point, that severe blows to our export primary industries would fall with
particular severity upon particular areas,. industries, and people. The
impact would not be more or less evenly distributed over the whole nation, but
would be concentrated and therefore more damaging.
We cannot as yet anticipAte the result of the negotiations.
We can, I think, reasonably assume that Great Britain will not accede
to the Treaty of Rome unconditionally. Such an accession would bring to an
end the Commonwealth Preferential System which has endured for many years.
It would be highly damaging to Australia, and could be disastrous to our
neighbour and friend, New Zealand. As the preferential system operates both
ways, it could mean the end of B. P. T. rates in our Tariff schedules.
On the other hand, it may be too much to hope at this stage that
Great Britain will be allowed ( by the necessary unanimous agreement of The
Six) to maintain the Commonwealth Preferential System completely unimpaired.
Some compromise will no doubt be sought. We shall, of course,
battle for the best possible arrangements for the protection of our traditional
and legitimate interests.
We cannot doubt that Great Britain will be on our side in that
battle. We also have good friends in Europe, and can be assured of their
understanding. I have already said something about some of the exports which
are our special concern and need not repeat it. But we are not unaware of
the suggestions, already being made in some quarters', that the emergence in
practical form of the Common Market issue has suddenly made the Australian
Government aware of the need to develop new and deversified markets.
The suggestions are quite unfounded, as I shall quite easily
Wshow. The matter has not arisen with the suddenness which recent
publicity may suggest. We have for some time known that~ attempts would be
made to bring The Seven and The Six together. I myself had some general
talk about this with both Chancellor Adenauer and President de Gaulle in
1959. But no detailed proposals were ever put to or considered by us because
first, it was the specified object of Great Britain to keep agriculture
out of any negotiations, thus preserving our own and British interests, and
second, it was made clear that before any negotiations were decided upon,
we would be effectively consulted.
In London, immediately after the last Prime Minister's Conference
I proposed ( and the proposal was accepted) that our officials should go into
preliminary conference in London, so that, " getting down to brass tacks"
we could identify the points of difficulty and try to find common methods of
approach. 
This Conference preceded the visit of Mr. Sandys; a visit which
produced, for the first time on the political level, a specific exchange
of v. ews. Meanwhile much official study has been made in the relevant
departments. The matter has, therefore, not come suddenly out of a blue sky.
From Australia's point of view, neither time nor ground has been lost.
Indeed, we have been active for years in strengthening and diversifying
our exports to whatever markets we could find.
When, in January 1956, I announced the creation of the Department
of Trade, I pointed out that it would direct its major attention to the
stimulation of trade. It has, with the backing of the Cabinet, acted vigorously
in this field. It has continued to intensify the Trade drive through the efficient
and widely appreciated Trade Commissioner Service.
In 1949 there were 17 posts in 12 countries. In 1961-2 there will
be 37 posts in 28 countries. Since 1949 we have opened posts in Karachi,
Rome, Trinidad, Bonn, Montreal, Salisbury, Auckland, Manila, Christchurch,
New Delhi, Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok, Stockholm, Chicago, Ottawa, Nairobi, Accra
and Beirut with plans already announced for opening in Lima, Caracas and
Teheran. The Trade publicity vote has increased from œ E16,000 in 1949
to œ. 1,000,000.
0 InJul y 1956 we established the Export Payments Insurance
Corporation. On June 30th, 1961. current policies were valued at œ E26 m.
the export transactions covered being spread over 120 countries, mainly in
Asia and the Middle East.
Since 1954 we have organised 13 major trade or survey missions, and
have co-operated with industry associations in the organisation and despatch
of two trade ships. Another trade ship is planned for the Persian Gulf
in the new Year and trade missions to the Middle East, Pacific Islands, and
South America will be organised during 1961-1962.
There were three passages in the communique issued at the end of
our talks with Mr. Sandys which deserve special mention.
The first showed that the Australian government took a view of
the impact of Great Britain's membership of the Common Market upon Commonwealth
Relations different from that of Great Britain.
The second showed that we refrained from giving approval to the
opening of negotiations. 
The third made it clear that we wished to take an active part in
the negotiations affecting our special interests.
These statements have been interpreted by some as indicating a
spirit of hostility in our discussions, or at least a lack of a co-operative
Commonwealth approach. I want to make it clear that our discussions were
conducted on a proper Commonwealth level; our common interests never forgotten,
but our particular interests zealously expounded and upheld.
I should perhaps repeat our general attitude, for the benefit of
the people of Great Britain as well as our own.
We want whatever decisions are finally taken to bring added
strength to Great Britain, for her own sake, for our sake, and for the sake
of the world. For we are both British and Commonwealth.
But our first duty is to protect what we believe to be the proper
interests of Australia, whose future development will be a considerable factor
in Commonwealth strength, and will in particular produce economic advantages
for Great Britain herself. We do not doubt that this is understood and accepted
by Great Britain. There is therefore much common ground upon which to
stand. But the problems will not be solved by saying that we have common
objectives. The real issues will be those of method. Some long-accepted
ideas may need to be modified; there will be conflicts of opinion; the
advocacy of lawful interests may produce high and intense argument. But
such matters are in the British tradition. We need not fear them, nor
pretend that they do not exist.
The decision that will ultimately be taken by Great Britain, to
enter on the negotiated terms or to stay out, will be the most momentous peace
time decision in living memory. Upon its wisdom and success probably the
future of the free world and most certainly the future of our own family of
nations will turn.
It follows that Australia will bring to her own negotiations with
Great Britain and, as we venture to hope, with The Six, not only the most
powerfully presented exposition and defence of her own interests, for her own
future is our special care and responsibility, but also a strong and wide sense
of common responsibility. It will have been observed that Great Britain has put The Six
on notice of these complexities. She has informed them that Great Britain must
take account of the special Commonwealth relationship as well as the
essential interests of British agriculture and of the other members of the
European Free TradeAssociation. 
THE BROAD POLI T ICAL I SSUES
We believe that the entry of Great Britain into the European
Economic Community would have far-reaching political implications. As we
see it at present, we believe that it would mean a substantial departure
from, or even an abandonment of, the traditional British policy of the
Balance of Power, a policy which basically represented a form of isolationism,
of freedom from what I 4nay call standing or permanent obligations. True, as
Mr. Macmillan pointed out in the House of Commons on August 2n4t " in every
period when the world has been in danger of tyrants or aggression, Britain
has abandoned isolationism". Nevertheless, I pointed out that a decision to
enter the European Economic Community expressed to be a permanent body, and
with political " overtones" of the clearest kind, would represent the
abandonment of the old position and the acceptance of permanent European
involvements. I ' thought' th'at Mr. Macmillan accepted this when he said, in the
same speech, that while European federation should be rejected, a confederation
of European nations was an acceptable concept with which Great Britain could
associate willingly and whole heartedly.
The distinction between the organic distribution of sovereignty
which exists in a Federation and the looser association of a Confederation is one
which I was at pains to make in our discussions with Mr. Sandys. But even a
confederation involves mutual political obligations of a continuing kind.
A few days after we had been pointing this out in the Canberra
talks, the Heads of State of The Six issued a communique, dated July 18th,
which gave special point to the argument. The Communique stated that the
Heads of State and Governments were convinced that only a United Europe is
in a position, allied with the United States and other free peoples, to meet
the common dangers of the free world; that they were determined to develop
their political co-operation with the aim of European unification; and that
for this purpose they proposed to have regular meetings in order to bring their
policy into line and reach agreed views.
Of course, we need not suppose that European unification is just
around the corner. National histories and prides and characteristics are not
so easily set aside. But it does seem clear that, as the Rome Treaty's
economic provisions become effective, there must be a closer co-ordination, if
not actual integration, of political policies. For where there is a common
economic system established and made enforceable by law, the journey to
confederation or even federation is half completed. Common domestic policies
will cry aloupI for common external policies to protect them.
If Great Britain joins, and other West European nations with her,
and Europe becomes, step by step, a great power ( or a cohesive agglomeration
of power) Great Britain will become, we would hope and expect a most important
integer in that power. But she will, ex hvpothesi, cease to be completely 
independent in relation to European affairs.
This is why the decision which she must make after the proposed
negotiations, is so politically momentous.
We do not doubt the strength of the ' broad political considerations
which lie behind the decision to negotiate. Some of them clearly are:-
the importance of the cohesion of free Europe
as an area of resistance to Communist threat and aggression;
the fear that the perpetuation of economic rivalries and
differences in Europe: will mean political rivalries and
differences, and so weaken the joint will and capacity to
resist the Communist threat;
the importance of influencing that area from within,
if it needs such influence, to maintain po$ itive and
outward looking policies which will be non-neutralist in
character; the belief that Great Britain, as an influential member of
the European Community, will bring added strength to
British Commonwealth consultations.
I have stated these matters so that it may not be said that we
have failed to see the arguments on the great issues, and have adopted a small
and unimaginative view.
We understand, and freely acknowledge, that if true European
unity can, in spite of the history of the past hundred years, be brought about,
the prospects of world peace will grow brighter. But, as a senior Commonwealth
country, we have felt bound to say that we do not think that the Commonwealth
as a political organism would be strengthened. Great Britain, as the
centre of the Commonwealth, has in the past spoken for herself at Commonwealth
Conferences. After entering the new Europe, with its common policies and
institutions and rules, she could no longer speak with detachment. The
Treaty of Rome cannot be approbated and reprobated at the same time.
Nor could a growing interest, and, more than interest, involvement in Europe,,
be calculated to leave completely untouched the present British position in and
around Asia and Africa.
It is for these reasons that we have publicly expressed our grave
doubts of the continuance unimpaired of the Commonwealth to which we are deeply
attached, with which we have stood in peace and war, and the existence of
which still means much to civilisation. 
We may be wrong on this matter. We sincerely hope that events may
prove us wrong. But, as much is being said about the impact of any accession
to the Treaty of Rome on the Commonwealth in its present form, we think it proper
to express our own view.
In the long run, of course, the stern facts of contemporary history
may require some abatament of the special Commonwealth relation. in favour
of a powerful European unity: we do not as yet know. But it would be
a mistake to pretend that there was no change when in fact there had been a
great one. We have not based our opinion upon any narrow ground of the
importance of absolute sovereignty. All international pacts, from the
United Nations to N. A. T. O. and S. E. A. T. O. involve the exercise of sovereignty
to limit, by free choice, liberty of individual action. But neitl~ er U. N.
nor N. A. T. O. nor S. E. A. T. O. is a super-state. Parties to the agreement may
leave as they think fit, in the exercise of the very sovereignty by which they
joi'ned. The Treaty of Rome., as I have pointed out, is different.
There must be unanimous agreement for the joining and the leaving. Complete
independence of action no longer exists.
We pronounce no dogma. We do not seek to turn back the great
tides of international affairs. We do not say that the British view of the
effect upon the Commonwealth of a decision by Great Britain to go into
Europe is demonstrably wrong. In the present state of the world, with
bullying and bluster our daily diet, it may be that the Commonwealth must
once more change, for the common good.
Even a cursory examination of the Treaty of Rome and its
proposals will indicate, as I have briefly indicated before, the immense variety
and complexity of the matters to be negotiated. The decision as to whether
we should participate directly in those negotiations which affect our special
interests does not depend on Great Britain, but on the willingness of The Six
to permit it. We are, however, confident that Great Britain will do her
best to bring it about. So far as we can judge at present, the actual
negotiations, once begun in, say, October, will last for at least six months.
They will need to be proceded by close exchanges between Great Britain and the
other Commonwealth countries, some time next month. If these preliminary
talks are to prove valuable in a fairly short time, our representatives will
need the best possible briefing from this end. For this purpose, we have
established a special Committee of Cabinet, to sit-frequently and to be
available at short notice, working in conjunction with senior officials and
expert advisers. Important decisions will need to be made at this end, not
only before but during the course of the negotiations themselves. For the
problems confronting our export industries are so great that every last
detailed care must be taken to solve them in a way which protects, and indeed
enlarges, our national,. developmental, and trading future. 



CONFERENCE OF AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES
at Sydnay. 1_ 926__ 6
att nRG ens
Speechby the Prime inister, the Rt. HoRG._ Men,.
Mr. Chancellor, Mr. Chairman, gentlemen:
It is quite true that today is for me, or this few
minutes will be for me, an interlude. Last night I was engaged
in the complexities of the European Common Market, and when I get
back to Canberra after lunch I will no doubt resume thoze
complexities; only to find that before the Test Match is
completed I will be involved in the complexities of the Budget
Debate. So you can imagine that it is something to come away from
it all and to see such a distinguished collection of people
gathered together for so magnificent a purpose, a purpose of which
Iwill say something in a moment.
I should explain to you that these unearned increments
of mine, these Honorary Doctorates tiat I seem to have been
collecting around the world involve one embarrassment. Whenever
I attend something and they say " Academic Dress" of course I must
be glorious and wear a Doctor's gown. But in what capacity shall
I masquerade? Well that problem has been solved for me because
although 12 or 13 Universities around the world have made me a
Doctor, and I had occasionally got away with a hood, the only
time I ever got amay with a gown was in Queensland. ( Laughter,
applause) And even then hen the gown was delivered to me, and
finally unpacked in Canberra, it had the bill for it at the
bottom of the box3" Laughter) But I am bound to say to my
friend, Dr. Schonell that I haven't taken the bill seriously.
( Laughter) I am wailing to sou whether in due course a rather
curt little communication arrives, named Account Rendered. If
that happens I shall have to do something about it.
But when I come here the Vice-Chancellor of the Sydney
University is good enough to lend me his Bristol gown, which I am
just as much entitled to wear as he is; but which he happens to
own, This is a matter of contention between the two of us. I
always say to him, " How did you get away with a gown? After all
the great Winston Churchill invested me, and then took it back".
Put he got away with it. And the result is that when I come down
here I just have a message sent forward " Bristol please", And
of course he is shrewd enough to know that I am referring to the
gown and not to sherry.
This Conference is, I think, one of enormous
significance. All of us ho have been concerned about tertiary
education you, intimately from the inside of University affairs;
and I, as a very friendly outsider have all been exercised in
our minds, I think, about the future. In one sense, in a very
important senseo, it is a oreat thing that in Australia there
should be so many more thousands, year by year, anxious to have
Univrsity experience, and to achieve a univeLsity training.
That is a very, very good thing. But from the point of view of
practical administrators, and even from the point of view of
practical politicians, the prospect of coping, decade after
d,, cade, with so many more thousands, and thereby incurring all the
responsibility in the completing of present universities, and the
creating of now ones, is a tremendous problem,
I may tell you that I have heard it said in political
circles, even in the purlious of the Cabinet, that the
Universities will need to make more effective use of what they
have if these numbers are to be coped with within the reasonab. e
limits of Budgets and materials. That, I think, is very true.
The day has ; one by when we can jo along quiatl: y the day has
certainly, I am proud to say, gone by when universities have to 
live from day to day or if not from day to day at any rate from
year to year. In my own university days I am perfectly certain that
the authorities of the University of Melbourne had no idea as to
how much money they might have next year; it was enough to cope
with the problems of this year. From tine to time they went
along to the Premier of the day and did their best to extract from
him another œ 10,000, œ 20,000. I remember one Premier who said,
" Yes, I'll give you œ X, 000 more on the grant provided you make a
certain anprtaYment." WIell that is not a very satisfactory state of
affairs. But it merely illustrates how two things coincided: the
major dependence of universities on Governments; and their
inability to know, in any one year, what they could plan for in
the following year Because of this, because of the enormous
post-war demand for university training, and after a few years of
special grants worked out on a fairly arbitrary basis, which I
began in 1950, I myself came to the conclusion that there ought to
be something more forward looking, taking a longer view, taking a
broader view. And so we established the Murray Cormmission.
Sor. e of you before today have heard me say that the
Murray Cormmission appointrent represented a certain -amount of
sleight of hand on my own part. I don't think anybody else
realised that you couldn't have a pow,-rful committee investigating
the condition of the Universities in ZAustralia without having
recommendations that would involve very large sums of money. My
experience has been that when something is going to involve a very
large sun of money, you want to deal with it on the highest
po. s'ibl. lovel, and get people to accpt a certain number of really
first-class ideas before you cone down to tile sordid question of
cash, That is what happened. I saw Sir Keith Murray in London and
asked him to conme He said he would if the Chancellor of the
Exchequer would allow him. I saw the then Chancellor who was Mr.
Harold Macmillan, and he agreed. Then I knew that all that was
needed was for the committee that he presided over to make an
investigation, and make a report and something would happen
provided the Australian Chancellor of the Exchequer proved to be
agreeable. As I don't need to remind you, the first result, one of
the results that perhaps the outsider doesn't appreciate to the
full, was that it looked at the problem in relation to a 3-year
term: it wanted to create a financial state of affairs in which
people could plan forward, Now you may not realise . s clearly as
I do i-yself chat this i. s in the toetii of all traditional Budget
practices. The Budget is an annual Budget; the Treasury very
properly and very spiritedly takes the greatest possible
exception to cormitting future Budgets and as for getting a 3-year
y . a ij. . o p
iaounts of money, this is alumot anathema. But; in Gcis ca~ s wr;.
got away with it and the first triennium went into operation. It
involved a trer: ondous increase in the CommQonwealth financial
responsibility. From 1950 to 1957 1950 being the first year in
which there was a State Grants ( Universities) Bill we found a
total of œ l116 millions. The first trionniium of the Mi:? urr. y
Report which was, of course, adopted by us, meant that in 3 years
the amount was to be just under œ 22mo Now compared to the total
cost of maintaining a proper university structure in Australia
that perhaps is no very grLat sum because the State Governments
themselves have boon called on to find larger amounts of money in
their turn. Then we appointed the Comruission under Sir Leslie Martin.
He is, I have no doubt, regarded by the Universities as a little
bit on the cheese-paring side, a little bit niggly over a mere
matter of a million or two, I can assure you that when he comes to
see me at Canborra he looks three ways to see that there are no
Treasury officials aoout because he knows that they regard him as 
the most extravagant r. mn we ever had attached to a Conmomnwealth
instrumentality. Therefore I tnink I might say that while he has
no hope of unbridled popularity, he has, in his present position,
a narvellous opportunity for reconciling demand and supply, for
constantly reminding the political arm of the immense importance
of university training and, at the sane time, occasionally
reminding professors, particularly professors of science, that
there is such a thing as a Budget, that money has to be brought
from:.. oamewh: e. So I regard him as performing a very great
public service. When his Commission sat it produced its reco m-endations
totalling very nearly œ 41m. for a second triennium.
Now there is one other fact that is worth having in
mind. Before the war the university populations in Australia
were not very great. After the war there was a sudden
burgeoning of demand for higher education: the universities
became crowded; probably because of the shortage of facilities,
the excessive size of classes and so on, the failure rate,
particularly in first year, becajei very disturbing. But the
population continued to grow. Sir Keith Murray thought that he
was being a little extravagant when he estimated in 1957 when the
university population was 30,000 odd, that it would rise to
48,000 by 1960 and to 71,000 by 1965. This was an enormous
prospect. The fact of course was that in 1960 the population
wasn't 48,000; it was 53,000, And the estimate now made and
I don't think it is at all extravagant for 1965 is 90,000.
This has produced a probl wahich I believe is one of your great
purposes here to consider.
Is it reasonably to be supposed that we can go on the
well-trodden paths, maintain our original and somewhat orthodox
conception of a university, and at the sane time cope with
university populations of this kind? Because this, of course,
will mean enormous expenditures, It doesn't follow that
Governrments in future will necessarily take the same vioew of
these matters as my own Government. You can't gamble on that.
There will be, we know, tremendous demands. Consequently we
began to discuss I did r. yself with Sir Leslie and with his
Conrrission whether there was a possibility, in fact a demand,
for a review of the structure of tertiary education, to see
whether it can be made more diversified, whether every
univuersity, every tertiary establishnent called a university
ought to be pursuing the sane lines of study, and doing the sane
kind of things, and achieving the sane results. This is an
enormously difficult problem,
They have, as yo-. i know, established in England a
Conittec to investigate this, having regard to the nods and
resources of the nation, I expect within a day or two now to
announce the appointment of a Committee in Australia which will
perform a similar function. I was delighted when I found that
you were having this Conference this unique Conference, because
it seemed to me that the subjects that you had taken for
discussion and indeed the paper is already distributed had a
profound bearing on this very matter, and that the Comittee that
will come into existence ought to achieve immenso benefit from
the results of your work.
But if you will allow me to say so, there are two
things I would suggest to you. A Conference occasionally
attracts a distinguished collection of ninds: it has the lost
valuable discussions; it has its records prepared and it
dissolves Somebody reads the report; somebody reads the
record; somebody else doesn t. It all tends then, to sag a
little. I believe that you are meeting to discuss matters which
. must produce a genuine impetus and a continuing impetus if these 
problems are to be solved with wisdom all over Australia. So I
would like to think that after this great Conference finishes
you would think fit, perhaps, to establish a few working parties
to follow up some of the things that you will have discussed, to
develop then, to be in a position to bring before the Colmmittee
that is going to be appointed, the results of your studyo
I firnly believe that you are going to discuss a
problon, that this Committee is going to examine a probloe of
the utmost complexity. It is one not to be solved by any casual
onlooker but only by having people who know this business from
the inside and who have a sense of responsibility for the future,
putting their brains to it and continuing by some such method as
I have suggested, to pursue their oxaL. inations and to push
forward their results.
Ag. n, of course and it is unnecessary to say this to
you, but I s3y it because there are Vice-Chancellors present
the Universities themselves have an im.: ense responsibility in
this field. They can't leave this just to a Coiir. itteo; they
can't leave this just to a body of advisers. I know perfectly
well that they realise that there is a great problem of
organisation in front of then, the constant search for nore
efficiency, the better use of resources.
There is another aspect 3f all this and it is the
only other matter that I wanted to say snmething to you about.
There is a great disposition in our country to think of
everything, evaluate everything in terlns of noney. ' All you need
to do' and " you" always means the Cormonwealth I suppose ' is
to find œ X millions and theproblem is over'. That, of course, as
you all know, is not true. I can't cormit my successors but I
believe m-yself that the social conscience of Australia will
require Governments to go on finding physical resources, noney
and otherwise, for the development of tertiary education, I
haven't the slightest doubt that that is so. But the problem
that concerns ny mind much more is whether those universities of
the future, con. anding these resources, will be able to maintain
the academic standards that have hitherto obtained. This is a
tremendous problem.
In 1959 the total academic staff in the Universities of
the States was 3,392. It is nou estimated that by 1966 which is
not far off, that number will have to be increased by 3 613. In
other words hero, in a period of five or six years we will need
more than to double the existing numbers of academic staffs in
tertiary education. This is not easy. Even to me, a layman, it
seems to present the most formidable difficulties.
Because here you are, University people, teachers,
researchers, people who have found your vocation in this great
occupation and every one of you, from time to time, in the still
watchos of the night, . ust ponder over the future of the
University that you are attached to; its future standards, the
maintenance of the highest possible quality in the teacher so
that the highest possible product nay be obtained in graduating
students. You don't get that result just by having enough
money. It is well for us to renreber that we are living in a
world, the population of which will more than double between now
and the turn of the century and that as the standards of living
rise, particularly in the groat new countries, there is going to
be a greater and greater demand for universities and for
university teaching. So our prospects : ff, so to speak, buying
additional people from the rest of the we rld is not a very rich
one. Some people will be attracted here. I hope so. I believe 
so. But in the long run we will be thrown on our own resources.
to a major extent. That oeans that our universities thioselves
must produce these teachers, these professors and lecturers of
the future. And if they are second class then before long the
university itself will be third class. Deliver us fron having
in Australi a a sries of second-rate hones of learning,
It will be a tragdy for Australia if, as a result of
university dovelop: i. ent, we dn't produce, year by year, out of
our universities people who are not just qualified to earn a good
incone, but people who have the heart of learning in their
minds, who go on learning, who have the scholar's habit even
though they nay be engaged in some highly practical undertaking
as the world would see it. The standard must go up. We must
not have a sort of GroshrLm's law applying. That means not just
that we want 3,600 -ore academic staff; it means that we want
3,600 first-class poorle for the academic staffs; people of
individuality and learning and enthusiasm and who will,
therefore, produce their own kind out of their class rooms in
Clue course. So, Sir, these are great and difficult problems. I
believo that they will all be solved. But the first thing to do
is for all of us to recognise that the problems exist. We must
make better use of what we hove. ! eo must seo that whatever we
can get in future is related properly to our basic conception of
what the particular students need to get. Above all things, we
need to make it quite plain that for the universities of the
future, and for the old ones as they continue, the standard must
be nothing lower than the best.
You know every one of you has been an undergraduate;
every one of you can look back on some professor you sat under,
some teacher you sat under. I find the greatest pleasure in
looking back on some of the men who helped to fashion mo, to
realise that they were not only men of learning, but men of great
character and quality. They are the people who make a
university; they are the people who maintain in the conmunity,
increasingly, a sense of pride in the university. If people
have that pride, and arc determined that it is to be maintained
during their lifetimes, I believe that you needn't worry about
the community reaction to what may need to be done. The great
things to be done, the kind of thing that you are hero to discuss
is to see that the quality is upheld, that ways and means are
discovered of not wasting talent, but of employing it to the
highest possible extent for what I believe to be the greatest
educational task that this country confronts.
Sir I declare the Conference open. ( Applause) 



BUDGET, 1961
Speech in the House of Representatives by the Prime
Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies. 24th August, 1961
Sir I must be careful not to laugh. This debate has
been quite interesting. It has been very reminiscent of budget
debates that I have listened to for a long, long time. I have
heard some of it directly, and some of through the medium of the
wireless. I have learnt more things about myself than I ever
knew before. Not for the first time, but for about the twelfth
time, I have listened to honorable gentlemen on the Opposition
side explaining with some vehemence how my Goverrunont is busy
ruining the country, creating disaster, and bringing despair into
the hearts of people. This may be, of course, merely
repetition for the sake of emphasis, but I know, and all those
who have been here for a similar time know, that this is the
customary diet. The odd thing is that, in spite of this ruinous
process of administration that we have adopted, not only in 1949
when, I gather from one honorable member who spoke earlier, we
won the election by fraudulent practices, but in 1951, 1955 and
195Z at five consecutive gene ral elections the people of
Australia, who are not fools, have been told of this kind of
thing.
Mr. Costa You said this afternoon that people are gullible.
MR. MENZIES Gullible are they? Is that the Labour Party's viev?
All I can say is that in this series of five elections they. have
voted for us although there has never been an election campaign
yet which was not preceded by prophesies from honorable
gentlemen opposite of mass unemployment and grave disaster. At
the end of nine years of our incompetent administration, the
people of Australia gave us the biggest majority that a
government has over had. Gullible are they?
So I speak tonight on behalf of the people of
Australia who have voted for us, who have maintained us, who
have supported us, and who are now under attack for their own
folly, so the Opposition says. That is the issue. Are the people
stupid? Do they not understand these things? Or has the
Opposition suddenly, in the still watches of the night,
discovered the answers for the first time? It has never had them
before. I do not propose to waste my tine on this or that. I
want to say something about the spcech of the prospective Prime
Minister the Leader of the Opposition. It is quite proper to
refer to him in that way, as you will at once be disposed to
agree. One must fight in one's own division. Therefore, I deal
with the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, who was
described this afternoon in a somewhat intemperate speech as
am I permitted to use his name? the great Arthur Augustus
Calwell. I know him very well and we are, I am happy to say on
the best of terms. I have no objection to being Prime Minister
and he thoroughly enjoys being Leader of the Opposition. The
other night ho favoured us with a speech on the Budget and I will
with proper respect, confine my remarks within a limited period
of tirie to what ho had to say.
Mr. Peters Get on with it.
MR. I, 4ENZIES Yes, I will got on with it. So far I have been
doing rather well, don't you think? The theme song of the
Leader of the Opposition I quote his words was: All the
troubles in the economy have been Govornment-caused. I would like
to say to my distinguished friend, if he wore in the chamber,
that, as a matter of advocacy, it is a very great mistake to 
overstate your case. He said: All the troubles in the economy
have been Govrnment-caused. That remarkable proposition
ignores the rest of the world and the great tides of events that
sweep around the world. Having established that proposition to
his own satisfaction, he says what? He cannot say, and he did
not say, that we created the boon of 1959-60, because he denies
that such a boom over existed. I want all honorable members and
all the people of Australia who may learn of the honorable
gentleman's statement, to got that firmly fixed in their minds.
He denies that there was a boom in 1959-60. I think I have a
note here of what he said. I must quote his precise words. He
referred to
The myth
I am not lisping
of the 1960 boom which the Government has been trying to
create in recent months.
That is how the Leader of the Opposition disposed of the boom.
He said that there , as no boom. It never existed; it was an
invention, an act of imagination on our part.
Mr. Haylen Hallolujah, I'm a boom!
MR. MENZIES I know that the honorable member who interjocts
agrees that there was a boom, but his Leader, or whatever he is,
says that there was no boom. If the Leader of the Opposition
means anything, he means that everything was going nicely, I am
delighted to see that the honorable gentlemn is here now. For
his benefit, I must repeat what I said. I was saying that the
Leader of the Opposition denied that there was a boom. He
described it as a myth created by the Government in recent months
Mr. Fox He will " myth" out, too.
MR. MENZIES I am sorry that honorable members should see fit to
laugh, because laughter is prohibited by the Sydney " Mirror". I
never read it without laughing. But what does the honorable
gentleman mean, if he moans anything, by his statement that there
was never a boom? Uhat he must moan is that, there being no boom
and everything, presumably, going nicely, wo, within a year of an
election, being minded to cormit suicide politically, took
unnecessary measures and caused a depression and dangerous
unemployment all of which my honorable friend will cure by the
time-tLaoured Evatt-Calwell recipe of increased inflation. If he
does not mean that, I ask everybody: What does he Tean? If
there was not a boom if everything was completely normal-why
in the name of fortune did the Government that I have the honour
of leading suddenly make up its mind to take unnecessary measures
to cause a depression and to go out to create unemployment? I
put this to the common sense, if not of honorable gentlemen
opposite, at least of the groat Australian people: Why should
they suppose that we would commit such folly, unless they imagine
that in a single stroke we had all gone mad?
Now the Leader of the Opposition, having committed
himself to these propositions, says, ' When I come in" he moans
after the next elections " I am going to have a February Budget"
I suppose January will be devoted to reconstruction and all
that " for a œ 100,000,000 deficit". That sounds magnificent,
does it not? It is the master-stroke of statesmanship. I think
the honorable gentleman does well to be optimistic. Every
leader should be optimistic. He says, " He have an election. I
come in. HJe form a Cabinet. We get to work and in February I
bring in a new Budget for a œ 100,000,000 deficit." A Budget in
February, let me remind honorable members, would relate to the
rust of the financial year. Itwould not become effective until 
March. There would be March, April, May and June. So in four
months of the current financial year the honorable gentleman
would run into a deficit of œ 100,000,000. Subtracting the
deficit of œ 16,000,000 for which we budget, he would have an
œ 84,000,000 deficit for four months of the financial year. I am
sure that, as an honest man, he means that; but I am equally
sure that, as an intelligent man, he does not think it will
happen. But if his statement means anything, it means that he
would, in his Budget in February, introduce taxation reductions
and increase Government expenditure at the rate of 000 000
for four months and, therefore, at the rate of œ 250,006 006 a
year. This is the thoughtful contribution made by the Leader of
the Opposition. The arithmetic is simple. The deficit would
run at the rate of œ 250,000,000 for a full year.
Let me go on from that point, because I am perfectly
certain that my honorable friend does not design himself to be
the Prime Minister just for the balance of the financial year.
This is always a salutary reminder. There will be another year,
the financial year 1962-63. WIhat would he do in his Budget for
1962-63? The honorable member for Shortland ( Mr. Griffiths) is
interjecting. I am not asking him, because he will have nothing
to do with it. What would the Leader of the Opposition do with
the Budget for 1962-63? Would he go flat out for another deficit
of œ 250,000,000? Is that what we are being promised by this
party that wants development and hates unemployment? Is that
what the game is? Because if it is not, then presumably, having
got through an election on this rather lush promise he will, in
1962-63, bring in a Budget in which he rjstores taxes, or cuts
expenditure in order to achieve a balance, or continues the
inflationary process and budgets for a deficit of over
œ 200,000,000. Now, Sir, I do not ask the honorable gentleman to
come clean onthis matter in this debate, because he has already
spoken; but I do hope that he will cone clean on it with the
people of Australia before piling day.
We want him to come clean on this: Are we being
promised a vast inflationary system of finance because I will
say something about the consequences of that a little later or
is he just saying something at this stage in order to get over
the problem of the moment, and will then come along six months
after polling day saying, " I an sorry. Those taxes I reduced I
must now increase. That expenditure I let out I must now pull
back"? Because, Sir, he has made glowing promises of easier
borrowing. I wonder if he would mind my repeating it? Easier
borrowing! Easier borrowing for the Government? For the people?
How do you make borrowing easier if you are running into an
inflationary boon? How do you make borrowing cheaper if the
value of money is running away through inflation, as it
undoubtedly would on the programme he has put before us a
programme which, I may say, was so admirably exposed by the
honorable member for Wide Bay ( Mr. Bardidt) this afternoon.
Mr. Curtin Awl
MR. MiHZIES Yes, aidirably exposed. It is a pity you were not
here listening at the time.
Mro Reynolds You are easily pleased.
MR. MENZIES The hon: rable member says that I am easily pleased.
If he would make only one bright remark I would be delighted.
Easier borrowing. If I may use the famed Macaulayan phrase,
every schoolboy knows that in a period of inflation borrowing is
harder because interest rates must rise. But he is going to have
easier borrowing. He is going to do something about the pay-roll
tax. I must say to him, as an old friend, that I rather admired
the way in which he phrased it. He did not really say, " We will
abolish the pay-roll tax." That would have been well received 
by some of those business interests that we are supposed to
serve, would it not? Ho did not actually say, " We will abolish
it." He said, " We will look into this to see whether we can
replace it in some other way." That is as broad as it is long,
and I do not attach much significance to it. He is going to do
something about the petrol tax. He is going to have vastly
increased expenditure in " Jestern Australia and Queensland, in
which States the expenditure by this Goveornnent leaves for dead
whatever was done by the Labour Party in its own time. He drags
out the good old thing about an ovrseas shipping line the
deficit on which no doubt he will carry on Treasury account. He
is going to have some sort of government ihsurance company that
is going to be unlike any other insurance company and be able to
carry on profitably at a loss.
This is the kind of thing he says, and because he has
put it in that way, because he or whoever has advised him has
looked up all the points of criticism, particularly in one or two
places that we know of, and they have added them together, he
produces this astonishing prograrmme so astonishing that I hope
Australia will never have to suffer from it.
Mr. Reynolds It has suffered from the Menzies Governmeiont a lot
MR. MBJZIES Australia has suffered from the Menzies Government
for twelve years, and if you can find anywhere in the world a
happier and more prosperous country than Australia, I should like
you to drop no a postcard.
Now I pass on from that in order, if I May with
profound respect, to point out a few uaps in the reasoning of the
honorable gentleman who made this policy speech. I admit it is
a little subject to correction, because the federal executive of
his party had not finished meeting at the time the policy speech
was made, and we all know that the policy of the Labour Party is
fixed by twelve people, or whatever it may be, outside. But I
say nothing more about that, because I an sure he has had a
difficult time. However, first of all, let me take the gaps in
his reasoning. He denies the boom. I just repeat that, because
he went to some pains to say that there was not a boom. I wonder
Sir, if the honorable gentleman believes that, and whether he is
unaware of the tremendous rise in 1959-60 of what has been
called " fringe banking" but which I much prefer myself to call
money dealing by people dealing in money, many of them making
Qnor. lous profits in consequence.
Mr. L. R. Johnqson You could have stopped that.
MR. NENZIES You say so, but I had other legal advice. Then
there is hire-purchase finance. Is he unaware of the tremendous
development in this field, of the development of fancy rates of
interest, or does he deny that those things existed? To me,
there were many indications of a boom, and to my delighted
colleagues they conveyed the some idea.
Does the Leader of the Opposition deny that we have
had a tremendous speculative boom in land sales?
Mr. Peters Promoted by the Governmento
MR. MENZIES Wait a moment! You do not get away from it by
saying " promoted by the Government". I am asking a simple
question: Was there a boom in land selling? Was there a
speculative land boom?
Mro Haylon Ring up Artie. He will toll you.
MR. 1ENZIES All right. Run away as fast as you like. Having
a sense of relativity I am saying this to the Leader of the 
Opposition, who says that there was no such thing as a boon. You
do not explain this by saying that somebody was to blame for it,
because immediately you say that you adnit it existed. But the
Leader of the Opposition denies it existed. Does he? I wonder
what people would say who found themselves having to pay a most
fantastic sun of money for a bit of land on which to put up a
hone. But the Leader of the Labour Party denies that there was
any such thing. Does he deny that there was a speculative boon
on the stock exchange? Not a bitU He says there was no boom. I
do not like speculative boons on the stock exchange becauso,
quite frankly, stock exchange speculation very seldon, if ever,
puts new noney into industry. Does he deny that there was
enornous increase in purchasing power and that in consequence
there was an inr: ense denrand for inports? Does he deny that? I
put this, because he never thought fit to refer directly or
indirectly, to the fact that there was a grave threat to our
overseas reserves, which were falling rapidly aid, but for strong
action, would have fallen to the point of danger. The
prospective Prine Minister of Australia is unaware of the fact.
It is so trifling in his mind that never, from first to last in
a carefully prepared speech, did he mention it. This is the
leader of the alternative government. Does he deny that there
was an acute competition for labour and materials? I wonder
whether it crossed his eye, looking ovvor the records in the
course of his studies, that because of this boon and this
tremendous donand for basic materials, Australia, with all its
remarkable increase in local production, had become a net importer
of steel. There was no mention of it.
These are all the m. rks of -a bo.) n, and a government
that is confronted by a boor and is afraid to do something about
it is not fit to be a governreont. A Government that inherits a
quelled boom, or an abolished boon, and sets out to create a new
one by its policy is not fit to be the Government of Australia
either. Being confronted by all these obvious questions the
honorable gentleman took refuge in saying that the boon was an
imaginary thing created by our imagination and having no existence
in fact. So, Sir, as I repeat, he paid no attention to the
problem of the balance of payments. May I remind him and remind
Australia, if it needs to be done, that this wonderful country of
ours lives on international trade more than does any other
country of its population. We are one of the great trading
nations of the world. I am not boasting about this. It is a
fact that if you put down the first ten trading nations in the
world in absolute terms, not in comparative terms, we are one of
then. Of course we live on it, because our exports enable us to
pay for the things that we bring in from overseas, the bulk of
which are in aid of production in Australia itself. We are a
groat trading nation and therefore we have a vital interest in
what our balance of payments may be.
Do honorable members realize that all the economic
troubles that have arisen in Great Britain of late are troubles
of balance of payments America had a few of the same kind not
so long ago all problems of how you can keep your exports up to
the world so that you may buy what you want from the world and
not go bankrupt in the process? This is the simplest possible
way of stating the problem of the balance of payments. But the
honorable gentleman opposite says nothing about it. It does not
count in his world. Whoever advised him did not think of it.
Governments have had to think about it very greatly in ny time.
I wonder lam now speculating on what would have gone on in my
friend's mind if he had thought about this matter lad r. it this
is a dangerous and almost an impertinent exercise on my part
whether he would have said that there would not have been a
problem of that kind if import licensing had not been abandoned.
It is a very udd thing that in his speech, so much adn irod in the
Sydney afternoon press 
Mr. Haylen The dailies were not bad cither.
MR. MENZIES I was referring only to the juvenile section; you
know what I nean.
Mr. Haylen I understand. You would read the conics first,
MR. MENZIES I always do except that I road the loading
articles; they are the sane thing. Of course, my friend reads
the comics, provided they are guaranteed written or drawn by an
Australian. Anyhow, we will not quarrel about that. The Leader
of the Opposition said not a word about import licensing. I
thought he was going to say, " Of course, there was a boon and you
caused it. You did not invent it; you caused it. And you would
not have caused it if you had not got rid of import licensing."
Now, Sir, this leaves us free to speculateo Does not
the Loader of the Opposition know that in a period of domestic
inflation with full and, fron tine to tine, over-full
employment a reduction in the supply of goods will increase the
inflationary pressure unless corresponding with the reduction in
the supply of goods by impor. t licensing, you stiffen up the credit
restrictions at hone? You cannot have it both ways. There are
two weapons you can use on this matter. One is to let nore goods
in, and the other is to restrict credit at hone by various
processes. But if you let all the goods in, then quite palpably
you will have to restrict credit twice as much; otherwise the
inflationary boon will So right out through the roof. This is
elementary. You do not need to be a professional economist to
know that. But the honorable gentleman has thought fit to ignore
it. I wonder, Sir, whether my friend, who is a good Australian
and believes in Australian industry, regards import licensing,
with its inevitably arbitrary and bureaucratic character, as a
sound permanent means of encouraging Australian industry because
quite frankly I do not. I am a great believer in Australian
industry. I am a life-long protectionist. I will not accept the
proposition that the right way to protect Australian industry is
to put it at the mercy of the government of the day and of the
officialdom of the day under a licensing system. Import licensing
lasted long enough, and I hope that it will never cone back.
There is one other question that I ought to put. I
wonder whether my honorable friend, when he wins the next
election and puts this new Budget of his into operation, is going
to restore import licensing. He did not toll us. I am sure that
as a member of the govornm cnt which made Australia a party to the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, known as Gatt, he will
realize that with the present state of our overseas reserves
because our measures have restored then to a position of
abounding health in the last few months he could not
re-introduce import licensing because, as he well knows and as
his Government explained to us at the time, you cannot impose
quantitative restrictions except to protect your balance of
payments, and the balance today thanks to these measures that
we have taken is so healthy that nobody would have believed it
possible five months ago. That of course, explains why the
Leader of the Opposition has not promised that he will restore
import licensing. He has not even referred to import licensing
and in fact, of course, he would not dream of making a promise
because he knows that until his policy has been operating for six
months there will be no justification at all for import licensing,
Then, Sir I am bound to say that I heard this with
great reluctance and with some sorrow I am accustomed to some
of the extravagances elsewhere, but the honorable gentleman
seemed to me to set out to destroy confidence, to preach gloom,
to prophesy mass unemployment and to prophesy a depression deeper
than anything we have ever known. Of course and listening in 
this afternoon, I have learnt that there are quite a few
expressions that are now parliamentary it is utter drivel to
talk about a mass depression of that kind. There is not the
faintest reason for any such prophecy.
The fact is that every one in this chamber I say
this emphatically on behalf of all of us hates to have out of
work people who like to be in wo?: k and who are competent to be in
work. Of course we do. No gover. nument in our history has done
nore over a period of twelve years to maintain the highest
possible level of employment than has this Government. We do not
need to be told by bellowing fellows you know, Sir, whom I
mean about unemployment and its hardships. Unemployment
presents the nost tremendous human hardship that one can possibly
imagine. But when people make speeches which, unless those
people are utterly stupid, are intended to increase unemployment
and human hardship, I express my utter contempt for them,
One of the greatest tasks we have is to get rid of the
relatively small amount, bur too big for our comfort of
unemployment that exists au present. The right way to do this is
not to destroy confidence in the cormunity but to encourage it.
Let me put it into simple tcrms. Today, the numbers of registered
unemployed are a little more than twice what they were in the
period of the boom. Do not let us forget that we have always had
a number of people registered as unemployed, even in a boom when
we have had full employment. Let us agree that the nunmer today
is twice as great as it was that is 50,000, 60,000 or whatever
you nay care to call it. These people are tremendously important.
How do we get them back to work? I put it in the simplest terms:
We get them back by improving business turnover in this country
by 2 per cent that is all.
Mr. Griffiths What sort of business?
MR. MENZIES The business of buying at the ultimate end, if you
want it explained to you. If people are threatened with
unemployment and are constantly told by their supposed leaders,
" You never know, you may be out of a job tomorrow; this is going
on and it will get worse and worse until it reaches the Lang
percent.", then, of course, they will button up. But if they go
about their affairs in the normal way, believing, as I think they
should, that this country is in a resurgent movement which will
make everybody before long forget these troubles, business
activities will return to normal. I put it in this way: 2 per
cent. more buying at the ultimate end
Mr. James With what?
, iR. MENZIES There is a good deal of purchasing power in the
cormunity. The honorable gentleman forgets that there has been a
substantial increase in the basic wage, a substantial increase in
social service payments in this Budget and a very large amount of
tax refunds this year, running, I think, to about œ 90,000,000. An
increase of 2 per cent. and the trade position will begin to
clear, the stocks will begin to move out and the manufacturers'
wheels will begin to turn. Sir, I am trying to put this in
proper proportion. It is all right to stand up and moan about
people. I know it is the fashion for a few honorable members
opposite to think of me as a thoroughly inhuman fellow. I am not.
Mr. Jones Aren't you?
MR. 4ME4ZIES You are the last nan who ought to say so. I an not.
I an a responsible political leader and as such it is my duty to
point out to this country that whatever reduces the confidence of
the people will destroy their employment and whatever makes then
see the position clearly with all the elements that make for
employment will restore the jobs of those who today are without
them. 
8.
Opposition Members Oh!
MR. MENZIES I have heard that " Oh" many times. I have been
here a long time. I know Opposition members say I have been here
too long.
Mr. Curtin Too long!
MR. MENZIES Yes, too long for I th-t b. c. orable
members opposite live year by yearelecti. ro by eluction. on
prophesies of gloom. They say . o will DO more and more
unemployment. That is the most sh. ockingly barren policy I have
ever heard. It is quite discreditable. When they find 97 people
out of 100 employed in a factory or whatever it may be, they say
to the 97 as vdciferously as they can, " Be careful, you may be
the next to go". I know it is not very well regarded by people
of a delicate nature to say this kind of thing, but I perfectly
well believe that there ure honorable members opposite who would
regard another 100,000 the list of unemployed between now and
December as the greatest r-' O. itical triumph in their lives.
Mr. Reynolds Who is being inhuman now?
MR. I-ENZIES I am being human, but I am taking leave to question
your humanity. You might think about that occasionally.
To me, the existence of unemployment is a terrible
thing. It imposes human hardship. It is quite true that every
government, whatever its political colour may be must deal with
these groat problems in the broad an. occasionally m'ay have to
accept some of these consequences. But it is a monstrosity to
think that the Govcrnment does not know that there is tremendous
tragedy in homes in which the breadwinner is willing to work but
cannot work. The whole of our policy is designed to remove this
tragedy. The whole of our policy has been to get rid of
inflation, which is a threat both to development and to investmont,
to produce a sensible stability in the community, to prevent
the value of wages, s'Alaries and pensions from being run out by
an inflationary movement, and thereby before long in total to
restore a complete prosperity not a boom prosperity but a sound
prosperity to the country.
Our position today is that our overseas balances are
good; that the seasonal prospects appear to be good, except, I
regret to say, in parts of Queensland; that we have good
prospects for wool production; and that we will have, I hope,
good wool prices. Sales tax has been reduced on many cormmodities
that afect the householder and we have the virtual ending of the
credit squeeze, because all banking: restrictions today, under
Reserve Bank directions, are concentrated in substance of
speculative operations, as the Treasurer ( Mr. Harold Holt) pcirted
out in his Budget speech. We have good bank liquidity and a
vastly accelerated works and housing programme which has not
received the study in this place that it deserves, though the
Treasurer might, if he had had time, have said a good deal about
it. We have increased purchasing power along the lines that I
have mentioned. The last thing I wish to say is this: The Leader of the
Opposition said, being put to it by himself, that he prefers expansion
to stability. I want to say, if it is a permissible form
of words, that we prefer both. We attach enormous importance to
stability not for stability's own sake, but because we believe in
expansion and because we believe that unless we can have a stable
base in this country we can never attract the investments, the
hopes, and the willingness to take risks that the country needs
if it is to expand as it should. I could elaborate on that, but I
will not, because my time has almost expired. Perhaps, before I
resume my seat, I ouht to say that I hope I have made it clear
that we do not accept the proposition advanced by the Leader of
no Opposition. 



EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 7 p. m.-SUNDAY
27th August, 1961. P. M. No. Y+/ 96
COMMITTEE ON THE FJTURE OF TERTIARY EDUCATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today the composition of
the Committee which the Government has established to inquire
into the future of tertiary educetion. The Committee would be a
committee of the Australian Universities Commission and under the
chairmanship of the Chairman of the Commission, Sir Leslie Martin.
Professor C. R. McRae, formerly Deputy Vice-Chancellor and
Professor of Education in the University of Sydney, would act as
Deputy Chairman and Dr. C. M. Gilray, former Principal of Scotch
College, Melbourne and Deputy Chancellor of the University of
Melbourne, as an executive member. Other members who have
accepted invitations to serve on the Committee are
Sir Keith Angas, Grazier and recently Chairman of St. Mark's
College Council, University of Adelaide.
Professor A. H. Ennor, Deputy Chairman of the Institute of
Advanced Studies and Dean of the John Curtin School of
Medical Research in the Australian National University
Sir Alexander Fitzgerald, former Professor of Accountancy,
University of Melbourne and for many years Chairman of the
Commonwealth Grants Commission
Professor Sir Edward Ford, Professor of Preventive Medicine
and Director of the School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine at the University of Sydney
Mr. N. E. Jones, Managing Director, Broken Hill Proprietary
Ltd., and Chairman of Finance Committee, University of
Mel bourne
Professor P. H. Karmel, Professor of Economics in the
University of Adelaide
Mr. R. R. Mackay, Principal, Royal Melbourne Institute of
Technology, Professor F. J. Schonell, Vice-Chancellor of the University
of Queensland and formerly Professor of Education in that
University Sir Samuel Wadiamr, former Professor of Agriculture in the
University of 11, N3bourne
Mr. L. tI. Weickhardt, Technical Director, Imperial Chemical
Industries
Dr. H. S. Wyndham, Director-General of Education in New
South Wales. 
2.
In announcing the composition of the Committee the
Prime Minister recalled that the recommendations of the Murray
Committee and, more recently, those of the Australian
Universities Commission had been accepted by the Commonwealth and
State Governments with the result that vastly incru~ ased grants
ha~ ve beon made available for universities since 1958. However,
the rapidly increasing number of students who may wish to take
advantage of tertiary education and other factors, such as
student wastage, staff shortage and the pressure on universities
generally, make it imporative that we investigate the best way of
making the most efficient use of available and potential resources.
The Government has decided, therefore, to establish
this Committee to consider the pattern of tertiary education in
relation to the needs and resources of Australia and to make
recommendations to the Commission on the future development of
tertiary education. The Prime Minister said that the Committee would make
a wide-ranging investigation and it was hoped that it would be
able to complete its work and submit its rocommend~ ations before
the end of the 1961/ 63 triennium.
Committees of enquiry in this field have already been
created by the State Governments of New South Wales and Victoria
and close association between the National and State Committees
would be of the greatest value. In the United Kingdom a Committee
with similar responsibilities had been established under the
Chairmanship of Lord Robbins.
The Prime Minister cxpressed the hope that the
Committee would have the benefit of advice and co-operation from
the Australian Vice-Chancellors' Committee, University staff, the
Commonwealth Office of Education, State Departments of Education
and other Commonwealth and State Departments and instrumentalites
CANBERR, 27th August, 1961. 



61/ 053
P. M4 , o 3/ 1961
LOCOMOTIVES AND ROLLING 3TOCK FOR THE
PORT PiRIE-COCKBURN LINE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced that he
had written to the Premier of South Australia, Sir Thomas
Playford, to inform him that the Commonwealth was willing to
provide South Australia with finance not exceeding
œ 1,325,000 for the purchase by the State of twelve ' 9001 h. p.
Diesel-Electric Locomotives, and one hundred 55-Ton capacity
cre waggons for operation on the existing Port Pirie-Cockbun
line. This offer is on the basis that the State shall repay in
full to the Commonwealth over a period of 50 years, 30o of
the expenditure incurred by the State for this purpose,
together with interest at the long term bond rate.
Mr. Menzies stated that he had made it cleaTr
conveying this offer of Commonwealth assistance that i wou.-i.
be quite separate from assistance under the 1949 Standardisation
Agreement. However, in making the offer, the Commonwealth
recognised that new and efficient locomotives and rolling
stock, which would be capable of conversion to standard gauge
operation, would be most advantageous on standardisation of
the line.
CANBERRA, 27th August, 1961. 



61
EMBARCO: Not for publication or broadcast before 8 p. m. E. S. T.
SUNDAY, 27th August P. M. No. 1l91
BEEF ROADS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
In his recent Budget speech, Mr. Holt, in dealing
with the matter of Roads for the cattle industry, indicated
some particular provisions totalling œ 1,000,000 in respect of
Queensland and the Northern Territory. He then said:-
" The provision of œ 1,000,000 is by no moans,
however, the limit of the expenditure we have in view.
Subject to agreement being reached with the Governments
of Queensland and Western Australia, we are willing, and
indeed we intend, to provide additional funds for roads
in these two States."
After the completion of our Railways no got.:
with Mr. Brand, Mr. Court, and Western Australian of:. ciaaI,
we took up the question of beef roads.
The Commonwealth has, in consequence, made an
agreement that, matching corresponding provisions by J.. estern
Australia in relation to roads in the Kimberleys, it will find
œ 00,000 for the improvement of the Wyndham-Nicholson road,
the Wyndham-Turkey Creek-Hall's Creek road, and necessary
bridges over the Bandicoot Bar and the Dunham River.
These works are calculated to increase the offturn
in good condition of beef cattle, primarily for export.
CANBERRA, 27th August, 1961. 



PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE
RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES ON MONDAY, 28TH AUGUST,
RT. HO 1961, AT 4 P. iM.
QUESTION: Sir, could you tell us, perhaps, for South Australian
interest, how far back South Australian rail
standardisation has been set by the decision to go ahead
in 4estern Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. That process is the subject of
litigation in the High Court, commenced by the State of
South Australia so it is sub judice; so perhaps one ought
not to talk about it too much.
The , est Australian rail project, that part of it
that runs from Koolyanobbing down to Southern Cross, then
down to Kwinana, of course, is directly related to the
development of the iron and steel industry in that State
and is related to the Agreement that the iJest Australian
Government made with the an agreement which has
been ratified by them by Act of Parliament in Jostern
Australia. The condition, of course; of the agreement
becoming effective was that the necessary railway
facilities should be provided from Koolyanobbing to
Kwinana a very large enterprise and that couldn't be
done unless the Commonwealth itself, particularly in the
initial stages, provided financial assistance because
Western Australia would have had a very large cash problem
unless it could get large amounts of initial finance from
the Commonwealth. Well that is a very great new industry in the JWest
and I would think, perhaps, as a basic industry, it would
probably lead to an expansion of ancillary industries in
that State. I think it is the biggest single development
in ilestern Australia in my time and we showed ourselves
willing to discuss the terms and conditions on which we
could help on that matter. It was, to a large extent
of course, an industrial venture, one of those things that
will pay for itself very well over a period of time by
increased freights and better railway revenues. It is
estimated it will be quite a profitable line in that
segment. To that degree it has somu points of
resemblance to the Mount Isa-Collinsville railway in
Queensland. But we thought that it had an element of
standardisation and we have allowed for that in the
arrangemonts that we have made with the Govz. rmniont of
' J-stern Australia.
As for the rest of the line from Southern Cross up to
Kalgoorlie, . well it , rould have been quite ridiculous to
have a standard gauge line running to Southern Cross and
then get back on to the old one and have the change of
gauge transferred from Kalgoorlie to Southern Cross. So
we decided, and so did Jestern Australia, that it would be
as well to do the lot when we were at ito Thoportion
from Kalgoorlie to Southern Cross, being essentially a
standardisation project, is being financed on the same
standardisation terms as applied in the case of the
iWodonga to Melbourne line. Under that the State accepts
an ultimate liability of 30% of the cost spread over a
period of 50 years. 4e weighed all this up the
primarily developmental line, from there on the primarily
standardisation section that I have just been referring t,
and we arrived, broadly, at the conclusion that if you
called half the expenditure on the total matter
standardisation, and half development, that would give
broad justice to the position. That was very acceptable
to the Government of ' Western Australia, and hence the
terms that have been announced, 
QUESTION: I think that this is a remarkable developmento
lWestern Australia has been considerably handicapped by
being short of secondary industries, to that extent
having an unbalanced economy; it has meant that e. ostern
Australia has had to be a claimant State on a considerable
scale. I don't moan that they will cease to be a claimant
state overnight, or even when the railway is comploted,
but it ought to improve very considerably their overall
financial and economic position when it is in full
operation, because the total expenditure on both the
railway works and rolling stock and the blast furnaces
and so on, the iron and steel end of it, will be about
It is estimated that the railway works will be
completed by the end of 1968.
Has B. H. P. given any timetable for when they start
operations and also for completing their sectioh? Are you
aware of any time limit on that?
PRIME MINISTER: Uell I can't give you that precisely; but I think
that there will be very little, if any, interval between
the completion of the line and the opening up of
Koolyanobbing and the beginning of the transportation of
ore and the completion of the B. H. P.' s first stage, at
any rate. You see there will be three stages: first cf all
they will be able to ship some of the iron ore to the
East. There is a limit to the extent to which they can
ship iron ore without processing, without producing pigiron
at any rate, after the establishment of the blast
furnaces. Although I haven't their precise date in mind
I think it is in the agreement that the Western Australian
Government made. But you can take it that there will be
a steady development of the process, first of all
receiving iron ore, then the blast furnaces coming into
operation and the production of pig-iron, and then,
finally, the production of steel.
QUESTION: Sir, you said you expected this project would pay
for itself in a certain time. Was that expectation based
just on the economics of the Koolyanobbing trade, the
developmental end of it; or on the expectation of higher
traffic because it is part of an eventually standardised
transport...?
PRIME MINISTEI~: No, that is primarily on the Koolyanobbing-Kwinana
traffic. This will run upo. well in the first instance
they estimate it will be about a million tons, then it
will become two million tons by the time the blast
furnaces are operating. They are the estimates made by
the West Australian railways and the Commonwealth
Railways think they are well-founded. They show that the
line will, as from the time the iron ore goes into
transport, be a profitable line.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies when you said at first they will have to
ship some iron ore to the east, were you thinking of
Whyalla?
PRIME MINISTER: It may be Whyalla, I don't know. They have got good
iron ore suppliers there on the spot. I would have
thought, myself, primarily to Port Kombla and Newcastle.
But I am not speaking for then. 
QUESTION: Sir, are you able to give an indication how long the
legal drafting of the agreement and the Bill is likely to
take, and when you think the Bill might be introduced into
Parliament?
PRIME MINISTER: ; e arranged on Saturday that the officers would get
together for the drafting within a week; and that must
be completed and the Agreement executed in time for the
Commonwealth Parliament to ratify it by legislation. That
means that the Bill must be in a position to go into our
House not later, I would have thought, than the end of
September. So there will be no delay. Late October is
the deadline for all of us, including the West Australian
agreement with the B. H. P. and our own with Western
Australia. So there will be no delay on that. I expect
that we will be looking at the legislation by the end of
September, and that it will be in the House immediately
thereafter. It is not anticipated that there will be any
drafting difficulties.
QUESTION: Mr. Whitlam on his recent visit to Queensland
* criticised the difference in terms for the financing of
the Mount Isa railway as compared with those for
Southern Railway work and now in Western Australia.
Could you give us the Government's thoughts on that?
PRIME MINISTER: Jell that is more than the Queensland Government has
ever done I must say! The Mount Isa Railway has got
nothing to do with the standardisation problem. The Mount
Isa Railway scheme began as part of the entire development
of the nines at Mount Isa. It will have incidental
benefits in the north, of course. But when that line was
originally investigated by some railway experts, Ford
Bacon Co. the then Queensland Government got them
out it became quite clear that that line would be most
profitable and, as a matter of fact, would pay for itself
over a period of 20 years.
In the case of Western Australia part of the line is
pure standardisation, and the rest is primarily, but not
entirely, a developmental and industrial developmental
job, rather like Mount Isa. So we blended the two
Stogether. There was no inconsistency, either with
Wodonga-Melbourno, or Mount Isa-Collinsville; it merely
means that we have taken the same principles and tried to
work out, as sensibly as we could, how the two could be
blended for the purposes of this mixed venture in Western
Australia. We had very good discussions about this. We
discussed a lot of details. But in the end result, they
were about the only negotiations I have conducted in which
both sides appear to be content.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, in your communication to Sir Thomas
Playford about the dioselisation of the Port Pirie-
Cockburn line, have you given any undertaking about the
standardisation of that?
PRIME MINISTER: No. Well as you know he has got a Writ out on the
standardisation issue and I don't need to go into what is
involved in a Urit. Sir Thomas has chosen to have
litigation. All right, I don't mind. That case will,
no doubt, be determined by the High Court in due course.
But whatever comes or goes on that matter: if he's
right in saying that we have to do the standardisation
right away, or if we are right in saying that this is a
matter for judgment under the circumstances of the case, 
whatever happens, it will be, on the view that he put to us
some time ago advantageous to dieselise ( to use that
horrible word) this line -s it stands, because it would
mean some substantial reductions in the cost of haulage.
His original proposal was that these diesels, and the
rolling stock, should all have their bogies so constructed
as to be adjustable to a standard line, if and when the
line was, in fact, standardised. So that it is not part
of standardisation it is ahead of it. But it is
something that we think presents obvious adrantages.
Therefore putting the standardisation argument on one
side that will be determined by other people we have
made an offer to provide the finance for this dieselisaticn
venture on the basis that the State would repay to the
Comronwealth over a period of 50 years, 30% of the
expenditure for this purpose, together with interest, of
course, at the long term bond rate.
W! ll I haven't heard yet of course I couldn't
have from Sir Thomas as to what the view of his
Government is on that matter. But we think it is a pretty
good offer.
QUESTION: Whatever happens in the matter of the Writ, Sir, the
West Australian project will go on?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, there is nothing sub judice about our arrangemnnts
with then. The only thing that could prevent that
one from g-ing ahead is for the Commonwealth Parliament to
toss it , ut.
QUESTION: Has B. H. P. given the Commonwealth any indication that
it will use the new West Australian facilities in an
endeavour to increase Australia's export oarnings?
PRIME MINISTER: We have had long discussions with then. We are
satisfied that they are going to press on with this job
and that they are going to expand their production as a
result. This will certainly either reduce the present
importation of iron and steel, or, in the long run we
believe, will increase our exports. In other woras, from
our point of view, the attraction of this thing was that
it bore on export income, or on the balance of paym-ents
to put it more accurately. That was what attracted us
abJut this matter; that is what makes this a rather
special case and gives it some special urgoncy Because
it would be a great pity if they had to hold up all their
plans for iron and steel in the Jest bh cause there was no
agreement on the subject of the railway. . Je believe that
the B. H. P. have a completely good attitude on this matter.
QUESTION: Have the Commonwealth talks with B. H. P. resulted in
the B. H. P. promising to, or have the B. H. P. decided to
speed up this West Australian development?
PRIME MINISTER: Look you are asking me as if we had made some
specific bargain of some kind. What we have been
eliciting is the general approach, Mr. McEwon had a good
number of discussions with them and I sum that up myself,
by saying that I am sure that they are not going to waste
any time about this matter. It nay very -well be that they
can speed up the operation, particularly with this railway
work being put in hand and being due to be completed by
the end of 1968. 
QUESTION: Sir, the Treasurer in his Budget speech made it
clear that the grant for il/ stern Australia and the
Queensland beef roads would be considered at the end of
the year. As your statement yesterday indicated the
amount for Western Australia, does that mean that will be
for the beef road scheme for this year, or will you still
consider further
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no, this is our arrangonent with Western Australh.
But in Queensland there are discussions going on now on
the official level in order to identify some other road
project about which we could agree. We are already, as
you know, finding œ 650,000 for the Julia Creek-Normanton
road. What the Budget speech ueans is that if wo can
agree and I hope we can quite quickly on another one
which has a high order of priority, we are perfectly
willing to come to their financial aid on that matter. So
that I an anticipating a second road proposal in Queenslind
just as we have had the one that I announced in the case
of Western Australia and the one that we have already
included for the Northern Territory.
QUESTION: This financial year, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, this financial year.
QUESTION: Sir, the arrangement with U. A. on beef roads is for
this financial year?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right, that's right.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies, Mr. Holt is reported as saying he would
be quite happy to fight the election campaign on the
Budget
PRIME MINISTER: I would go better than that: I would be quite happy
to fight it on anything.
QUESTION: Can you say when the election will be held, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no. Everybody knows except me.
QUESTION: Do you feel, Sir, that the upturn in the omployment
statistics the other day indicate that an upturn in the
economy is already taking place?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I think that there is. I don't delude myself
into thinking that it is going to be sudden and violent.
But I am sure that there is an upturn. And of course the
speed with which the upturn can affect employment is a
different problmn, because there has been a good deal of
building up of stocks and they have to be cleared out of
the pipelines to a reasonable extent. Then there has been
a little choking along the line of trade credits, from the
retailer to the wholesaler, to the manufacturer, When
they are cleared up there will, I think, be a marked
effect on employment all down the line. But until that
happens I am not looking for anything exciting about this
upturn expressed in terms of employment, I think the
position will go along quietly.
Q1CSTION Sir, has there been any retreat on the Government's
policy, or modification, of its now ,1-year old policy of
full employment?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, none whatever. I think, you know, there is a
good deal of misapprehension about full employment. The
man isn't born who can bring about a state of affairs in
which there are always exactly the same number of jobs as 
there are non wanting thcn. He's not born; he doesn't
exist on either side of Parlialent. So what you do is to
get full employment without spilling over if you can
help it, into over-full employment with all the bidding up
and inflationary pressures that are the result. At the
morent we are short of full employment, fractionally. One
of our great aims in our current activities is to break up
that, so that we jet back once more. You have got to
remember that if you look over the period of the last 11
years, as you rightly say, the extent to which full
employment has been maintained is quite remarkable. We
have no apologies to make about it.
QUESTION: Sir, do you see any problem arising at the end of
this year because of the extra number of boys and girls
leaving school?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, in all the calculations that have been put to us
that figure has always been broug. ht forward and is well in
mind. There are a rather higher number of school-loavers
than usual.
QUESTION: Sir, you have announced that the Duke of Edinburgh
will open the Commonwealth Games in Perth next year;
there has been a Buckingham Palace spokesman quoted as
saying that the Duke will come only for three days and
that he is not likely to make any country tours or visit
any other State. I am wondering if you can indicate the
sort of mechanics of negotiating the tour from the point
that there is an acceptance in limitation.
PRIME MINISTE: Yes. W/ hat happens is this, that we either have some
one of our people in London go and discuss with his staff
the details of what is to be done and those haven't
been fixed yet anyway or, if it became necessary we
would send a man from here. In the case of longer tours
we would always send somebody from here so that they
organise what there is. Then if you have a tour you have
people engaged in a sort of broad organising committee
representing each State concerned, and also the Commonwealth.
But if it turned out that the Duke came out and
opened the Games and stayed around there for a while and
then went straight back, the organisation problem is very
much simpler. It might not be necessary to send somebody;
it perhaps could be readily worked out in London. But
whether he will do anything else I don't think that he
will take on any particular public form of engagement, I
don't think so, I don't know of it but whether he will
just go to Western Australia and then go straight back
remains to be seen. This is a matter I take up with him
in correspondence.
QUESTION: Mr. Monzies it has been reported that you have begun
talks with the U. K. Governnont on a new Agroemont covering
Woomera in relation to the proposed European space work.
Could you tell us something about that, or give us some
background?
PRIME MINISTER: Mr. Thorneycroft has been noeotiating with European
countries, as you probably know, about a " Space Club".
They have got to a certain point. We have been told what
that point is; we have been asked for our cor. rlents; and
we have made some. They are going to have a conference
about this matter on the official lovel I think it is in
London fairly shortly. JWe will be represented at that,
not necessarily to conclude an agroo.: ent because there are
a lot of questions that we have on it which have yet to be 
QUESTION: answered. You can take it that Australia is at present
not co-iitted to any proposal. But as the proposal would
involve the use of the ' oomnera facilities, we have, of
curse, a very large interest in it. But there is no
conclusion. But it will involve a now agreoment, a separate
agreement as distinct from the Weapons Research
PRIME MINISTER: It doesn't necessarily involve any change in our
Weapons Agreement because, of course, there is a great
volume of that still going on, irrespective of Blue
Streak. There is more nuney being spent now than there
was five years ago I mean on the general weapons
development. But if there were a Space Club established
and Australia was in it, in virtue of the Rocket Range,
and terms had been arrived at, which they haven't yet,
then there would presumably be a multi-lateral agreement
about that in which we would be a party, and Great Britain
and France, and Italy, whatever it may be. But that would
be in parallel with the i/ oapons Establishment Agreement.
QUESTION: Has the Governnent any plans for enlarging the
Tariff Board further to expedite its hearings, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no plans, no plans. There are always
discussions, you know, going on about that because it is
very important to expedite its hearings without lowering
the quality of the work done. But that is one of those
things that we occasionally have informal discussions
about, but there are no plans.
QUESTION: Sir, have you hpd any reaction from abroad yet to the
scheme mentioned by Mr. McEwen for an orderly marketing
of world primary commodities?
PRIME MINISTER: I have had none, no.
QUESTION: Sir, talking about Mr. McEwen, what is the latest on
the threat of the Liberals to contest his seat?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I seem to be the only fellow who hasn't made a
statement on this so far. I have the greatest confidence
in the world that Mr. McEwen will be back here after the
elections.
QUESTION: Are you going to send him away, before the electin,
on the Common Market, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I hope not, but who knows? I mean, we don't
know what is going to develop in the course of these
Commonwealth discussions that are going to occur in
London. He wouldn't want to go away at this stage; nor
would I want him to. But it may be that he will have to
go. But I don't know.
QUESTION: Do y. u think a Liberal will be contesting the seat
against him Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't. But I don't run the Liberal Party you know.
You are just asking me now, as an innocent bystander.
Well, as an innocent bystander, I don't think that he will
be.
QUESTION: How innocent were your ruearks to certain people,
then, about the Liberals contosting the seat, Sir? 
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. You ought to ask then that. I don't
run the organis _ tion of ny Party. The rolations between
ne and the Liberal Party Organisation soon to be somewhat
diffrent from the rolati-ns between my opponents and
their Party organisation.
QUESTION: Sir, your Party has endorsed the establishment of a
Northern Australian Developnent Commrission, but your
National Developient Minister is opposed to it. Could we
have your personal views on it?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I don't know what you mean when you say " my
Party" has endorsed it. Tell no about this; I always
like to learn a bit of news.
QUESTION: The Federal Council of the Liberal Party, Sir, at the
Conference just prior to the last election, endorsed a
' Jest Australian scheme that it should be treated as a
natter of national emergency.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, no, I've no comment on that. I don't think we
are doing too badly by the north at the noment.
QUESTION: Has the proposal cone up, or been discussed in
Cabinet Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: This thing he is talking about?
PRESSMAN: Yes: the Northorn Australian Dc relopment Comrission.
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I daresay somebody has mentioned it at one tine
or another. We haven't set one up. You can draw your own
inferences from that.
QUESTION: Has any sort of pattern developed, so far, for
Commonwealth aid to the States for special development
projects, or do you favour dealing with each matter as it
comes up?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, it is a combination of the two things. The
pattern, broadly, has been, as we have indicated in
statements that have been made, that we are interested in
proposals which lead to a material improvement in exports.
It is for that reason that we were interested in the Mount
Isa line, because that speaks big in terms of export
earnings; it is for that reason that we have been taking
a hand in these beef cattle roads because they will
increase the outturn, or the turnout, I don't know what
the word is, of cattle, primarily for export; it is for
that reason that we have been in touch with the New South
Wales Government about coal ports, improved coal port
facilities, because there is a prospective growing market
for coal. But that has been the thing that attracts our
minds in the first place. Then we deal with then ad hoc.
Je think, as a matter of fact, we probably do better
by discussing concrete proposals individually with the
State Governnents than by leaving all this to some nonparliarentary
authority. In the long run these things
usually end up by us having to find some money. You rather
like to be the master of your own fate on those things.
QUESTION: Mr. Monzies, Sir Garfield Barwick said the employment
situation got a lot worse than the Government ever
intended. Was he speaking for the Government when he said
that? 
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I read about that, something about that in the
paper. I didn't hear him speak. I have road some rather
amusing comments on it. We have made our position quite
clear on those things.
QUESTION: Sir, has the Government any knowledge of President
Kennedy having indicated to the Indonesians, a change of
Anerican policy over Ieost New Guinea, or a willingness to
modify the American attitude to Indonesia's claims?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we have heard suggestions made and all that kind
of thing. But I wouldn't tell you that they had nade any
change in their policy. I don't know. So far as I can
make out there have been some rather exaggerated rumours
in that field. That problem is always being discussed;
we are always having exchanges with other Governments
about it, including the Administration of the United
States. But I have no reason to suppose that the
Americans h.: ve developed some new approach on this matter:
they may have thought of a few. But I imagine you want to
know whether they have propounded something.
SQUESTION: ir. Macmillan is reported to have said on the weekend
that no one would fight over Berlin. Do you agree
with him on that?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, for heaven's sake dn't ask me about a statement
of his which is in the cables. My experience of Mr.
Macmillan is that he is quite capable of expressing his
own views. And when I have tabled some papers about Berlin
and made a statement I will express mine. Wait and see.
QUESTION: Your other week-end statement about the Univrsities
Committee, Sir, can you enlighten us any more about these
University-type institutions which you suggested earlier
might emer: e from this? What sort of institutions did..
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, now, look, this is the very thing that they are
going to exaimine. It is not for me to say bec-use I lack
the competence to say. But it is quite clear that we have
reached a stage here, just as they have in England, where
they have appointed a similar coramittee, where you have to
* think very hard about whether you . o on just increasing
the number of Universities on the stock pattern; or
whether there ought to be a greator variety of instruments
of tertiary education some simpler than others; some
may be less costly than others. But, of course, the
financial probler. for the Comr. onwealth, and even more for
the States, is growing and can become formidable. And,
just as in 1ngland, they said, " Well we had better have a
look at this thing and see whether the answer to it is to
develop more technological institutions", if you want
technology developed, or do this or that. That is why we
have got a pretty broad-based committee that can have a
look at it.
But it will take it a long time because it is a
tremendously complex problem. It doesn't need to make a
report overnight because the present triennium lasts for
two ori-years, but they need to give us their ideas in a
pretty precise form by 1963 either us or our successors
because it is a problem which you wouldn't allow to drift
into a third triennium. It would perhaps affect the way
in which you were working out the money to be found and the
way it is to be spent. But it is very important, always
remembering that we have gone along for a long time now on
what I call Universities on the 19th century model. The
whole thing needs re-looking at. 
QUESTION: Sir, Mr. Holt in the 3ud: et speech, I think
mentioned that you woro working towards agreoment, or
hoped to roach agreement soon, or some such thing., with
the Now South Wales Government on the coal ports project.
PRIME MINISTER: That is what I was just mentioning. Didn't you hear
me mention that just now? It has great possibilities I
think.
QUESTION: A recent report, Sir, said that the United States
would oppose any special arrangements being made about the
Cormmonwealth if the U. K. should enter the Common Market
because of their concern over the ability of the Latin-
American countries to export. When you were in Washington
recently, Sir, did you have any discussions on the Common
Market question with Mr. Kennedy?
PRIME MINISTE'R: No. When I was in Washington last the state of the
Common Market discussion was that the last statement by
Great Britain was that she wasn't proposing to enter the
Common Market unless agriculture would be kept out. It
is only in the last few weeks that that position has been
modified. 



CO1MONWEALTH CONTRIBUTION TOWARDS THE COST OF
COAL LOADING FACILITIES AT THREE N. S. U. PORTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the flt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said that he was pleased
to announce that the Premier of New South Wales had accepted, on
behalf of the New South qales Government, the Commonwealth's
offer of financial assistance towrards the cost of installing new
coal loading facilities at the ports of Newcastle, Port Hembla
and Balmain. As the Commonwealth Treasurer mentioned in his
Budget Speech, there are good prospects of a substantial
increase in coal exports from New South aes, but these
prospects will be enhanced if improvements are made to existing
port facilities for handling coal.
The New South Hales Government has undertaken to ensure
that its programme of work on these three harbours, estimated to
cost some œ 10 million over about three years, is carried out with
the maximum possible expedition, and that the funds necessary for
this purpose will be provided as required.
The Commonwealth has agreed to provide financial
assistance to Now South dales in respect of the provision of coal
loading plant and equipment ( including wharfage, storage and
associated rail facilities, but excluding the provision of deep
water berths) at Newcastle, Port Kembla and Balmain. This
assistance will be provided on a for matching expenditure
basis with the State and will be up to individual maximum
amounts of œ 1,500 000 at Newcastle, œ 1,070,000 at Port Kembla,
and œ 80,000 at Balmain.
Of the total Commonwealth contribution of up to
i2,650,000, an amount of up to œ 1 million will be by way of grant
and will be provided from the Coal Industry Fund held by the
Joint Coal Board. The credit balance in this Fund arose as a
result of the Board's activities using moneys provided by the
Commonwealth. It has been agreed that the remaining Commonwealth
assistance of up to œ 1,650,000 will be provided by way of
advances, each of wiich will be wholly repayable, together with
interest at per cent, by the State within ten years from the
date on which each advance will be made. Repayments by the State
to the Commonwealth will not be subject to any sinking fund
contribution by the Commonwealth.
Having regard to the uncertainties concerning the
volume of coal trade that will develop and the costs of handling
it, the Commonwealth decided to make part of its assistance by
way of grant. This grant element will be applied to reduce the
coal loading charges that would otherwise be levied for the use
of the new facilities at the three ports.
The Prime Minister said he was satisfied that both the
Governments have good reason to be confident that the new
handling facilities will stimulate the development of our coal
export trade. Not only will the prospective improvement in this
trade benefit the workers in our coalfields, but the additional
export income will be of significance to the whole economy.
CANBErRA, 31st August, 1961. 



P. M. No. 48/ 1 1
EXTETSION OF THE PERIOD OF OP: ERATION OF THE
j-1 56/ f96.1 SUGAR AGREEI'MENT__
Statement by the Prm e " Minister the Rt. HonMenzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today that
the Commonwealth Government and the Queensland Government had
agreed to extend until 31st May, 1962, the period of operation of
the 1956/ 61 Sugar Agreement, which would otherwise have expired
on 31st August, 1961.
Mr. Menzies said that his Government had decided last
year that an examination of the sugar industry should be carried
out before steps were taken to enter into a new sugar agreement
with the Queensland Government when the 1956/ 61 Agreement expired.
Accordingly the Sugar Enquiry Committee, under the C. airmanship
of Mr. M. E. McCarthy, was appointed to investigate the
circumstances of the sugar and fruit industries and their
relationship. The Committee had been asked to furnish its report
if possible not later than May 1961, but owing to the wide scope
of the investigation and some unexpected difficulties the
Committee had been unable to complete its leport in the time
proposed. Mr. Menzies said that since the current Agreemennt was
due to expire on 31st August and the Committee's report was still
not available the Commonwealth Government and the Queensland
Government had decided that the existing Agrooment rould need to
be extended for the further period necessary to enable full
consideration of the report, the framing of a now formal
Agrouemnt mutually acceptable to both Governments and the
introduction of the necessary legislation.
CANBERRA,
1st September, 1961. 



P. M. No. 47/ 961
JOINT STATEMENT
By the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, and
the lion. G. Nicklin, Premier of Queensland
Last night re conferred at Canberra. Those present
included, apart from ourselves, Mr. ' v,-rris ( Deputy Premier of
Queensland), Mr. Hiley ( Treasurer of Queensland) Mr. McEwen, Mr.
Holt, Senator Spooner, Mr. McMahon, Mr. Davidson, Sir Gaifield
Barwick, Mr. Adermann, Dr. Cameron, Mr. Hulme.
The first purpose of our conference was to discuss the
Commonwealth's financial assistance to the Mount Isa-Collinsville
railway in the light of the recent agreement betwccn the
Coi-monwealth and lostern Australia regarding the Kalgoorlie-
Kwinana industrial development and standardisation and of a
diesclisation offer recently made to the Premier of South
Australia. Those matters and the special features attaching to each
were fully explained by the Prime Minister and closely discussed.
In the result, the Queensland Ministers are fully satisfied with
the proposals for CoTmmonwealth finance as being fair and
reasonable. It will be recalled that these proposals for the
Mount Isa line involved the making of repayable advances by the
Commonwealth up to an amount of œ 20,000,000 as requested by the
State to help to finance the total cost. On the most competent
advice, it is agreed that the traffic on the new line should
readily amortize the cost of the line and the repayment of the
advances over a period of 20 years. The Government of
Queensland will now sign the proposed agreement, which has been.
ewaiting signature. This will enable Queensland to take up in
the current financial year the sum of œ 4.6 million which the
Commonwealth has stood willing to find in 1961-2 as the first
instalment of its advances.
Joth of us attach great importance to this railway
project, one of the biggest undertaken in Australia in this
century. It will facilitate the full development of the great
Mount Isa Mine and will also serve substantial developmental endsin
both the mineral and pastoral industries of North Queensland.
oe are, for these reasons, both happy that all misunderstandings
have been removed and that the project may go " full steam ahead".
For both the State of Queensland and Australia as a whole, this
is a most significant event.
An opportunity was also taken of discussing beef roads
in Queensland. As is well known, the Commonwealth Governmont has
displayed active interest in this matter having regard to the
need for exports and the great possibilities of their increase by
increasing the effective marketing of beef cattle in the Vorth.
Mr. Monzies recalled that in a statement on February
21st on developmental prospects he had referrod to the development
of roads in the North. Mr. Holt had also specifically referred
to this matter in his Budget Speech indicating a willingness to
provide additional funds for these purposes in Queensland and
[., estern Australia. In the existing Connmowealth Budget,
provision is made for the Common ealth to find œ 650,000 for the
Julia Creek-Normanton road with a matching arrangement on the part
of Queensland. In our conference last night, w all agreed that it
would be more satisfactory from the point of view of effective
planning if a longer prograr. u' could be worked out. The Prime
Iinister, recalling the special arrangements that had been made 
some years back to find œ 5,000,000 for the State of Western
Australia for northern development, said that the Commonwealth
would be prepared to find, in respct of Queensland2 œ 5,000,000
for beef roads over the five year period to June 19o6, This
œ 5,000,000 will include the " 650,000 already agreed upon this
year. But in respect of œ 4,350,000 representing the balance of
the proposed œ 5,000,000, the State will not be obliged to undertake
matching expenditure. This offer, which we agree should do
much to help this important industry, is willingly accepted by
Queensland. As in the earlier case of Western Australia, the
off-r provides that the State will submit to the Commonwealth for
its approval details of the projects upon which it proposes to
spend the Commonwealth grant. It was also made clear, as Mr.
Holt had indicated in the Budget, that part of the additional sum
could be made available to the State during this financial year.
It should also be made clear that the total sum of œ 5,000,000
need not necessarily be spent at an even million a year, but is a
five-year's sum..
The Premier said that for its part the Queensland
Gova. rnr nt would lose no time in submitting to the Commonwealth
details of further road projects, the planning of which was
already far advanced.
, e are very conscious of the fact that additional
traffic will be attracted to the Mount Isa line as a result of
the joint arrangements that we have just described for a more
intensive development of the beef industry in North Queensland.
This we are glad to observe will strengthen the capacity of the
Mount Isa railway line to pay for its total cost in the period
of 20 years. Our discussions were frank and searching, but most
harmonious. On behalf of our respective governments, we
express our pleasure at the conclusions arrived at, which will
enable great and important work to go on without interruption.
CAN BRRA,
1st September, 1961. 


3rd September, 1961
Sir,
Thankyou very much, indeed, for your kind introduction. I would like to thank, through you, Dr. Benson, for the very courteous references that he made to me; and I would like to thank my fellow-Presbyterian who has just spoken about me.
He said that I must have a record score for " Pleasant Sunday Afternoons" in this place. I am quite sure that is right. The first time I was beguiled into coming here by the late Mr. Cain must have been at least 30 years ago. And the only thing that is evidence to me that time marches on is that, although now I must have come the better part of 30 times, the audience has a tendency to get a little smaller each time. And I don't blame them.
In all those years I have never undertaken the improper task of talking about Australian politics because this is not the place for that. I have in various ways over the years tried to say something to you about the problems of the world and our relation to those problems' and our duty, as individuals, in relation to them, This afternoon I thought I might, following along that line, say something about the current state of the world, because it is a cliché today that we are living in a very critical period in the world's history.
You may well say that we have been living in critical periods of the world history for most of our lives. It is quite true. We have, perhaps, become so accustomed to headlines, to riots to outbreak, to little wars, to rebellions, that we have almost become accustomed to them; and perhaps a little bit disposed to say, " Well that's happening somewhere else and I mustn't concern myself about it too much". But while all that is going on, we ourselves are presented, almost every day, with false statements about false issues, with propaganda of various kinds, and with a good deal of so-called sentiment, which is rather bogus, And I thought that I might help you, and help myself, if I put a few questions this afternoon and endeavoured to answer them. As I once rather mischievously said to a political opponent in the Federal Parliament who had prepared a series of questions and answers, " There is one great advantage about answering questions if you prepare the questions yourself, as well as the answers". Therefore whatever I say on this you must discount to that extent,
But you know what we are hearing time after time: we read and we think about what is called the " cold war". We don't perhaps go down into that matter deeply enough to find out: Is there a cold war? Who is causing it? What can we do about it? Therefore, perhaps, one ought to begin by saying something about what a " cold war" is.
We now talk about war it is a very strange development in the broad, as meaning a great global war, a war in which great powers are hurled at each other. And anything that stops short of that, anything which is local, which is hot propaganda, but not actual fighting, any actual fighting, such as the fighting now going on in Laos, in South-East Asia -we call these things the " cold war" because we do that to distinguish them from the great war which we all pray may never come. But that is not to say that we ought to have an &nbsp;affection for the cold war.
There are great conflicts in this world and they are not just conflicts of power. Don't let us succumb to the idea that the great conflict in the world is a conflict between the power of the United States, for example, and the power of the Soviet Union. This is a false picture. The conflict in the world is a conflict between basic principles, profoundly important ideals, differences of outlook on the spirit of man, and the significance of man; a conflict, as we would wish to believe, between what, from our point of view, is the Christian conception of the freedom of the human mind and of the human spirit, and the dictated, dominated, unfree human spirit that exists under totalitarian Government in the Communist regime. And this is a tension which will never be quite removed, and never can be quite removed, until other people have the same outlook on the human spirit as we have ourselves.
We must remember all the time that while physical slavery is a terrible thing, spiritual slavery is much worse. We must be free or die who speak the tongue that Shakespeare spoke. This is it: freedom of the mind, freedom of the spirit. The great Communist leaders, men of immense power, of immense authority, take advantage of the fact that our very freedom tends to divide us. le argue with each other. Believe it or not there are 49 1/2% of the people of Australia who would love to get rid of me (Laughter) I'm not sure that some times I don't agree with them! But this is part of our freedom: to approve, to disapprove me, to have ideas of our own in the political field, and to defend them with vigour, and sometimes a little roughly. This is part of our inheritance. It will be an ill day for Australia when that sort of thing comes to an end.
On the other side you have leaders who need consult no Parliament, who need respect no public opinion; but who, with the sheer voice and power of authority can decide what they are going to do. And this is an unequal contest, I will illustrate this by reference to Berlin, this great problem that is going on today Berlin. What is it all about? Just let me put it to you in a few sentences
When the last war was being fought to its successful conclusion the powers, the victorious powers the United States, France and Great Britain, and the Soviet Union achieved rights in Berlin; a series of sectors in which they were to establish themselves pending the execution of a Treaty of Peace with Germany as a whole. And in the r. meantime the Soviet forces had come in and had occupied East Germany any in which Berlin itself is a more island you can't roach it except through or over East German territory, And of course West Germany was there, and has become a free, independent, self-governing and tremendously prosperous country,
Well., Berlin presents a spectacle that we in Australia would never hope to see ourselves, Can you imagine Melbourne divided down the middle? No connection between one half and the other except by permission, except by authority? And at this moment, of course, lined with temporary walls actually to prevent people in one part of the city from going to their work in another part of the city. Here is the division of a great historic city: it is almost symbolic of the division in Europe, and the division in the world,
&nbsp;Are the Western powers to say to the 2 ½ million people who live in freedom in West Berlin that they are no . longer interested in them, that they propose to withdraw? Because if they do, then this island in East Germany will be absorbed as certainly as anything could happen, absorbed by the surrounding Communist authority And here is the terrible thing about it: one portion of Germany not free, controlled with a puppet Government, but controlled by the Soviet Union with the aid of Soviet troops; and on the Western side of Germany, as I have said, freedom, hope, happiness, prosperity. It is little wonder that over recent years hundreds and hundreds of thousands of people from East Germany have fled across the frontier not to escape into slavery, but to escape from it. And in Berlin itself, there have been many, many thousands of people crossing from one side to the other, in order to get out into a state of freedom. West Berlin, rebuilt, prosperous; East Berlin still with its ruins and rubble on view, and people living in a state of poverty. This is a tremendous point of conflict, and a tremendous point of crisis for the world.
Well, what does the dictator have to say about it, Mr. Khrushchev? He doesn't need to consult a parliament he hasn't one to consult; he needn't worry about electors because that is a species that you don't find in the Soviet Union. So he can engage in the great tactics of the cold war. He can threaten. He can say, " Unless you get out of Berlin, unless you agree to my proposals in relation to Berlin, I will sign a separate Treaty of Peace with East Germany; I will perpetuate the division of Germany; I will make it impossible for you to conduct your affairs in Berlin. Because once I have signed a Peace Treaty with East Germany, which surrounds Berlin then, whether you can go into Berlin or come out of it will depend upon the Government of East Germany, which will be a Communist Government". Now he can do that.
&nbsp;What are the Western leaders to say? This is a great problem. They can, as they have already made clear, indicate to him that they are always prepared to sit do-. n and have a sensible discussion about the position of Berlin, but that they will not respond to threats or to violence, That is a hard thing for democratic leaders to do, Never forgot that. It is very hard for a President of the United States, or a Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, to say, " If certain things happen then we will do so and so" because be must carry with hin public opinion; he must carry with him his Parliament or his Congress; he must be sure that he is speaking with authority., And his authority is derived from a wide area. But the authority of Khrushchev is his own authority: he imay bluff; he may threaten; he may advance: he nay withdraw at his own free will,
&nbsp;Now this is a great crisis in the world, I don't need to tell you that you can't dismiss the Berlin problem by saying, " Well is it worthwhile to have all this argument over one city?" We have an interest in it here in Australia, strange as it may seem to some. If Berlin goes, if Berlin goes into the Communist maw, if they have this enormous triumph in the cold war, the same kind of -triumph as that which has subdued Hungary, an older country than ours, a country of a great ancient civilization, if those tactics succeed in Europe, then you will have an encouragement all over the world to people who don't believe in the freedom of the spirit, who don't believe in the divine right of man. Because they don't believe in a God anyhow. And we will find in South-East Asia the pressure growing more triumphs in the cold war. Time after time we will be told " Well is Laos worth worrying about'? Is South Viet Nan worth worrying about? Is Thailand worth worrying about?" When will we start to worry about it? . When we have to say " Is Darwin worth worrying about?"'
You see this is a matter of immense significance. We are not only looking after our own interests; I believe that we are, all over the free world, trustees of matters of imperishable significance, We’re not to allow the enemies of freedom, the enemies of a free religious faith, to trample over more and more people, more and more in order to achieve their ambition of dominating, the ., whole world
Now I am not saying this because I want to rattle the sword. This is too grim a natter. I don't believe, myself, that the Soviet loaders want a great world war. The very power of destruction that exists today in these dreadful weapons, the nuclear and thermo-nuclear bombs, to say nothing of the intercontinental ballistic missiles that are now being practised, the very power to destroy is mutual. It is quite truce If a great war broke out a country like Great Britain could be practically eliminated in a few minutes. But so could all the great centres of Russia. Action, re-action, both sides equally powerful, both sides equally alert,
It is not a matter of waiting for months you know, to find out what happens, but a matter of minutes, in attack and counter-attack. This means that a nuclear war will, beyond question, it is not a mere matter of metaphor destroy both sides in the conflict and leave the outskirts of the world to some extent untouched; but the growth centres of the , world eliminated. And this is something that can't seriously be contemplated by any nan, whether he is Russian, British or American. Because there is a good deal of human nature in all of us Therefore I feel, myself, that Khrushchev has the great advantage of knowing that he doesn't want to have a nuclear war knowing that we don't want to have a nuclear war, and feeling al1 the tine, if he can divide our councils, that he can press forward a little, pressing forward, not taking the final risk of a great war, knowing that we don't want one, feeling that we will be prepared to abandon a few positions in order to avoid having one This is an immense game of bluff in that sense. And people can be easily bluffed in this world if they have confusion in their minds, if they are not clear about what goes on. Just let me give you one illustration of that because I cant hope to cover all this ground in one short speech. But let no give you one example of it.
Every now and then quite worthy people in Australia associate themselves with ideas of having a petition, or a deputation, for example, tone, about banning the bomb, about peace as if I didn't want peace, as if I had any atomic bombs around the corner, because I haven't, and 1 don't want then. What is the use of coming to no? Where does the threat come from? Who started the cold war? Who is going to initiate a great war of destruction'' The old country? How stupid. The United States of America? Ridiculous! France, bled by two or three wars? Of course not Well who is going to start it? And yet people will come to democratic leaders like myself in the free world and speak earnestly about the atomic bombs when I would very much prefer that they went to the Soviet Union and talked about then to the Kremlin Let us go to where the real danger exists.
All this idea of making armaments unpopular in the free world is exactly what the Soviet Union wants. &nbsp;Because armaments will always be popular in the Soviet Union until it has got all it wants in this world. So don't confuse this matter, don't let us think that we are going to solve all these problems in the world by weakening our own position, or by appearing to accuse ourselves of being responsible for world positions for which other people are responsible,
Now. my one illustration of that is the question of the further testing of atomic weapons, Back early this year we had a Prime Ministers' Conference in London and we passed a very significant resolution, unanimously and it is very seldom we pass a resolution a resolution on disarmament in which we endeavoured to get down to the reality of the matter We decided that the first step in the direction of disarmament, the first proof of good faith, the first ray of hope for mankind would arise if the powers concerned agreed that they would suspend all further testing of nuclear weapons.
Now that was simple enough. Great Britain has a few; America has a great many; the Soviet Union has a great many; France has two or three perhaps. But there is a limited number. There are four nations that have these terrible thing. All right, let them all agree that they will stop testing any more. That would be a wonderful stop, wouldn't it? This would, to that degree, remove a feeling of threat from the decent people of the world. What difficulties are there about it? Only difficulties of good faith.
The Western people went to the Conference at Geneva. They said, " Yes, we are prepared to suspend the testing of atomic weapons Of course, if you are", because it has to operate both ways. " Of course we will need to arrange to have this agreement supervised; we will need to be sure that not one of us is doing it secretly behind the other fellow's back, so to speak. Therefore let us have a system of inspection, and a Committee to conduct the inspection and scientific people from both the Soviet Union and the free world side, to conduct their examinations to see that this agreement is being honoured". What is wrong with that? All that is perfectly fair. And for months they have been sitting there getting nowhere, with the Soviet representatives refusing to agree to this or that, playing for time.
And now, at the very moment, I repeat, when there are good people in England and in Australia who want to talk to us about suspending atomic tests, they are now reading the last news that Khrushchev has said " We will resume tests". And to illustrate the utter insincerity of the whole thing, within 48 hours of him indicating that they are going to resume tests, they have one. Now lam no scientist but I don't think you can get ready the testing of a new weapon in 48 hours. Experience indicates that the preparation for this must have been going on all the time these talks wore being engaged in at Geneva,
You see the hypocrisy of it. Play for time: If you can get the West to halt while you go on, quietly, and then say, " We won't have an agreement" and then be in a position, at once, to test your new developments, you may ultimately got ahead of the West; and you may ultimately be able to threaten more destruction than you can receive. And on that day you will be master of the world. This is the way; this is the approach. You and I can't understand this; we haven't boon nourished in such a creed. This is not part of the conduct that we understand that we aim at, not at all. But this is it. This is the kind of thing that you are up against.
&nbsp;So, while I am a great believer in persuasion, and am always willing to receive complaints, criticisms, or advice, I hope that on these matters we will clear our minds and know really who are the people who are responsible; and that while we will talk, anywhere, at any time because I an sure the Democratic leaders will in order to resolve these difficulties like sensible people, we are not going to let down our own defences and accept a risk which, if it materialised would make us guilty of abandoning some of the most vital things in the world.
&nbsp;



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
THURSDAY, 7TH SEPTEMBER, 1961
BERLIN
I have already laid on the table of the House a
chronology of events since the end of the ' Jar and a collection
of documents relating to the period from May, 1959, to the
present time. Copies of a comprehensive collation of papers
prepared for the United States Senate and covering the period
before May 1959 have been available to Honorable Members in the
Library. How the Berlin Situation came about
History of estern ights
The two collections are not confined simply t-Berlin
but relate to the larger question of a post-war settlement in
Germany, of which the problem of Berlin forms part.
How did the Berlin situation come about? It is a
product of the unconditional surrender of Germany and of the
arrangements made in the closing stages of the Second Jorld War
for the future occupation of Germany by the four principal
victorious belligerent powers. These arrangements were intenae
to be temporar, and to govern the administration of Germany
pending the negotiation of a German peace treaty.
Perhaps we might begin by looking at the situation in
early 1945, when the Allied Armies were advancing into Germany.
At that time, for military reasons which need not detain us now,
the Western strategy was not to race for Berlin, but rather to
concentrate on objectives which were judged to be of more
importance for the early destruction of the German armies. Sir
Winston Churchill, in his war memoirs, tells how he questioned
this strategy, because of the political importance of Berlin.
But it was adopted; and in consequence, the Western armies were
halted along the general line of the Elbe, West of Berlin, and
it was there that the mooeeting with Soviet forces advncing from
the East took place. In some cases, Western troops were in fact
withdrawn to this general line.
In the agreements worked out in the European Control
Commission which gave each of the chiaf belligerents a zone of
occupation in Germany, the zonal boundaries were so drawn as to
leave Berlin as a special area within the Soviet zone of
occupation, by which it was surrounded. For Berlin itself,
arrangements were made for a special regime of joint four-power
control. For administrative purposes, the area of Greater
Berlin was divided into four sectors, each allotted to one of
the four occupying Powers; but Berlin itself was to be
administered as a unit by a Four-Power Kommandatura of the
United Kingdom, United States, French and Soviet Military
Commands. These early agreements were made in the period from
before the surrender of Germany until a time immediately after
it. As I have said, they were intended to lay down the general
lines of the arrangements that would obtain pending the
conclusion of a peace settlement. 
In addition to the rights of the Four Major Powers,
those agreements also defined certain rights of the other
belligerents against Germany. As one of these belligerents
Australia was enabled to establish a Military Mission in Berlin,
which it still maintains.
The rights of the victors include the right to
maintain garrisons in Berlin and the right to free access to the
city for this purpose. Such a right is essential to the Western
position in Berlin. Without it Western forces cannot be
maintained there, and without these forces there would be little
physical obstacle to the extension of Communist control over
Jest Berlin. The manner in which the Western powers and the Soviet
Union exercise their rights ( notably for the Western Powers this
right of access) forms the subject of the various agreements
among the four powers. But it is important to stress that the
rights themselves, being originally derived from the unconditionlsurrender
of Germany, do not depend for their validity upon the
continued acquiescence of any one of the four. Accordingly, the
rights of the Western powers in Berlin cannot be lawfully
cancelled or reduced by the Soviet Union.
Events leading up to the current crisis
The divisions which after the War opened up between the
wartime allies have prevented the effective negotiation of a
German peace treaty. However, having consolidated its physical
hold on the zone of occupation in Eastern Germany which fell to
it on the surrender of Germany, and having installed Communist
officials in key positions, the Soviet Government sot up in 19:-9
a Communist regime there, the so-called German Democratic
Republic. Since then it has worked to place its special sector
of occupation in Berlin formally under the control of that
regime. These developments were accompanied by measures to
restrict freedom of movenent from East to West Gornany. These
measures were and are in breach of various four-power agreements,
and most strikingly of the Paris Agreement of 1949, which ended
the Blockade of 1948-49. It is understandable that in these
circumstances the existence of a free West Berlin, enjoying the
protection of the Western powers, and with living st: andards so
superior to those of East Berlin, has been an increasing
embarrassment to the Russians. They showed early signs of
wishing to put an end to this state of affairs, in the imposition
of the Berlin blockade in 1948. This attempt was defeated by
Allied resolution and the Air Lift and for some years there was
little trouble. But towards the end of 1958 Mr. Khrushchev faced the
Western powers with an ultimatum calling for the conclusion of a
separate peace treaty with East Germany ( which would formally
legitimate the Communist regime there and perpetuate the division
of Germany) and for the establishment of lest Berlin as a socalled
" free city".
There followed a Foreign Ministers' Conference held in
Geneva in the European summer of 1959. At this Conference, the
Western Powers made constructive proposals designed to ensure
free elections for the whole of Germany and at the sane time to
safeguard both iestern and Soviet security. Mr. Khrushchev
refused to agree, and though he temporarily withdrew his
ultimatum there wore indications that he would again raise the
subject when he judged the time was ripe. 
The present crisis was set in train by a Soviet
momorandun delivered to United States officials in Vienna at the
time of President Kennedy's meeting there with Mr. Khrushchev on
3rd and 4th June, 1961. The text of this memorandum is set out
in the paper I have tabled; I shall describe its contents in a
moment. The Attitude of the Two Sides
The Soviet View
Essentially, the Soviet Union wishes to perpetuate the
division of Germany because it knows that a freely elected all
German Governnent would certainly not choose the Communist
social, economic and political institutions which the Soviet
Union has imposed on the people of East Germany.
The aim of its policy is to strengthen and stabilise
the Communist regime in East Germany, to obtain international
recognition of it, to dim the beacon light which West Berlin
shines into the darkness of East Germany, and to close off the
escape route which it offers to the oppressed population of the
Eastern zones. Each year since the war some 200,000 refugees from
Communist rule have fled by way of West Berlin. The flight of
these refugees has naturally disturbed the rules of Eastern
Germany, because of the consequences both for the ocoionmy of the
Eastern Zone and also for the prestige of the Communist regime
which the Soviet Union supports there. According to official
figures, some 2.7 million people have fled from the Eastoen z'ne
of Germany since 1949. Some estimates place the total number who
have fled since 1946 at nearer four million. Out of a total
population of 17 million, either of these is a formidable figure.
It shows, more dramatically than anything else could, the misery
and oppression which rule in the Eastern zone, in striking
contrast to the freedom and prosperity of West Berlin and of
JWestern Germany. It is small wonder that the Corm-unists regard
West Berlin as a " cancer" in Mr. Khrushchev's teom, and that they
wish to seal off the means of escape which it offers.
The " Free City" Proposal
The thome of the Soviet omeorandum of Juno this year
and of subsequent speeches by Mr. Khrushchev is that there is an
urgent need for a Peace Treaty to be signed with " both German
states" ( that is the Federal Republic of Germany and the
Cormunist regir. e in East Germany) by all the powers at war with
Germany; that, if the Western powers refuse to sign, the
Communist powers will conclude by the end of this year a
separate peace treaty with East Germany; and that this treaty
will terminate the present basis of Western rights in East
Germany and in Berlin and will define the status of West Berlin
as a " free city". The Western powers would then be obliged to
work out with the East German regime new arrangements for their
right of access to Berlin. Mr. Khrushchev has stated that any
attempt to raintain Western rights by force would be mot by
force. But he has also suggested that, after the signature of
the peace treaty Western rights of access to Berlin would not
necessarily suffer interference. The Warsaw Pact powers have
issued a declaration stating that a denilitarised " free city" of
West Berlin would itself enjoy free comr. unications. But nothing
was promised in this declaration about access for Western troops
and clearly, if the Soviet view were accepted this would be a
matter for the East German Government to determine. 
No gotiations The Russians have not suggested negotiations except on
their own terms. Any conciliatory signs fron then have been
balanced by stateents of their willingness to resort to force
if necessary to defend the so-called sovereignty of the German
Democratic Republic.
The Western View
The Western attitude towards the Berlin problem has
always been that it is, essentially, part of the wider problem of
a German settlement and indeed of a European postwar
settlement. They have long considered, as the Soviet Union
claims to believe, that a peace settlement in Germany which would
make it possible to end the occupation regirme in Berlin is
overdue. In a series of unsuccessful negotiations with the
Soviet Union extending over many years, they have endeavoured to
reach agreement on arrangements which while meeting legitimate
Soviet fears about its own security ( fears which, in the light
of modern history can be understood3 would ensure a stable and
peaceful Germany in future.
Together with the Soviet Union the Western powers are
committed, by signature of the United Nations Charter, as well
as by agreements specifically relating to Germany, to respect
the principle of self-determination.
The Western attitude has also been based on the
conviction that a divided Germany would prove a source of
constant tension in Europe and that the only really pe:. manent
solution lies in the reunification of the country by moans or
free all-German elections followed by the conclusion of a peace
treaty with a single German governrlent. Such a Treaty could be
combined with various measures constituting a European security
system to guard against any revival of German militarism. For
the same reason, the Western powers have been opposed to the
recognition of a separate puppet state in the Eastern zone of
Germany, which would inply acceptance of the permanent
division of Germany. They have withheld formal recognition of
the Oder-Neisse line as the Eastern frontier of a future Germany
on the ground that the determination of Gernany's frontiers is
properly a matter for an all-Gernan peace treaty.
The Western powers have, however, made it clear in the
past that they are prepared to enter into negotiations and they
have on various occasions in the past made constructive proposals.
At the Foreign Ministers' Conference at Geneva in 1959 they
proposed an advance in three phases towards the conclusion of a
peace settlement with an All-German Governmont: first, free
elections throughout Berlin to establish a united city there;
second, a mixed German comnittee ( from Westrbnd-, rany) to draft
an electoral law and submit it to plebiscite; third,
elections for an all-German assembly and the formation of an all-
German Government to conclude a peace treaty. They proposed
that, concurrently with stages two and throe, there should be
certain reductions in military strength in central Europe.
These proposals wore not accepted by the Soviet Union.
The Western Powers will no doubt be prepared to enter
into further negotiations. In such negotiations, they would
undoubtedly continue to defend and secure the freedio of the
inhabitants of West Berlin, the rights of the Western forces to
be there, and the rights of access of these forces. 
The Inmportance of Berlin
In the years since the unconditional surrender of
Germany a democratic state has been established in iWestern
Germany with a Government deriving from the freely exercised
vote of the population. Under the able leadership of Chancellor
Adenauer the Federal Republic of Germany, though not a nember of
the United Nations, has developed into a loyal member of the
free world, to the strength of which its economic vitality
contributes. Similarly, the zone of Western occupation in Berlin,
West Berlin, has prospered as the result of its inhabitants'
efforts and under the protection of the rights that the Western
powers enjoy there.
Two and a quarter million people now live in West
Berlin. They have steadfastly resisted Communist pressure and
the Western Powers have a responsibility for their future, to
see that they are not abandoned to Comr: unist oppression. They
cannot be allowed to share the fate of the other German millions
in the Eastern zone, the nature of which is so eloquently
attested by the refu~ goe figures I quoted just now.
The existence of free Berlin is of importance not only
to Germans, but to all the peoples of Eastern Europe and
indeed, to people everywhere in the world. To hand the
Bcrliners over to Communism would not only be wrong in itself
and a denial of every principle of justice; it would also be a
fatal blow to the hopes and confidence of people everywhere in
the determination of the Western powers to defend their frooecnm
What happens in Berlin will affect the balance of power and
reputation between the Communists and the Wust in areas
geographically much closer to us than Berlin itself.
Future Prospects What may we expect to see in the next few weeks and
months? It is likely that there will be a series of measures
and counter-measures over Berlin by the Co. mmunists and the allied
powers. The sealing off of West Berlin by the East German
authorities on 13th August, and their subsequent action to draw
the ring round Berlin tighter is an example of the action open to
the Communists; as is their apparent threat to air col. u-i. cations
with Berlin in their latest note to the -estorn Powers. ' J. is
note, it may be observed, has boon speedily and firmly rebuffed..
Against this background of tension there may well be a
neow series of negotiations. I will not venture any prediction
about their exact timing, location or outcome.
It is possible that at some stage there will be a
recourse to the United Nations. Article 107 of the Charter
envisages that action in relation to former enemies may be taken
" by the Governments having responsibility for such action." It
will be recalled however that the problem of Berlin was placed
before the United Nations at the time of the Soviet Blockede of
Berlin in 1948. A Security Council resolution was vetoed by the
Soviet Union, and an appeol by the President of the General
Assembly and Secretary-General produced no perceptible result.
The lifting of the blockade was the result primarily of the
steadfastness of the Western Powers and of their patient.
negotiations with the Soviet Union. But the United Nations
interest may have helped to bring to bear on the U. S. S. R. the
force of world opinion, and it was the Soviet United Nations 
representative through whom the U. S. S. R. announced its
willingness to lift restrictions as soon as a date had been set
for a meeting of Foreign Ministers. The possibility of the
United Nations playing a useful role in the present crisis can
therefore not be excluded.
Conclusion The Berlin situation is both difficult and dangerous
and much patience, firmness and good sense will be needed to avoid
its manifest dangers.
These dangers will be rocogn. sed by both sides. In
particular, I believe that the Cormunists would do well to
realise that, though the Western nations will never be the
aggressors, they will if necessary defend their rights.
As to Australia, we shall of course continue to support
the Western position in Berlin and the right of Berliners to
freedom which we have maintained in the past. I night recall our
contribution in 1948 to the Western airlift, in which R. A. A. F.
aircrew helped to nan the aircraft which beat the blockade.
We are in close touch with other Governnents '. ad with
our own missions including those in Bonn and in Berlin itself
about the developing situation; and I shall inform the House
fron tine to tine of events as they occur.
indeed, since this statement was first drafted, a new
move has been nade by the Soviet Union. It has in substance
abandoned the negotiations for a cessation of nuclear weapons
tests, first by the dramatic statement that the Soviet would te. t
another bomb; and then, within a matter of hours, the actual
carrying out of that and further tests.
In order that this entirely cynical and dangerous
action may be fully understood, I should remind the House that on
August 28th 1959, the Soviet Government made the following
announcement " The Council of Ministers of the Soviet Union have
decided not to resur. e nuclear explosions in the Soviet Uhion
if the Western Powers do not resume the testing of atomic
and hydrogen weapons. Only in the event of the resumpti. on
by them of the testing of nuclear weapons will the SF~ v. l1t
Union be freed from this self-imposed undertaking."
The Soviet Union has professed to believe, as th-
Western world certainly does, and as the Commonwealth Prime
Ministers publicly declared earlier this year, that the cussation
of further nuclear testing would be a step in the direction of
disarmament, would serve to reduce tension, and would offer to
the people of the world some hope of a reduction in international
tension. Honorable Members will be wll aware that the Soviet
Union has by every instrument of propaganda, including statomcn:-ts
made by Mr. Khrushchev to me in New York at the end of last yc. ar,
professed a desire for complete disarmament to be arrived at b
organised stagos.
Thefirst stage clearly would be to hold up the
development of now and even nore terrible weapons of destruction.
The Soviet Union has now, by its action, exhibited its contempt
for such an idea. We will no doubt be t-cld that the decision to
explode these further bombs is due to the tension resulting from
the Berlin crisis. But, as I have pointed out earlier in this
statonent, this is a crisis manufactured by the Soviet itself, 
The immediate effect of this last action by the Soviet
Union might well have been to produce an imediate resumption of
testing by the Western Powers and an abandonment of hope that so
sensible a measure could ever be achieved.
It is therefore of significance that on Sunday last,
President Kennedy and Mr. Macnillan made the following staterent-
" The President of the United States and the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom propose to Chairman Khrushchev
that their three Governnents agree, effective iim-ediately,
nnt to conduct nuclear tests which take place in the
atmosphere and produce radio-active fallout. Their ain in
this proposal is to protect mankind from the increasing
hazards fron atmospheric pollution and to contribute to the
reduction of international tensions.
They urge Chairman Khrushchev to cable his irmediate
acceptance of this offer and his cessation of further
atmospheric tests.
They further urge that their representatives at
Geneva meet not later than September 9th to record this
agreement and report it to the United Nations. Thry
sincerely hope that the Soviet Union will accept this offer,
which remains open for the period indicated.
They point out that, with regard to atmospheric
testing, the United States and the United Kingdom are
prepared to rely upon existing means of Jotection, which
they believe to be adequate, and are not suggesting
additional controls. But they reaffirm their serious desi-e
to conclude a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, applicable to other
forms of testing as , ell, and regret that the Soviet
Government has blocked such an agreement."
The reply which will presumably be made to this
statement will be a complete test of the good faith and pacific
intentions of the Communists.
On Tuesday, 5th September, on the day that the third
Soviet nuclear explosion was announced, President Kennedy, after
careful thought and a thorough review of all the factors invol) ved,
issued a statement ordering " the resumption of nuclear teo-, in
the laboratory and underground, with no fall-out". It
emphasised that this announcement did not qualify in any :/ the
Western offer to make an agreement. Nevertheless, in the.
circumstances, which clearly show that the Soviet has cm-: ' ed on
a series of tests which, it must be presumed, will materially
increase Soviet nuclear weapons capability, the steps taken by
President Kennedy are, in his own words, those " which prudent
men find essential". I will reserve further comments on this subject till
next week when a further statement to the House may be
appropriate. 


11th September, 1961
Sir, parliamentary colleagues, Lord Mayor, and gentlemen:
The toastmaster has told you that I am to propose the toast of Commerce and the 75th Anniversary of the Chamber of Commerce..... Now, Sir to propose the toast of Commerce is rather to invite oneself to make one of those long speeches and I don't want to do that. But to propose the toast of Newcastle on the Anniversary of the Chamber, now that is something that really, I think, attracts the mind.
&nbsp;When I arrived here this afternoon out at Williamtown, I met the Lord Mayor, Alderman Purdue, which, as you know is a corruption of " par Dieu" really it is only that the name has been changed that gets him rid of a few rather blasphemous observations, ( Laughter) in the street. Well of course the moment they said, " Do you know the Lord Mayor?" I said, " Of course I do. I've never known anybody else in that position". So honour was satisfied. And after a few exchanges we came in. Then one of them, I would have you believe, said to me " We have been looking through the records and we find that you are the first Prime Minister to visit Newcastle" I think he said " officially", whatever that means " since" was it Mr. Lyons? I’ve forgotten. Well I wouldn't have that. Because God knows, Purdue knows, that I have been here time after time and I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus, with some of my friends here whipping them on from the back of the hall, time after time. he said " officially". Then another gentleman I met subsequently said, with an absolute excess, I thought, of virtue, " the first Prime Minister to visit Newcastle in 77 years". Now I warn you gentlemen, this is a perfect example of how extravagance can grow on you because there has only been a Prime Minister for 60 years! (Laughter) And for my sins I have been it for about a quarter of the time. (Laughter) But this man, in order to put me at a disadvantage that's what I don't like (Laughter) went back to 1884 and imagined Prime Ministers. Well anyhow I've remembered it; but I will now forget it. And, of course, I forgive it. Because I think all this shows that he wanted to establish something about Newcastle.
&nbsp;Now I will tell you something about Newcastle if I may. I think that Newcastle and the country of which this is not a contentious remark of which it is the natural capital ( Laughter, applause) this is not to be treated as a preliminary judgment on any new State movement I never anticipate troubles: they come fast enough is a very remarkable place and a very remarkable area.
Now I should have known, but I didn't, that Newcastle as a port, if you just start there, vies with Sydney and Melbourne in the tonnages that it handles. I don't think that that is at all well understood around Australia. I have been coming to Newcastle unofficially for I think 35 years, though I seem to have made singularly little impression ( Laughter) on any of my hosts, but until I read the brochure that had been sent to me on this occasion, I didn't really clearly understand how tremendous a port Newcastle is. I think that ought to be very much bettor known in Australia.
Then, apart from that and perhaps, of course entirely related to it, here we have the home, in the modern sense, of the iron and steel industry of Australia. A tremendous iron and steel industry an iron and steel industry so remarkable, and the people who work in it so remarkable, that there is no more efficient in the world. ( Applause) And all round the world, into the United States of America, into Great Britain from time to time, will go the products of this industry, through this port, into those gr,) at countries. When one thinks of Newcastle one thinks of those things.
Then, not long ago, my wife came up here and launched a magnificent vessel, the Princess of Tasmania, of which she still regards herself as the part-owner; the product of a great shipbuilding yard which still has many fine things to do in the shipbuilding world.
And then there is the whole coal country behind us. Coal has never boon without its problems it still has them. But I am hoping and believing that with the development of proper coal export facilities a now world is opening for the production of coal and the export of coal from Australia. I know there are other coal fields, but in the old days when I used to be a bit mixed up with these problems, to think of coal was to think of Newcastle not because you wanted to take coal to Newcastle, but because you had behind it, places like Cessnock and Kurri Kurri, of which I have happy, but exciting memories. Here you are in a port, &nbsp;a great port, with a great major industry, with all sorts of other industries that I won't take time to mention because you are all so familiar with them, and behind this some of the greatest deal measures in the world. This alone would make this a remarkable place.
But if you go further still you come, as I have been taking great pleasure in reminding my friend Vercoe from South Australia -where they are a little bigoted about their wine, you understand -that if you go up the Hunter you will come to some of the finest wine country in Australia. (Applause) And the one thing that I complain about in the expensive brochure that was sent to me was that I couldn't read anything in it about Mount Pleasant wine, or about Tulloch's.
But let us remember it. This is a remarkable state of affairs: a port, a great iron and steel industry, coal, wine.
When, recently, I said to some people who are associated with me that I would like to make a speech on the Common Market problem a country audience because country people have a lively and particular interest in it and they said to me " What about Maitland?" I said " Oh, come, come, I've spoken, or been spoken to, at Maitland a fair number of times". And they said " That’s &nbsp;all right". And I found myself talking to a thousand people, most of whom were farmers, and woke up, as even a Prime Minister will ultimately, if you give him a chance after all I'm only a beginner woke up to the fact that here was an immense farming area with dairy farmers, and wheat growers and, of course, behind all that, wool growers, an immense wool market here in Newcastle.
&nbsp;Look I could stretch all these things out to the crack of doom. The point that I want to make to you is that you must never think of Newcastle as just a heavy-industry city or just as a port. This city, and the area that it serves the area for which it is a port, the area of which it is, in the sense that I have described it a natural sort of sub-capital, this is a microcosm of Australia itself. If you wanted to find an area in which you said " Well now let us consider the state of Australia, what we ought to be doing, how we are balanced on two feet in our economy, our hopes, our future", then I would recommend to anybody that he should come here and study, not only this town but the country that lies behind it: a perfect example of inter-dependence.
I think, Sir, that that is ono great reason why for once in my life since I arrived here I haven't had ny ear bashed about tariffs, or import licensing, or subsidies, or whatever goes on, you know. The truth is that you here and I can see it when I realise who are represented here tonight represent the broad sweep of Australian interest. Therefore you are all conscious of the common interest much more than you are of your particular interest within the common interest, And this is, I think, vastly important.
One doesn't need to talk party politics on an occasion like this it would be ridiculous and quite improper having regard to your association but as I get older, not on. y in years, but in the service of. this country, I like to feel more and more that we are all Australians and that the greatest interests that we have are interests in common.
Therefore, Sir, it is a very refreshing thing to come to an area in which all these things are demonstrated; in which all these things are brought together.
I can remember when I was a small boy living in the bush, in the north-west of Victoria, when people became passionate about protection or free trade this is going back a few years, you understand my father was a violent protectionist, in the middle of a wheat growing community. It took a bit of something, you know, to be that. But he brought me up to understand that if ever I ceased to be a protectionist he would rise from his grave and deal with me. And I think he would, because he was a man of considerable vigour; (Laughter) and men of considerable vigour like that are not easily kept down. But there it was: protection and free trade. And I went through a period in my early manhood when it seemed to be taken for granted that if you were for manufacturing industry in Australia, you must be against the farmer; and if you wanted to be for the farmer, you must be against manufacturing industry.
This has now been understood by the people of Australia to be the most &nbsp;sorry nonsense. Because we live on each other, with each other. And if anybody wanted to be taught the rudiments of this broad understanding of the Australian economy I will recommend that he be sent up here and made to understand w. hat is going on here, and what is going on 50 miles west, and up the valley of the Hunter, so that at the end of the time he may realise that the whole business of commerce in Australia is a business of inter-dependence, and not of quarrelling about what we suppose to be individual interests.
When I look at the list of your membership as I did and I see its broad sweep I can very well understand, Mr. Chairman, that your Chamber, in its 75 years, has been able to emphasise this mutuality of interests, this mutuality of patriotism, which I think must characterise a great Chamber of Commerce in a great commercial, industrial, farming and pastoral centre,
And so, Sir, I am delighted to be here, and I am delighted to have the opportunity of proposing the health of the Chamber on its 75th Anniversary. But before I do so actually, perhaps I might say this to you.
I went out to Maitland on this occasion expecting to see 120 people, not a bad crowd that would have been, and finding 1 000. Why? Because they loved me? On the contrary Probably or you might say 50.5% hated the sight of me. But they came. Why? Because they had realised that these events in Europe about the Common &nbsp;Market :. re not only the business of the United Kingdom but the business of Australia, the business of Canada, the business of New Zealand, with tremendous force, the business of other countries.
Don't ask me to say what is going to happen. But I do know this: that this is an issue which rises above all party considerations. I don't believe for one moment that there is a man in the Federal Parliament who doesn't want to see that everything that can be done is done to protect the proper interests of our country in the markets of Great Britain, and of Europe, and of the world.
But it is not going to be easy. There are powerful considerations that affect the old country. There are tremendous political considerations and they don't grow smaller, day by day, as the manufactured crisis over Berlin becomes more difficult. These are tremendous problems And in the solving of them we all know that we need a powerful Europe; and we all know that a powerful Europe needs a powerful Great Britain. Never let us abandon our recollection of the fact that the great nation in the saving of the world, twice in this century, has been Great Britain itself. ( Applause) And as we remember that we will remember that we must be astute, not to do something that will hurt her, or diminish her significance in the world0 But at the same time we are Australians, we have a profound duty to our own country, and we don't want something to happen that will hurt us. And we believe that with good sense, and good judgment, and some understanding on the part of European countries, and of the United States of .America, we might hope to arrive at a conclusion on matters which will lend strength to all of us, and to Europe itself.
I am not going into details on this matter &nbsp;- though we, have been doing it in other fields &nbsp;- but I just want to say to you that I don't think these are problems that are going to be solved by rhetoric, by aggression, by aggressive remarks, by aggressive arguments. These require firmness of character and level-headed judgment and resolution. And isn't it interesting that those three things are still needed on everything that matters: level heads, clear minds, firmness of resolution.
I mentioned just now the Berlin crisis. You know, it is so easy to dismiss Berlin. " Is it worthwhile? It's only a particular city. Is this worth a war?" Well you don't avoid wars that way. After all Czechoslovakia wasn't worth a war, it was said; Poland wasn't worth a war as it was said; Belgium wasn't worth a war. You can go around the whole gamut of these things and you come back to the proposition which ought to be established crystal clear by now that there is a ' point of no surrender' otherwise the free world retreats and retreats and retreats into surrender. And here we have Berlin.
&nbsp;I am happy to say that I think the attitude taken on this matter by the great Western powers has been admirable firm but not provocative. Mr. Kennedy s statements I think have been splendid firm, but not provocative. And at the moment they are being met by blustering and threats and bullying. Well gentlemen, blustering and throats and bullying nay go down well with some people, but they have never cut much ice with us have they? Never cut much ice with you; never cut much ice with me.
And yet we don't want to be behaving as if we were hungry for battle. Because the next great battle in the world will leave none of these countries to be discussed in future. And they all know it. And when Khrushchev knows that, as he does, then I have a firm belief that the first time he sits across a table and sees a man with a clear eye who represents true authority, and a great massive body, not only of public opinion, of free strength, but of power, and he is told that this&nbsp;is where it ends, that is where it will end. This is going to be the most tremendous, the most tremendous event in recent years. ( Applause)
Well we all hope, we all believe, that we won't come to this dreadful pass. I don't think there is any reason inhuman nature and there is a good deal of human nature on both sides of the iron curtain to suppose that it will come to this pass,
But in the meantime we have one prime duty: to get on with the development of our own country; to get on with the production of our own country; to establish that here in this remote corner of the world, not by one means only, but by a hundred different means, we can become not only great producers for ourselves, but great producers for export markets around the world, and particularly around our quarter of the world. This is a great task. I feel infinitely indebted, myself, to those who take time eff from their own business undertakings to think about these things.
We have just had a magnificent conference in Canberra about exports, a widely representative conference. We all mean business on this matter. And all i want to say to you is that it is a good thing to talk about at a non-party gathering~ because this, with great respect to everybody, &nbsp;is a non-party matter. This is an Australian problem. When we have solved that one we can take time off to have a crack at each other -we will anyhow because that is all part of the game and I enjoy it -but anyhow we can take time off to do that, and we will. But here in Newcastle in this place, in this area, with your immense variety of activities, you, I believe, represent, in summary, ti~ e whole thing that Australia is aiming at.
So, Sir, I say to you that as this Chamber has been going on since nine years before I was born, so I hope that it will go on for 90 years, 900 years, after I am dead. And then, I trust, an industrious secretary, looking through the records of the past, will produce as a piece of ancient history that a fellow called " Menzies" once came here and spoke. ( Applause)



STATEi4ENT BY THE 1RIME MINISTE ( RT. HON. HR. G. MNZIE;
IN THE HOUSE OF aEPRPESENTATIVES
1EDNESDAY 2_ 13TH SEPTEMBER 1 61
NUCLEAR. TEST
On 7th September I made some observations on the
resumption by the Soviet Union of nuclear bomb testing, and sai
that I might make a further statement this week. I should lie
now to trace in more detail the course of negotiation on thiz.
most important question, and to examine some of its
implications for us.
Eiarly Western Proposals Rejected by U. S. S. R.:
It was in July 1957, that the ' 4estern Pouers on the
Sub-Committee of the United Nations Disarmrament Commission first
proposed that a group of experts meet to devise an inspection
system to control the suspension of nuclear tests. T'he Soviet
Union did not respond.
The following month the Uestern Powers proposed the
suspension of nuclear tests for two years, during which time a
s; stem of international inspection could be worked out to ensure
that all future production of fissionable material would be used
solely for peaceful purposes. In making these prcposal, the
ifcstern Powers again called on the Soviet Union to join in expe: t
studies. The Soviet Union refused.
In November, 1957, these proposals woro endorsed by the
United Nations General Asserbly but the Soviet Union still
refused to discuss them.
Not until March, 1958, after Russia had concluded a
series of test-, and just before the start of a United States
series, did the Soviet Union announce that it would suspend tests
unilaterally for six months. The Iest pointed out that unilato7%--
declarations, without a system of inspection and control to
ensure that the declarations were being honoured, wero valueless;
and called again on the Soviet Union to take part in technical
discussion on the feasibility of devising an effective system
and the form it might taku. This time the Soviet Union agreed.
The Conference of Exp. Lrts lo7s:
So, in July and August, 1958, the first conference of
exports met in Geneva, The experts, including the Russian
experts, concluded that it was possible to devise a practicable
system for detocting violaticns of an agremont to sispend
nuclear weapons tests. The United Kingdom and the United States
thereupon announced that they wvere prepared to suspend tests for
one year from 31st Octobur, 1958, : n ce rtain conditions0 One
that negotiations should begin on that date for the conclusion
of a treaty on the suspension of tests under ffectivo international
control. Anothter was that Russia should not rosuilme
ts ting.
O _ oni. oEf-E Nozotiations, Octob 8:
The Conference opend at Geneva on 31st October, 1958.
On 1st November the very next day the Soviet Union oxploded
an atomic device. Two days lator it exploded another. Despite
this flagrant breach of faith, the United States declared that
would adhore to its undcrta1ing, provided the Soviet Union
refrained from further tcsting.
From that . time, noarly throo years ago, the
negotiations have continued, . with occasional adjournmonts and
they are still technically continuing: despite tho Sovio
rPsumption of testing they have still not formally been broken 
off. Progress has been slow. From the beginning it was
apparent that Western and Soviet views on what constituted an.
adequate, reliable and acceptable treaty were very far apart.
But by painstaking porsistonce, with the United Kingdom and t.:
United States making every effort of compromise to break deadlocks,
the areas of fundamontal disagreement were perceptib:
narrowed. djournnent of Conference, December 1.960:
When the Conference adjourned in December, 1960, in tan
last days of the Eisenhower Administration, thore had been
adopted a preamble and seventeen articles of a draft treaty, an:'
two annexes. Important differences on issues of principle still
remained unresolved, but the progress which had already been
made encouraged the hope that with persoveiance agreemont could
yet be reached on the outstanding points. ' With perseverance~,
I have said: perhaps I should have added ' and with goodwill and
sincere endeavour'. For there were already by the end of last
year disquieting signs. Honourable ai-ners may recall that, as
I stated to the pe: ss afterwards, when I talked wi. th iMr
Khrushchev in N-, w York on 12th October, 1960, he oxprs-'~ d tihe
view that the suspension of nuclear tests was of diminishing
importance. Nevertheless the ! estern Po,, wrs, for their part,
continued their unremitting efforts to seek agroement.
Resumption of Conforence, March 1-61:
Presi. dent Kennedy, on assmiing office, ordoeed an
intensive review of the issues involved, and when the
Conference resumed on 21st March, 1961, a now set of proposals
was submitted by the United States and the United Kingdom.
These proposals, which incorporate important concessions to
Russian positions, were:-
1. To reduce the number of on-site inspctions in each of the
nucljar countries fro~ m a fixed figure of twenty to a
possible twelve, depending on the number of suspicious
seismic oeJnts;
20 To reduce the number of control posts on Soviet tor: itory
from twenty-one to nineteen;
3, To extend from twenty-soven months to three years the
proposed moratorium on snaller underground tests and the
associated research prograrir.' oz,
4. To institute a ban on all nuclar woapons tests at high
altitudes and in outer space;
To ask Congress for legislative authority to permit Soviet
inspection of the internal mechanism of the nucloar device;
used in the seismic research and peaceful uses progrcammes:
6. To accept the Soviet request for veto over the annual bud,-,
of the control organization;
7. To accept the Soviet demand for a parity of seats between
' icstern and Soviet bloc States on the top Control
Commission an arrangement which would give the Soviet
Union a voice in guiding the control system equal to that
the United States and the United Kingdor combined, and
which would be unprecodented in an international
organization. 
Then on 18th April, building on the agreements already
reached and incorporating these now proposals, the United States
and the United Kingdom tabled a complete draft treaty for the
suspension of nuclear weapons tests.
Soviet Reversal The Soviet reaction was ominous and disheartoning. Not
only did the Soviet Delegate, Mr. Tsarapkin, return to the
conference table without constructive proposals, making it clear
that the Soviet Union had not used the three months' adjournnont
to seek ways of resolving points of difference, but he even went
back on an agreement which the Soviet Union had made over a year
previously. He insisted that, instead of having, as had boon
agreed, a single neutral administrator as chief executive officer
of the control organization, there should be established a
triumvirate of administrators, one from the Soviet group, one
from the western powers and one from the ' neutralists', who
would be required to reach their decisions unanimously. Each
member would therefore have a veto. This is the so-called
' Troika! principle which the Soviet Union put forward at the last
Geniral Assembly of the United Nations to replace the office of
Secretary-General. It would give the Soviet Union the power to
prevent any inspection by the control organization of m-uspected
breaches of the treaty by the Soviet Union,
Konncdy-Khrushchev Moeting in Vienna:
This uncompromising, retrograde attitude was
continued by Mr. Khrushchev when he met President Kenneoly in
Vienna. The Russian ' Aide-nemoire' or memorandum of 4th June
reiterates this new Soviet contention that " there do not and
cannot exist neutral men". I call it " now" advisedly, because in
January of last year, Mr. Tsarapkin, the Soviet negotiator said
at the Conference: " Out of the three thousand million human
beings on earth we shall always be able to find someone on whor
you and we can agree". And the following month he said: " In
neutral countries it will always be possible to find a person, a
really neutral person, who can be used for the job of carrying
out the duties of administrator". And in June, 1960, he said:
" It will always be possible to discover in the world a person
acceptable to both sides for nomination for the post as
administrator". The Vienna Memorandum also proposed that the
negotiations on the suspension of nuclear tests should be merged
with discussion of general complete disarmament. That is to say,
the Russians proposed that the measure of agreement which had
been so painfully won through nearly three years of patient
negotiation should be tossed back into the molting pot. They
proposed that agreement on the suspension of nuclear weapons
tests, which is, despite its complexities, a relatively simple
operation, should be made dependent upon achieving agreement on
the much vaster and the infinitely more complicated question of
general and complete disarnament. This Memorandum also
disclosed the hollowness of the much vaunted offeo to accept
unconditionally any proposals of the ! estern Powers on control if
they would accept the Russian proposal on general and complete
disarmament This Memorandum makes it plain that the Russians
wrill accept control and inspection only after disarmament has
been completed because " as long as states maintain their Armed
Forces, no control can be free from intolligenceo When Armed
Forces are abolished and ari,. an: ents destroyed, then only control
will not be connected with intelligence".
The Memorandum further suggests that the policing of a
disarmed world w-ould be through natbi:, nal contingents ( in other
words there would be no standing international force) which 
" could be used through the Security Council" ( that is to say
they would be subject to the Russian veto). In addition, " all
the main groups of States should, of course, be equally
represented on the cormand of such international forces" ( that
is to say they would be under a ' troika' command which would
give the Soviet Union the power of veto over the day-to-day
operations of the forces).
United States Reply:
The United States replied to this Memorandum in a
Note of 17th June. This Note patiently rehearsed the substantial
concessions which the WIest had offered since the talks resumed,
pointed out the objections to the Russian proposals, and drew
attention to the wider consequences for which the Soviet Union
would be responsible. The Russian reply was a long Note dated 5th July which
made no concessions but maintained the new Russian position
uncompromisingly. The exchange ended with a United States Note of
July which returned to the central issue and sought to
determine whether the Soviet Union was willing to reach an
agreement which would halt nuclear weapons tests under effective
international control.
Broakdown of Conference:
The Conference at Geneva continued, despite all
discouragnremnt, with the Jest still trying to meet the Russian
objections. On 28th and 30th August the United Kingdom and
United States representatives made three new and important
concessions:-( 1 They tried to satisfy the Soviet Union completely
about small underground tests. ( These at present
cannot be reliably detected and a moratorium had been
suggested to allow research into improved detection
methods.) The now proposals envisaged consultation
before the moratorium ended. During the last six
months a panel of experts would report on recommended
improvements in tno control system, the capability of
the system in the light of these improvements, and
whether or not it would be possible to reduce or
eliminate altogether the range of undetectable
explosions. They tried to satisfy the Russian doubts about the
impartiality of the administrator, by making him
removable from office by simple majority vote in the
Control Cormission which wo. uld comprise four Russians,
four WJestern representatives, and three neutrals.
They tried to allay Russian fears that inspection
teans would be used for espionage by offering to make
half the number of each team nationals of " uncommitted"
countries.
The Soviet reply, made on the same day as the last two of these
concessions, was to announce its intention to resume testing.
Soviet Resumption of Tests:
On Ist September the Soviet Union exploded a nuclear
device. ' von this did not exhaust the patience or the hope of
the Western leaders. On 3rd September, as I mentioned last 
week, President Kennedy and Mr. Macmillan made a joint offer to
Mr. Khrushchev that their three governments agree, with imrediate
effect, not to conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere such as
would produce radio active fall-out. They proposed that their
representatives meet at Geneva on 9th Septenber to record this
agreement. They further emphasized that this proposal was not in
any way conditional upon the establishment of new or additional
controls and that they were prepared to rely on existing longrange
methods of detection which would not involve entry into or
overflight of Russian territory.
The Russian reply, as we all know, was the explosion of
a second nuclear device, and a third and then a fourth. The
explosion of four atomic devices within a span of six days
points to a high degree of planning and advance preparation over
a long period. It means that Soviet participation at the Geneva
talks has for some time been a sham. It neans that while they
have allegedly been negotiating for the suspension of nuclear
weapons tests they have been preparing an extensive series of
tests which, it must be assumed, will add materially to Russian
nuclear weapons capability. In this context I would again
recall that on 28th August, 1959, the Soviet Government
announced its decision " not to resume nuclear explosions" if the
estern Powers did not resume. In the face of the Soviet Union's
patent indifference to the Western proposals or world opinion,
President Kennedy found himself obliged to make the followin
announcement on 5th September, after the third in the present
series of Russian tests:-
" In view of the continued testing by the Soviet
Government, I have today ordered the resumption of nuclear
tests in the laboratory and underground with no fall-out.
" In our efforts to achieve an end to nuclear testing,
we have taken every step that reasonable men could justify.
" In view of the acts of the Soviet Government, we must
now take those steps which prudent men find essential. We
have no other choice in fulfilment of the responsibilities
of the United States Government to its own citizens and to
the security of other free nations.
" Our offer to make an agreement to end all fall-out
tests remains open until September 9."
Recent Developments: The Soviet Union has now rejected the joint United
Kingdom-United States offer and gone on to conduct t0eefurther
atmospheric tests of nuclear devices, two with a force of several
megatons, that is to say, equivalent in explosive power to
several million tons of TNT. Mr. Khrushchev, in rejecting the
Western offer, contended that a nuclear tests suspension
agreement must be considered in the wider context of general and
complete disarmament, This Soviet reaction, as I suggested last
Thursday, provided " a complete test of the good faith and
pacific intentions of the Communists". They have failed that
test. In contradiction to Mr. Khrushchev's repeated statements
on the need tc protect th . world from the dangers of radio-active
fall-out, they have brushed aside the offer of an aZreement
which would have done just this.
The Soviet claim that it is not prepared to conclude
partial disarmament or suspension agreements, but wishes to
consider all those problems in the context of general and
complete disarmanent, is a transparent propaganda device. The
problem of general and complete disarmament is vast and complex
and a solution cannot be achieved by " short-cuts". The West 
has always believed that a major stop towards general
disarmament would be the conclusion of a nuclear tests ban treaty.
In fact, some progress had been made towards the establishment of
such a treaty. Yet the Soviet Union by its present actions seems
prepared to nullify the progress already naeo. In the light of
this Soviet intransigence it was no surpri: s when the Geneva
conference adjourned indefinitely on 9th September.
On 10th September, immediately after adjournment of the
conference, the Soviet Union announced that it would begin
testing mu] ti-stage rockets to be fired into the Pacific Ocean in
an area south-west of Hawaii. The rockets to be tested are said
to be more powerful and improved versions of multi-stago carrier
rockets already used in space experiments.
Commentary The record makes it clear that the Soviet Union has,
from the outset, treated the whole issue of nuclear tests bans
with complete cynicism, recklessly pursuing what it conceives as
its national interest yet at the same time playing on the hopes
and fears of the millions of peace-loving people throughout the
world. The first Russian " suspension" in March, 1958, followed
completion of one series of tests. The next series, in November,
1958, was pressed through with a total disrogard of international
opinion. In August, 1959, presumably when the irmmediate
requirenents of the Russian military machine had been met, a
solemn promise was given that the U. S. S. R. would not be the first
to conduct any further nuclear tests. The events of these last
days show how-uch faith can be placed in assurances of this kind.
It is also clear that while professing to ne: otiate seriously at
Geneva, the Russians were making detailed prcp-rations for the
current series of tests. No doubt as soon as the series has
been completed there will be yet another Soviet proposal for an
unconditional suspension on both sides, with the Communist
propaganda machine fully mobilized to denounce the United States
if it continues the tests it has now been forced to undertake.
The Australian Government commends the patience and
restraint contrasting sharply with the Soviet approach to this
issue which the Western loaders have shown throughout the long
and ( as now proved) fruitless negotiations at Geneva. Still more
commendable have been their persistent and imaginative efforts to
seek out every possibility of agreenent and, in recent days, to
salvage something from the wreck. Given the total lack of
response from the Soviet Union, it is inconceivable that the
United States should continue its self-imposed ban on nuclear
testing in the present grave situation. My Government wholeheartedly
supports President Kennedy's decision to resume underground
tests, a decision which the Soviet actions have now made
essential to the security of the free nations. For, let us make
no mistake, our own security is directly involved. So long as
the Soviet Union refuses to conclude an effective aroeeent for
the prohibition and control of nuclear tests, we will be left in
the grim position that the only assurance that its leaders will
not resort to the ultimate weapon is the knowledge that its use
would mean their own annihilation.
At the same time it is noteworthy that even now the
United States, at a substantial sacrifice in time, convenience
and money, still refrains from carrying out the atmospheric tests
which generate fall-out. There is a clear and important
difference between the atmospheric tests conducted by the
Russians and the underground testing now being undrtaken by the
United States. 
Although the recent Lo_ v. i et actions have not com., e as
a complete surprise, their suclacnness a.-id brutality and the
threat which tiiey pose to w) rla! peace are nonotheless
shocking and," doeply dW prssin It ap-Doars tiha-t -the fifthl
sixth Lind seventh. Soviet tests we r: in tiO iAr t~ c regieins.
Only two m~ onths a'-o ton nati-o-ns ritin Canlbrra in this very
Char., ber to ive effect to the . AnIt-( 2Uctic Tre_) aty, a m_-odest
a,:: roeioent designed to rcim. ove cL1.1c:; e of fricti-n anMd dispute and
to facilitate work to,-etho lo'teernngodi xlrto
and developmient. The Soviat Union was amion.,, tnc simno.; orios to
this ag,-reement, under which nuclear explosions are forbidden in
the Antarctic. I should still like -to hope that in thne larger
interests of mankind, the S,. viot leaders co'. uld recover, something
of thie spirit of moeaion and co-operation which m11arked the
Antarctic Conference and that the ban on nuclear-tests, with
propter control an,' safe omurds, will become universal. Until it
does, the free nations place no reliance on Soviat
professions of concern for mankind. Nor can they accept as
~~. otnhu ie oitcaim to be the champion of erlan
complete Jisarrmariont. 
GEi-EVA C0NFR~ C OHl Tn DS OTTTNUANCE ONUCLAR
VEAP101* TfLST3-CC~ h~
1at July,, 1958
21 st Augu. st, 1958
22nd August, 1 958
31st October, 1958
1 st November, 1958
3rd November, 1958
13th April, 1959
23rd April, 1959-
May, 1959
14th May, 1959
August, 1959-
29th Aiugust, 1c, 50 Following oxchanrGes be twe en Pre side nt Ri sonhowvir
of' the United States and Marshal LuIgani of' the
Soviet Union on the possibility of' a Nuclear
Tests Dan Treaty a Oonf'orenca of' iEcprts to
Study tho PFossibility of' dotecting Violations
of a icssiblej Agreement on the suspcn , ion of'
Nuclcear Te sts opcned at Geneva.
An agroed report on the technical f'earsibilitiy
of' detecting nuohar explosions was3 adopted by
the Conf'eronce of' Experts.
The United Kingdom and the Uited States Governments
announced that thcy wer3e proparad to
suspend nuclear testing f'or cno year from 31 st
October, 19508, provided negctiatic,. ns for a
Tests Pan Traaty beg-an on that dlate arid provided
the Soviet Unidon did not resume tssting.
The Geneva Confc-rence on the biscontinuance of'
lluclear Weapon Tests convened.
The Soviet Union cmx~ odoed a Nuclear dovice.
The Soviet Union exploded -a furtier Nulcar
device. President Eisenhower a letter to Mr0 Kitrushchev
suggested. that, in the absence of' Soviet
agreement to controls that would be ef'fective
in all anvircnmcnrtf$ a6.~ erou rvd~
for disconftd khco n ccartaid' 6hivironrlentb -be negbtin.
tad. The krnsidRnt suwCGested banning all atmos-
' nhoric tests initially.
PLr. Khruschav rejected President Eisenhowe.-r's
proposal and insisted that ef'forts continue with
the sole objective of' concluding a treaty that
would provide for the cessation of all types of'
nuclear weapon tests.
ro sidenb Eisenhowor in a letter to 14r, Khrushchev
reitezratod the terms of' his letter of' 13th
A . pril0o
W'o IKhrushchev in a letter to .1&amp; e-sidant Eisenhower
althu-h r3stating thco views expressed in
his letter of' 23rd April, exressed Soviet
willingness to entor in~ to experts' meetings on
the deteaction of' higLh altitude tests0
Mz--Ydlrushchov statod that the " is
ready to accolpt th3 most solemn obligation not to
be the first to conduct any further tests of
nuclear weapons".
The Government of' the United Kinigdoma confirmed
an earlier st,% temant, made by Mr. RA, Dutlor
in the H-ouse of' Cormxons, that it would not conduct
anmy nucJloar iweapon-tests so long as useful
discuss0ions at Geneva conitinued.
0./ 2-
Page 2.
29th December, 1959
11th February, 1960
13th February, 1960
19th March, 1960
29th March, 1960
1st april, 1960
3rd May, 1960
11th May, 1960
December, 1960
27th Locember, 1960 President Eisenhower announced that the United
States would consider itself free to resume
nuclear weapon, testing when its voluntary
moratorium expired on 31st December, 1959, but
that it would not resume testing without
announcing its intention in advance,
The United States, supported by the United
Kingdom, presented to the Conference a proposal
for a phased treaty which would immediately
end all nuclear weapon, tests in those
environments where effective control could be
established. The proposal called for a ban on all tests above
ground up to the maximum height to which effective
controls could be agreed, all underwater
tests, and all underground tests above a seismic
magnitude of 4o75 on the Richter seismographia
scale( This magnitude became known as the
" threshold").
France exploded its first nuclear device in the
Sahara Desert.
The Soviet Union expressed its willingness to
agree to a treaty banning all tests in the
atmosphere, underwater and in cosmic space,
and all underground tests above seismic magnitude
4.75, contingent on a proviso that all parti-s
to the treaty undertook an obligation not to test
below the threshold daring the period required to
conduct a research programme.
The United States and the United Kingdom declared
themselves willing to accept a temporary, unilaterally
declared, moratorium on tests below the
threshold. It was made clear that neither country
would institute this moratorium until the remaining
treaty issues e. g. quota for on-siteinspections,
voting procedures, etc. were resolved.
France exploded its second nuclear device in the
Sahara LDsert.
The Soviet Union declared that the United Kingdom
United States declaration of 29th March could
have a " positive" effect on bringing the positions
of the East and West closer together on an agreemont
to halt nuclear weapon tests.
A conference of scientists from the United Kingdom,
the United States and the Soviet Union convened
to exchange information on the research programmes
each power believed should be undertakon to
improve capabilities for detecting and identifying
underground nuclear explosions.
The Geneva Conference on the Discontinuance of
Nuclear Weapon Tests adjourned.
France exploded its third nuclear device in the
Sahara Desert. / 3 
Page 3.
21 st -1rch, 1961
18th April, 1961
April, 1961
4th June, 1961
17th June, 1961
July, 1961
July, 1961
28th August, 1961 The. Geneva Conference on tha . Di oc( uAtf inlanon of
Nuclear Weapon Tests rn-oponed. The United
States pros nt. d new proposals covering most
of the contentious issues relating to the control
system which still remained.
The Soviet Union demanded, contrary to its
earlier position, that the proposed Administrator
of any agreed treaty should be replaced by a
triumvirate representing Soviet, Western and
Uncommitted nations and that all decisions should
be unanimous. The Soviet Union for the first
time raised the question of French nuclear uesting
claiming it would have a " negative" effect on
the Conference.
The United Kingdom and the United States'
representatives at the Geneva Conference on the
Discontinuance of Nuclear Weapon Tests introduced
the text of a complete draft treaty for banning
nuclear tests.
France exploded its fourth nuclear device in the
Sahara Deserto
Mr. Khrushchev meeting with Mr. Kennedy in Vienna
handed the latter an " Aide-Memdre" restating the
Soviet points of view on the Western proposals
for a Draft Treaty. In this " Aide-Memoire", the
Soviet Union propounded the view that it was
impossible to find a " neutral man" and that it
was thus necessary for any body administering a
Nuclear Tests Dan Treaty to be a tripartite body
and for any international peace-keeping body to
operate through the Security Council with a
bipartite commission. These two proposals lay
open the way to Soviet veto.
The United States Government delivered a Note to
the Soviet Ministry of Foreign Affairs in reply to
the Soviet " Aido-Memoire" which rebutted the
arguments of the Soviet Union, drawing attention
to the handicaps of the Soviet " troika" proposal
and pointing out that truly neutral officials
have frequently held international office before.
The Soviet Union forwarded a Note to the Government
of the United States which in greater length
repeated the arguments already advanced in the
Soviet " Aide Menoiro" of 4th June.
The Government of the United States of America
forwarded a further Note to the Soviet Government
in reply to the Soviet Note of 15th July, but
concentrating on the central issue in dispute;
that of whether the Soviet Union really wished
to negotiate an effective Nuclear Tests Dan
Treaty. The Note pointed out that despite
Western concessions on all points which the
Soviet Union had stated to be stumbling blocks,
the Soviet Union remained intransigent.
The Western representatives at the Geneva Conference
mada concessions designed to satisfy the
Soviet Union completely on what would happen
towards the end of the moratorium on small underground
tests. Provision would be made for a panel
of experts to report on improvements in a control
system and recomendat.-ons made on whether the
" Threshold" should be lowered or eliminated. 
Fage 4.
August, 1961
August, 1961
Ist September, 1961
3rd September, 1961
4th September, 1961
September, 1961
Septembar, 1961
6th September, 1961
September, 1961 The Western representatives at the Geneva Conference
made concessions designed to satisfy the
Soviet Union on the remaining matters which the
Soviet Union claimed constituted obstacles to the
conclusion of a treaty. These further concessions
covered the position of the Administrator of
a treaty providing for his replacement by a
majority vote in the Control Commission if he
proved unsatisfactory and the inclusion in
inspection teams operating in the territory of
the original parties of the treaty of 50% of
members from uncommitted countries.
The Soviet Union announced that it was resuming
the testing of nuclear eapons.
The Soviet Union exploded a nuclear device in the
atmosphere in Soviet Central Asia. The device was
in the " intermediate" range ( approximately
kilotons). The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and the
President of the United States proposed to Mr.
Khrushchev that the United Kingdom, the " nited
States and the U. S. S. R. agree immediately not to
conduct nuclear tests in the atmosphere which
would produce fallout. This offer was to remain
open until 9th September.
The Soviet Union exploded a iucloar dev co in the
atmosphere of " intermediate" range in Soviet
Central Asia. This was the second device exploded
following the Soviet announcement that it was
resuming testing.
The Soviet Union exploded a nuclear device of
" intermediate" range in the atmosphere in Soviet
Central Asia. This was the third device exploded
by the Soviet Union following the announcement it
was resuming testing.
President Kennedy issued a statement that " in
view of the continued testing by the Soviet
Government, I have today ordered the resumption
of nuclear tests in laboratory and underground
with no fall-out". President Kennedy further stated
that the offer he had made jointly with Mro
Macmillan still remained open until 9th September.
A White House spokesman said that testing would
resume some time in September.
The Soviet Union exploded its fourth nuclear
device in the atmosphere since announcing the
resumption of tests. This explosion was somewhere
cast of Stalingrad.
The Soviet Union exploded two nuclear devices in
the atmosphere near the Arctic island of Novaya
Ze nlya. The first device exploded was the largest
of the present Soviet series with a force of
several nmegatons one megaton eauals the force of
one million tons of T. N. T.
The second device exploded was in the " intermediate"
range 
Pag~ e
1 2th Septoniber, 1961 The Soviet Union explodad its sovnnt-h xiuloaxr
device of several mogatons force in thG
atnosphorci in the Arctic. 


14th &nbsp;September, 1961
&nbsp;Sir, Your Excellency, Mr. Premier, Lord Mayor, and gentlemen:
I am the first "dish", as you might say, on a remarkable programme. I am to propose the Toast of "Australian Industry"; it is to be responded to by Mr. John Walker who reveals himself for the first time in his true colours, I'm told, as John Noble Walker. (Laughter) Then you are to hear my friend, Mr. Herford, propose the Toast of " Parliament", with a tongue in each cheek if that is anatomically possible; that is to be replied to by Dr. Heffron. (Laughter) No, no, no, I wouldn't have you believe for one moment that there is anything silly about that, because Bob Heffron and I are both Doctors of two Universities in this State and if he creates a third we will cut each other down becoming a Doctor of the third. But anyhow we are Dr. Heffron, and Dr. Menzies. I am a Doctor of Science now this is a wonderful thing, you see, a Doctor of Science of the University of New South * ales and a Doctor of Laws of the University of Sydney. Bob Heffron is a Doctor of something or other, I've forgotten, (Laughter) of the University of New South Wales, and he's a Doctor of Letters, believe it or not, of the Sydney University. Now I have never seen anything in the letters that he has addressed to me (Laughter) over the last few years that would justify this magnificent award. Then you are going to hear a Toast of the " Guests" proposed by John Burnett who really is a man of immense talent on these occasions. And then it is to be replied to by the Lord Mayor of Sydney who has more or less I wouldn't want to be dogmatic about this agreed with me that in replying he will sing ' I left my love in Bennelong" (Laughter,applause).
&nbsp;Anyhow, Your Excellency, I would not want to introduce you into any of these secrets of the charnel house, but that, more or less, is the programme, All I am serving to do is to be the ice-breaker? I'm to propose the toast of Australian Industry which, by common consent, in this room, is Australian secondary industry. That is something worth thinking about, isn't it? Because after all Australian industry is a magnificent conception.
I was born, little as some of my opponents might believe it, ( Laughter) in the bush, a geographical circumstance in which some of my opponents think I still live. (Laughter) Of course we are not talking politics but one of the earliest things that I remember about politics was that my father, who was a very dynamic, powerfully minded person, and who had strong views, and who didn't readily admit the existence of any others you know what I mean? &nbsp;- (Laughter) - a bit awkward for a third son &nbsp;- he used to be waving his hand at me and talking about the system of protection of Australian industries. Well, in a wheat-growing neck of the woods, this must have been regarded as a little odd. But not for him, no, ' Robert I would have you understand this and that', And when your father I'm going back a fair time says ' Rrrobert I’d have you understand this and that', by jove you sit up and take notice otherwise you bend over and take more notice! (Laughter) And so I was, as you might say, Mr. Chairman, born and bred a protectionist. I am sorry that occasionally I have to tell some of my friends that I still am. I believe in Australian industry; and I believe in Australian industry because I believe in Australia. It is as simple as that.
I remember a time, so long ago that it was before the time when I first became Prime Minister if you cast your minds back ( Laughter) when people used to argue about protection and free trade. Those days have gone, they really have gone. There is no earthly occasion for us to revive them. Because as time has gone on in this great country of ours we have discovered more and more that, splendid as our past has been, our future is Illimitable.
&nbsp;But our future is illimitable only if come to understand without arguing about it, come to believe in our guts, that we will produce things for the rest of the world to buy, from the soil, and from our flocks, that we will produce things in our factories which millions of people not so far away from us will buy, that we will have the land industries, and we will have the factory industries and we will have all the subtle developments of these things available to us so that we will take our place in the world.
It is worth thinking for a moment about what our place in t~ id world is to be &nbsp;- not just a quiet little corner of the world, not just a relatively small nation hoping that nobody will take offence at anything we say, not just a few million people who hope to be left alone, because a few million people who hope to be left alone in this modern world are living in a world of delusion. They won't be left alone.
&nbsp;It is our duty, and our privilege, to develop this country of ours so that the day will come when our great grand-children will not be very worried about being alone; but will know that they have strength and character and fortitude and capacity and can hold their place in the world. We happen to be not at the end of some phase, but at the beginning of it, for what we do this year, and in the next 10 years, and in the next 20 years, will determine what is going to be the position of our country in the world. This is tremendously important.
&nbsp;It was not very long ago that people began to argue about the European Common Market. I am not going to make a ponderous speech to you about that matter because the United Kingdom, God bless it, will determine that matter after discussion, in due course. We, of course, Will be on the sidelines pushing our claims to protect our interests. And that is quite right. That is not a party matter; everybody will be on the same side in this matter.
But suppose that the United Kingdom ultimately determines, on the conditions that can be worked out, that she is going into Europe because that is what it means: not the old balance of power, not standing outside putting a nudge here or a nudge there, but going into Europe, to be, as it were, primus inter pares, as those who have learned Latin more than I have will understand if she determines that, then that will be her decision. That may turn out to have enormous advantages for the world. But wei, as Australians, will still want to think about our own country, our own industries, our own future, the growth of our own population not in a spirit of hostility, but serving the first duty that we have, which is to our LAA country, and to our own people,
&nbsp;Therefore we are just entering on a period Which is, I think, of tremendous importance, which will call, not for extravaganzas on the part of people, but for tolerance, level heads, quiet minds, and underneath it all a genuine Australian patriotism.
&nbsp;I get very tired of people who want to say to me that " so-and-so a free trader", that " so-and-so is a protectionist", that therefore there is a world of difference between them. Now I am a protectionist, I am a' all for Australian manufacturing industry. I don't think that the history of Australia could have been what it has been in the last 20 years without the great industrial enterprises, the great basic industries, the great factories of Australia. I am not saying something clever when I say that; I am saying something quite obvious,
&nbsp;When I look back, as I can, I regret to say, quite a number of years, politically, - what, 25 years not long for me - , a little longer for some of you young fellows &nbsp;- I can remember a state of affairs in Australia in which we stood so much on one foot our pastoral and agricultural exports that when we received a buffet on the chin because the world wouldn't lend us money, or because the prices of things fell, we fell into a state of disorder i~ n which unemployment became 30%. Thirty per cent!. It could never become again unless we all became lunatic.
Because in that interval of years something has happened; and the something that has happened has been that Australian secondary industry has developed, from the basic industry on, and that we have more and more and more come to stand on two feet, Today if somebody says to us “Common Market" we are not like some other-c countries that may have to say " Well this will kill us if this happens'. we are in the position of a country that says " Well, we don't want that, we wouldn't like that', we don't want to be driven back on these industries" &nbsp;- and we certainly don't " but, on the other hand, we are, of all the countries in the world. in this century, of all the countries, the one that has developed most &nbsp;in manufacturing, in all the great basic industries and therefore we have -two feet to' stand on".
This is not a matter, Sir, for manufacturers to be complaining about; this is a matter for them to be proud about. This is not a matter on which manufacturers ought to feel that there are all sorts of people against them, because I have met nobody outside where’s Bob Heffron? outside Callan Park (Laughter) if I may refer to that highly argumentative place 1o refuses for one second to believe that the future of Australia is today balanced on both feet and that as time goes on, and as we have more and more migration, we will become so good in the manufacturing field that we will export more and more manufactures. Then the day will come when, in this corner of the world, we will be, as it were, a sort of United States in the 20th century.
Now, Sir, this, I think, is a great charter for manufacturing. It doesn’t mean that Australian manufacturers must be protected from every wind that blows; because a tree that is protected from every wind that blows will fall over the first time a hurricane attacks it. But it does mean that Australian manufacturing industry must be given its chance, its proper chance, to ne-et reasonable competition, to show the stuff that it has in it, and to grow, as trees grow, when the wind blows.
&nbsp;Now I hope, Sir, that this metaphorical expression won't be misunderstood. I do, occasionally, if I may say so to you, encounter a manufacturer who says, " Well, you know, old boy, are you a protectionist?" And I say "' Yes, I certainly am. I'm a life-long protectionist if for no other reason than that my father would turn in his grave if I were not". But I am that because I believe in it; I see no future for Australia without it. And then he says " Well why do you allow imports to come in?" Now, really, gentlemen, does protection mean no imports? Because if protection means no imports before we are much older the rest of the world will tell us " No exports". And that will destroy our economy more rapidly than anything else could,
Don't let us get into the idea which, on the whole, is a rather silly idea, that Australians can't make things in factories in competition with the rest of the world,' unless they are absolutely preserved from any form of competition. As an Australian I resent that. I think we can do any job at least as well in Australia as other people can do in their countries. Therefore I am a protectionist; I want every Australian industry to have its chance; I want to resolve all doubts in favour of Australian industry. But please don't ask me to accept the view that if somebody starts an Australian industry the rest of the world must be excluded automatically. This is not very good, not very good. It all depends on whether you are proud of being an Australian, whether you believe in Australia and whether you believe, as I do, that given any kind of a break our people can do a job rather better than other people in the world. The truth is that over these years our factories, our great industries, have done a job rather better than the rest of the world.
&nbsp;You know it is worthwhile to recall occasionally the story of Australian iron and steel to take the basic industry after one aspect of which I was long since given a nick-name. Here is our country which in the period covering the growth of the iron and steel industry has had a population ranging from six million people to ten million people. Yet our steel masters have sold steel into the United States of America and into Great Britain on competitive terms. This is something that gives me immense pride. I was talking only the other day to a manufacturer, in a not so big way, but a considerable way, who said -to me, "You know we are rather proud of the fact that we sell our goods in the United Kingdom, and we sell them, here or there". Why did we get this idea into our minds that the only function of high policy is to enable Australian manufacturers to fill the Australian market and no other market? When did we get this impression of inferiority? Because I don't believe this thing. I believe that before 1 am dead and there are people who would be willing to contemplate that event with some pleasure I believe that before I am dead Australian factories and workshops will be putting goods into other countries on competitive terms and of the highest quality, and that this country of ours will become, in the South-West Pacific, the equivalent, in due course of the United States of the last 60 years. why not? why not? (Applause) But it won't happen to us if we bow our heads to the storm and say " No, no, the only thing that matters is that nobody should compete with us".
The real point I am making to you, Your Excellency and gentlemen, is: I am not so concerned with other people competing with us as I am with the determination that I hope you all have that we will compete 6ith them; and that competing with them we will beat them into these markets. It would be a poor Australian who, in my position which, as I know, I don't want anybody to tell me, I've occupied too long said: " Well as long as we (. an hold a defensive position for the rest of my term I’m happy". I won’t-have a &nbsp;bar of a defensive position. I would die unhappy if I didn't think that Australia, industrially, economically, had gone on to the offensive and that everybody in Australia concerned with these things had got a vision in his mind of an enormous future for the most magnificent country, as I believe, in the world.
And it is for those reasons, Sir, that I want to accept the honour of proposing the Toast, tonight, of Australian industry. ( Applause)


Sir, and ladies and gentlemen, and boys:
I have had a tempting seriesa of invitations, haven' t I, laid out before me: the Judge has been doing his best to persuade me to tell you the story of my life. This, I think, I would prefer not to do. But if the boys of the school are interested in how a man can begin in a small way as a speechmaker, and end up by doing about six speeches a week I will tall them.
When I was 12 years old, at school in Ballarat I was thought, for some reason or other, to have what they call " the gift of the gab". A master was leaving the School, or he was being married, or some disaster was about to overtake him and it was decided to give him a small present and have it accompanied by speeches. The first boy to speak, who subsequently became a General, was selected; and I was selected as his supporter. He made a very good speech he took the precaution of writing it out and reading it.
I, in my youthful vanity, decided that that wasn't for me so I stood up, at the ripe age of 12, opened my miouth and nothing cam out. Mly moath got drier anddrier, not a solitary syllable could I utter, and I returned to my formcompletely discredited. Of course my enemies would say I have made up for itsince. But I thought that might encourage some of the boys who are called uponsome day to utter and who find that for the time being they can't.Now I admit with shame that this is the first time I have been here,My first impression, of course, on a lovely day, is this: that this must be oneof the most beautiful, and beautifully situated, schools in Australia. It isreally quite a moving thing to look around and to be told that in its presentposition this School is a young school; though, of course as we dl. kn~ ow, inactual years of life it is a very old school, the senior school of the lot.But what has been done here just amazes me.
I found it very hard to believe that Bruce laid the foundation stone over there when he was Prime Minister. And that doesn't seem long ago. I congratulate you. I think this is a marvellous place, beautifully situated; buildings growing more andi more mature as time goes on, and now this splendid oval completed by this splendid pavilionbehind me. I had the great pleasure of knowing Gordon Rolph very well indeed,and of spending many holidays down on the river with him. A lot of peoplethought that we must have a busy time talking politics we didn't ever mentionth'em. Even then we talked about two subjects where the fish might be biting,and grandchildren, grandchildren. I knew all about his grandchildren, or thoseof them who were then available, by hearsay, even before I met them in theflesh. And I used to say to him occasionally, " You know I think you spoilI thisboy, or that". And he would say " No~ doubt; you wait, you wait and see whatyou do". And I've waited; and I know how right he is, or how right he was.But they were great days, wonderful days we could have toget'-' er -a wonderfulfamily. If I spoke about Lady Rolph too much I would embarrass her, becauseshe has always been to me, aikd to my wife, one of the great women of Australiaamarvellous person. She tolerated me, she tolerated us, she tolerated thegrandchildren, she tol rated the fishing; and between ourselves she could cookrock cod 3o that it tas'Wed like the finest f4. sh irñ the wiorl. d, So I go back Cvlera few years of this.
Now Sir Gordon Rolph was, of course, as you have been reminded, greet citizen of this city and of this state, a man whose friendship I valued enormously, a man whose friendship contained no alemernt of se. lfishness, or self-seeking in it. He liked people because he liked people, and people. liked him because they liked him. And of course, as you know he had a considierable belief in his family. His daughters wore beyond conpare to him; and indeed almost to me with one exception the finest daughters i. n the world. li1g. a ve him great satisfaction to think of his grandsons coming here, growing up in the tradition of their own fathers. And Lady Ro2. ph couldn't have done anything more significant, or more moving, than to commemorate his name here in the School of his grandchildren, and no doubt their children, and so almost ad infinitum. This is a very happy thought and one that vm all appreciate.
Now all I want to say to you about a school of this kind, about thisschool in particular, is that I am no believer in uniformity carried too far,There is almost a passion for uniformity in Australia. What happens in oneState must happen in all States; schools that exist in one State must exist inall States. AUl the rules of the game, whatever they may be, must apply, fromCooktown in the far north to Cape Teeuwin in the South West. There is a sortof strange passion for uniformity. And uniformity has very little to be saidfor it, in my opinion. We are all different we have an element or two incommon but we are all different. The business of a community is to encouragethe individuality of every human being so that we won't be a driven crowd of U2million, but will be U1 million individual people. If you are going to producethat result, you can't carry uniformity too far.Now as you have been reminded I have had a varied scholasticexperience, if that is the right word to use, having begun in a small countrystate school in the north-west of Victoria where there were about 25 boys andgirls, then having gone to a bigger state school in Ballarat, then having goneto a secondary school % hich, I regret to tell you, closed up the year after Ileft. Then I went to a big public school in Melbourne and then to theUniversity of Melbourne. So that I have seen this problem from a number ofdifferent angles. I don't criticise our State system of education; I think itis magnificent. I never go anywhere in Australia without being tremendouslyimpressed by what is being done in the building of schools, and high schools,and the provision of facilities. But I have a particular spot in my heartand mind for the Church schools like this, because I think they produce thatvariety in education which, in my opinion, is literally the spice of life.They are different. It is a good thing to have some schools that aredifferent. They develop a particular point of view. It used to be said manyyears ago that what we call Public Schools in Victoria, great Public Schools,were the homes of snobbery; of privileged people.You know really, ladies and gentlemen, there is an awful lot ofmisuse of language in this country of ours. The privileged classest. ihen Ilook back on the fellows who were at a Great Public School with me there wasonly one fellow whose father had a decent income and he was bitterly unpopularbecause he could spend more money at the tuckshop than anybody else. We hatedthe sight of him; and we were quite right. As for the rest of us we didn'thave two shillings to jingle, one against the other. Privileged! You knowthere is an awful lot of nonsense talked about these things.But we had the great good fortune to find ourselves, by one way oranother, by some efforts on our own part, and by a proper spirit of devotion onthe part of our parents, and a good deal of self-sacrifice, to find ourselvesin a school in which the whole operation was conducted against the backgroundof religious belief, against the background of a high moral ethical standard.This, I think, is of tremendous importance. I believe, in other words, that ifyou were to abolish every school like this in the sacred name of uniformity,and send everybody through exactly the same hierarchy of scol, willy-nilly,something would go out of the life of Australia that we wouldn't very readilyreplace. The best proof, I think, of this is that as time has gone on moreand more people are sending their boys to schools like this, sending theirgirls to si'ter schools of .9chools like this, with an eagerness to secure theadvantage of this particular educational training, Noboody can toeiL. aie thatthat is just keeping tip with the Joneses, or being snooty, or superior: thisis a growing recognition of the fact that when~ your son, or your daugh. er,comes out of school, goes to a University, or goes out into the world ofaffairs: or goes into some technical training, you want him, or her, to be anindividual, with somie parsonality-devel'ped, Vith an irrdividual mark, ri jus1tthe mark of a mould.
To do that I believe that we have to draw out of aJ,?. those who are at school the best that they have. It may be the best that they have at cricket, or at football; it may be the best that they have in Latin, if one may speak with respect of what I understand is now almost literally a dead language. We must try to get the best out of their minds, their personalitie s, so that at the end of it people will say: " That fellow went to a good school" and won't say " I wonder whether that chap ever went to school".
It is the individual who matters. There is too much nonsense talked about in this century about mass movements. Half' the troubles in the world today are caused by roaring politicians like our friend from the Soviet Union, who are appealing all the time to a mass hysteria, to mass fear. The moment the people of Australia become disposed to yield in the face of mass persuasion, mass hysteria, mass fright, mass whatever it is, then liberty will begin to cdhiasraapcpteearr iins Atuos thraavlei at. r ue Thien dgiuvairdaunatle ec itofi zelnisb e% rhtoy atnhdi ntkh ef ogru atrhaenmtseeel voefs , w-hh have had their minds developed, who have put themselves in the way of learning more and more right through their lives; and who are, therefore, able to speak their minds and resist any petty aspiria1g dictator, in whatever fie1. d, who may come along.
N'ow, Sir, that is a pretty large survey from a small beginning. But I believe that it is true. It is because I believe in those things that&nbsp; I have felt it a very great privilege to come here to this school, for the first time, in order to say something to you and perform this small office of a very deep and abiding friendship.
( Applause)


P. M. No. 49/1961
I have seen reports of an incident in Townsville&nbsp;where a hotel-keeper refused to serve liquor to a visiting&nbsp;Education Officer from Kenya. Quite clearly the laws&nbsp;governing the sale of liquor in Townsville are a matter for&nbsp;the Queensland State authorities and the Commonwealth&nbsp;Government has no jurisdiction in that matter. I have been&nbsp;reliably informed that in fact a hotel-keeper is not obliged,&nbsp;under the Queensland liquor licensing laws, to sell liquor&nbsp;to any individual person if he chooses not to do so.
Having said that, however, I would like to make it&nbsp;quite clear that I greatly regret this incident. I deplore&nbsp;any discourtesy to any visitor to this country from overseas,&nbsp;whatever the colour of his skin and whatever country he&nbsp;comes L. rom. I am sure that most Australians will share my&nbsp;feeling on this. I am particularly sorry, however,&nbsp;that the&nbsp;incident reported has occurred to a responsible government&nbsp;officer of another Commonwealth country who is here to study&nbsp;the way in which Australians are educated.&nbsp;
CANBERRA,22nd September, 1961.
NOTE: Newspapers carried reports on 19th September of a&nbsp;Townsville hotel-keeper's refusal to serve liquor to a&nbsp;Kenya Education Officer, Mr. Gerald Kalya, who is at&nbsp;present on a study course in Australia.



SPEECH 3Y THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.
R. G. MENZIES, AT THE ANNUAL FEDERAL COUNCIL
MEETING OF THE LIBERAL PARTY, AT CANBERRA,
2TH SEPTEMBER, 1961
Mr. President and ladies and gentlemen:
I must begin by agreeing with the President, not for
the first time, that we can look forward, I believe, with no kind
of pessimism, to the electoral events of the future. It is quite
true that we have a very great problem in the Senate a problem
rendered, on the whole, more difficult by some recent unhappy
events. But that means that we must concentrate our attention
more than we ever have before on the Senate vote, and on the
Senate voting. I know that the Federal Executive has had this
very much in mind; I know that some of the State Executives, at
least, have. When one considers the number of informal votes
that come to be put into the ballot box in a Senate Election it
is a pretty serious reflection on the intelligence of our people;
and a pretty serious reflection on the effect that we have had in
making, at any rate, our own supporters understand how to vote.
Because don't let us be superior about this: it is pretty safe
to say that a good half of the informal votes are cast by people
of our political persuasion. And indeed, perhaps more, A lot
of work will have to be done. All of -s who go and make speeches
in the campaign are not to be content just to feel that on the
platform somewhere the names of the three Senate candidates are
displayed. I think we want to make a great resolution that every
time we speak, before we conclude, we will say something dut
the Senate vote, we will say something about the Senate
candidate, and draw specific attention to how you can make an
effective vote in tnoir favour. I say that to all my brother
practising politicians, to all candidates, and to all those who
will be speaking in support of candidates.
Now I want, if I may, to do what I usually have done in
the past on this occasion, to say something about one or two
issues overseas, one or two external problems, and something
about internal problems. I will take the external ones first
because as it happens we have, in the last few weeks, almost in
the last few days, been witnessing the occurrence of events
which will have a profound effect on the future of the world.
First of all we have seen the tragic death of the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. Now the Secretary-
General of the United Nations occupies a post, the full
significance of which may not have been seen when the United
Nations was established. But as time has gone on he has become
the chief functionary of the United Nations; he has become, in
a true sense, its Chief Executive Officer; and, in a very large
degree a director of operations which occur under the United
Nations: a species of what shall I say? managing director
with rather more power than the average managing director would
possess, The result has been that whenever the Security Council
has passed a resolution and that does happen occasionally
whenever the General Assembly has passed a resolution, and the
Secretary-General has been instructed to take certain step, it
has been he who has been going to the spot, who has been trying
to bring contending parties together, trying to arrive at some
means of pacification in some part of the world. While Mro
Hammarskjoeld had his critics I was guilty of crit: icising him
myself more than once I think that everybody outside theSoviet
Union regarded him as a man of great integrity and remarkable
talent And now there is no Socretary-CGenral, Now there is, I
imagine, a species of paralysis in the administration of the
United Nations. And this is the great opportunity for Khrushchev; 
Last year in Noveibor, at the Assembly, you will renmemnber
that he devo ed most of his efforts to attacking the
Socretary-General, to attacking the principle if a single Sacrctmy
-Gonoral and of advocating what has now becorac familiar as the
troika the throoee horses driven abreast. He said there ought to
be three Secrotarios-Goncral, one fron the Communist countries
ano fron the West, and one from the so-called uncomnitted countrit
each of tho with a power of vote. In other words three
Secrotarics-Geneoal unable to take a single doecision, or mako a
single step, without unaninity.
Well, of course, as everybody knew, anI as he knew we
know, this was a more attack upon the existence of the United
Nations. The whole idea was to render it complotely futile
because, of course, Comunism flourishes in tr. ublod waters and any
organisatich which enajos the support of 99 or 100 nations in the
world, ost of whom want to have peace is sonmething that stands in
the way of Communist aggrossion. So all of us understood at that
time in New York that this was an attack on the existence of the
United N.. tions certainly upon its capacity to function. I an
hoping very nuch that this icok when the great -o there to speak
they will make it quite clear that the troika principle in the
Unital , a1tions is intolerable and will, under no circumstances, be
accepted. It is about time that Khrushchov was nad to understand
quite clearly that there is a point beyond which he can't go,
Anyhow this is his great opportunity.
And while this is occurring, and while thoSO threat wiil
be nmade and manoouvros performed, thoro will be gr.. at agitation,
great pressure: " But we haven't a Secrotary-General, vo'e ust do
sonothing otherwise the whole thing will become paralysod". You
seeo the traedy of it? All the pressure will be in favour of a
quick cou-pronise: we nust have sonmobody, And that is t* ie time in
life when you are liable to make errors, and to be forced into
positions that you wouldn't want to adopt under any other circunstances.
Therefore we are going to witness a very significant woad
in United Nations history, and therefore in the history of the
world, since the Great War.
Now while that is goin on we have had some ron.-iarkable
experiences in Great Britain and, to a trifling extent, in
Australia. You all renomber that at the last Prime Ministers?
Confeounce we unaninously said, in a decl. aration about disarr. cancnt,
that the first thing to do was to bring about a suspension of
nuclear tests because, as we said, the danger didn't so much arise
from the groat responsible powers which have the bonb as it would
arise fror2 the oxtonsion of this power to other countries less
responsiblo and therefore more likely to bring about, by accident
or by design, some groat world conflict. The right way to do that
was to got an areoonent betoon the great powers, the nuclear
powers, that they would not have any mor tests either in the air
or below the surface, It sounded rather sin1ple. They had been
working on it in Geneva for a long tie; they had got within
measurablo distance of each other; there wore some argunants left
about the nature of the inspection body and how many inspectors
there ought to be and what the nature of the r. anc-ging c cmnittoo
ought to be. But on the principle that you ought to suspond these
tests, on the principle that there ought to be internati-nal control,
on the principle that there ought to bb some effective intoe-
-national inspection to soo that the agroieont was being carried
out on these natters there was no disagreement in principlo at al,
Well you know what has happened. The Soviet Union,
having gone alon nmonth after nonth, nonth after nonth, sparring
for tinme, agroing to somthing and then cancelling its areOcont
a few weeks lator, having alnmost exhausted the patience of the
Western world, but not copltely, suddonly announces that it is
going to renew its tosting and poops off six or seven testing
explosions within the next three or four days. 
Now I have had something to say about that in another
place. But I want to say something about it in another
connection today. Aren't we a strange lot of people in te
Western world? I think we are probably more sensible than most
because so far we haven't had anybody attempting to organse
10,000 people to sit down and disrupt the traffic of a city.
What for? Because they are against the bomb. We had a poor
bediaggled remnant who came up here to Canberra the otherday; I
gathered from somebody that they were on the same lineo They
don't go to the Kremlin; they don't go to the people who alone
have shown that they don't want to ban the testing of bombs, the
one group of people who have absolutely ruined the world's
prospects of cutting off further tests. They don't go to then,
no. They sit down in the heart of London just making nuisances
of themselves, challenging the police to take action about them.
What do they think, if they think at all? It can't be
very easy to think if you are squatting in Trafalgar Square, or
in Parliament Place. But let us assume that they think,, What do
they think they think? Do they bla: me the Government of Great
Britain for the fact that there are nuclear tests going on? Or
are they, in fact, whether they know it or not, weakening the
resolution of the Western world and conveying to Khrushchev and
his people the belief that there is an enormous body of ornion
in Great Britain which believes that Great Britain ought :-ot to
be in the nuclear business, and that Great Britain will not
dream of using nuclear weapons, and that in Great Britain there
is a wave of pacifism which is completely inconsistont ~: ith the
will to fight the will to defend? That is what they are
conveying to the Soviet Union. In short, these nisguidedy~ ople
are increasing the danger of war, not reducing it. And t1hat I
think is something that we have to have very very clearly in niLLd
If the complaint is that there are tests of bombs,
whose fault is that? If the proposal is that we should, in the
West and I use that word comprehensively because we don't have
nuclear weapons in Australia but if the proposal is that the
West should throw away nuclear weapons because of the appalling
character of a nuclear war, then all I can say is, to use the
famous old phrase that was used about George Lansbury once in
the Sunday Observer, " This is the very ecstasy of suicide"
because it would be.
Bury all the nuclear , weapons deep in the sea if you
can bury these wriched things deep in the sea put theo cut of
the mind of man, put them out of the capacity of man to produce,
put then out of existence in themselves., and the result would be
that in terms of what we are pleased to call conventional trces,
the Soviet Union plus the satellites could dominate Europe,
could overrun Europe in a few days, And that is not a position
that the Western world wants to be in.
There is another matter which is, in a sense, external
to us I want to say very little about it and this i-the
discussion that is about to begin over the Common Markct. I am
not going to rehearse the arguments you have all had the
opportunity at any rate of hearing the views of the Government,
and of reading a pretty carefally composed statement that I made
on the matter myself but I would like to tell you, ii. a
summary way, what the procedure is.
At this moment we have officials in London and they are
having a lot of discussions on coi modities it may be butter,
it may be dried fruits, it may be canned fruits, neat wheato
All the various commodities that are involved in our Lrade
pattern have boon under discussion beot'ion our people and . ther
Commonwealth people and the officials in Groat Britain, Not with
the idea that the Britisii officials can say " Well, that is what 
we are going to get for you" because they don't know what they
can get; not that our people are saying " If you got that we are
quite satisfied". But the real thing is that they are exploring
the ground and examining how far it might be possible to deal
with this connodity in terns of tariff, or how far with that
commodity in terms of quota, or with that other coanuodity in
terms of some special levy arrangement. There are myriads of
fashions in which these natters can be dealt with. And they are
having, therefore, exploratory talks.
But before long the negotiations with the Six will
begin, It is anybody's guess as to how long they will takeø
The first estimate that came to us was that once begun they might
take nine months. There are some now who think that they might
not take so long as that, that there night be either sudden
agreement or sudden disagreement on some vital matter. But I
think that we have to face up to this fact that the Government
of the United Kingdom would not have announced that it was
applying for membership and proceeding to negotiate the terms
unless it felt that the argument for going in was, from its
point of view, tremendously powerful. We want to face up to that,
nustntt just regard this as a sort of debating society
gesture. No country like Great Britain, having, after great
reflection in 1956, decided to stay out of the negotiations for
the Comnon Market, and now in 1961, having decided to go in to
negotiations for the Common Market, makes that tremendous change
in outlook and opinion without the most profound thought, and
without a pretty clear determination I should think, in its
mind, that if it can got any kind of arrangement which seems
reasonable in relation to the Comonwealth in relation to the
Free Trade Association, in relation to British agricultire, then
it will accept membership on those terms.
There'ore we must negotiate closely, valiantly,
intelligently; and we must conduct ourselves in all these
negotiations at the moment, and next year particularly, with a
sense of responsibility and with considerable authority. For
once people have to be reminded, I think, that this job, this
enormous negotiation that will affect the whole course of
Australian overseas trade and affect Australia's internal
economy possibly quite profoundly must be conducted by people
of judgent of experience, and, above all things, of authority
in the greal countries with whom we negotiate. This is no job
for unknown people; this is no job for untried people.
we have, I am happy to say, a pretty good repute in
these countries overseas. ' l not only can talk to a country like
the United States, but the United States encourages us at all
stages to speak up and say exactly what we think, frequently
asking us for our views. Our views nay be right or wrong, but
they are respectable views in those countries. In Great Britain,
as I don't need to tell you, we as a senior Commonwealth member,
and as a country so intimately associated with Great Britain in
every way, have a voice that is listened to. On the Continent
of Europe increasingly, our voice is heard. We will need to
have every bit of prestige that . e have been able to acquire,
every bit of influence that we have been able to exercise, in
these negotiations, because wo have much to lose; but we have a
great deal to gain by putting forward, effectively putting
forard, the position of our industries and their irresistible
claims in a growing country to be growing industries with
growing markets. Now I don't imagine for one nonent that the Common
Market is, in the true sonsc, a political issue in our next
election, It ought not to be, I We ouht to have a complete
community of interest on these matters in Australia. I confess 
I was disappointed when, having made a statement on this matter
which was, I thought, completely objective and balanced, putting
the problen and explaining the nature of the Treaty of Rome and
the nature of the arrangement, I was disappointed when the Leader
of the Opposition, instead of saying, as I would have expected,
" We are one people on this matter; this is no Party matter; we
will all stand together to do the best thing that we can for
Australia on this matter", moved a vote of censure on us for
some silly reason, and then proceeded to make a highly comic
speech which those present will remnober, I don't understand
the position of the Opposition but then I never could. And
they can't which is perhaps one of the great sources of their
weakness. Now I want to turn away from those natters and say
something about the internal position; and I do this very
largely by way of reminder, and by way of record.
We have had an experience in the last few months, in
the last year or so, which has given rise to violent opinions,
; o groat fluctuations of fortune on the part of the Governrmnt,
Having encountered a boom in 1960 a boom, the existence of
which is admitted by everybody, except, strangely enough, the
Leader of the Opposition we took steps to deal with it. And
of course whatever steps you take to get rid of a boon cre bound
to be unpopular with a lot of people. They have to be, because
boons are very profitable for a lot of people. They are
unprofitable for the ordinary man and woman who finds the value
of his money running out, who finds that things are becoming
dearjr, while a lot of other people find that their profits are
rising in an astronomical way.
You can't quell a boom by letting industries run along
exactly as they were. lJhat do you take economic steps for?
Take an example: ieJ found that one industry, which was an
outstanding example of tremendous boom conditions and
inflationary pressure, was the motor car industry, with a
delivery of vehicles on to the register of about 1,000 a day an
almost fantastic state of affairs for Australia, Well, wore we
to let it go? I know there are poop, including some so-called
economists, who think that inflation is not a bad ideas " It's
not a bad thing; let it ride; let it go; let the boom go
until it bursts". The fact that for every hundred people
directly affected by neasures against a boom, there will be
thousands and thousands of people ruined by the burst after the
boom, the collapse after the boom, this doesn't trouble some of
these so-called experts very much at all. It troubles us.
It is the first duty of a Government, in the economic
sphere, to look for progress , Jf courseo of all things progress
and development for the nation un a basis of stability which
does justice between man and man in the community. What would
you think of a Government which paid no attention to an
inflationary boom, which did nothing about it? I dare say it
would -et an awful lot of votes in the next six months; but it
would lose an awful lot of reputation six months thereafter,
And the country would lose far more than the Government itself
lost in terms of reputation. There are times, and we know it,
and we have some reason to be proud of it, when you nust, if you
follow the light that you see, take steps which will be
unpopular with some. In the course of nature they are going to
be unpopular with some people who normally vote for us, people
engaged in business activities of one kind or another, We can't
help thato Now if you are , ping to dampen down the boom, if you
are joing to take steps which will prevent the motor car industry, 
for example, fron boing. the outstanding example of inflationary
pressure, of course you are joing to reduce the demand for cars.
What is the use of playing with words on these natters? Of
course you are going to r. 2duce the demand for cars. That is the
object of the exorcise. And if you reduce the demand for cars
then you are going to reduce the employment, in a direct sense,
of people who are engaged in producing the cars. There is no use
people getting into a grat flutter over this and saying " Look
at thon, deliberately creating unemployment". You are not
deliberately creating unemployment; you are putting people out,
if you like, of employment in an over-flush industry. But you
are releasing those very people for employment in other
industries. A lot of people were paid off from various
activities. Mr. Bolte down in Victoria for the first time found
he was able to got the men he needed in the railways and in the
tranways, which had been gravely understaffed. There is a
movement of employment. But what I want to say to you is: for
Heaven's sake don't be afraid of these people who put it all on
a purely sentimental basis. If you are going to put down a boom,
then you must be prepared to hit a few heads in the process.
And we have done it. And the boom has gone. I dare say some of
the people mngaoed in speculative activities in land curse the
very sound of our name. I hope they do. And they no doubt
will complain. But speculation in land was becoming a minor
tragedy in Australia. How on earth people simple, ordinary
people could afford to buy a block of land to put a home on
began to elude my imagination.
All these are aspects of a boom and they have all been
dampened down to a point where all talk of the credit squeeze
let me say quite plainly is purely a matter of history. There
is no such thing as a " credit squeeze" today. I know everybody
who can't get the finance that he wants attributes it to the
credit squeeze. Of coursel But if you were to say to him,
" What do you mean by ' the credit squeezeI doubt whether you
would got an answer. The banks are liquid much more liquid
than the conventional minimum of liquidity that they observe
The only restriction on the banks' capacity to advance today is
one that everybody would approve of, and that is that they are
asked not to finance speculative activities, and they are asked
to keep their attention very clearly on export industries and on
home building. Now those are very good Central Bank directives.
That is all that is left of the credit squeeze.
But of course, you know, a lot of people who have boen
over-trading, playing it up when the boom was on, are naturally
going to find that things are not so easy when the boom is
exhausted. In the old days they would have said " Well there
you are, I played it up and the boom burst and I ve ot it in
the neck. What a fool I was". But today it's " the credit
squeeze". It isn't the boom that produced their trouble they
claim; it's the corrective measures of the Government that
produced their trouble, Now you want to keep some of those
things, I believe, very clarly in mind.
' lell in effect, what has happened? The boom has been
brought down, has been quelled, Inflation has, for all
practical purposes, been arrested; not completely yet, but the
Consumer Price Index, as you have all observed, is becoming
comparatively stable,
One of the great problems that we had, the problem of
the running down of our overseas reserves a very serious
problem for a great international trading country like
Australia has been solved. At the beginning of the year, or
at the end of the last calendar year, as we saw it, we had a
great chance, if we did nothing, of seeing our overseas reserves 
run down to a -oint of dangero All the advocates of letting a
boon roar along, T think, would hardly have b c-n satisfied if
they had found at the end of a financial year that our overseas
reserves were not competent t. pay for nore than two or throo
months of normal imports, ost of which are for manufacturing
But we took our steps and in the result our overseas balances at
the end of June were healthy, remarkably healthy, And apart
altogether from a borrowing or drawing made according to our
rights, from the International Monetary Fund, our overseas
reserves were near enough to œ O0m. But if we had done nothing,
if we had not taken these economic measures, then our reserves
overseas would have been, well, with a bit of luck, half that.
The result of this, of course, is tremendously
important, because if our reserves are high and healthy, if our
credit is so good with the International Monetary Fund that we
are able to put in a sort of premium against run-down with them,
then our progress in Australia becomes more and more assured.
Don't forget I know you all know these things, but have them
in mind as you go into an election that this country can't go
on at its ,-ate de. velopment unless it has more and more capital
from outside T'-ni and a half million people can't generate the
capital tha. : ceded to develop a continent the size of the
United States of America. It can't be done. Therefore we are
chronically a capital-hungry country; and a capital-hungry
country depends very fundamentally on its repute and credit
abroad. If my Government, so disastrous a Government as I now
learn, hadn't been able to establish in the sources of investment
overseas, or helped to establish, a reputation for reliability,
a reputation for being credit-worthy, a belief in the minds of
people in the irmense possibilities of expansion in Australia,
then I don't know where we would be. But as it is, as you kno;,
last year in the boom year, we had a very large investment of
capital from overseas in. , ustralia between œ 100m. and œ 200m,
This is tremendously significant. Not public borrowing, but
private investnent, productive investment. This year, in spite
of all the disasters that we are supposed to have brought about
by the credit squeeze, and by our policy, investment from
overseas has reached a record luveL Wle have had much more capital
flowing in in the year of corrective measures than we had in the
year of boom. ,] ow this is a tremendous thing. Don't let us pass it
over lightly. We were complimenting my friend Mr. Bolte just a
little while ago about the result of his election. He wouldn't
have won his election if it hadn't been that in the economic
climate that I believe we have helped powerfully to createo ho
himself has been able to ipursue a driving policy in Victoria
which has developed the State, developed its industries, and givn
people a feeling of high optimism about their own State, This,
I am sure he would a: ree with me, is the dominating factor in
the position that he not, and enabled him to increase his
majority although unemployment was already the theme of the
Opposition. So I remind you that if the object was to arrest
inflation it has been substantially achieved; if the object was
to preserve our balances and strengthen our balances overseas it
has been more than successfully achieved, if the object has been
to reduce the inflationary pressures, and particularly
speculative pressures, then I think everybody would agree th: a
it has been achieved.
The one thing, the one thing that remains which is
unpleasant, is that we have some uner. ploynnt. We don't answer
that by saying " Well . e have always had some', because, of
course, there are people who are normally not likely to be 
8.
employed we know that in a large numbor of millions of
people. But forget about that. If we have at any stage oven
50,000 or 60,000 who are willing to work, who are competent to
work, and for whom there is no work, that presents a problem
which, in an economic sense nay be regarded as fairly small, but
in a human sense is serious, in a human sense must engage our
constant attention. As a man said to me recently, and I
thought he put it very well, " You can with great truth from an
economic point of view in Australia say you have 1lo or 2% of
people who are out of work, and that means you have 98 or 98-%
who are in work, which is perhaps a better and more positive way
of putting it. But to the ran who is out, and who oughtn't to
be out, unemployment is 100%".
Now that is, in a human sense, profoundly true. That
is why we have concentrated so much effort, so much attention and
no small amount of money on helping, the re-employment of people
in some of these areas by providing, to a greater extent, the
means of finance in local government, by making greater
provision in relation to housing in arrangement with the States,
by entering into an arrangement with the States that in the
first half of the financial year they would tend to accelerate
their works expenditure in relation to the total. All of these
things have been directed, essentiallyto getting rid of what is,
in mass, a small amount of unenployment; but what is, for the
worthy individual, a very serious human problem.
We are doing that and I am bound to tell you that I am
quite optimistic about it. We observed that in the last month
the figures of those registered for unnmploymont, registered as
unemployed, fell and that the number of vacancies rose. though
there may be a little variation here and there I'm told in the
future. But I myself will be very greatly disappointed if, in
another month or two, we don't find that the figures on the one
side are continuing to fall, and the figures on the other side
are continuing to rise.
I mention that matter to you not because I have he
slightest sympathy with an Opposition which, in order to win an
election, will try to create a panic about employrent. There is
no occasion for panic about empl: yment. Unemployment is, I
repeat, in the economic sense, in the statistical sense, smaller
here than in any other country, any other free country, you might
care to mention. It is, in a sense, nominal. But our great
human responsibilities are to put unemployment out of existence
as quickly as we can for the people who are willing and able to
work in Australia. All round, Sir, I think that one can report that the
policies have worked well. The best proof that most of then have
worked well is that we have been able to abandon most of them
once they achieved their results. For 1962, as I have said
repeatedly in other places, I am a complete optimist. I think
that economically in 1962 we may run some risk of some boom
conditions; but no risk of a depression at all. I would like all
of you to say to those people who keep preaching depression that
they are the only people who could produce one. Today a
depression on the old model is just not possible.
Therefore let us go into this battle with some pride in
what we have done. We have been doing it now for 12 years. The
country is in pretty good shape; it attracts increasing
attention all round the world; it is, in a true sense, regarded
more and more as the country of the future. I an veryproud to
have had some connoction with the foundation laying of the last 12
ears and I belivo that this Party is going to have, as it lodks
ack in another 10 years, a . roat pride in showing that it was,
from the beginning, the Party of the future, that it has gone on
being the Party of the futu're and that it has : iven great oncouragemren
to he people of Australia and great growfh to
Austral a itself. D
P I I 



1292 Estimates 1961-62. [ REPRESENTATIVES..' siaes16-2
Director-General of Security, one would
imagine that the Government would take
some further action to see that she did not
remain a resident of Australia but if the
Government attempted to send her out of
Australia, obviously it would be obliged to
reveal in the courts at least some of the
grounds on which a certificate of naturalization
has been refused.
I have only a few minutes left so I shall
refer to only one other case which concerns
a Portuguese gentleman also. He has been
resident in Australia for many years. He
was deported from Portugal as a young
man. He has never been inside a police
court in Australia or in his own country.
According to him-and I have no ' reason
to doubt him, and knowing what we do
about the Government of Portugal it could
be possible-he was seized and put on a
ship because he was the secretary of his
local municipal workers union. He was
sent to Portuguese Timor, and after a
number of years there he managed to come
to Australia. For many years he has been
~ rking on the Sydney waterfront. This
' wan applied for a certificate of naturalization
and, on the basis of a security report.
it was refused.
I think there should be some answer to
e details of these cases that have been
* vealed to mc. There should be some
opportunity for these people to reply to
some of the allegations and charges that
are made against them. If this is the type
of activity in which the security organization
is engaged, how can any member of the
Australian community have confidence in it?
I ask the Prime Minister and the Attorney-
General ( Sir Garfield Barwick), who share
the responsibility for this organization, to
give some answer to this criticism.
e Mr. MENZIES ( Kooyong-Prime Minis-
Wer and Minister for External Affairs)
[ 3.59.-I do not propose to detain the committee,
but I want to say a few words about
what has now become an annual feature of
. thiesoe Enstima. tes -a discussion on educa-
Before I do that, I might perhaps
Orelieve the mind of my friend who spoke
about tourism by saying to him that if he
looks in the estimates of the Department
of Trade he will find that this year our subvention
to the Australian National Travel Association is œ 150,000, having risen to
that amount by stages over a period of
years. I am not going to rehearse what I have
frequently spoken about before-the attitude
of the Government to the education problem
-because that is quite well known, but I
do think perhaps I might, in a very
few words, bring up to date what I have
said before. I first of all clear away one or
two misconceptions. Several speakers have
quoted figures-not always identicalrepresenting
the percentage of gross national
product which Australian expenditure on
education represents, and have compared
that unfavorably with expenditure in other
countries. It is very dangerous to make these
comparisons too hastily because, in fact,
in at least some of the countries which have
been set up by way of comparison, 90 per
cent. of the expenditure on primary and
secondary schools and so on is government
expenditure. In Australia, it -happens that
75 per cent. of expenditure on education
is government expenditure and the other
per cent, is the result of other causes, and
comes from other sources. Therefore, a
precise comparison cannot be made. If, in
Australia, 90 per cent. were dealt with in
what in effect would be government schools
and institutions, then the percentage that
educational expenditure would represent
here would rise quite materially, as must be
quite clear to honorable members.
Another honorable member had something
to say about the pressure that immigration
had put on the capacity of the States
in this matter. indeed, he and several others
have sought to create an impression that we
are in a critical condition, that the whole
State educational structure is in effect in a
state of crisis. There are two answers to
that, and I shall just mention each of them
quite briefly. in the first place, let me say
that the increase in government school enrolments
was about 7 per cent. in 1952.
That percentage has diminished year by
year, and by 1960 was only 31 per cent.
And that fall is expected to continue until
the annual increase represents something of
the order of 2 per cent. These figures do
not demonstrate a crisis. On the contrary,
they demonstrate that the pressure of
demand is rising not at the rapid rate of
which it was rising six or seven years ago,
but at a very much more moderate one.
Estimates 1961-62. 
EEsittmi1a9atet1e( -6sS6 P . T1 E916B91E1-R6. ] 2 . 1293
The second thing I want to say is that
it has become quite the fashion now to say
that the Commonwealth sits idly by. I have
been accused of the most frightful indifference
to the educational demands of the
country, and I find that a rather odd allegation
to be made against me, since I venture
to say that no Prime Minister has been so
active in this field as I have and that with the
complete support of both sides of this Parliament.
The fact that to-day the Commonwealth
is spending fifteen times as much on
universities as it was spending ten years ago
is trifling to some, I suppose, but it is worth
recalling. The fact that we -have done so
much in the university field has rather
created a false impression in the public
mind, an impression which is carefully fostered
by some people, that we are making no
contribution whatever to the State problem
of primary and secondary education.
What are the facts? It is quite true that
we do not make specific grants, but, before
people become too steeped in gloom, let
me say that our Commonwealth general
revenue grants to the States have risen
during my term-over this decade-from
f102,000,000 to an estimated E302,000,000
this year. In other words, it has trebled
in that time. The expenditure by the States
from Consolidated Revenue on education,
this field in which we are supposed
indifferently to have starved them, was, in
round figures, œ 38,000,000 in 1950-51, and
œ 140,000,000 in 1960-61. So that, in spite
of this beggarly treatment of which we are
accused, the States were able to increase
their expenditure on education from
œ 38,000,000 to œ 140,000,000 over a period
of time in which our revenue grants to the
States were trebled. I venture to say that
those are very remarkable figures.
Turning to the capital side, I say once
. wmoreh thaot althloeugh I think that on the
the States have coped splendidly with
their educational problem, they certainly
could not have coped with the building
demand, the capital establishment of their
schools, if it had not been for the treatO
fmiresnt t tipmroev idined thbey hthisitso rGy oovfe rnthme enCto mfomr otnh-e
wealth, because, beginning with 1951-52,
this Government has found from taxation,
from the Budget and from general Commonwealth
resources, an average of about
œ 80,000,000 a year by way of assistance to State works programmes. In other
words, the short fall of loan raisings for
approved programmes has always been
taken up by us and, over that period, that
has in fact averaged no less than
œ 80,000,000 a year. In one year it was up
as high as œ E152,000,000, and in another
year it was down to a relatively small
figure, but, over the whole period, the
amount provided was about œ 800,000,000.
Quite plainly, without that assistance, the
States could never have maintained their
capital expenditure.
So, on the revenue side, and on the
capital side, it must be perfectly clear to
anybody that because of the way in which
we have improved revenue grants to the
States, because of the new formula that
was devised to the unanimous satisfaction
of the States, a formula which took into
account increases in school population and
things of that kind, the States have been
enabled to do something of which they are,
I think, very properly proud.
Somebody wanted to tell us that at the
last conference of Commonwealth and State
Ministers the Premiers unanimously wanted
us to go into this field, that they wanted
emergency grants, that they wanted a fullblooded
inquiry. I will take one of them
by way of type, because that will be
sufficient for my purposes. I shall take Mr.
Bolte. After Mr. Heifron had put forward
his proposal very briefly, in a mild and
disarming way, Mr. Bolte said-
I support their case on the general level, but
I point out that in presenting a ca-se for them
we may be thought to he admitting in some way
that we are not doing a very good job in the
field of education. Such an inference would
not be correct. I think that the position in other
States is much the same as is that in Victoria.
In the current financial year, we are spending
close on œ 60,000,000 on educaetion, and a lot
of the departments other than that concerned
with education are perhaps becoming Cinderellas
for the benefit of education. I firmly believe that
if we can continue to spend at the present rate
we can handle the situation. I am perfectly
frank about the matter. I am not here to admit
in any way that Victoria is behind the door with
respect to making provision for the educational
requirements of the present generation and future
generations. Having said that he went on to say-
But I think that one aspect of education should
have special attention. That is technical
education.
Fstimales 1961-62.[ 26 SEPTEMBER, 196 1.1 
1294 Estimates 1961-62. RP SET iVS] Etmes16-2
That was his view, and it is an entirely intelligible
one. But I have mentioned these
figures in order to remind the House,
which * hears certain things from year to
year with some regularity, that Commonwealth-
State financial relations have been
conducted, I believe, with such justice and
liberality that the States have been able
to achieve in the educational field the
results that we all know of to-day.
Mr. Reynolds.-But they all want more
money. Mr. MENZIES.-Of course everybody
will ask for money from the Commonwealth.
That is the easiest thing in the
world. You seem to think that we just
say abracadabra " and down comes
100,000,000. We have to be a bit responsible
in handling the finances. We are not
handling them theoretically. I said and
I repeat-ho-iorable members will appreciate
the significance of it-that these
figures demonstrate beyond doubt how
false is the argument that we stand by indifferently.
I have an old-fashioned preju-
* dice in favour of doing one thing at a time.
We tackled this university probleman
enormous problem-and but for what
we did, the universities would have been
complctely bankrupted and the development
of universities would have been
frustrated for a decade. I am very pleased
that we were able to assist the universities
and, I bzelieve, to open up a new future
for them. We then established the Universities
Commission. You cannot provide
for university development a month at a
time. You must do it as the commission
decided, and as we agreed, in three yearly
terms, the triennium, as it is called, and
we have just approved in this Parliament
of the current triennium expenditure. At
the same time as approving of it we told
the Universities Commission, under Sir
Leslie Martin, that we thought it very desirable
to have an examination made of
the whole future structure of tertiary education;
not just taking for granted that what
may bz called the traditional type of
university is the only answer to the problem,
but letting our minds run on to consider
whether we might not need special
technological institutes of some kind or
other. To meet the demands of the modern world there may be a call for various grades
or types of tertiary educational establishments.
For that purpose we have appointed
a special committee, and a very powerful
one, I think. It is widely representative,
containing in it not only high-quality expert
opinion but business experience and
financial experience. We anticipate-not
in a month or two months, because this
will be a long job-getting from that committee,
which will sit under the chairmanship
of Sir Leslie Martin, a report which
we can then take up with the States in order
to see whether, for the future, some other
system of finance must be worked out.
We do not decide whether th. ere is
going to be a new university at, say, Shortland.
It is not a political decision by us.
This is one of the problems, first of all, for
the State Government, because it establishes
universities and the Commonwealth
does not, and, secondly, for the Universities
Commission, which will discuss the requirements
and the appropriateness of what is
proposed to be done and then make
recommendations to us. When all that is
added to by the report of this committee
on tertiary education generally, which will
include technological education, then we
will be to that extent further forward.
I do not beguile myself into believing
that this is not going to cost more money,
because every investigation into a problem
of this kind comes up with recommendations
which cost money to implement. But
having tackled the problem of universities
in the broad we did not pause there. We
turned to that important branch of medical
training, the teaching hospitals and clinical
instruction generally. We set up a committee
to examine that. I have not seen its
report yet, but it came near me one day
and it sounded, even at that distance, pretty
costly. But, anyhow, it is either in or on
the way in, because we realize that the
work done by teaching hospitals in the
training of medical practitioners is a branch
of tertiary education that cannot be
excluded simply because it is not conducted
actually within the four walls of a
university. I mention these matters to show that, so
far from being indifferent, we have had
a lively and imaginative mind on these
problems. We have pursued these matters
( REPRESENTATiVES.] Fstimates 1961-62. 
Estim1Sa9E-e6P6sT 2 E.[ M26B ER, 1961.] Esmas1912. 29
as and when we could, and pursued them at
great outlay, while, at the same time, our
financial arrangements with the States have
put the States, to use a homely phrase, in
funds" as they never were before, to carry
out their educational activities, with the
result-I conclude by repeating it-that the
educational expenditure of the States on
their own purposes has gone up from
œ 38,000,000 to œ 140,000,000 over the
period of office of this Government.
Mr. CAIRNS ( Yarra) think it
is very significant that the Prime Minister
( Mr. Menzies) has chosen the subject of
education on which to speak in relation to
the estimates for his own department. This
I think correctly and rightly bears the
assumption that he considers that of all the
subjects he could have spoken about in ' this
debate, education is the most important.
He began by saying that he intended to
clear away a number of misconceptions and
in order to make his speech more effective
he started by stating one hinmself. He stated
t hat the Opposition and other critics had
said that his Government had ' stood idly
by and had been indifferent to the needs of
education. This was not the position taken
by the Opposition or by the other critics.
Our view is that during the last ten years
the Government has provided substantially
for education but that it has not treated the
matter with the urgency that it needs and
that it deserves and demands. In order to
make his answer to our criticisms more
effective the right honorable gentleman
overstated them. He created his own case
so as to be able to demolish it more easily.
He had practically nothing to say about
our case. But in the course of doing this
the Prime Minister attempted to show that
there is not any urgency about the problem
of edu:: ation and that there is not a crisis
Ois nta tteh e tphree sepnrets ' s~ intut atdioefni. c ienOcniees neoefd endoutc aotvioernto
know that that attitude is not consistent
with answering quickly enough the needs
of education.
The Prime Minister began by saying that
O it is dangerous to make comparisons
between the proportions of the gross
national product spent by different countries
upon education. He said that whereas
in Australia about 90 per cent. of expenditure
on education is by governments, in some other countries the position is very
different. All this is true, but it still remains
true also that the 1.9 per cent. of the gross
national product spent on education in
Australia is not any more than half of the
amount that is spent by othcr countries in a
comparable position. When one allows for
the different significance of the types of
expenditure there is still a very great deal in
Australia to be concerned about in this
respect. The Prime Minister contended that the
proportion of new enrolments had reached
the highest point in 1952 and had then commenced
to diminish. This is also not strictly
true. There has been a variation in the level
of enrolments. However, assuming for the
sake of argument that the statement is true,
the position is that the main case for improvements
in education in Australia has not
been based upon an increase in the proportion
of students each year, but on the existing
deficiencies. The various inquiries and
reports made by educationists in Australia
have been concerned primarily with the
large classes, with the insufficient number
of teachers, with the insufficiency of buildings
and with the large capital requirements,
in existing circumstances, without any question
of increasing numbers of students. Ainy
one who knows anything of primary education,'
particularly in this country, knows that
the case put forward by the educationists
about inadequacies on present standards,
leaving aside entirely any increases in numbers
of students, has been proved up to the
hilt. I suggest that it is not satisfac'ory or
pleasing to those concerned with education
in Australia to know that the Prime Minister
comes into the Parliament and attempts to
make a case, claiming that records have
been created and that there is no urgent need
to improve the situation.
The Prime Minister has said that the
Commonwealth is spending fifteen times as
much on universities as it did ten years ago.
It is not, however, spending fifteen times as
much on secondary schools or on primary
schools. Certainly the amount spent on
universities has increased, and if the Commonwealth
record in respect of primary
schools and secondary schools was as good
as it is in regard to universities, we would
have much less cause to criticize.
Mr. Reynolds.-The problem is not
solved as to universities, either.
Estimates 1961-62. Estimates 1961-62.1295 



CIVIC WELOOM AT NARRABRI TOWN HALL
29TH SEPTEMBR. 1961
SPEECH BY THE PRIM MINISTER. THE RT, HON. R. G. MENZIES
Mr. Mayor, Mr. Deputy President, and ladies and gentlemen, and boys and girls
I live a most peculiar life, quite crasy. I left the office at 20 to 1
today and have to be back home in time for dinner, on peril of expulsion from q own
house everybody will understand that. Wherever I go in Australia if I am driving
through a town that is big, or a town that is little, or a town that is middle sise,
I see som Hall and I say, in a gloating fashion, " I rem-ber making a speech there
once". I think it is unlikely that there is any Hall left in Australia in which I
haven't had to speak. When I walked in here this morning I reminded myself, and you
confirmed it, that I had made a speech here. I shall never forget this Hall it has
oneof the highest platforms in Australia. ( Laughter) It has a great moral for a
politician to speak froa a very high platform because he is constantly reminded how
fast and how far he can fall! ( Laughter) This is very health-giving to people in
public life. But the last time I was here I was here in my complete political capacity.
There was a by-election. I am enjoying today's visit compared to my recollectiom of
that one. I have never been so hot in my life except in New Guinea. They tured
on the heat from the heavens and the heat from the platforms and the heat from the
audiences. I want to tell you I hope you won't take offence at it I was jolly
glad to see the last of the place. Today is a very much more civilised occasion.
I was very interested just now, talking to you, Sir, the Mayor, to find oat
the system of local government because it varies from State to State. I myself have
occasionally achieved credit with people like yourself by boasting of the fact that
my father was once the President of a Shire and that y erliest knowledge of
politics at a very tender age, right up in the bush, was when the Councillor from the
North Riding cam, clop, clop, clop, down the road, 24 Jiles from where he lived he
came down in a buggy to pick my father up. Then they west clop, clop, clop down
the road and a fairly rough one for another 25 miles, to where the Shire had its
seat, and where it carried on its business. For a leg time I thought that
politicians were Jhire Councillors. ( Laughter) Now of course I have discovered that
it is the other way around: shire councillors are politicians.
But it is a wonderful thing, a good thing, for anybody who presides over
the central government of a nation, and who has great international problems to
consider, to cow into shire or municipal administration, by whatever name it my go,
and see where the grass roots of Government are to be found. Grass still remins the
most important crop in the world, so the grass roots of Governmnt are, I think, very
frequently, the most important aspect of it bec a use you then produce people who have,
beginning with a local sense, and local responsibilities, a feeling for publie
service. It is the feeling for public service that distinguishes a democracy from
all other forms of government.
Now I want to tell you, before we move on to the next port of call, how
delighted I am to be here, and how delighted I am at what you have been good enough
to say Sir. This place is, I discovered, as I came in from the airport, the sam
distance, almost to a mile, from Sydney by rail, as Mildura is from Melbourne. And
to a Melbourne man Mildura seem the last word in remoteness. To say of sombody
that he has gone to live in Mildura is practically to say he has been botted out of
the book of life. I suppose you occasionally feel like that here.
I have now lived a fair number of years unfair my opponents think yet
the longer I live the more I marvel at the tremendous developments that I have seen
in my own lifetime. We, inour generation, I in mine certainly, have seen some of the
most fabulous changes in the life of mankind. Not only great wars and terrible
tragedies, but I can remember the first motor vehicle coming intothe valley, the very
first. It had been bought by the local doctor and it confirmed the belief that most
people had that ' he must be very ricH. It was a motor buggy; not a very comfortable
affair, but very superior to the old horse. Fancy a fellow of my age being able to
remember the first motor vehicle coming into a substantial part of the state of
Victoria. Similarly I can remember the first moving pictures. They jumped up and
down on the screen but they were marvellous. The first film I ever saw was the
_ C i 
2.
Great Imerican Train Robbery. And there is no doubt about it, the robbers were
magnificent. But the film was jevky. ( Laughter)
All these things have happened; radio wireless. We have got all the
instrumnts of civilisation put right into our hands except one, the greatest
instrument of civilisation, which is our own spirit. You will test the
civilisation of any comanity by finding out how ma men and women there are in it
who are prepared to do somthing, unselfishly, for other people. That is why I end,
as I began, by saying I like to be brought back into contact with what we call
municipal life, local governent, for it is in local government that you find so=
of the most disinterested service to the comnity that you canfind anywhere inthe
world. Thank you very meh, Sir. I am very delighted that you have given me
this welcom. 


SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIESAT THE WHEAT 1HESE. RCH INSTITUTE, NARRABRI,FRIDAY 29TH SEPTMBER, j.Sir, and ladies and gentlemen:I have been listening to the Chairman's speech with great interestand it has left me with a very, very clear impression that he is ratherfavourably disposed to the wheat industry. ( Laughter) 1 hope he will correctme if I have the wrong idea.But one error he certainly fell into: he seemed to tnink that thiswas one of the rare occasions on which I could hear about the wheat industry.I have been sitting in Parliament, man and boy, one Parliament or another, for31 years, or 32 years, and I have never heard about anything else except thewheat industry' And I don't suppose I will fail to hear about it in future.As a imatter of fact I have been looking forward to this very muchbecause though I belong to that group of people sometimes referred to as " cityslickF. rs", being a lawyer by trade, I was born in the Mallez, in the middle ofthe wheat country and wheat wo: the commodity I heard most about for the first12 or 14 years of my life. I am old enough to remember the great drought of1902 when in our district 2 inches of rain fell in the year, and that at thewrong time. By the time summer was well on there was no grass, dead or alive,and the north winds blew, and the sand came up out of the sandy loam anddeposited itself over any object that it 2ncountered, These were tremendousexperiences for people.But I can also remember, as a small boy, an occasion when up fromMelbourne came an agricultural expert from the Department of Agriculture andhe was a very good man, indeed. On all counts a man of considerableauthority. But in those days of course I am sure it isn't so now wheatfarmers looked rather suspiciously at scientific gentlemen from the city. Andhe went out and had a field day and I remember, as a small boy of abcut 9,hanging around at the fringe of a group of about 20 or 30 or 40 farmers and hewas explaining to them the great importance in that partiualar soil of the useof superphospLates. This was the first time that any of us, or any of thoselistening had ever heard of them even as short a time ago as that. This,Sir, was regarded wi-h immense reserve. 1" Wlhat's this new-fangled business"" How much does it cost?" " How much do you need to use?" And he was explainingto them that in their particular circumstances 1 cwt. night be a good idea.Three or four farmers, who were the most advanced, daided to give it a go, butin some moderation. So they put on half a hundredweight. But as a result ofputting on half a hundredweight they so improved their yield that other peoplebegan to look on and be interested and to follow the example, But as you, Sir,know, it literally takes years in the ordinary course of events for ideas ofthat kind to be commonly accepted; and profitably acted upon.It is, after all, not so very long ago, is it, that we began to haveour first great investigators in the breeding of strains of wheat? forgetsometimes about these great men. Many people today have forgotten aboutFarrar. And yet Farrar began his experiments about 6 years before I was born,And when I was, at the time I am talking about, 9 or 10, or 11 years old, Ican remember the enormous results that accrued when Federation wheat came intogeneral use Federation and Darts Imperial and these strains that had beenbred as rust resistant strains. Not entirely successful in the long run, butwith a tremendous, immediate impact on what occurred. And ever since then youhave had dedicated men going on with their work in the investigation of wheat.You have had, particularly in recent times, the tremendous novel attention, Irather think it is, given to the chemistry of the soil things which oncewere regarded as acting according to some immutable law of nature. You can'tinterfere with that: you fallow and you sow and you have a stubble and thereit is. But time goes on and research is finally winnirng its battle in theminds of the industry and of the men w. o run the industry itself. This to meis a tremendously important thing because by research you bring about changesfor the better; by research you accelerate progress, you improve production,you improve quality, you nake yourself more competent to meet the demands ofthe world.
And you need to, because the world is changing around us everyminute. I don't merel. y refer to the fact that there are threats of war, orthe circumstances even of the last few weeks which give the whole world causefor arj. ety. But you take a problem that at this very moment our officialsare discussing overseas, the problem of the Common Market, I am not goinginto any detail about this matter because a good deal has already been saidabout it. But the wheat industry, it is quite clear, can be affected byGreat Britain going into the Common Aarket. It may aliaust be a certainty thatthe old pattern of trade in wheat won't remain unaltered. I don't know.Wve are all going to do our best to preserve it, and to improve it. But nobodycan say what is going to be the outcome of discussions in which Great Britainir negotiating with six countries of Europe and at the same time negotiatingwith every country in the Commonwealth.So that you have all these cross discussions and cross negotiations.,1l these talks will go on a long time, a very long time. But from our pointof view what we have to get into our minds is this: that this is one moreproof that it is a changing world, that it isn't the old lines that ccn befollowed quite so simply, that it is undoubtedly true that if the wheatindustry is to go on being one of the most valuable significant industries iniustralia we must find new mall. ets for wheat, we must find new methods ofcheapening the production of wheat, new methods of getting the greatestpossible value from the land, maybe new methods of marketing, I don't know.But above all things we must find new millions of people in the world whowill want to buy from us. That is true of wheat. It is true of every otheragricultural product in Australia, but it is particularly true of wheat becauLwheat, in the agricultural field, is one of our great major undertakings.Therefore, Sir, I want to make clear that all the discussions thatwill occur about the Common Market are not just arguments between politicians,between people who are making a business deal about some commodity or other.They are that; but they are far more than that. These are discussions whichremind us that for Australia, growing at the rate at which Australia is growing,we must never rest until we have increased our markets all round the world. Wecan, because most of the people in the world today live at a standard of livingimmeasurably lower than any we know. But as time goes on, as help is extended,as great international schemes bear fruit, the standard of living among themillions in Asia and Africa will rise; and so will their demand for the kindof thing that we produce so well in Australia. Therefore markets, markets,markets we must look for them. But we mustn't fall into the error ofthinking that all you have to do is to find the market and all other thingswill be added to you. The fact is that, though it is vital to find the markesit is equally vital to fill it when you find it, to produce the goods for thatmarket. I have had some experience myself of people who took a few orders onsome trade mission this is fine but when orders came in by way of followupthe supplies were short. We must be able to supply every market that wecan find. That brings us back, once more, to the problem of research becauseresearch is, in its nature, a slow business. Science doesn't proceed by aseries of brilliant improvisations. Above all agricultural science, the kindof thing that is going to be done here, requires patient work and testing andexamination year by year. Research is a slow, painstaking thing, aiming ata peat percentage of accuracy and a testinr. of results under everyconceivable circurstance. Therefore there is no time to be lost aboutstarting research, no time to be lost about encouraging it.Let me remind you of this: when we were younger, a great dealyounger, there was a disposition to think that scicntists had alr. ost reachedtheir limit. They knew some of the broad principles of science, but so faras the land was concerned, well, everybody knew what type of soil it was,everybody knew, in the appropriate areas of Australia, that he ought to havea three-year rotation and that in the black-soil country he wouldn't need oneat all I only discovered that during the Gwyder by-election. But you know,all sorts of people knew all sorts of things and that was the end of knowledge.But what has happened in Australia? What miracles have occurred? Whoeverthought, only a few years ago, of the trace elements work that has gone on inAustralia, of hundreds and hundreds of thousands of acres re-claimed fromuselessness into high productivity, either pastoral or agricultural? Nobodyever thought of it only a f'c years ago. AWhoever thought, as I said, a fewyears before I was born ii-yself, of the breeding of strains of whnt in order to
produce certain results which would avoid damage in the field? Somebcdythought of them. Somebody got on with them. I venture to say that the manwho goes onto a farm today, if he is prepared to take advantage of theknowledge that is available to him, will go on twice as well equipped from thebeginning, as his father was. Then, if he can add to that, as much work as hisfather did, as much enthusiasm as his father had, well there is no limit towhat may result from it.Sir, I don't need, I hope, to say any more to satisfy you that it isno mere formality for me to come here. I think this is a great enterprise. Iam perfectly certain that without this foundation, and other places in whichwoik of this kind is being done in Australia, we will net be able to take ourplace in the world of international commerce in wheat that we must be prtparedto take as the world changes around us. So that in the name of our orncountry, in the name of new and expanding markets, in the name of that necessayefficiency which will reduce costs mounting otherwise to thc point ofdestruction, in the name of all those things I call this Foundatio:ñ blet9ed. Ithink this is a splendid business.I wasn't entirely su. prised to hear my friend the Chairman throw out abroad hint of a financial kind I'm accustomed to that. I always say, " Yes,my dear fellow, you must drop me a line about it". Oetween ourselves they neverforgot. But we will put that on one side. -e happen to be a modestcontributor to this thing. But that this thing is good, that this thing is,in its nature, essential I don't for a moment doubt. It is a very great honourto me, a very great privilege, to be here, to say something to you, howeverbriefly, and to declare it open. ( Applause)



I o OFFICIAL OPENING OF MEDICAL BEIEFITS BUILDING, YDNEY
ON
7TH OCTOBER. 1961
SPEECH BY THE HRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES.
Sir, and ladies and gentlemen:
I speak here under very very great difficulty. I would like to take
you into my confidence on that matter. First, they have these wretched li&amp; ghts,
which, in my experience render only the rarest people like Sir Ronald Grieve
capable of utterance. To me they have nothing but destruction in them. My
second difficulty is that Sir Ronald Grieve, himself, having gone throu. eh the
gesture of sending to my secretary all the things I ought to know in cvrde,-to
make a speech has now, for greater caution, produced them all in his vn speech.
( Laughter) This is the first " dirty" trick that he has ever jiayed on Irc--. My
third disability is one that all laymen here can understand perfectly: I am
sitting here under a battery of what I can only describe as " basilisk medical.
eyes". ( Laughter) It is bad enough to consult your own physician and have him
look at you, penetrating all the murky secrets of your carcass I'm spe aking
only of myself but to look along and see them all, all equally f orthcoing, all
looking at us up here, saying to themselves " a clear cpse of so-arnd-so".-or " I
think I would like a blood test", is very embarrassing. Therefore, subje: t to
these disabilities I will proceed to declare the building open. But I suppose
that having done that you would expect me to say a word or two about the
occasion and what it stands for.
I have been in Parliament, man and boy, State and Federal, for 33
years. I dontt want the obvious rejoinder I get them up at Canberra. I think
for most of that time one became accustomed to the problem of sickness, people
having to secure medical. aid hospital treatment almost as if it were one of the
unalterable laws of life. There it was and perhaps nothing very much could be
done about it. That is usually, historically, the way in which problems begin to
evolve. Then somebody begins to say, " Well the right way to deal with these
matters is to put them all in the hands of the Government". Vie have a great
passion for that in Australia. 1I feel complimented, I do indeed, when so many
people who disapprove of me personally, want to put everything in my hands. But
that is rather one of our ideas. Well, the Government ought to provide medical
treatment; and it ought to do it, of course, by having a great corps of medical
people, and nurses, and all those who go with it, and attend to the people,
whether they like it or not, willy-nilly. The Government is to do the lot.
That is one extreme view, I would doubt whether anybody, today, se3riously
entertains it. As so frequently is the case, on the other hand you E-' t the
exctreme view of doing nothing and saying, " Well this is one of those matters
that happens and if you can raise the general standard of living then. people can
provide these things for themselves". So you get the extreme view on -ea-ch side.
What has happened in connection with this scheme is that tro':' e has
been a tremendous effort made to get a middle of the road course .% hich; il
pre serve the best aspects of both; a middle course which irl retain th6
precious relationship between doctor and patient not to be underestimated, I
believe, even therapeutically a tremendously important relationship of mutual
confidence; and, of course, after a period of time, of great knowledge and
understanding. Keep that; but at the same time do something to get rid of the
horror that attached itself for so long to sickness in the house, the brnead
winner out of action, great financial liabilties incurred, financial assets,
perhaps small, dissipated. These things couild alter an entire life, destroy
the entire family history. Th.-refore the middle of the line course had to be
to rake some arrangements which would leave people free from that kind of horror
and at the same time not deprive them of that proper feeling of pride and
independence which, thank God, charactarises our community. Out of those ideas
came this scheme. I very well remembeor it is very interesting that Sir Earl Page is
here today because I very well remember the first time he produced whlat I must
tell him quite frankly was a rather hazy outline of this schem, accon-panied by 
estimates which were conspicuous for their slight inaccuracy. They were
optimistic, let me put it that way, This was his technique: don't make it too
clear to these lawyers, or they will have the insides out of you intellectuiJ-y
speaking but make all your estimates optimistic and then people will be in a
happy frame of mind. A pearfect piece of medical work, it was. In the long run,
as you very properly acknowledged, this scheme emerged. Of course like all
schemes of this kind which don't please either the extreme of this side or the
extreme of that side, it was under great criticism. But in spite of the fact
that it was under great ci-iticism it has been so seized upon by the people, it
has so hit the mark in the social and individual consciousness, that today
somewhere between 70 and 80% I think I am right in saying of the people of
Australia are covered by these voluntary arrangements. Now this, I think, is a
splendid thing. Government responsibility, self-help, justice and the
preservation of the personal relationships which still remain so important.
Now of course it couldn't have succeeded unless there had been ( a)
people who belioved in it and people who would work, devotedly, about it.
In the case of this one, well there is Ronald Grieve. The first time I ever
heard of him he was unfailingly reported to us in Canberra as " a very diffic4t
fellow",' the sort of man, who, unlike myself wanted to argue about things.
( Laughter) I have no doubt that he argued, with great force, and fought his
battles with great force, and when these things were concluded he has set a
conspicuous example of devoting his energy to making it succeed. He has
around him, as he has already told us himself, hundreds of people, with a
spirit of devotion, who know that this is a very great social thing, this is one
of the most significant social mvements in our time, and Vwho, accordingly,
: egard it, I've no doubt, as something rather more than a job. People who
regard their work as a job achieve without dif. Ficulty a state of miserable
mediocrity. The people who are going to do things properly must think that it
is more than a job, that it is something that calls upon everything that they
have ini them. The result of all this has been this fantastic development. I venture
to say, ladies and gentlemen,' that if, a few years ago, when Earl Page was
dazzling us with science in the Cabinet room at Canberra, anybody had said that
the day would come when a building like this would find itself, not only in
existence, but necessary, housing active people and dealing with thousands and
thousands of-people, few would have believed it. It is one of the most tangible
proofs that 1 have ever seen of the complete success of the medical benefit
schemeI and of the matters associated with it.
I want to compliment you, Sir, I want to compliment aji~ those who have
been associated with you, and through you all the thousands of people around
Australia who in this and compflarable entarprises, arc doing so much to make
effective what I believe to be, and there are people who agree with me, the
finest medical scheme in the world.
Sir, I declare this building open. 



EMARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 8 p. m. EST 10TH OCTOBER. 1961
SECOND READING SPEECH
by
THE PRIM'E MINISTER. THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENT!, TIVES. CANBERRA. TUESDAY. 10TH OCTOBER. 1961
RAILWAY AGREEM~ ENT ( WESTERN AUSTRALIA) BILL. 1961.
This Bill seeks the approval of the Parliament to an Agreement botween
the Commorwealth and the Western Australian Governments relating to reconstruction
of the Kalgoorlie/ Fremantle/ Kwinana line of the Western Australian railways,
In the course of a statement I made last February about the
Government's economic measures, I indicated our interest in certain major
projects in the States as projects which could make a significant contribution
to national growth and development, particularly in the promotion of increased
export earnings. I said then that the Government had several large undertakings
under consideration; that we were prepared to assist in their detailed planning;
and that we would, at an appropriate time, consider the provision of financial
assistance to facilitate their execution. One of the undertakings I mentioned
was a railway project in WJestern Australia which would aid the establishment of
an iron and steel industry in that State and in respect of which the Government
of Western Australia had sought Commonwealth financial assistance.
We subseauently embarked on a close examination of this railway
project in consultation with both the Government of Western Australia and the
Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. We satisfied ourselves that construction of the
railway had a vital place in that Company's plans for a major expansion of the
steel industry. Indeed, we ascertained that, if the railway were not built,
the prospects of an expansion of steel production which would substantially
assist in bringing about a major contribution to our export earnings would be
adversely affected. It was against that background that we entered into
discussions with the Government of Western kustralia, the outcome of which is
reflected in the Agreement of which the approval of Parliament is now sought.
Conditional upon the construction of a standard gauge railway for the
carriage of iron ore, an agreement was concluded late last year between the
Western Australian Government and the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd, for the
establishment of an integrated iron and steel industry allied with the
development of the iron ore deposits at Koolyanobbing.
In that Agreement the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. undertook, by the end
of 1968, to set up at Kwinana a blast furnace with a capacity of 450,000 tons
per annum of pig iron, and to establish within the following ten years a steel
making plant and additional rolling mill facilities to produce 330,000 tons per
annum. of finished steel products. Part of the scheme for establishing the steel
industry was and is the development of the rich and extensive ore deposits at
Koolyanobbing and Bungalbin, situated about 33 miles north-east of Southern
Cross. The ore requirements for the steel works at kSwinana, and for shipment
from Western Australia to other steel works, will be in the region of two
million tons per annum.
The existing narrow gauge railway would be quite incapable of carrying
economically tonnages of this magnitude, and, to be able to cope with the likely
traffic, would need to be substantially reconstructed. Because of the capacity
of a standard gauge line to carry the heavier loads and cope with the speeds of
modern trains, and because of the fact that, for the tonnages which would beinvolved,
the standard gauge line would make the enterprise economically sound
and attractive, it became essential to reconstruct the track on standard gauge
rather than on the existing 31611 gauge.
The Government of Western Australia therefore proposed reconstruction
to standard gauge of the railway between Southern Cross, on the main east-west
railway, and Kwinana, south of Fremantle, plus construction of a spur line from
Southern Cross to Koolyanobbing, for the purpose of carriage of ore from the
Koolyanobbing deposit to the site of the steel works. Such reconstruction, if
done by itself, would have left the section of the main line between Kalgoorlie. 
and Southern Cross on narrow gauge. In order to avoid yet another break of gaU&amp;
on the east-. wast railway system, therefore, the State Government proposed that
the section between Kalgoorlie and Southern Cross should also be reconstr'Ucted
to standard gauge as a part of the overall project.
The proposals of the Western Australian Government were closely
examined by the Commonwealth in all their aspects. Very substantial funds are
involved, the cost of the railway works at current cost levels being estimated
at œ 41,200, 000. The analysis which has been made of the estimted expenditure
and operating results of the line shows that, based on the carrying of 2
million tons per annum. of iron ore and on general traffic at exidsting levels,
the new line should be a thoroughly sound economic proposition. Indeed, it is
to be expected that the new line will attract additional general traffic, and to
the extent that it does so the economics of the railway should be correspondingly
still further improved.
The construction of the line is in itself a project of the first
imnortance, but oven more important is the part which the project as a whole
will play in the development of Australia's resources, the increasing of export;
and/ or the saving of imports. It will bring to Western Australia a major heavy
industry, certainlr 1te most important industrial undertaking in the history of
that State, and indeed among the most significant projects of this kind
undertaken in the Commonwealth in recent years. The ijestern Australian proposal
is an essential part of a general expansion in steel making capacity planned by
the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. for the purpose of producing a substantial quantity
of steel for export, and thus will make a most valuable contribution to the
export potential of this country.
Moreover, the establishment of a basic steel industry in Western
Australia will inevitably bring in its train a number of ancilIlarj industries.
These will contribute further to the general economic expansion of th. State and
will do a greait deal to promote the industrial balance which is so important to
this part of Australia. It is not en exaggeration to say that the undertaking
will represent just about the most remarkable new advance in the development of
Western Australia since the discovery of gold.
Having all these important considerations in mind, the Government
concluded that the proposed railway undertaking merited the assistance of the
Commonwealth in financing it. It was obvious that, because of the very large
cost of the project, the State Government would be unable to go ahead with it
without financial assistance. We. therefore, commenced negotiations with the
*-estern Australian Government and were nuickly successful in reaching agreement
with that Government on the work to be done, the manner in which it wou~ ld be
performed, and terms undor which it would be financed.
I come now to a brief description of the contents of the Agreement
itself. With regard first to the method of financing, the undertaking has, as
1 have indicated, olements related both to development and to rail
standardisation. In its industrial developmental aspects it has in it features
veñ' y similar to the proposal for the reconstruction of the Queensland railway
from Collinsville to Mt. Isa. Insofar as it is a standardisation project, it
resembles the Victorian and South Australian Rail tandardisation projects in
whiich the Commonwealth has participated. It was difficult to differentiate
precisely between the proportions of the costs which should be attributed to
each of these elements. e discussed the matter at some length and reached
agreement with the State Government that as a matter of broad judgment the cost
might be divided into two equal parts one half of which could be regarded as
representing the developmental element and the other the rail standardisation
element in the project.
This is not to say that particular components of the overall project
are to be treated as developmental components and others as standardization
oomponents. The arrangement is rather that all expenditure on the project as a
whole, irrespective of the particular nature of that experditure, will be
treated as comprising equal parts of developmental and standardization
expenditure. 
For the dE. l'eJopwral portion the Commonwealth will provide 70% of the
funds initially required and the State The money provided by the
Commonwealth will be repaid by the State from its Consolidated Revenue over a
period of 20~ years commencing from the completion of the project, with interest
at the long term bond rate ruling at the time the advances are made. Interest
accruing during the construction period may be capitalised if the State desires.
These provisions follow closely the now accepted arrangements in the case of the
Mt. Isa Railway. For the standardisation portion the Commonwealth wil-l provide the iwhice
of the finance initially required, and the -State will repay friom its Consolidated
Revenue, over a period of 50 years, 30% of the amount provided during each
financial year together with interest at the long term bond rate ruling at the
end of each such yeaar on the outstanding amount from time to time These terms
follow those in the Victorian and South Australian Rail btandardisation
Agreements except that some special sinking fund provisions in the South
Australian Agreement ( but not the Victorian) will not apply in this case.
The overall effect of these arrangements is that the Commorwealth
will provide 85% of the total initial finance ( 70% of the developmental part and
100% of the standardisation part) and that the State will provide 15% of the
total initial finance ( 30% of the developmental part). On the basis of an
estimated cost of E4J, 200, O0fl the estimated amounts to be found by the
Commorwealth and by the State in the first instance are œ 35million and
œ 6,200,000 respectively.
The effect of the provisions relating to repayment by the State is
that the State will eventually meet 65% of the total cost ( 100% of the
1evelopmental element and 30% of the standardisation element). The proportion
of the overall cost to be finally met by the Commonwealth will be 35% ( 70% of
the standardisation element), On the basis of an estimated overall cos: t of
œ. 41,200, mOO, the respective figures are State E26,800,000, Commonwealth
Provision is made in the Agreement for the furnishing of estimates of
funds required each year and for annual statements showing the expenditure
incurred on the project from time to time, together with a revised estimate of
the amount required to complete the work.
The usual provisions are made for the keeping of accounts and records
and for the audit of accounts by the Auditor-General for the State.
The work to be done under the A~ greement is set out in some detail in
schedules annexed to the Agreement. Briefly, what is proposed is a new
standard gauge line parallel to the existing track from Kalgoorlie to East
Northam, with a new line from Southern Cross to the site of the ircn ore leases
at Koolyanobbing. The existing 31611 gauge track between Kalgoorlie and
Coolgardie will be retained, as a third rail, in addition to the W811 guge
to permit the working of the existing 3t' 6" line between Kalgoorlie and Esperance.
From East Northam the line willI take a new route vin Toodyay and the Avon River
Valley to Midland. This deviation from the existing route is necessary to
provide the required grades for the heavy trains which will be operating and
which could not be operated over the present route.
The line will then follow the existing track to Perth and Fremantle
and on to Kwinana. There are associated works necessary in and a-round the
metropolitan area and sowe narrow gauge works, especially between East Northam
and Midland, which are needed for the maintenance of services on the State's
narrow gauge system. There are also some ancillary works made necessary by
the provision of the new standard gauge line, including new station buildings,
workshop facilities, marshalling yards and the like. Standards for the
construction are also set out in a schedule to the Agreement. There is
provision for variation of the schedules if the Commorwealth and the State
agree that variations are necessary for the more effective fulfilment of the
objectives of the Agreement. 
Rolling stock to be provided is also set out in a schedule. it
consists of the rolling stock necessary to lift twu million bono por annum of
iron ore, together with rolling stock needed to carry general traffic at the
present level. The estimates for rolling stock include a component representing
the minimum requirements for general traffic which generally constitutes the
extent of the intention of the Agreement for that particular type of rolling
stock. The Agreement provides, however, that -the objectives in regard to the
general traffic rolling stock may be varied by agreement following a review to
be carried out about the end of the year 1966. It is intended that this review
shall take into account the quantity of rolling stock which tlh,-State : T'ly have
available for conversion to standard gauge at -uhat date and any other fa-ct -2' s
which may be relevant at that particuL' time.
The work entailed is to be carried out by th5 Western Australian
Government, the intention being that it will be completed by 31st December, 1968..-,
In the interest of the more efficient and expeditious completion of the project,
it is provided that, except where special circumstances may dictate otherwise,
thu work will be carried out by the letting of contracts after public tenders
have been called.
The A~ greement provides for close collaboration and agreemeaft between
the State and the Commonwealth for the programming, planning and carrying out of
the work. Expenditure on work done under the Agreement is subject to
authority of the Minister for Shipping and Transport. There are several
miscellaneous provisions. In the unlikely event of any dispute arising, it is
provided that the matter in dispute shall be determined by the Commonwealth
Treasurer. Another clause provides that the parties affirm the principle that
their respective railway authorities shall collaborate with each other in the
matter of standards of design and construction of rolling stock and also its
operation to the end that an efficient co-ordinated service over the Commonwealth
and estern Australian railways will be achieved and intersystem traffic be
facilitated. This provision is an important one. The Commonwealth and
' estern Australian Governments are making a substantial investment in this
railway and both Governments are anxious to ensure that the maximum possible
benefits are obtained from the new line when it comes into operation. The
Commonwealth and Western Australian Railways will both benefit from the
interstate general traffic operating over their respective systems, and it is
obviously desirable that they should make such arrangements as will ensure that
this traffic moves with the minimum of delay, and that the travelling public and
shippers of goods will receive the best and most efficient service that can be
provided. I am sure that this great railway project will have the whole-hearted
support of Honourable Members on both sides of the House. It will have farreaching
effects of the most beneficial kind on the development of Australia
and of Western Australia,( which is an important part of Australia) in particular.
Indeed, it can truly be said to mark an important milestone in our advance as an
industrial nation. I have great pleasure in commerding the Bill. to the House. 


The Commonwealth Government has approved of the Snowy Mountains&nbsp;Authority entering into three new contracts aggregating more than £20 million&nbsp;for projects within the next major stage of the Snowy Scheme, These projects&nbsp;are the 15-mile Eucembene-Sncwy Tunnel to connect the Snowy River at Island Bend&nbsp;with Lake Eucumbene; the Island Bend Dam, which will be used to divert the&nbsp;Snowy River into the tunnel system at Island Bend; and the Snowy Section of the&nbsp;Snowy-Geehi Tunnel.
Tenders for this work closed with the Authority on 4th September, 1961and eleven large contracting organisations from Australia and overseas countriessubmitted tenders for one or more of the projects. It has now been decided thatthe three contracts will be awarded to a joint venture comprising UtahConstruction and Engineering Pty. Ltd. and Brown and Root Sudamericana Ltd., ata to'al pricd of £20,887,000.
The world wide interest in these contracts, and the high reputation ofcontracting organisations, are a significant tribute to the standing of theSnowy Mountains Authority, and to the soundness and stability of the Australian. conomy. The competitiveness of tender prices is equally a source ofsatisfaction. These were substantially below the level suggested by pastexperience. This is a notable achievement standing to the credit of theAuthority and the Australian Nation,
The Snowy Mountains Authority urged upon the Government the need, indetermining the lowest suitable tenders, to give due weight to the experienceand technical capacity of tenderers in relation to the particular type oflarge-scale engineering works involved. It stressed the critical importance ofkeeping to schedule if the Miurray 1 Power Station is to be commissioned by 1966.Accordingly, the Authority recommended the acceptance of the tender of the Utah,Brown and Root joint venture, this being the lowest tender by thoseorganizations which had demonstrated the capacity and ability to complete toschedule large-scale engineering works of the type specified in the contracts.Work on the contracts, which have now been let, will proceedimmediately. It will provide substantial additional employment in the area,and will involve large demands for raw materials, plant and equipment to theadvantage of activity and employment in the supplying industries.The letting of the present three contracts follows the completion,ahead of schedule, of the Snowy-Tumut Section of the Scheme. Under the Snowy-Tumut development which has accounted for the main construction work up to ncw,the waters of the Eucumbene, Toorma and Murrumbidgee Rivers have been diverted tothe Turmat River for power development and for subsequent irrigation in theMurrumbidgee Valley. The Tumut 1 Power Station has been in operation since 1959and Tumut 2 Station is now in the commissioning stage. When the latter stationcomes into operation shortly, the installed capacity of the Snowy Scheme willtotal 660,000 kilowatts.
The new contracts mark the first major stage of the Snowy-Murray&nbsp;Development. The contracts are only the first of a series of seven Vhich will&nbsp;ultimately be let to a chain of projects linking Lake Eucumbene on theeastern side of the MK lRange with the Murray Catchment on the western side.&nbsp;Tenders have been calltd for a further two works. Tenders for the final two&nbsp;works in the-chain-wiLJaloeo'be'called shortiy. Those four additional contracts&nbsp;will involve an expenditure of a possible further œ 30-35 million. In all,&nbsp;three dams, over 31 miles of major tunnels, a largo steel pressure pipeline and&nbsp;the Murray 1 Power Station, the largest of the Scheme, must be completed by&nbsp;early 1966 to help meet the growing demand for electricity in New South Wales&nbsp;and Victoria. At the same time the waters of the Snowy River will. be diverted&nbsp;to the Murray Catchment, thus making available an increase initially in the&nbsp;normal supply for irrigation in the Murray Valley of 450,000 acre feet per&nbsp;annum with consequent benefits to Victoria, New South Wales&nbsp;and South Australia.
The supply of water will be increased to 800,00O acre feet when the full Snowy-Murray Diversion includiig the Jindabyne Project is completed.&nbsp;The overall programme will involve a total expenditure of the order&nbsp;of £115 million by the Authority during the next five years. Up to now the&nbsp;Commonwealth has made available more than £180 million for the construction&nbsp;of&nbsp;the Snowy Scheme.
CANBERRA,15 October, 1961.



siPhLCH it iL, hPM1KL Mi1IS1bh 4-It~ hTdIN.
My colleague having said uverythingt I shall nov proceed
to sal it again. 1hat's fair t. gh I think.
3ut two things struck me very :'! uoh dfrhof 1 came In here*
The first was that Odhs din religious air, this cloak or darkness,
seemed to so to be a sort of fittin, surround ' or a politician
( Laughter) asort of sjmbollsm whbich 1 didn exi. ect -ro. my
somewhat matter of fact colleague Kro -ulmov. And -Ae 3econd thing
that struck me, ratber unpleasantly, ias that -you know hat my
opponents jay about soe thero was a &amp; rout pla. card right In front of
as, which says OHMO.( High Altituade Measurement) ( Laughter) jut apart
from these two incidents I am delighted to have the opportunity of
openiing this Exhibition*
Xy aoflcaga* e, Mr. 4' ulmep Is 4-, uito r h. vo) n no lays that
the work done in ros arch and dorelopient , In ustrai. ia is really most
romarkable. I tnm ure there iero jpople in the rid % i! to Im ginned
that we 4ero not up to it just as theeo have been,, in my own
ifetime9 people in the cild who thought triaL , utstralia was
incapable of manuf act iring Zoods on the Zmad zcalo and in the
highest qality. It takes a whie C'or ,. eople to realse that this
cjuatry of ours is a modern conunity wi th as Iuuch c~ paoi ty per head
of . opulation, as can be found anywhere else in the jorid; and, I
sometimes think,, perhaps a little more.
This is demonstrated in Lhe field of scientific research,
applic tion. of it in research nd deielopsont of 4Iea,-ons. It is a
4reat pity that in this w'orld 4e sho~ ld hat* to devote so uoh time
arid talent and money to the prodaacti,) n of weoapons, but we umv that
are living in that kind of dorld and that we can't afford to be
without protection. iut the work that has been done has 1 believe,
beew of a 41nd of whioh every Australian ought to be pro; 1. I
haven't been able to poor through the gloomi, so L'ar and see what
is here but there are one or two things that ' ave loon produced on
this sile of Sup-typ like lHallarra. for examploo ihich have became
quite accepted around the 4orld as showing the way in the
production of a part. oulcr -reapon of war. n. rd the work tMat has
been done at ' doomera has -As you Anow, been dork which has attracted
the attention of the whole world and part'lcularly of the free
-iorld. his kind of thing isaft done except by Lretlendous, talent
and great enthusiasm. doomera is not just a stretch of earth.
People think, pqrhaps, of aiRocket Hang. as being a place
4here, you need to have a great deal of distance in front of you and
some particular means of recoverinig the rocket ihen It comes down*
3Iehind all this ' space' on the etirtll-there is a Lremendous
coawentzation of talent, or tremendous research effort, 0 of
productive activity, Any body who ; ianted to get a now conception of
what ustralia in doing in this field sho-ild take the first
oppirtufity, if he is allowed to br my colleagues the minister,
provided the journey is not boycotted for ainy reason or other of
going,, not only to omers, but to SalisbWr in aiouth wstralfa
and to see thlisproject right from the first elements of resear&amp;
until the final testing of the finished product, It is, 1 1 think,
one of the exciting things In . ustralia* And it hasp already, 0 in
the ease of at least two matters,, demonstrated an Inventive and
original genius In this country, viich marks it out among countries
of the world as being a true home of thoaght, and of talent. It is
a very pod thing Indeed, therefore, that we should all, those of us
who are relatively stricken in years, have a look at dhat is here. 
But it Vi, 1 believe, be particularly attractive,
*.. citing, to the minds of younger people those 4ho are interested
in science, those iho are about to go to a Jniversity', or to a
technological institute for the purposes of further scientific
training. They will find here something tremondoual( interesting
because they will see how in this cmplex departmeort of science
the concentration of skil zid of effort have beer, able to lead
the most astanishing results. 1 was happy to remind ; aiself the
other day that the Departiont or Supply ias an elaborate system
for providing for wbat i will call cadet training along these lines.
I do hope that there will be thousands of younger oople who will
come here and have their minds iind imaginations t1mulated, not for
thie purpose of destroying eople in ti world but to pursuo the
search of scientific knowledge and to add I-heir own knovlede to
what we so badly need in tustralla.
Nov what 1 don't knov about science is, of ciurse
consid-rablo. rIan ". ulme has just jeen bold enorgh to say that I
know nothing about science this is competi/ untrie. 1 aa
extremely familiar with the irst law of p1Vsics ' which, if i
remember it correctly is that action and re-action are equal ;, nd
opposite. 10a sure tiis has a ; re. t de31 o . o Aith politics.
klauihter) i's sure it has, I am aiso not at all sure that it
hasnt got a good iil to do with projectin,; a rocket i-Ito 3paOe.
3ut for z who h the easy mastery that i have or the 0irat
prineiple of physics, to be accased of havingj no knowlad, e of
physics is really ar very, very, unkind cut, ( iauhtor)
ArWhow we won't keop you from his. fo. i must peer
throu the Lloon. lou will see these things hanging in the air
don't Kflov whether that is the moon or the sun, or a star. iut
I did read in my notes for this occasion, with great envy, that my
colleague the Kinister for iupply, luis alreadi -onduoted a
oonirersation that was bounced off Le moon. I'l try it at my
nexL fPoA. Icy 3pech it might et over the b-rr.. oade of interjectors,
( Lauzhter) 4ouuldn't that be a mag. ificent idea. % loon and back.
And my opponents would then say exactly ' And thatts just ihat it
sounded like'. tIuahtor)
I have the very greatest pleasure in Jeclaring this
zhibition open* ( Applause) 



SECOND READING SPEECH
by
THE PRIIIVVI INIST, THE RT. HON. R. G. ~ ZE
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESEI\ TATIVES. CANBERRA, W~ EDYESDAY, 18TH OCTOBER, 1961
QUEENSLAND GRANT ( BEEF CATTLE ROADS) BILL, 1961
This Bill seeks the approval of the Parliament to a grant of financial
assistance to the State of Queensland for the construction of beef cattle roads
in that State. In February last, I announced the Government's interest in1 a number
of large enterprises which would assist with development and increase export
earnings. Included in the list was " road development in the North, including
North and Western Queensland, the Northern Territory, and the North of
Western Australia. 1" Following a very careful examination of the whole
question of road requirements in the North, and consultation with the StateL;
concerned, the Government decided on an immediate programme of assistance in all
three areas. The current Budget includes a special allocation of œ 350,000
designed to speed up road development in the Northern Territory, and we have
also agreed to a special grant to Western Australia which is the subject of a
Bill I shall be introducing shortly. The present ffeasure covers the assistance
we plan for the State of Queensland.
It is perhaps unnecessary for me to stress the great importance of
transport to the development of our sparsely-populated northern areas, or to
1well on the part played by the beef cattle industry in those areas and the
significance of beef as an export earner. These facts are well-known, and
there is also general acknawlhdgment of the further fact that droving as a means
of moving cattle from place to place is rapidly being superseded, where suitable
roads are available, by the use of motorised road trains. The use of road
trains speeds up movement. More importantly, its general availability has the
side effect of promoting quite significant changes in animal husbandry,
allowing cattle to be " turned off" at much younger ages and thus increqising the
productivity and overall efficiency of individual properties, as well as
producing, in most instances, an end product of higher quality.
Expert economic studies, designed largely to measure the cost of
roads against the value of the benefits expected to flow from their
construction, have shown that there is much scope in Queensland f or roads
expenditure which should produce really worthwhile results. Apart from the
Queensland section of the Barkly Highway between Camooweal and Mount Isa, there
is practically no road in the west and north-west of the State suitable for the
regular transport of cattle.
Earlier this year, I announced that, as a first step, we had agreed to
provide œ 650,000 of the first œ 1,000,000 spent on the construction of a road
between Noirnanton and the Tovnsville-Mount Isa raillway at Julia Creek. This
work is now well under way, and the 1961/ 62 Budget has made provision for the
Commonwealth contribution of œ 650, 000.* However, at Budget time it was
announced that we were ready and willing to go much further than this, and in
subsequent discussions with the Qlueensland Government woe have agreed to an allinclusive
grant of œ Smillion to be rmde over a period of five years for
expenditure on approved road works.
In effect, we have left the Normanton-Julia Creek arrangenent as it
stands, and we have added a further œ 4,350,000 as a straight-out grant which
does not have to be matched by corresponding expenditure on the part of the
State. Put in another way, if the State spends a total of œ 5,350,000 on
approved roads during the prescribed period, it can qualify for a Commonwealth
grant of œ 5million towards this expenditure. The grant would be made
available progrossively over the period and so provide for financing of the work
as well as ultimate assistance, 
The actual roads on which expenditure will qualify for
reimbursement will be selected in the first instance by the State, but must be
approved by the Treasurer. Neturally from a Common-wealth viewpoint we want the
funds to be applied to the best advantage, and thus the Treasurer is required
to have regard to certain criteria essentially the effect on beef production
and the relationship between cost and benefits before giving an approval.
The Bill also provides that the Treasurer may approve standards of
design or construction and that, if he does so approve, then the State must
comply with those standaids to be eligible for a grant in respect of the -Tor
concernfd. On this aspect I can say that there is already a very substantial
measure of agreeme~ nt on standards.
I feel sure that there will be general support for this measu.' e
which, in conjunction with other assistance proposals already before the House
or to be introduced, should contribute greatly to that development of this
country and its resourcesz in which we all believe.
I commend the Bill to the House. 



SECOND READING SPEECH
by
THE PRIE MINISTER. THE RT. HON. R. G. DENZIES
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. CANBERRA, WEDNESDAY. 18TH OCTOBER. 1961
WE-STERN AUSTRALIA ( BEEF CA1TTLE ROADS) BILL, 1961
The purpose of this Bill'is to seek the approval of the Parliament to
a grant of financial aasistance to the State of Western Australia for the
carrying out of certain road and bridge works in the northern part of that
State, connected with the transport by road of beef cattle.
In introducing a similar measure relating to roads in Queensaand I
mentioned the several steps being taken by the Government to assist in the
development of roads across the north of Australia. I referred also to the
importance of general development and expansion of the beef industry, and the
significant role which roads could play. I need not repeat what I then said,
as the remarks have general application to Itestern Australia as well as to
QIueensland and the Northern Territory.
The assistance proposed for Western A-ustralia is a grant of
œ 500, 000 in respect of expenditure by the State in the financial year 1961/ 62
on two specified roads and two specified bridges in the Kimberleys. The four
projects are inter-related in that both roads lead from beef cattle areas to
the meat works and port at Wyndham ( from Nicholson in one case, from HallIs
Creek via Turkey Creek in the other), while the two bridges will allow the
Wyndham-Nicholson road to be taken across the Ord and Dunham Rivers and so
eliminate an existing low level crossing over the Ord, which puts this road out
of commission in times of flood, Incidentally, the bridges ( one of which is to
be superimposed on the Ord River Dam at Bandicoot Bar, which itself is being
constructed with the assistance of Commonwealth funds), and the improved road
between the Ord Dam and Wyndham, will be of great assistance in the development
of the areas opened up for settlement by the Ord project.
When we discussed the question of roads with the Western Australian
Government, we were impressed by the amount of self help in developing
communications in the north being undertaken by the State from its existing
road funds. As I announced at the time we agreed to ossist the State, the
Commorwealth grant is " matching corresponding provisions by Western Australia
in relation to roads in the Kimberleys". This concept is written into the
Bill, which requires the State to undertake to spend not less than œ 500,000
from other sources on road works in the northern part of the State ( d-, fined as
north of 20 degrees of south latitude) during 1961/ 62. I might add that this
is by no means an onerous provision, as the inforrmation provided by the State
indicated that its 1961/ 62 programme of road works included an alloca-tion of
muro than œ lmil-lion to that area, including over Z800,000 in the Kimberleys.
The detailed arrangement is that the Commoriealth will provide 50% of
expenditure on the two bridges in 1961/ 62 ( estimated at œ 320,000, calling for
a Commoriealth contribution of œ 160,000), and the whole of the expenditure,
also in 1961/ 62, on improving the two roads. If the expenditure on the
bridges accords with the estimate, this will mean that Pœ 340,000 is available
for the road works. However, within the agreed limit of œ, 500,000 we have not
specified expenditure limits on either of the two groups.
I might mention also that the availability of the Commorw4ealth grant
will allow the State to release, for other road works in the area, the funds
already allocated in its programme to the two roads, plus half of the amount
allocated to the construction of the two bridges.
Other provisions in the Bill are similar o those in the Queensl~ and
measure, including the power of approvasl of standarcls of design pr
construdtion which the Treasurer may exercie
Western Australia is receiving very substantial assistance from the
Commowealth in its railway plans, which essentially will benefit the southern
part of the State. This measure provides for a considerably smaller but
nevertheless significant, grant of assistance for the development of the beef
cattle industry in the far north.
I commend the Bill to the House. 


61/ 07 1SECOND READING SPEECHbyTHE PRIME MINISTER. THE RT. HON. R. G. Iva,.% LmsIN THE HOUSE OF HEPFLS: E NTATIVES CANBERRA,,-THURSDAY. 19TH O&amp; urix= 19RAITJXAY AGREEMENT ( QUEENSLAND) BILL, 1961.The purpose of' this Bill is to seek the approval of the Parliament toan agreement between the Commonwealth and the State of Queensland covering theprovision of financial assistance to that State in the work of increasing andimproving the facilities cf the Collinsville-Townsville-Mount Isa Railway.Mount Isa is just over 600 miles by rail from the coast atTowtisville,* and the total distance from the Collinsville coal mines is morethan 750 miles. For many years this line has been the main transport linkserving the whole of North-western Queensland and in more recent times it hasacquired greatly increased importance because of the discovery and developmentof rich and extensive mineral deposits in the Mount Isa area. The transporttask here is primarily a railway operation, but the existing railway hasbecome increasingly deficient in many respects so that it could not possiblyprovide the capacity to move the tonnages in prospect from the developmentslikely to occur in that region. Rehabilitation of the railway to the standardnow required includes extensive reconstruction of the permanent way to achievebetter grades and curves, replacement of one major bridge and a host of minorbridges, considerable replacement of rails and sleepers, new marshalling yardsand crossing loops, improved methods of control and administration, theprovision of modern locomotives and rolling stock, and so on. This vastproject, which is already under way and scheduled for completion by December1964+, has been estimated to cost œ 3Omillion. The provision of financialassistance to Queensland by the Commonwealth, as in the agreement to whichapproval is now sought, will enable this work to be carried out.At this point I must emphaSi3e that the reconstructed line will retainthe existing gauge of 31611 so that the question of gauge standardisation is notinvolved. It could be argued, of course, that the rehabilitation of a sectionof a State railway system is purely a matter for the State concerned, and thatthere is no parallel with other cases where, in the interests of moving towardsa uniform gauge link between the principal mainland railways, the Commonwealthhas provided financial assistance to certain States. But, in this instance,the very nature and magnitude of the project compels a different approach. Itwas obvious from the start that the State of Queensland would need some outsidehelp if the complete job were to be done properly and within a reasonable time.Furthermore, the increase in export earnings that will undoubtedly flow fromthe expansion of metal production at Mount Isa, made possible by an improvedrailway, gave the Commonwealth good reason for using its best endeavours toensure that the rehabilitation project would be vigorously pursued. From theoutset we expressed a keen interest in the project, and this interest, plus anamount of hard work, has now culminated in the present agreement.Our approach to the form of the assistance to Quaeensland has howeverbeen conditioned at all times by the fact that this is not a standardisationwork, and so should not attract the same measure of direct support as has beenaccorded by the CommonwealIth to standardisation projects. I might add thatthis view was strengthened when it was demonstrated by the most expertinvestigations that the revitalised line should have no diffioulty in paying itsway, including the complete a-mortisation of its capital cost over a period oftwenty years, and making a profit.The first approach for Commonwealth assistance was made in 1956 bythe then Queensland Premier ( Mr. Gair) and arose from the declared intention ofMount Isa Mines Limited to increase greatly its production of metals andconcentrates provided that the necessary increased railway capacity could bemade available. Deposits of silver-lead-zinc ores were discovered at MountIsa in 1923, and the present Company commenced production in 1931, mainly of lead.
From the outset we contemplated an oversea borrowing, and with thisin mind suggested, and the State agreed, that independent experts should beengaged to look at the rehabilitation plan and report on its economicfeasibility. This led to the appointment of the eminent American firm ofconsulting engineers, Ford Bacon and Davis, who ma de very thorough investigatiaBand reported, initially in November 1957 and finally in August 1958, that theproject was in fact economically feasible. Their calculations showed that therehabilitated railway should be able to pay its way, and as I said before,completely amortise its capital cost from earnings over a period of twenty years.I mention that Ford Bacon and Davis have been retained by the State tosupervise the project, and to undertake various other tasks associated with itand with the genaral operation of the Queensland Railways.On the financing side, wc had been able to interest the Internationalbank for reconstruction and development, and at the 1958 Meeting of the LoanCouncil we sought and obtained unanimous agreement for the Commonwealth toborrow moneys for the Mount Isa project. This opened the way for a formalrequest to the Bank for a loan. Quite a lot has been said on this subject,and it is well known that the negotiations with the Bank, which at the startgave great promise of success, finally broke down because the Mount Isa Companywas not prepared to provide guarantees of freight revenues from the railway ofa kind required by the Bank. This was disappointing to us because in rearlyall respects the railway was a project admirably suited to finance by theInternational Bank. I said at the time, and I now repeat, that we in theCommowealth used our very best endeavours to ensure success. I did not then,nor do I now, criticise in any way the Bank, the Mount Isa Company, or theQueensland Government. It is understandable, of course, that the International3ank must abide by whatever rules it lays down governing the loans it makes andthat, having regard to the numerous demands upon it from many countrirZ itcannot readily make exceptions in particular cases, no matter how credit-worthyit regards a particular project or a particular borrower. On the other hand,the Mount Isa Company made its own business judgment as-to how far it could goin guaranteeing the railway freight earnings.When howaver the negotiations with the Bank ended in mid-1959, onething was perfectly clear. Money had to be found for the job. 4' either we northe Queensland Government were prepared to let the matter rest where it stood.( Ale intended to try and did try to secure loan finance from overseas sourcesother than the International Bank. Meeting, however, with no immediate successin that direction and believing that the project was of the greatest urgencyand importance, we decided to offer to guarantee the Queensland Government themoney for it ourselves, even if our efforts to secure overseas finance shouldfail. Towards the end of 1959, I therefore wrote to ' Mr, Niolin totell him the Commowealth was prepared to underwrite the provision of theadditional œ 2Omillion required ( that is, the amount over and above thewhich the State had indicated it could finance itself), onvirtually the same terms and conditions as would have applied had the loan fromthe International Bank boon forthcoming terms and conditions which, I mightadd, Queensland had always indicated it would be quite happy to acc'; pt. Ineffect, despite the burden that it would place on our resources, we undertookto put ourselves in the position that the International Bank would haveoccupied if it had provided a loan of œ 2Omillion.The Premier of Queensland wrote to me a few days after I had made theoffer, accepting the offer and expressing satisfaction at what-was, for both. ofus, a very notable event. With one exception which I shall Lrention presently,.the terme and conditions whnich were offered and accepted by Queensland were theterms and conditicne which have ncw been embodied in. the Agreamvt which thisBill seeks to approve.As we intended, this offer assuring the State of the finance enabledproper planning of the work to proceed immediately, and the work went forward,without having to wait the results of any further efforts we made to borrowoverseas for the project. The lueensland Government wasted no time, and theactual work commenced some time ago. I am plc asad to say that, on theinformation I have, it is proceeding very satisfactorily. Queensland has beenable to meet expenditure so far from its own agreed contribution to the project.However, the time is now approaching when the Commowealth will have to startmaking its contribution, and it is, of course, necessary for this Agreement tobe approved before that can be done.
4 4.I heavo monñ A. i. nod 4A-ext, -in olbr. i-ho pX-&gt; opsed toi-n, of theCommonwealth's assistance differ from what was offered and agreed at the oc1 of1959. This is in regard to the matter of the interst rate on theCommonwealth's advances. As I have said, our intention was to put ourselves inthe position that we had hoped the International Bank would occupy, and offerQueensland the same terms as would have applied to a loan made by the bank. Sofar as the interest rate was concerned, we offered to . charge Queensland whatevorhappened to be the ruling rate for International Bank loans of about the sameduration at the time we': provided the money, subject to a reduction in that rateif we were successful in borrowing more cheaply elsewhere overseas. At the timewe were negotiating with the Bank, the ruling International Bank rate was in thevicinity of 6 per cent per annum. Although the State accepted this arrangementinitially, we, following receipt of a later suggestion by the Premier,reconsidered it. In an attempt to settle a firm rate once and for all andavoid unnecessary complications and arithmetic later, we subsequently suggestedinstead that we charge Queensland tho average rate of two particular oversealoans then being raised, the full proceeds of which would, with Loan Councilapproval, be allocated to the Commowealth, instead of being apportioned betweenthe Commonwealth and the various States in the normal way. The Premier agreedto this, and the necessary Loan Council approval was secured. The average rateof interest on these two loans was 52 per cent per annum and this is theinterest rate that the Agreement provides will be charged to Queensland onadvances made by the Commonwealth under the Agreement.There were subsequent discussions with the Queensland Government aboutother aspects of the financial arrangement but I feel that I do not need to gointo details of these matters here and I do not propose to do so. It issufficient to say that full agreement was eventually reached on the basis I haveoutlined and when this Bill is passed these arrangements can be put intooperation. Apart from the interest rate, the other main terms on which theCommorealth is proposing to provide financial assistance areAmount Two-thirds of the actual cost, up to a maximum of œ 20million. AsI mentioned earlier, Queensland had indicated that it would be able toprovide up to œ 10million towards the cost of the project. The Commonwealthts advances will be made under Section 96 of the Constitution, andare thus outside the provisions of the Financial Agreement governingordinary State borrowings.Term The Commonwealth advances are to be repayable in fu1Lover twentyyears, commencing from 1st January, 1965, after the work has beencompleted. Interest is to be capitalised during the construction period.Twenty years is the period over which the expert consultants estimated therailway would be able to repay the money from surpluses earned; it will bemost unlikely to impose any burden on the Queensland Government's finances.On the contrary, the Queensland railways seem likely to show improvedresults as a consequence of this undertakirgThis, then, is in br&amp;.. f the story of how the Agreement which thelegislation embodies has come about. I am convinced that it will prove to beone of the most successful and rewarding examples of co-operation ever undertakenbetween the Commonwealth and, a State. For not only will it assist the effectivedevelopment of vast resources already known but it will almost certainly help tounlock potentialities for growth exceeding anything we can now envisage. It ismuch more than a State or regional undertaking; it is a national project in thetruest sense of that term.I have great pleasure in commending this Bill to the House.


SECOND READING SPEECHbyTHE PRIME MINISTER. THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIESIN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, CANBERRA, THURSDAY. 19TH OCTOBER. 1961COAL LOADING WORKS AGREEMENT ( NEW SOUTH vJALES') BILL, 1961.The purpose of this Bill is to obtain the approval of Parliament to anAgreement between the Commowealth and the State of New South Wales providingfor finp~ ncial assistance to the State towards the cost of installing improved,coal loading facilities at the ports of Newcastle, Port Kembla and Balmain.This project is one of the major State works to which 1 have referredbefore as being projects which should make a significant contribution to thepromotion of increased export earnings. Increased and diversified exports areessential. The ex Port of coal overseas from New South ,, ales has expanded notablyin the last three years and is already making an important contribution toAustraliats balance of payments. During 1960461, over 1.9 million tons valuedat about E7.4. million were exported through the three ports concerned in thepresent project. The exports wore shipped mainly to Japan, to meet therequirements of that country' s rapidly growing industries. There are goodprospects of a further substantial increase in the trade. Forecasts based onstudies of Japan's future coal requirements and discussions with Japaneseindustrialists indicate that coal exports from the New South Wales ports coul4increase to œ l2million per annum within a few years and to over œ l6million pe~ rannum. in this decade. These exports will be possible without prejudicing inany way the needs of the Australian steel industry. In addition to thevaluable export earnings which can be expected, the New South WJales coalindustry and the coal mining districts should bene fit directly in many waysfrom the wider market for New South Wales coal.The expansion in coal exports which is in sight cannot materialise,however, unless the facilities for loading coal at the ports are improved andthe improvements are complete-d in the shortest practicable time The trade isvery competitive. The overseas buyers might turn to other sources for theircoal requirements if they thought that the New South Wales ports would not beable in a few yearst time to provide adequate and economical facilities for co4shipments. Of primary importance is the need to deepen the harbours and berthsto receive the larger vessels now coming into use in the coal export trade.Larger vessels offer significant freight advantages. Coal exports are expectedto be carried increasingly in ships of 25,000 tons capacity and upwards ascompared with the present 10,000 to 12,000 tons. Equally important is the needfor modern equipment at the wharves, capable of loading coal at reasonably fastrates, so that the full benefit of larger ships can be gained through quickturn-around and reduced harbour and wharfage dues. Faster loading equipment atthe wharves necads, in turn, adequate storage and access facilities to maintainthe supply of coal to the loaders.The New South W-, ales Government has a full realisation of the problemsassociated with the expansion of coal exports and the trend towards largervessels. For some time it has been studying the prospective volume of thetrade and planning the facilities required to handle it. The maintenance anddevelopment of ports is a State responsibility and the Commorwealth Governmenthas no intention of intruding into State rights and responsibilities in thisfield. In the present case, however, the expansion of exports in prospect wassufficiently important for the Government to believe it had an obligation toinform itself about the progress being made by New South Wales and toascertain whether there was any way in which the Commonwealth could help inthe carrying out of the project.lt became apparent during the discussions which took place with theNew South Wales Government that the Commonwealth could make it possible toreduce materially the time taken to complete the work. Without outsidefinancial assistance, New South ' ales could not undertake to construct theworks at all three ports simultaneously. It would be necessary to spread outthe works over a pcriod of about six years and to complete some sections of the
total programme before starting on others. -rven this programme could havebeen delayed for financial reasons. Financial assistance from theCommorwealth, on the othar hand, would make it possible to compresF thetimetable by removing financial obstacles to the completion of the portfacilities in the shortest time practicable on engineering and other physicalgrounds. This is estimiated at 3 to 4 years, and the shorter constructionperiod could make a significant difference to Australiat s ability to securefavourable export contracts.The outcome of the discussions between the Commonwealth and theState was a formal submission by the New South Wales Premier of estimated coptsand of proposals concerning the way in which Commonwealth financial assitancemight be put to best use. On the basis of his submission and the detailedknowledge of the programme which had been gained during the discussions, aCommonwealth offer was formulated and was accepted by the State.The main features of the assistance agreed upon were described in astatement which I i~ sued on 29th August. The New South Wales Governmentundertook to ensure that a prcgramme of work, involving the spending of someœ 10,660,000 on three harbours, would be carried out as expeditiously aspraz-ticable and that the funds necessary for that purpose would be provided asrequired. The total programme includes the deepening of harbours and theprovision of deep water berths as well as the installation of coal loadingplant and related works. The Commonwealth, for its part, undertook toprovide financial assistance to New South ' dales in respect of the coal loadingplant, including the associated wharfage, storage, road and rail facilities,up to half the estimated cost of the coal loading w~ orks, that is, up to anamount of œ 2,650,000. The Commonwealth assistance is to be provided on a F,f or Z matching expenditure basis with the State, up to individual maxima ofœ 1,500,000 at Newcastle, œ 1,070,000 at Port Kembla and E80,000 at Balmain.Out of the total Commonvealth assistance, up to E1,000,000 is to bemade available from the Coal Industry Fund of the Joint Coal Board. As Ipointed out in my statement of 29th August, any assistance which theCommowealth might provide to revenue-producing works of this kind wouldnormally take the form entirely of repayable advances, In this case, however,we had regard to the uncertainties in the costs of works of this magnitude andin the estima~ tes of the eventual volume of coal exports through these ports.The State naturally accepts whatever risks are involved in these respects,but the Commowealth has been anxious to give the State all reasonable supportand decided to make part of the assistance available by way of grant. Thiswill also serve to reduce the charges which would otherwise be levied for theuse of the new facilities.The remaining part of the assistance, amounting to up toœ 650,000, is proposed to be made available by the Commonwealth in the formof advances repayable by the State. Negotiations have been conducted betweenthe Commonwealth and State Governments on the terms and conditions of therepayable advances and a formal Agreement has been drawn up and signed onbehalf of each Government. It is the Bill to give effect to that Agreementwhich is now before the House for approval.The Bill itself is brief and provides mainly for approval of theAgreement and for appropriations from the Consolidated Revenue Fund foradvances to be made by the Commonwealth in accordance with the Agreement.The Agreement is set out as the Schedule to the Bill and itscontents may be summarised as follows;The preamble is, in effect, a brief description of the reasons forand the nature of, the whole Commowealth financial assistance, including thegrant element as well as the repayable advances. The arrangements for thegrant assistance referred to in paragraph of the preamble are straightforwardand do not require further approval. They are simply that when theState applies for funds, it will apply for grants as well as advances in thesame manner and supported by the same kind of evidence of expenditure. TheCommowealth will arrange for payments to be made to the State in theproportions of grants to a&amp;'-ances set out in paragraph of the preamble.
The terms and conditions of the repayable advances are given in detail in thebody of the A'greement.Clauses 4 and 5 of the Agreement provide for the making of advancesby the Commonwealth to the State up to the amounts specified either asreimbursements of expenditure ailready made by the State or, if the Treasurerapproves, in anticipation of expenditure to be made, on or in connection withthe coal loading works. The advances are to bear interest at 5 3% per annumand are to be repayable in 10 years by 20 semi-annual payments. The Stateundertakes in clause 9 to carry out the coal l. oading works with o view to theircompletion as part of the harbour works at the earliest practicable date,subject to the Commonwealth providing financial assistance as agreed. Th2remaining provisions relate to variation of the schedule of works, the provisionof estimates, the supply of information, audit and the giving of notices. Adescription of the works is set out in the Schedule to the A greement under twoheadings, the harbour works and the coal loading works.I conclude by emphasising that the programme which the New South WalesGovernment has embarked upon is an important contribution to the expansion ofthe export trade. Some of the work has already begun and other sections are inan edvanced stage of preparation. At Balmain, dredging has been completed anqtenders have been received for the new coal loading facilities. At NewcaqtlQ,tenders have been called on a world-wide basis for the removal of rock from thebar at the harbour entrance and it is proposed to dredge the leads and channelsand the berths, to provide a depth of at least 36 feet of water to -the coalloading plant. It is planned that the coal loading plant will be able to loadat a rate which is yet to be dotermined but which will be at least 1500 tons anhour as provided for in the schedule to the Agreement. At Port Kembla, planningis well in hand for the construction of a coal berth on a new site in theInner Harbour and tenders have been called for a loader with a capacity of.2,000 tons an hour. The plans include the provision of adeo ' uate storage andaccess to the wharf and the deepening of the berth to at least 36 feet of water.The Commonwealth Government is satisfied that the installation ofthese works will permit the coal export trade to be maintained and expanded andthat financial assistance from the Commonwealth in the manner proposed willcontribute importantly to their early completion.I have grent pleasure in commending the Bill to the Hou3e.



P. M. No. 51/ 1_ 96.
CONSUYER PRICE INDEX
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Among the objectives of our mu~ ch discussed economic policy were
The arresting of the run-down in our overseas balances and building them
up to satisfactory levels. This has been successfully achieved, the
reduction in imports in recent months being notable.
The halting of the inflationary boom. Today's announcement of the
Consumer Price Index figures demonstrates the success so far of our antiinflationary
measures. The figures released today for the six capitals
show that in 1960 up to and including the September quarter, the rises in
the Index were 1.8% and each of these being a quarterly
figure. Since the announcement of the measures of last November this
increase has steadily fallen until now it has turned into a reduction.
The three quarterly figures of 1961 are 0.6% and This puts
into graphic form the steady success of our measures in the battle
against inflditon. The news should be received with pleasure by all
Australians who feel that the battle against inflation is a battle for
the financial security of urdinary men and women.
I am informed, as a matter of interest, that in this last quarter the
overall movement of the Consumer Price Index was much the 3ame as would have
been shiown by the old Series Index.
CANBER. RA October, 19,61. 



INTINJPIATI. N. L ALIR TRA'SPORi T A3SOCIATICN ME2&amp;, ING
In Sydney. 3rd October. 1963.
Speech byZ the Prime iinis ter the Rt. Hon. Menzies
I am delighted to be here this morning under your
presidency, because really Sir Kudson Fysh is one of the most
remarkable of living Austr:: aians. He was the true pioneer of
commercial flying in Australia. I have no doubt that back in
those earlier days he thought this vas a bold stroke to start a
-thing and call it Queensland Northern Territories Aerial
Services hop from here to there, and hop back again. with a
little bit of luck. That is how it all be:, an. Now it is one of
the great airlines of the world. And the man rho began it and
who thought of himself, first of all primarily, I hage no doubt,
as a pilot and an adienturer, still remains an adventurer. But
he has in one sense ceased to be c pilot and become a pirate,
because he tarns out to have, and unexpectedly in those
circumstances, a positive flair for business, for driving an
enterprise on he saw , rith an eye of imagination all round the
world and, what is more, he has, in my experience ( and I don't
want to say this to encourage any of the others of you) an
unrivalled capacity for rifling the Treasury.
Now, Sir, having said that and all the good bi. ts
about you are completely true I just want to tell you that at
the week-end I thought " Jhat can I say in opening a conference of
this kind? I suppose I ought to be completely agreeable and
pat everybody on the back". But when I sat down I found that at
the end of two hours all the things I had thought of about
aviation, about civil aviation, were extremely disagreeable. I
recall the fact that over the better part of a million miles I
have been sitting in mid-air in my time trying to think and
failing, trying to read and failing, arriving at the other end
in a state of complete intellectual dejection, being cross
examined by people in press conference and television interview.,
people who had been to bed the previous night. One has some
of these strange memories.
Indeed I ' ant to tell you this great historic
disclosure: I am a fairly senior sort of Prime Minister
attending Prime Ministers' Conferences and about 5 or 6 years
ago, attending one, I proposed that we should form a Prime
Ministers' Union. iWell, of course, you know not all Prime
Ministers appreciate that kind of remark and so it was rather
badly received. I said, " Well, it's perfectly simple. The
union has only one rule. It won't have anything to do with
-ages and conditions or any of that sort of thing we ill do
the best we can in those departments ourselves but" I said,
" there must be one rule and that is No press or television
interview . rithin 24 hours of arriving after a flight of not less
than 3,000 miles". I said that to give Diefenbaker a chance
from Canada. And do you kno, that with the exception of my
support, this wise, humane proposal this statesmanlike idea was
unanimously rejected. They all went away feeling that I was an
extraordinarily frivolous fellow and I have never had the same
status in a Prime Ministers' Conference since.
But, Sir, in spite of these qualified remarks about
flying, let us agree that flying is here and your business is to
make flying better, safer, more economical, meaning by that
economically -ore sound, I may say something about those things
in a moment, but before I do I just want to remind myself and
all of you, of some of the benefits that have come to us hrough
flying. 
A great deal of trouble in the -orld has arisen from
notions of insularity, each country tending to live to itself,
drag its cloak about it, feel that it is a better country than
any other and that on the -hole it is prudent not to know the
neighbours. This idea of insularity is an idea which has, in
our lifetime assailed even the greatest of nations and what
flying? international flying, has done, perhaps more than any
other instrumentality, is to break down this feeling of
insularity. Thousands more people, to take the example of
Australia, zisit us and we visit them. Thousands of people, in
an early day and by other means perhaps, saw little of us except
the ports, and ports with great respecc to Sydney are seldom
the most fascinating parts of a country. Lots of people who
did not ; et beyond the ports now by reason of the greater speed
of arrival and the more time that they have available to them,
see a great deal more of the country and that goes for the
people of our ow. n who travel abroad.
Then, inside our own country and this is worth
remembering in Australia, a country roughly the size of the
United States of America with only 10 million people flying
has done more than any othe4' thing in our history to eliminate
many of the symptoms and disabilities of remoteness in our
country. A country like ours wiill never develop unless those
people who have the feeling cen be encouraged to live and work in
remote places: otherwise we shall be all city heads and nothing
else. Before flying, a man was remote in the centre of
Australia. A man who was in the far outback was indeed removed
from his fellowmnen. He indeed felt the great loneliness that can
come to a man, and that can come to a woman, to the wives even
more so. 3ut today with our air services instead of being weeks
away from other people, people are only hours away from other
people. We have great things like the Flying Doctor Service in
Australia. This is one of our prides and joys. People who on . e
would have been left almost literally to die in remote places are
today, rithin a few hours call by a flying doctor and a proper
medical aerial sarvice.
People get letters more frequently. They have the
great and stimulating advantage of leading the newspapers more
frequently, which is an awfully good thing for the digestion
because it stirs something up in you.
So, Sir, I believe that inside Australia and outside
Australia commercial flying has a great record and an even
greater opportunity in the future. But when I have said that I
want to turn from prestige to the work of your great Association.
I may tell you at once that its recording system is remarkably
good because Twhen I said, as one does on these occasions, " Have
they sent me any dope so that I will know rhat to talk about?
Has Sir Hudson Fysh drafted a speech for me?" or words to that
effect, the answer was to bring indeed all the speeches made by
the presidents and the heads of governments welcoming conferences
of IATA since it began. I want to tell you that I am a glutton
for punishment: I read the lot. But I still found myself left
with this: W'hat is it that you are doing? Tell you are, I
believre, primarily engaged in developing what in effect is a
co-operative system, a system based on mutual understanding and
mutual willingness to help and to eliminate absurd things. I
believe that if you can do this to perfection, the future of
aviation is going to be much better than even its very
remarkable past. 
And safety: you know we road the newspapers and from
time to time we read of another crash somewhere. These are
dreadful things but, . rhen you compare them against the enormous
number of millions of people carried safely every year, I
venture to say that one of the most astonishing things in the
history of civil aviation has been the safety factor; and I
dare say that it is a rapidly growing safety factor when you
consider the enormous demand on air services. This doesn't
happen by chance. This happens by tremendous scientific
researd by vast expenditures on safety measures, vast
expenditures on the machinery, the tackle that is needed in
order to control flying, in order to make air movements safe
movements. I know that there are organisations which have,
perhaps, a more particular interest in that mattor and a more
particular responsibility than you have but another thing which
must have given you great exercise is that there is, alter all,
a disposition in the :. orld to say, " We have an . irline, our
prestige requires that , we should, so to speak, have no connection
with the firm next door". I can o1ll imagine that it is not a
simple matter to get a areat number of airlines together and get
them to work out ways and means of the interchange of their
services, the working out of routes so that people, instead of
having to be precipitated at their ultimate destination iith the
highest speed ill be able to change over, will be able to pause
hero have a look at this country, learn something about this
country, and then go on in an orderly pre-arranged progress.
This kind of thing seems to me to be tremendously important.
But one of the things I do not envy you and I do not
envy governments who are concerned in these matters, and that is
that as the world goes on, faster aircraft are produced, faster
aircraft are demanded. ; e are about, I believe, to enter the
ultimate miseries of supersonic international aviation. I have
a pet the. ry myself that my successor, because I am bound to
have one you know, that my successor, in a few years' time, will
be rung up and will be invited by the Primo Minister in London
to " nip over and have dinner, there are one or two matters I'd
like to have you talk with me about". He will then go out and
be put in a sort of capsule, will be fired off up into space,
dodging those copper needles on the journey, and will no doubt
be brought down by some form of remote control at the other end,
and go to dinner. It is a terrible prospect to me, but I do
know quite practically, that every time an airline today
re-equips it begins a process that is already half over.
It gets the latest as it sees the latest. It knows
quite well that in a couple of years' time there will be
something later than the latest; it may, when it buys its new
equipment or aircraft of a particular type, optimistically say
" Well now, we'll amortise the cost of these over X years". At
the end of half that time it is sometimes suddenly reminded that
after all it's impossible to resist re-equipment with this new
one because you are being driven out of business by your
competitor and so the partly amo-tised cost suddenly becomes a
write off. How the financial men connected with the great
flying companies manage to survive and have dark hair in so many
cases, I do not understand.
This problem of the economics of flying is one to
which I believe we all and you in particular must direct
more and more attention, because I do not believe it is possible
to go on just keeping up with the Jones's whatever the cost of
keeping up with the Jones's may be. The last thing that you
want to have happen, or that I want to have happen, is to have
international flying or domestic flying, civil aviation in the
broad, regarded as something that is inevitably insolvent or
to put it another way, is something which inevitably cannot live
except without massiv3subsidies. 
I do not believo that needs to be true. I do not
believe that it is beyond the wit of man to solve these problems,
to organise the production of now types of aircraft, and to
organise new programmes so that they have some relation to the
effective use of the reoat assets already in oporation. I do
not know Ahether there is a temptation among flying people to
look down on the earth and say that is a matter for pedestrians.
This, of course, is a very pedestrian problem I am reminding you
of; but it is a problem that will have to be solved because the
people themselves in the world who, in the long run pay, will
require to be satisfied that the economics of air travel are
regarded today with equal urgency and importance as the mechanics
of civil aviation, or the electronics of controlling aircraft and
their passage through the air.
Now, Sir, I know that you have all those things in
mind. I apologise for reminding you, therefore, of them. But
speaking as one who sees no limit to what may be done in the air
in the second half of this century, I would like to feel that it
was not only going to be something dramatic, sonithing exciting,
something of immeasurable use to the world, but that it was
something that could, to a very large extent, live on itself,
depend on itself and not be beholden too much to the politicians
of the world. Now, before I conclude, I just want to tell you that I
mentioned a little while ago how remoteness in my own country was
being overcome by flying. Political remoteness, I may add
before I close, is being overcome in just that way. In the old
days my earliest predecessors, as Prime Ministers of this
country, if they wanted to go to Jestern Australia, travelled
by an international ship. They went comfortably, or
uncomfortably, across the Great Australian Bight; they had four
or five days of leisure, which, no doubt, they devoted to reading
heavy matter and engaging in powerful thoughts. They then
arrived at Perth, they discharged some of these powerful
thoughts at a meeting, and then they got back on to the ship and
came back to the Eastern States. This is a marvellous form of
life. I look at it now just retrospectively. But it was
impossible for them to know very much about Australia. Today,
the problem is solved by flying.
In the last six months I myself, just inside Australia
and as normal routine, have flown just under 20,000 miles and
will fly another 10 or 11 thousand before polling day if I may
refer to that unhappy event.
I think it is quite safe to say that in the course of
the last 12 years I must have flown, inside Australia, the better
part of half a million miles and all this has been done into
every corner of the continent, into remote mining towns north,
north west, north central, south central all over Australia, to
places Icould never have gone to if it were not for flying. This
I trust, though I am not the best judge of it, has made me a
slightly less incompetent Prime Minister than I other ise would
have been. It has broadened my kncwledge, broadened my horizons,
brought into my ears and into my eyes, the problems of people
whom otherwise I would never see. This, I believe, in a country
like ours, is the ultimate, marvellous . ans.. er to that remoteness
4hich might otherw ise overcome the Federal Capital with its
limited opportunities on the part of Ministers to see the
country and the people for wom they are responsible. 
And so, Sir in spite of my initial complaints which
are genuine, but not to be taken out of proportion I stand here
as the debtor of civil aviation, and as your debtor, because as
I see it, I reard you as some of the -reat driving men in this
business in this country. If I venture to suggest that I have
some uneasiness in my mind about whlere we are getting to,
economically, when we consider this tremendous rapidity with
which re-equip-: ent becomes necessary, it is only because I think
so highly of civil aviation all around the world that wouldn't
care to have it put at the mercy of other people, or put
financially into a precarious condition.
I relcome you and I declare this Conference open. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G.
MENZIES, IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, ON
WEDNESDAY, 25TH OCTOBER. 1961
I do not propose to devote any time to what has fallen from the
honourable member for ivacquarie ( Mr. Luchetti). suite frankly, I have never
heard him to worse advantage. He went through a process like the legendary
tiger of lashing himself into a fury with his f ill. In the course of doing so,
he came out strong I think that is the phrase as the champion of privat.
enterprise. This was a magnifirant effort on his part, because when his
party establiblhtd Trans.-lnstralia Airlines, and I hope that is not forgotten,
it sought to establish it legislatively as the one single airline in Australia.
To hear people who sought to do that and were frustrated only by the processes
of the law come out now as dhampions of free enterprise is really more amusing
than unpleasant. The reason why 1 am taking part in this debate is that there has
been an attempt in the last few days to create an air of scandal about sometlin.
to do with my distinguished colleague, the Minister for Civi. L Aviation
( Senator Paltridge), a man i, I might adept thefrase of the honourable
member for Macquarie ( Mr. Luchetti) of undoubted integrity, a man whose word
cannot be doubted, a public-spirited man. 1 refrain from running through the'
whole calendar that he put to Us.
Today I notice that what I might call the juvenile, irresponsible
evening newspapers of Sydney have really gone to town about this. There is a
crisis! Somebody is going to resign! I do not know whethcr it is myself
Mr. Ward I hope so.
MR. ' ENZIES I know you hope it will be me. The honourable member for tast
Sydney ( Mr. 1Ward) hopes that I will resign. That is his one chance of getting
rid of me. I just want to say this about this matter: What is the allegation?
I think it is , ery important that the people of Australia who happen to be
interested in this matter should understand what is the allegation. It
appears to me that the Minister for Civil Aviation tried to persuade, or,
rather, to order East-West Airlines Limited to accept a take-over offer made by
Mr. Ansett, or by his company when? In May 1960: It was an offer which was
rejected by the company and which the company protected itself against very
shortly thereafter by altering its articles of association to provide that
shares could not be transferred except with the approval of the directors
themselves. In other words, they had an offer, they rejected it, they took
steps under their articles of association to make it quite certain that no offer
thereafter could be accepted except with the approval of the directors
themselves, meaning by that, Mr. Shand, ? Mr. Pringle and these other gentlemen we
have been hearing about. All that took place in the middle of 1960. That is
the allegation. Unless it is alleged and I should like to hear it if it is
that tb,, reafter the linister has been putting pressure on them, delivering
ultimatums to them to accept offers which have not been made, because, if there
is one thing that is clear about this it is that the only offer to take them
over that was ever made was made in May 1960. That was rejected, steps were
taken to see that it could not successfully be renewe4 and not since then his
any offer of a take-over been made to them. I have a very considerable respect
for the intelligence of the MinisLer for Civil Aviation. He is a man with a
great record in the administration of this department. He is a man who has
done a great deal for civil aviation in Australia, and if I thought that he
could be ordering people to accept a non-existent offer made by non-existent
people, I would seriously worry about his state of mind. Yet that is the
allegation. If the honourable member for Lalor ( Mr. Pollard), who is
interjecting, does not mind, that is a very important matter. These charges
have been made, I propose to deal with them, and I have made my first point on
that matter. The man against whom this charge which, on the face of it, is
fantastic, as I have just indicated, is made is now represented as somebody who
wants to crush out of existence, this airline. I just want to remind this
House that this is the man who brought into existence for the first time a
system of subsidizing these feeder airlines. But-for what Senator Paltridge 
did in his administration, backed by the Government, East-West Airlines Limited
would probably never have made a profit at any time because their profit, even
in the years when they have had a profit has depended on the subsidy paid by
the Commorwealth. I am not quarrelling with that. I thought it was a very
wise d3cision, but it really ought to give people son room for thought to
consider that the man who goes to the trouble of devising a system of subsidies
to maintain East-West Airlines Limited can all of a sudden want to destroythem.
Mr. Ward Ansett gets the bulk of the subsidies.
MR. 1 7NZIES There are all sorts of people who get the subsidies who run
feeder airlines. I am talking about this. I kncw you don't want me to talk
about this matter but I am talking about East-West Airlines; and East-West
Airlines Limited, under his policy not only has received a growing subsidy
through the years since 1957 but have also received, on his recomnendation,
through his instrumentality, more than half of the fleet they possess because,
in point of fact, of the total flect of four D. C. 3s and erie Fokker Friend: hip
used by East-West Airlines Limited that company is indebted to the Commonwealth
for two D. C. 3s and one Fokker Friendship. I am not auarrelling with the
efficiency of this Company. I think they are a very much needed enterprise.
I do not argue about these things. I acknowledge them with pleasure.. But, of
the four D. C. 3s and one Fokker Friendship used by them, East-West Airlines
Limited happen to be indebted to the Commonwealth, through the instrumentality
of Senator Paltridge, the Minister for Civil Aviation, for two D. C. 3s and the
one Fokker Friendship more than half of their operating fleet. So that, in
terms of capital equipment, the bulk of what they have has been found through
him. As for the subsidy they enjoy, they had none until he came along and
produced one. That is the short position about the relationship between the
Minister and this airline, and it is quite clear that, but for this subsidy
payment, this airline would certainly have been unable to pay a dividend on
capital at any time.
I told the House that the Ansett offer, which was an offer of 56s. a
share, was rejected by the company. The company, very naturally, I think, said
" I o, we want to stand on our own feet. . e have local interests and we are
going to preserve them". That, I think, was an admirable point of view. I do
not ouarrel with it at all. After the offer had been rejected, as I have saic,
the articles of association were amnended to make the renewal of any such offer
practically impossible.
The next thing that I want to say is this: Early in March this year,
the Government announced that it was making a review of rural airline
services. That meant, of course, that, subject to subsequent negotiation with
the Commonwealth, there would be, perhaps, some alteration of routes, some
reallocation of air routes, and, under those circumstances, what happened was
that the Director-General of Civil Aviation, Mr. Anderson, on 23rd March, 1961,
wrote again to Mr. Shand setting out the details of East-WJest Airlines
Limited's subsidy for 1960-61 and informing East-Jest Airlines Limited that the
subsidy contract was being terminated pending the outceme of the review being
undertaken by the N. S. 4. Government. T2hat was an elementary business precaution
because it would depend entirely on the re-arrangements that were ultimately
made as to what the subsidy ought to be. This is said to have been a throat
specially directed to East-;' est Airlines Limited. The fact is that a letter was
sent to the Ansett company within two or three days of that advising that
company in those precise terms of a sinilar position that the existing
subsidy contract would be terminated and that it would be re-negotiated as
socn as possible when the recommendtion , f the N. 3. W. Government had been
received. So, Sir, that is that. lo have hoard a good deal of allegations
about that matter but those are the simple facts.
Now, Sir, having said that, I just want to return to this allegation,
which appears to be at the heart, if there is a heart, of this strange series
of charges. Following the rejection by the board of East-West Airlines of the
Ansett take-over bid in June, 1960, it was quite clear that the issue was
dead. But thereafter conversations occurred between the Minister and
representatives of the board of East-West. The first of them indeed, it was
the first personal contact that Senator Paltridge had had with the board of
East-West Airlines was in Canberra in about July 1960; It is a pity to have
to go into all this ancient history, because all this has been vamped up
towards the end of 1961. it was in July 1960, it was on that occasion that my 
collocsuo, HIo Minister, saw Mr. Pringle, a director I think vice chairman
of the board of East-West. Mr. Pringlo spoke to him about the Ansett bid and
undertook to tell him the reasons, as a matter of interest, wiy the corpany
had rejected the bid.
Mr. Haylen Ah'
MR. MENZIES -It s figtftlUy funrny, is it not? He tol. d tho Minister why the
company had rejected the bid. The Minister replied, as any Minister would,
that consideration of the matter was entirely one for the board and was not
one on which the Government could be expected to have a view. During the
course of this meeting, Sir, Mr. Pringle indicated that the board did intend to
have some further discussion with the Ansett group about a variety of matters,
because people who are running airlines of this kind in the same State have a
number of matters on whichthey may wish to arrive at agreemsnt, working
arrangements of one kind or another. He asked Senator Paltridge whether he
could arrange this meeting fur him. The Senator said that he preferred not to
do that, because he did not want to have any part in any negotiations that Mr.
Pringle might be contemplating with Ansett. That was his bu-'.-nss.
" evertheless, Mr. Pringle wrote to him in April in these terms. I
direct particular attention to this because this let me remind honourable
members is a man writing as acting chairman of directors, a man who is
supposed to have been threatened in July that he must get on and he must be
taken over by Ansett, although the offer had long since disappeared. This is
the man who is a threatened man, and this is his letter
" Firstly, I would like to convey to you our appreciation for the
friendly and frank talk we had in your office in Canberra on the occasion
when Archie and I visited you."
Archie, I think, is Mr. Smith, the manager of the airline.
" The purpose of my writing you this personal letter is to inform you that
I am taking my directors for a stort holiday to Bramptca Island on
Sunday, 21st August, 1960, where we will be remaining for a period of
seven days. It has occurred to me that this could provide the ideal
opportunity for a friendly tal&amp; with Mr. Ansett along the lines mentioned
in Canberra."
That i s about the working arrangement. This is the threatened man'
" It is felt that such a meeting would be the only way in which we could
ascertain whether or not there is any chance of this company working out
some mutually acceptable agreement with the Ansett group."
That is to say, allthese arrangements that I was describing.
" I do not know Mr. Ansett personally and I would, therefore,, be most
grateful if you could pass this information on to him at an appropriate
time. * ith kind personal regards. Yours sincerely
1 must say, Sir, that 1 have heard that threatened men live a long time, but I
have never in my long experience known a man who had been threatened in this
fashion, the fashion that is now alleged, write a l tter of that kind. The
Minister having said, this is not my business", Mr. Pringle himself got
directly into touch with Mr. ' alker, of Ansetts, and his board in fact had some
discussion with Ansett officers at this paradisical place Brampton Island
wherever it is.
In March of 1961, that is, about six months aft:. r he had seen Eastwest
Airlines at Brampton Island, Lnsett again announced quite flatly that
there was no renewal of his take-over bid for East-West Airlines and
therefore, Sir, it naturally came as some surprise to my colleague, the Ministar
Mr. Pollard What did Dave Drummond say? 
Mr. Speaker Order:
MR. 1ENZIES It came as a great surprise to my colleague, the Ministe:, when
ir. Shand, who had seen him at Orange in July of 1961, again raised the question
of an Ansett -take-over bid.
Mr. Pollard But what did Dave Drummond say?
Mr. Speaker Order! The honourable member for Lalor will restrain himself.
MR. MENZIES Senator Paltridge told him that he was not aware of any offer.
i^ r. bhand said that he was referring to th3 offer made a year before. Senator
Paltridge then told him that if he wanted to try to reactivate the old offer,
tat was his business and the business of his board, and not the business of
the Minister. Then, Sir, after this discussion in Orange, Ar. Shand wrote a
latter to the Minister which is, I think though not quite as fascinating as
the first not without interest.
Mr. Bryant " Dear Shane"
MR. MENZIES " Dear Shane" that is how it begins. vWondrfull This is written
to a man who had been threatening and bullying and trying to force them out of
their property. It is the most ludicrous thing in the world. The letter
starts, " Dear Shane". I pronounce it " Shawn", but that is a mere technicality.
" I have given a lot of thought to the talk we had in Orange. I
called at your office when in Canberra last week and found you had
departed for South Lfrica. 1 hope your trip was as interesting as the one
I had there recently. I have been to see Donald Anderson
That is the Director-General, and in all these transactions he is " Dear Donald".
It is all a very happy family business!
" I have been to see Donald Anderson and had a long talk with him.
I now realise some of the tremendous difficulties that you have to cope
with, and hasten to assure you that small as our organization is we want
to help the progressive development of this country and not hinder it.
" Your Department, especially yourself and Donald have done much to
help us develop. I do thank you for all your kindness in the past and
hope you can spare some cf your time to see me in the near future."
It is really the most fascinating story of a wicked, bullying, fraudulent,
lying iinistcr-isn't it that you ever heard in your lifo
Mr. Browne Did he finishwith " fours faithfully"?
MR. ' ENZIES No, " fours sincerely"
Mr. Freoth What was the date of that latter?
MR. MNZIES 12th July of this year.
I do not want to pursue this matter. I set out to deal with the
substance and not with some of the frills. The substance of this matter is tht
it is now said, for reasons that I could only guess at, having regard to the
news of the last day or so, that from the middle of 1960 my Minister was
putting the heat on and delivering ultimatums and trying to force these people,
against their own judgment, to be bought out by a large air industry. Let me
rehearse the facts just once. An offer was made in 1960 and was rejected
out of hand by the board. The articles of association were altered so that no
offer would thereafter be made to the shareholders without the approval of the
directors themselves. No offer was thereafter made. There were two
conferences with these people and each ended up in the writing of letters in
these terms and in this atmosphere. I am asked, as the responsible head of
the Government, as a man who takes groat cride in the loyal service and high
integrity of his r4inistjrs, on this flimsy talk that has been going around to
suspend or dismiss the Minister for Civil Aviation; to appoint a royal
commission to investigate charges which can only be described in all their
nudity, in the way that I have described them the naked facts about them. 
I needed only to do that to explain to the House, and I think to the people,
why I certainly will not dismiss this inistor; why I certainly will not go
through Ull this hocus pocus about appointing a royal commisjon about nothing.
That is my position on this matter. I hope that I have made it clear and not
at undue length. 1 understand that the Minister is, in another place, tabling
a mass of corresoondence on this matter. Honourable members who want to read
it may do so. I have not, of course, undertaken in my limited time of half an
hour to cover the whole of this correspondence that has gone on. I am entering
into no charges against the honourable member for New England ( Mr. Drummond).
He is entitled to his own views on this matter and I am entitled to mine. And
my views on this inatter are t. r clear as crystal. If somebody wants to get rid
of Senator Paltridge on these flimsy allegations, I invite him to get rid of
me at the same time. 



.1/ 074
ELECTION CAMPAIGN ITINErARY
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, today released his itinerary for
the forthcoming Federal election campaign. The itinerary is as follows:
Place
MELBOURNE ADELAIDE 14AGGA CANBERRA CANBERRA CANBERRA LAUNCESTON HOBART
MELBOURNE GELONG MELBOURNE MELBOURNE MELBOURNE PERTH
GE'ALDTON PERTH SYDNEY BEGA SYDNEY SYDNEY SYDNEY SYDNEY
BRISBANE TOWNISVILLE
MELBOURNE MELBOURNE MELBOURNE MELBOUR\ E Date 1961
15th November
16th 17th 19th 19th
20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 24th 25th 26th 27th 27th 27th
28th 29th 30th 1st 2nd 3rd
4th 5th
6th 7th
8th 9th November
November November
November November November November November
November November
November November
November November November
November November November December December December December December December December December December Meeting
Po] icy Speech
Kew City Hall
Unley Town Hall
National Theatre
Theatre Royal
Ford Works
Moonee Ponds Town Hall
Depart for Perth
Forrest Place Time
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
q p. m.
8 p. m.
12,30 p. n..
8 p. m.
p. m.
p. m,
Depart for Sydney
St. Charles Hall
Waverley
City Hall, Brisbane
Wintergarden Warragul To be fixed
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
In addition to these engagements the Prime finister will make a
number of television appearances and radio broadcasts all of which will be
seen or heard in all States.
CAN BERA, October, 1961. 



EMBARGO: Not for publication or broadcast before 6.45 p. m.
Ist Noveberl P. M. No. 52/ L61
IMPROVED HARBOUR #. ND COIL LO.. DING FACILITIES AT
GLAD3TONE
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. R. G. M4enzies
Recently the Premier of Queensland ( Mr. Niclin)
sought Coronrealth financial assistance tc-wards the cost of
improving the facilities at Gladstone H.-rbour for the export of
coal to Japan. There is the prospect that at least one nillion
tons of coal from the Lov. iur Dawson Valley nay be exported
t'rough the port of Gladstone during the next five years. The
improvements it is proposed to carry out include the provision
of new coal loading facilities and the deepening of the port to
pernit access by larger vessels. These irprovements are
estimated to cost œ C405,000.
The Commonwealth Governament has been impressed by the
prospect of substantial additional export earninjs which
improvement of these harbolir and loading facilities would permit.
The Coimmonwealth has therefore offered queensland
financial assistance towards the cost of iz7proving the
facilities at Gladstone. The assistance is contingent upon a
contract being obtained for the export of at least one million
tons of coal from the Lower Dawson Valley within a five-year
period. Subject to this, the Co. rmonwealth will provide a total
of œ 200,000 towards the project. Of this, œ 100,000 will be a
, rant, and the remaining œ 100,000 will be a :: epayable long-terrm
loan. The Queensland Government Las accepted this offer,
CANBiJORRA,
1st November, 1l61. 



EMBARGO: Not for publication or hroadcast bofore-6.45 p. m.
1st NovembNr 126
JR'W SOUTH JILES INTRA-STTU ARLINES
Statement y the rii me Minister, the Rt. 1on. R. G. Menzies
I have written to iMr. Heffron, the Premier of New
South Jales, suggesting to him that having regard to the
important details that have to be rorked out bet. reen the
Commonwealth and New South ; ales in relation to the country air
routes in that State, there should be a deferment of operative
decisions until after the Federal Election. There are two very
good reasons for this.
The first is that, as has been pointed out by Mr.
Borthwick, who made a special enquiry on behalf of the New
South iales Government, the-e are practical difficulties
associated with the p-tting into operation of the plan
recommended by him e. g. fare anomalies, provision of
additional aircraft capacity, payment of appropriate
Commonwealth subsidies, redundancy of staff, etc. Mr. Borthwick
pointed out that ' concurrence and assistance" of the
Commonwealth would be necessary to carry out effectively any
plan adopted by the New South ! ales Government. The
Commonwealth aviation advisers, in the very limited time they
have had, feel that the proposed reallocation of air services in
New South . ales could result in some cases in fare increases, in
the substitution of DC3 aircraft for Fokker Friendships on some
routes, in some possible redundancy in some classes of airline
staff, in requests for increases in subsidy, and quite posibly,
though perhaps temporarily, a curtailment or cessation of
services to certain rural centres in New South Jales. These
are all important matters which I have quite frankly told Mr.
-effron deserve discussion between us before licences are
actually issued. I have no reason to doubt that Mr. Heffron
will see the force of these views.
Second, I always try to adhere to what I believe to
be the sound constitutional rule of practice that, when a
Parliament is dissolved, major decisions should not thereafter
be made by the Government until after the elections. This is a
sound principle, for the arrangements made by the out-going
Government, after the dissolution of Parliament, might, in the
event of the defeat of that Government, prove to be completely
unsatisfactory to the new Government. As nobody can reasonably
say that the matters which arise for discussion between New
South Jales and the Commonwealth in relation to these airlines
are not important and don't give rise to any elements of policy,
I am hoping that Mr. Heffron will agree to my suggestion of
deferment. The problems that have arisen are much more likely
to be solved by sensible and detailed discussion between the
aviation authorities and the airline operators than by public
hostilities. Having said this I want to say something about the
position of the two country airlines in New South -ales. I
understand that it is said in some quarters that the existence
of East-Jest Airlines is threatened. It is certainly not
threatened by my Government. . ie want to have the New South
Tales intra-State airlines system maintained on a sound and
efficient basis with East-West airlines playing its part in a
sound and efficient system. . e believe that the prevailing
interest in this matter of air services is the interest of
country people themselves. le are anxious that that interest
should be studied and given the greatest possible consideration. 
a 2,
The East-Jest Company, which has an honourable record of service
to a number of country districts can be assured that the
Commonwealth Government is in no way trying to render it
ineffective or precarious. On the contrary, re would like to
see it continue in a healthy state just as we vant the pecple
in the country areas served by Airlines of New South 4ales to
continue to have an effective service.
h y Government has in fact and under the present
Minister for Civil Aviation demonstrated its good faith in these
matters. It introduced the system of suOsidy from uhich both
last-Jest Airlines and Airlines of New South jales have
substantially benefitted. It assisted East-lest Airlines to
secure the bulk of the fleet of aircraft which it now employs.
Spaking generally for the moment, and not just in
relation to New South ales, the fact is that the Commonwealth
has throughout these years given great practical assistance in
order to make it possibe for country areas to have the effeptive
and much needed air services which are now in existence, not
least in the more remote areas. Services have been established,
for instance, in lestern Australia, the Northern Territory,
. estern Queensland, to Lord Howe island and the Sass Strait
Islands. The services in these pl. ces Lnd elsewThere are
supported in direct fashion by subsidy payments totalling
œ 500,000 annually. But, over and above that, there have been
many millions of pounds spent in providing airports in country
areas, providing other airways facilities, extending generous
financial help to the owners of country airports, and assisting
in appropriate cases the introduction of turbine-powered aircraft
such as the Fokker Friendship.
Jhatever comes or goes in the present argument in New
South ales, Ye have no intention to abandon subsidy arrangements
for either airline. All that we have said, and very properly, 7s
that there should be no assumption that additional routes would
automatically carry fixed entitlements to additional subsidy.
The question of subsidy must always be most carefully consideied
for it involves the application of public funds. However we are
not contemplating any proposal that the Cornmonwoalth should, in
respect of these two airlines, pay in total less subsidy than in
the past. To lend point to this, I now state that the short
period of deferment which I have suggested to Mr. Heffron, would
not hurt anybody because the Commonwealth would, in the meantime,
accept a liability to pay subsidy to each airline at the current
1960/ 61 rates. I hope that these reasonable proposals will be acceptAd
There is no profit in public disputes on such matters but there
is great importance to be attached to the proper interests of all
those citizens who are now served by each of the two airlines.
CAUN S ,! AI
1st November, 1961. 



MR. E. C. A. BR W, 1
Statement by the Prime 1inister. the 1t. Hon. RG. Menzies
On 27th September, 1961 the Director-General of Posts
and Telegraphs, in pursuance of Section 56 of the Public Sorvice
Act, charged Ed-rard Charles Alfred Brown, Director of Posts and
Telegraphs in Queensland with the following offences:
That between 28th July and 31st July, 1.961 Mr. Brown
was guilty of improper conduct in using for other than
official purposes a motor car belonging to the Postmaster-
General's Department.
That between 6th August and 8th August, 1961 Mr. Brown
was guilty of improper conduct in that he sought th. e
assistance of Colin Douglas Manley, Chief Investigation
Officer of the Postmaster-General's Department in Queensland
in fabricating reasons to justify the use by him between
28th July and 31st July of the motor car and
That betwieen bOh August and lth September, 1961 he
was guilty of improper conduct in that having been asked for
an explanation of the use by him between 28th July and 31st
July of a motor car belonging to the Postmaster-General's
Department he made false and misleading statements.
On 27th September the Director-General of Posts and
Telegraphs suspended Mr. Brown and notified the Public Service
Board of the charges and suspension.
Mr. Brown in writing admitted the truth of the charges,
and subsequently was given the opportunity of placing before the
Public Service Board matters . hich he considered to be relevant
to the recommendation the Board was required, under the Public
Service Act, to make to the Governor-General. A similar
opportunity was given to the Director-General of Posts and
Telegraphs who had, on llth October, forwarded a written
submission on the matter to the Public Service Board.
Until the time when the charges were laid Mr. Brown
haad a satisfactory record of service with the Commonwealth.
The Public Service Board, having completed elaborate
inquiries into all matters concerning the charges, has found that
Mr. Broain abused the authority vested in him as Director of Posts
and Telegraphs, Queensland, and has betrayed the trust and
confidence which a Permanent Head must place in a senior officer.
The Board noted that these are serious breaches of the
standard of conduct expected of a senior officer and on 26th
October recommended to the Governor-General that he be:
removed from the office of Director of Posts and
Telegraphs, Second Division, Queensland in uhich
position he received a salary of f3,650 per amum
reduced to an office of Engineer, Class 4, salary
scale œ 2,748 œ 2,878 per annum, Third Division,
Engineering Division, Central Office, Postmaster-
Generalts Department, Melbourne
paid salary at the rate of C2,878 per annum ( subject
to the variations in salary prescribed by reulation
106A of the Public Service regulations)
An Order in these terms was made by the Governor-
General in Council today and the decisions will take effect from
today. CANBERRA2nd November, 1961. 


SOUTH AUSTRALL-IN CHAMBER OF Mii. JF:: CTURES DINNER, ADLLIDETH NOV M3ER JSpeech by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon, R. G. MenziesSir, Mr. Premier Mr. Leader of the Opposition et hoc genusomne. ( That used to be Latin in my timel)I have hpd a most interesting night tonight. All thetime I have e-n saying to myself " ihat should I say?" and havinggot a rough iaea about it I have then heard this one and thatone and the otner one pluck all the food out of the basket, andI find myself left with only the crumbs that fall from the richman's tablel If I might start at the end, I ' want to say about youngBob Anderson that having heard him tonight in full cry I hopehe never gets into the ' enate..., I won't dwell on it any morethan that. I beg of him as a frieuid not to becc're a Senatorbecause if he were in my House I could deal with him, but I findit increasingly difficult to deal with Senators I hope you allunderstand this travail.Then, of course, the Premier who has been a Premierfor 23 years, seasoned not a novice like myself who has been aPrime Minister man and boy only for l1~ years made a powerfulspeech ( as he always does) and he went to some pains to explainto you that South Australia is no longer a claimant State. Youknow I've been waiting for that for a long time! When I thinkof all the development that has occurred in this State, when Ithink how increasingly difficult it is for me to get a majorityin this State, I've been waiting for the time when Tom would say" We are no longer a claimant State". But although no longerclaimant, you take it from me South Australia is still clamant( Laughter, applause)In my earlier days when I was at school as no doubtquite a few of you were in your own time somebody told 3story, do you remember, about the old Bishop asking about : heAngles and the Saxons who came in after the ancient Britons andhe was asked what they were, Angles or Angels a ratherdifficult problem ( It's like claimant and clamant) and he said," Non Angli sed angeli". Now that was rather flattering; forthem to be converted from Angles to angels was something thatrequired a theological effort on the part of the Bishop. Butall that is needed in South Australia to convert South Australiafrom being claimant into clamant is a characteristically nontheologicalexercise by the Premier of South Australial( Laughter, applause)Jell, Sir, I've listened in and I've collected rhatevercrumbs I could find. I remember being here two years ago Ithink two years ago. if I rememlber correctly ( but you willcorrect me, won't you?). I was tolerably popular, I think so,two years ago. And I went away feeling very content because Ithought that it was the finest Dinner of any Chamber ofManufactures that I had ever attended in the world. And youknow, oddly enough I forgive you for everything you've beensaying in the last twelve months I still think solThis is a remarkable occasion, and a remarkable place.I did not know ( so brutishly ignorant am I) that SouthAustralia produced the first Chamber of Manufactures I mighthave known it. Dear me, I haven't been in Parliament longabout 33 years one way and another, but I might have known thatall the troubles that I suffer from were bound to begin here!
You know it's ironical to think that in 1869 25 yearsbefore I was born the seeds of my present troubles were beingscattered in this State! And it is a tremendous thing toreflect that although at that time probably the manufacturers ofMelbourne and the free trade manufacturers in Sydney ( as theywere at that time) regarded South Australia as being ratherbrash. It is a remarkable thing to recall that in these lastyears or to be precise Mr. Premier, in these last 23 years,this State has become a powerful manufacturing State, so that itno longer needs to be looked at as the young brother who israther speaking nimself, but is, itself, a greatrcanufacturi..., -ommunity, a well-balanced community. Not acommunity that forgets about primary industry because, just asthere was a temptation years ago for primary industry to forgetabout manufacturing, so I want to say to you, never forget aboutprimary industry yourself because I am a believer in thebalanced economy of this country.If something happens that is weakening to the primaryindustries of Australia, the Australian manufacturers will findit more quickly than anybody else. If something happened torestrain the development of manufacturing industry in Australiathe man on the land would feel it more rapidly than anybody else,: Je are no longer to engage in the false dichotomy that you arefor one or the other I am for both; and I am sure that you arefor both. It is the fact that Australia has developed a balancedeconomy that has made us what we are today in spite oftemporary vicissitudes, a powerful and well balanced and strongnational economy. But we have problems in front of us. Some referencehas been made to the Common Market. I want to say, Sir thatI am afraid that an awful lot of people talk about the CommonMarket just as they might talk about the blessed word" Mesopotamia" without quite knowing what it's about. Ireceive tLh most earnest letters from the most earnest peoplewho say, " What about a Pacific Common Market?". You know, itsounds grand doesn't it? "' dhy don't we have a common market withJapan and India and South East Asia? This is the answer", towhich I always reply that although I am not incapable ofcertain stupid willingness to engage in a brawl, I wouldn't liketo have to look the Australian manufacturers in the eye and tellthem that I had established an internal free trade customs unionwith the countries of Asia. I think that is right enough,isn't it? Here we are, a great trading nation, most of ourexports primary products, but a perceptible and growingpercentage of our exports manufactured or processed goods, herewe are looking at the problem of the European Common Market,lith Great Britain negotiating to go in, tthiet ho ne problemthat remains at all times as to the terms on which GreatBritain will go in and the terms will be terms that affectfirst, Commonwealth trade, second, British agriculture, andthird, the European Free Trade area because Great Britain hassix associates in that area whose interests she must attend tobut from our point of view it is the interests of theCommonwealth countries that are of first importance.I am not here to make a prophecy about these matters.All I want to say to you is that ever since the Goverrn-mnt ofthe United Kingdom departed from the old statement thatagriculture was not to be in these negotiaticatns and began aprocess of negotiation which includes agricultural products, myown Government this is not a Party matter I'm sure that Icould speak for everybody in the Commonwealth Parliament hasbeen working on this matter, Ministers, officials, in London,here, with the express purpose of protecting, so far as we can,
the patterns of trade which have made Australia, small as we maybe, one of the first ten intern: tional trading nations in theworld. I don't think that is always understood, that inabsolute terms, not per capita, but in absolute terms, thiscountry of ours in which you have such faith and I have suchfaith, is one of the first ten international trading nations inthe world. ( Applause)We have our own patterns of trade: we sell a greatdeal to the old country, we sell a considerable amount toEuropean countries: we buy a great deal from the old countryand from European cuuntries, and it is our simple but difficulttask, to sLu..' for our own interests on these matters -notpreferring them to the interests of the peace of the world orthe strength of Europe, but as we are bound to do, standing forAustralia and Australia's future.Therefore this thing won't come to a head in a day ora week, or a month, or perhaps in two or three nonths and all Iwant to say to you is ' hat I hope that in all these matters thatwill be discussed we wi-l be able, whoever may be in office torepresent Australia with sanity and good judgment and with hebacking of the Australian people with the backing ofmanufactures with the backing of people who are concerned withgrowing wheat or butter or meat or wool, or whatever it may be.Because I believe that these negotiations are the most importanteconomic discussions concerning us that will have occurred inthe lifetime of any man present tonight. Far more importantthan the Ottawa negotiations, tremendously important, becausehere we are witnessing a movement in Great Britain, our mothercountry,which must lead to an enormous integration of the wholeof IWestern Europe; which must lead to a powerful associationbetween countries, some of whom have been at war with eachother in our own lifetime. And in all these matters we inAustralia, while not denying the importance of a powerful Europe,are properly concerned to see that industries built up in our owncountry on the pattern of British trade are not to be ignored,not to be set on one side, but are to be treated with fairness,with understanding and given some opportunity not just ofretreating a little but of expanding in the future.Sir, these are tremendously difficult matters. Butthere is one other that I would like to say a word about. Whatdo we export from Australia? ' Jell of course we export wool andwe export wheat, and we export meat and butter and dried fruits.We export a great number of commodities of that kind and weexport some manufactured goods, " Some" growing, growing, Iagree, but still only " some".Now why is South Australia no longer a claimant State?Because South Australia has developed secondary industries inbalance with primary industries. Why is it that today inAustralia we need not fear that another 1929 will produce adisastrous depression? The answer is because today in Australiawe stand on two feet ( you quoted my words on this matter, Sir),we stand on two feet. Je are a great manufacturing country,we are a great primary producing country; and if the wind blowscold on the one it doesn't necessarily blow cold on the other.! e have some balance, we can take up the shock. Je couldn'ttake up the shock in 1929. But if we can't take up the shock in1961 and 1962 then it will be incompetence on our part becausehave all the foundations for it wre stand on two feet,But in the world of exports we don't not yet, not yet,Why don't we export manufactured goods? Now we've all spokenabout this, haven't we, before today and somebody says, " Oh, yes,this is a very good idea, it's a very useful idea". -Je have,within the limits of our imagination and competence done what we
can and we will continue to do more things as we think of them,to develop, to encourage, the export of manufactured andprocessed goods, But why don't we export more? Is it becausewe are not as good at making things as they are elsewhere? Idon't believe it for a moment. Nobody can go around a greatfactory in Australia and look at it, see the people on the bench,talk to the people who are in charge, without saying to himself," But this is magnificent! There is a spirit there is avivacity in this thing'" Why can't we export? Somebody says," Well of course there are other countries that have a much biggerturnover" and I if we just sit down comfortably and say," Jell, he " 71. s more therefore he can produce more cheaply",that will be tne end of the question. I really want to say toyou 3entlemen, because I am a seetling mass of confidence in thefuture of this country I just want to say to you: Don't adopt adefeatist attitude on these matters. It may be that in order toget exports somebody may need to take a little less piofit,somebody may have to achieve exports without profit, or, if youlike at some technica] loss. But we will never be a greatcountry in the world, e. oncmically, until we are supplying thismassive mar! ret which lies just outside our doors,With all the skill that we have, with all thecompetence that we have, don't imagine for one moment thatbecause we pay people good wages ( as we should) and 4ive themgood conditions ( as we should) that we are contracting ourselvesout of the markets of the world. I don't believe it. I thinkthat this business of exporting the products of our factories isthe great matter which in the second half of this century willdetermine the future of Australia. I believe that, I believethat passionately. And if the day comes, not in my time -( butthen unlike the Premier I am not immortal!)-these things won'tcome in my time, I don't very greatly mind that but I wouldlike to cock my ear up from whatever strange place it is that Iam in in another 40 years and discover that just as in my ownlife time Australia stood squarely on primary and secondary feetin her internal economy, sc she had taken her place in the worldstanding on the same two feet, Because when she does, you seewhat will happen, Why do we have troubles about the balance of payments?Why do we have our overseas reserves running down? Why do crazyGovernments at Canberra get worried about the balance ofpayments? though importers apparently are not. Why? Why?Because, you see, w e believe and it is an old-fashioned beliefinnational solvency. We believe that a nation like Australiaought never to get into a position in which she can't expect topay her debts abroad her debts for imports as well as otherthings as they fall due. What we need to do in Austialia isto get over all these fluctuations, which are inevitable in thepresent picture. Ie can't control the price of wool re can'tcontrol whether there is going to be a drcught or noZ andtherefore the sales of whbet, we can't control what the world willpay for meat or for butter or for eggs; and as an exporter ofprimary products we therefore stand right out don't we, in thewind and the weathero If the price level falls then our overseasincome falls acutely; and if it falls acutely then we are rightup against the problem as to how we are to cut down ourexpenditure on imports and we get right back to the oldargument about tariffs and import licensing and all the rest ofit. Now these are important matters, but speaking as thetemporary head of the Government of the Commonwealth ofAustralia for another five weeks speaking in that capacity Iwant to say to you that I don't like this state of affairs. Iwould like to think that in due course we could take a
fluctuation in the price of wool we could take a fluctuation inthe world price of some primary commodity because we had built upan export income of hundreds of millions in the products of ourfactories? the products of our mines all these things on whichwe are doing great and useful exploratory work today.I hope, Sir, that I maake the point that I am trying tomake. There can be no avoidance of emergency economic measuresso long as the economic emergency is one a-ainst which you haveno protection. The right way to get a protection against it isto encourage everybody who manufactures in Australia and Ithink wvre can do it least as -, ell as anybody else in the worldandto pers every one of them to get into this business ofexporting, to get into the business of making people in Southcast Asia, or whatever it may be, expect to buy Australian goodsbecause they are Good, because they are vell made, because theyhave quality, and because they have a price that is competitive.Is this impossible? If I thought it was impossible Imust confess I should go home and die in despair. I don'tbelieve it is impossiblf.. When I look back over what hashappened in this country of mine and yours in my own lifetime,14hen I see the enormous development that has occurred, the greatsurge of productive effort, the great increase in livingstandards, I adopt as my mottc, that " nothing in my country isimpossible. ( Applause) And if that is right, and I make bold tosay, Sir, that it is right, then the kind of argument that wehave engaged in in 1961, 1960, with reserves runningdown andemergency measures becoming necessary, will be looked back upon,in another 20 or 30 years, as a sort of old wives' tale, just apiece of ancient history. Just as we look back on what happened.in 1929, when we didn't stand on two feet in Australia, as apiece of ancient history, why shouldn't our sons look back on thepassing problems of 1961 as a piece of ancient history?Here we are growing in population enormously. Doeseverybody ' n Australia realise that we have received more newcitizens into Australia in the last l5 years than America didpro rata in the great age of iimigration into that country? Arewe a+ iare of that? Don't we know that here we are living in acountry which is increasing its net population rather morrapidly than Japan is? tJe're a bit inclined to look about us ina melancholy fashion, to think about the problems that thispopulation growth imposes on us. This is a magnificent thing, aproud thing. It means that lO millions today, 20 milliorr thenmilliorr, we can look at the future with confidence. Am I tobe told, or are you to be told, that with that -ro-th in front ofus we are incapable of meeting the competition of the world inmarkets of hundreds of millions of people, with steadily risingstandards of living, only a few miles away from us? Sir, I don'tbelieve it. 4hat we need in Australia is a little less wingeingabout our temporary troubles, and a great deal more honest beliefin ourselves. This is a great country we may have confidence in it.And the first thing to do to have confidence i your own countryis to have confidence in yourself. ( Applause



-lqNo._ _ 261
QUEEN'S VISIT TO GHANA
Statement by the Prime M inister, the it. Hon. RoG. Monzies
I have, during the past three weeks, kept closely in
touch with matters affecting the projected visit of Her Majesty
the Queen to Ghana. I have received reports from the Australian
High Commissioner in Accra and have exchanged messages with Mr.
Macmillan. le all agree that visits by Her Majesty to the
countries of the Commonwealth are of the greatest possible
significance and value. There is a natural and lively concern
in all parts of the Commonwealth, not least in Australia, that
visits should be made and that each visit should be the greates'
ponsible success4 In accordance with custom, the principal
responsibility for arrangements in connection with The Queen's
visit to Chana rests with the Governments of Ghana and of Great
Britain. Clearly, the safety of The Queen is of the very first
importance for all of us. It is quite clear that the Governments
most directly concerned with the organization of the visit share
this view completely, and that their judgment will be most
carefully formed,
CANBvRRA,
8th November, 1961. 



GIFT TO ACADEMY OF SCEijCE
Statementb_ i ! eij. is t er, . t heHfi__, ML. z j(.
These are magnificent gifts. They are most
appropriately made to the Australian Academy of Science,
which is a bouy of most distinguished Australian scientists,
and, as I know, is playing an increasingly important part in
the advancement of science in Australia.
Mro ecker is a man of means, with a high sense of
civic responsibility. ' is spectacular generosity, so
intelligently directed, deserves the greatest possible praise;
its value will continue for a long time,
C... N3. JRRA,
8th November, 1961. P, M. No, ) 1I 



Weekly Index
No, 44
Week Ending_
11th November, 1961
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Weekly Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in
Canberra
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Nov. 8. No. 1142 ACTING SECRETARY-GENERAL OF UNITED NATIONS
10 No. 1151 COLOMBO PLAN CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE MEETING.
The Treasurer, The Rt. Hon. Harold Holt.
Nov. 9 No. 1144. THE TREND OF BUSINESS A SURVEY 12 MONTHS
AFTER THE CORRECTIVE MEASURES OF NOVEMBER,
1960.
8 No. 1153 AUSTRALIAN LOAN IN THE NETHERLANDS
The Minister for Nati'nal Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.
Nov. 8 No, 1143 SCOPE OF PETROLEUM SEARCH SUBSIDY EXTENDED
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck,
Nov. 9 No. 1149 TEACHERS FOR PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator the Hon. Shane Paltridge
Nov. 6 No. 1137 KING ISLAND AERODROME EXTENSIONS
The Postmaster-General; The Hon. C. W. Davidson
Nov, 7 No. 1140 AUSTRALIAN BRO,. DCASTING CONTROL BOARD
APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
Nov. 10 Nc. 1152A AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL SCHOLARSHIPS
The Minister for
Nov. 5 No. 1133
5 No. 1134
6 No. 1135
The Minister for
Nov. 6 No. 1138
10 No. 1152
7 No. 11411
TI
Nc T N TI N TI N Health, Dr. the Hon. D. A. Cameron
FLUORIDATION OF WATER SUPPLIES
VOLUNTA'Y ADVERTISING CODE ADOPTED
N. H. M. R. C. RECOMMENDATIONS
the Army, the Hon. J. O. Cramer
SCHOOL CADETS FOR MACQUIRIE ISLAND
OVERSEAS OFFICERS TO ATTEND ARMY SIGNALS
CONFERENCE
CHANGES IN APRMY APPOINTMENTS
ie Minister for Repatriation, the Hon. F. M. Osborne.
ov. 7 No. 1139 WAR PENSIONS FOR WAR NEUROSIS
9 No. 1145 YOUNGEST PATIENT
9 No. 1147 REPATRIATION FILM TO BE SHOWN
he Minister for Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
ov. 9 No. 1146 NAVY TO HELP RECOVER R. A. A. F. JET
10 No. 1150 BIG NAVAL TASK GROUP BEGINS EXERCISE
he Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert Opperman
ov. 6 No. 1136 PRE-CHRISTMAS ROAD SAFETY CAMPAIGN
ae Minister for Air, Senator the Hon. Harrie Wade.
ov. 5 No, 1132 RAAF FOR MANILA AIR SHOW
Department of National Development
Nov. 9 No. 1148 WOMAN SCIENTIST RETIRES
With the Compliments of
The Government Eublic Relations Office,
Parliement House, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 



61/ 082
^ 4 POLICY SPEECH
by
TTE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
at
THE CITY HALL KEW
;, EDNESDAf. A H NOVEMBR. 1961
On December 9, though you will be voting for individual
candidates, the end result will be that you choose a Government
-for the natl ' n.
I do not propose to put before you a long list of
promises. After 12 years the A. L. P. can easily make a series of
brand new offers without saying where the new hundreds of
millions are to come frkim; though they will, of course-come
from you. For Governments have no money to spend excep6 that
which has been earned and paid over, by tax or loan, by the men
and women of Australia.
But we are a government whose policies and ideas have
been for 12 years put into practice. For us to come along now
with a string of new promises would excite your ridicule. You
could well say: " You have had years to do these things. Why
didn't you think of them before?"
We offer you good government. The essential quality
of good government is that it should have sound and intelligible
principles, that it should pursue great national and social
objectives with resoluteness, that it should be able to meet the
storms that arise from time , o time with a proper sense of
navigation, that it should have cohesion in its own ranks and a
strong sense of mutual loyalty.
If a government has these qualities it will deal with
such matters as social services, medical benefits, repatriation
provisions in a liberal and just spirit. You vi 11 remember the
tremendous improvements in such matters which we have initiated
and carried through. Very few of them were ever mentioned by us
in a Policy Speech.
TonightI will lay before you a statement of principles
and ideas which have been followed and, in our belief, ought to
continue to be followed for the good of Australia.
I could speak to you for hours on the national and
social achievements of the last decade. The overwhelming majoriy
of Australians have benefitted from them, and will remember them.
I will not take your time tonight in reciting them. My brief
reference to them is made merely to provide the foundation for
my main purpose, which is to clarify the basic nature of the
continuing policies which have contributed powerfully to these
results. I say " continuing policies", because the one great
promise you will find in this speech is that these policies will
go on, ever strengthening the present and building for the
future. There can never be anything static about a policy of
national development; that would be a contradiction in terms.
That is why, tonight, -ihen I refer to the past, it is the living
past, leading inevitably to the living future. It is not enough
for us as a Government or as a nation, to say: " We have livedJ"
Je must feel the excitement of living and working and planning
and building. 
2.
2o
We are not-opposed tc the dismal doctrines of
socialism for merely theoretical reasons. rJe are for
competitive free enterprise because it is dynamic; because it
tackles new problems and creates new industries and makes
progress and profit by efficiency and the spirit of adventure.
Governments can do much to create an economic climate
in which things will grow. Within the limits of social justice
and national necessity, private citizens ought to be encouraged
to get on with the job free of the threat that if they succeed
too well some Social. it theorists will want to take them over,
de need to have a mental picture of the kind of
Australia want to see in another ten or twenty years; a
nation strong, respected, and friendly, and free; with a much
greater population, well-housed and fed and clothed and happy;
a producing nation drawing from the good earth a powerful
contribution to the materials which human beings need; a great
trading nation with such markets abroad for the products of
Australian fields and factories that her international solvency
is steady and secure; a well-ordered, because a self-ordered
country with responsible , overnment, a country in which
extremists and the promotors of division and hatred die for want
of material to sustain them.
It is because of one vision that wie have one total
policy; not a thing of shreds and patches and cash promises for
next week or next month, but a single conception of which what
we have done was an expression, and what we aim to do is a
continuing projection.
Let me illustrate this, After we had announced our
economic measures of November last, I indicated that we were not
confusing stability with stagnation; that although we auld not
in 1961 find large additional sums of money for works, we
wanted to confer with the States for the planning of new
enterprises which would-increase export trade and the national
: realth. Thereafter we began negotiations with several State
Governments on large and complex matters. It would have been
simple enough to pursue a time-table which would have enabled me,
tonight, to make some dramatic announcements in relation to
national works to be carried out during the term of the next
Parliament. But we prefer ( as you do) performance to promise,
Accordingly, during the last few weeks of Parliament, we completed
some large negotiations and secured authorising legislation
relating to The modernisation and re-building of the Mt. Isa-
Townsville-Collinsville railway in North Queensland.
This will enable a most remarkable development in
mining, particularly copper, in Mt. Isa, a development
on which the ompany itself will spend over œ 40m. and
which therefore represents the kind of mutual
co-operation between government and private enterprise
to which our policies are directed. It will add
scores of millions to our exports. It will be the
greatest specific development in Queensland, that area
so full of possibilities, for many years. It will be
of great value to Northern development generally, de
have voluntarily contracted to find initial capital to
the extent of
The mechanical improvement of coal ports normally a
purely State responsibility in New South Jales and
Queensland. This will permit of greatly increased
exports of coal. The work to be done at Newcastle, 
3.
Balmain, Port Kembla and Gladstone is being
substantially assist d from Commonwealth funds.
The equipment of the Broken Hill-Port Pirie ralway,
chiefly in South Australia, with modern rolling stock
and diesel locomotives. We have, by an agreement with
South Australia, agreed to find the initial capital for
this important work.
The establishment in Western Australia of an iron and
steel industry which should open a dramatic new era of
Western d~~ jlopment. Great iron ore deposits will be
opened up at Koolyanobbing, west of Kalgoorlie, to
ripply an iron and steel works to be built at Kwinana.
A tandard gauge railway will be built from Kalgoorlie
to Kwinana through Perth.
The overall cost of this immense scheme i. s
estimated at œ 42m. of which the Commonwealth will
initially find
In addition to the œ fm. which we had already found for
the development of the iorthern part of ' estern
Australia, we agreed to find additional money for
export beef roads. We have just secured Parliamentary
approval for the provision of œ 5m. to the State of
Queensland for similar purposes.
Here we have, going on over the next few years, a
total expenditure by Governments and the companies
concerned of the better part of œ 200m. of which the
Commonwealth Government is financing œ 70m. The most
satisfying aspect of all the negotiations has been the
forward-looking enthusiasm of all parties with no
pessimists to be found. The announcement, in an
election speech, of such a programme, coming on top of
the scores of millions to be spent on such enterpriscs
as the -reat Snowy Mountains hydro-electric and
irrigation headworks scheme, would indeed be
sensational and arresting. I hope it will be no less
so because we have not thought fit to let it rest in
promise, but have already assured its performance,
And let it be remembered that such works are themselves
the means for future works and development and consequent
enterprise, for many years to come.
Thus, the Snowy Mountains Scheme, though its planned
production of electric power is perhaps best known, will provide,
for New South Jales, Victoria and South Australia, increased
water storages and supplies for irrigation and general purposes,
The irrigation future of the Murray and the Murrumbidgee areas
will be assured. For South Australia, wator is particularly
important. The Snowy Scheme is here of great value. But, with
the growth of that State, new problems of water may well arise
in the next few years Accordingly, the question of another great
Murray storage at Chowilla, near the South Australian border, has
been examined by the River Murray Caters Commission. This would
create the greatest single water-storage in Australia and would
produce benefits to all three States. I have already announced
that, when a detailed scheme has been agreed upon, the
Commonwealth will find a quarter of the total cost, at present
estimated at œ l14m, or
ie will, within our financial capacity, antinue to be
interested in works which will add to Australia's producti've
capacity for the earning of export income or the saving of
imports. 
Some of the matters I have referred to are part of a
* pattern-of Northern Australian development. : e believe that for
the sake of our national future we must develop and use the
North. believe that its possibilities, particularly in
minerals ( the search for which we will continue actively to
encourage), and in cattle, are enormous. By co-operation between
State Governments, Territorial authorities, the Commonwealth
Government, and those engaged in industry, national growth in
the North should be a great feature of our next decade of
development. In Australia, of all continents, water supply, storage
and use are of paramount importance. The Commonweal~ h Government
has conducte, active research into water resources both in the
Northern Territory, rhere valuable results have been achieved,
and in the Snowy Mountains, through the Authority. . le think that
the time has arrived for the co-ordination of methods of research
and the pooling of the important information which can be
obtained. Already much good work is being done in various
States. I propose to ' like up with the Premiers and with the
lerritorial authorities * he idea of establishing a Jater
Resources Council so that the highest level of basic information
on our Australian water resources can be secured and made
available. In mineral development, our Department of National
Development haF given notable leadership.
Back in 1950 Australia was importing coal: today it
is a substantial exporter. The story of uranium is, I hope,
well known, crowned as it is by the work of the Atomic Energy
Commission, whose research and productive activities enjoy world
repute. Great resources of bauxite have been uncovered. Great
alumina and aluminium enterprises are in the making.
Selectively permitted exports of iron ore are leading to the
discovery of new deposits. le are encouraging, in the most
practical ways, the search for oil, sustained by optimism. In
our time, scores of millions of pounds have been invested in oil
refineries, which have achieved an export capacity, and are in
fact earning substantial export income. . ho would have
contemplated this a few years ago.' Nothing can prevent the most
amazing developments in the next decade so long as we avoid the
dead hand of reactionary socialism. These are great days for
men of enterprise, who know : rhere they want to go, and are
prepared to battle to get there.
I can imagi-ne somebody saying that this talk of
building for tomorrow is inconsistent with our policies of
November 1960, Those policies were designed not to impede
progress, but to remove impediments to progress.
An inflationary boom increases the cost of delelopmental
works, makes it more difficult to raise loan moneys for
essential works, raises the costs of our export commodities
encourages land speculation nd other forms of gambling, and
discourages savings and investment.
My government was not prepared to permit a boom to
roar on to the inevitable burst, Te felt that it should be
quelled, and a normal state of affairs restored. e knew that
this would be unpleasant for some, but we believed that our
actions would protect many more people against a collapse, and
that the progress of national development would in consequence
go on more soundly and steadily, 
What were -the facts?
1. The boom was evidenced by rising prices-and shortages
of labour. In 1960 the Consumer Price Index rose by
no less than 4.5% a greater increase than during the
preceding three years taken together. In justice to
those on fixed incomes and to the exporting industries
which cannot pass on cost increases to their customers,
action had to be taken. Our measures, unpleasant in
themselves, have succeeded. During this year the
increase in the Consumer Price Index first slowed down
and then stopped. The September figures recently
published showed an actual fall in the Index., 4e have,
a-at the present time, met and defeated inflation.
2. Our overseas reserves were running down at a
disturbing rate. If that process had been allGoed to
continue, Australia would not have been abLe to pay for
her imports. Our economic measures gradually :* ut back
the volume of imports, so that our overseas iLn. nds at
the end of 19t-61 were much greater than t!; ey wre a
year before. For the September 1961 quarte ( normally
a slack season for exports) exports exceeded imports
by no less than œ 36m. So the second problem was
successfully dealt with,
3. The third problem concerned the financing of public
works in the States. These are of immense importance
for the whole basis of industrial and community living.
water, power, roads, schools, hospitals, and a host of
other things. Under modern procedures created by my
own Government, the States get the whole of the
Government Loan raisings plus whatever the difference
may be between those raisings and the approved
programme the difference being financed by the
( Common: ealth. The greater the shortage which the
Commonwealth has to find, the greater the burden upon
the taxpayers, and therefore the slower the rate of
national progress. An inflationary boom is an
adverse element in the public loan market, where
people invest fixed sums of money at fixed rates of
interest, The effect of our policies was shown in the
latest Commonwealth Loan, which was heavily oversubscribed.
These were all great results. As we achieved them, we
reduced the emergency measures. The last survivor, the
restrictions upon Bank Credit, came to an end, for all practical
purposes, two weeks ago.
The most discussed by-product of our policies has been
come temporary unemployment.
The employment position has, for some months, been
steadily improving, and should continue to do so. Indeed, the
latest official reports show a further marked reduction in those
registered for employment, and a real increase in registered
vacancies. It is a painful business to stop an inflationary boom.
Some who have profited by the boom lose some of their business or
profits. Some of their employees have to seek other employment.
For the men and women so rendered temporarily unenployesd we
have a profound sympathy. In spite of aggestions in some
quarters, we have never forgotten or under-estimated their
personal problem. Percentage statistics are of no comfort to
them, though such statistics must be taken into account by
governments responsible for the overall economic state of the 
6,
nation.. But we are continually concerned with the position-of
the individual citizen. That concern is our greatest reason for
political existence. Our special financial provisions in recent
months show that our objective is the useful employment of all
who are willing and able to work. ie can point with pride. to the
fact that there has never been a period of 12 years in the
history of Australia when employment was so high, when so much
development occurred, and wrhen true living standards rose so much.
Our opponents magnify the employment problem for
election purposes, It will be for you to decide whether you
believe that business prosperity, employment opportunities,
capital investment, national growth and international trade will
be greater -ider a Socialist administration.
I said " socialist" and I mean it. The A. L. P. will
" pipe down" on it for the next three weeks. They do not want
you to remember that the Socialist policy, in action, would
bring about such confusion in private industry, and such
distrust in the minds of investors, both overseas and at home,
that unemployment would increase heavily and the national
progress would be halted. This is no theory on my part. Only in
June 1961, one Labour Member, the brightest feather in the
A. L. P's left wing, already an elected member of Labour's front
bench, had this to say
" How can economic power be transferred? This is the real
question. Broadly, the answer is by controls, by public
enterprise, and by nationalisation."
My troubled opponent, the Leader of the Opposition,
cries for Constitutional amendments which will enable this
objective to be achieved.
The truth is that our opponents are professional
pessimists. We believe that the national economy is healthy, that
there is no reason for pessimism, and that the greatest enemies
of future progress are those who prophesy disaster and try to
persuade you that a depression is just anund the corner. Such
foolish people are not those who have built Australia or who have
a proper understanding of its future.
Australia is one of the 10 leading trading nations. ; e
generate a great demand for imports, most of which are materials
and plant for local manufacturing, : 4e pay for these by our
exports and other moneys secured abroad. Because of our major
dependence on primary exports, our balances of payments tend to
vary sharply with world prices or seasonal conditions at home.
Such variations sometimes give rise to Government measures which
you, and we, find irritating and disturbing.
Yet such problems will continue to occur unless we can
increase our exports and diversify their character, with a
growing emphasis upon manufactured and processed goods, the
prices of which do not, as a rule, fluctuate wildly,
Agricultural and pastoral products will for years continue to
predominate in our export earnings; we will do all in our power
to stimulate their efforts; but until -we increase and vary our
exports we will have periodical balance of payment troubles,
Je created a special Department of Irade five years
ago. It has already achieved remarkable success. 
At-the Commonwealth Conference at Montreal my colleague
Mr.-McEwen, gave outstanding leadership in moves to persuade the
great industrial countries to join in schemes for stabilising
the world prices of export commodities such as wheat and sugar
and other bulk commodities of which Australia is not an exporter.
These efforts were strongly reinforced by Mr. Holt on his recent
important mission abroad. Je will continue our efforts in the
commodities field, and can see signs of progress.
Meanwhile, our policy of export expansion continues.
We have expanded ouir Trade Commissioner services, opening
successful new posts in over 20 new places in all continents.
Tne Trade publicity vote has increased 60 times. de have
instituted . Lie Export Payments Insurance Corporation, which
already insures transactions into no less than 120 countries. We
have provided substantial tax incentives to the export of
manufactures. Je have organised and are organising major trade
or survey missions. Studies by the Export Development Council and by trade
consultants suggest that there are promising prospects for
increasing exports by establishing Australian warehouses in
selected markets overseas. The Government will examine, in
conjunction with interested exporters, whether practical metods
can be devised to enable these additional export facilities to
be developed. The -overnarent will of course continue its policy of
protecting economic and efficient Australian industry through the
Australian Tariff Board.
However, we do not regard the present tariff system as
static. During 1960 the Government created means for providing
temporary tariffs for industries which might otherwise be
seriously damaged pending normal review and report by the Tariff
Board. It will also examine possible ways of overcoming the
particular difficulties of certain Australian industries where
production efficiency and a reasonable cost level require the
maintenance of a continuing high volume of output.
In all these dynamic processes, re rely upon the
encouragement of individual effort and investment. True, we
continue to be participants in great programmes of public works.
3ut such programmes do not restrict private enterprise; on the
contrary, they provide the essentials without which private
enterprise could not expand.
Jhat does the Labour Party offer you in exchange for
these principles and ideas?
It wants to solve balance of payment problems, not by
increasing our export earnings but by licensing imports. That
system, which is applicable only when balance of payments
problems render it unavoidable, is in its nature arbitrary and
bureaucratic. The Labour Party would also, it appears, use
arbitrary import licensing to afford temporary protection to
industries threatened by imports. Je prefer the scientific
fixing of tariffs by the system to which I have referred.
Labour has already made it clear, by its astonishing
list of financial . romises, that it believes in inflationary
finance, for which wo will all pay,, It exhibits hostility to
capital investment from overseas, and even to Government
borrowing abroad. Such a crazy policy ignores the needs of a
growing country with a limited population. 
8,
The record private capital inflow of recent years has
greatly-helped industrial expansion.. and employment. But we -mus t
not get into the habit of depending upon it to correct a
deficiency of exports. , Je must develop our own country and its
resources as fast as we can. must have stable government.
Investment from overseas will be attracted by stable government
and a sound economy, but could easily dry up if w. e produced an
unstable government and wild financial measures.
Je are sometimes chided by our opponents for having no
" independent foroi: i olicy". If this means that australia ought
to become a " neutral" or " unaligned" power, offering advice to
all and owing obligations to none, then my government rejects it
out of hana. We have great responsibilities for the safety and
future of Australia, and intend to discharge them.
But if the accusation means that, while looking to the
great democratic powers for help and protection, we should not
accept loyal engagements with them we equally reject the
conception. International arrangements for mutual defence give
rise to duties as well Es rights; we must be partners, not
passive dependents. It is for these reasons that my own
government, with no audible approval by the Opposition, has
pursued a foreign policy of the most constructive kind. 4e have
actively promoted, and become parties to the ANZUS PACT with the
U. S. A. and New Zealand; to SEATO, with Great Britain, U. S. A.,
France, New Zealand, Pakistan, Thailand, and the Philippines.
These have added positive elements to whatever protection is
afforded by our membership of the United Nations.
I really wish that we knew where the A. L. P. stands on
these matters. Take what we are doing in Defence, where our
forces and equipment, added to a massive Research and
Development programme in such matters as guided missiles, are at
the greatest peak of preparation we have ever seen in time of
peace. Labour would substantially reduce the Defence vote. i
regard adequate defence prevision as a vital element in foreign
policy. We cannot live comfortably without such agreements of
mutual security and protection as ANZUS and SE-D?, to say nothing
of our oldest, most durable, and most tested association with
Great Britain and the other 3ritish countries. We will not only
honour our obligations; we will preserve our capacity to do so.
For some years to come. c overseas problems will have
immense significance for Australia.
Communist threats and aggression are more violent than
at any other time since the dar. The arrogance and wickedness of
the recent Soviet nuclear and thermo-nuclear explosions has
produced an atmosphere of crisis and danger. It seems certain
that these acts are deliberate attempts at terrorising both the
WIest and the newernations of Africa and Asia, and by threat
extending the ColmmunisL zone of influence in those continents.
Much coolness :: nd firmness will be required of Great
Britain, the and the dlestern European powers with those
others like Australia, who are their friends and allies.
This is certainly no time to choose to have the voice
of Australia expressed by a Party as divided, as pushed around by
its left win;, as ambiguous even about Communist Unity Tickets in
Union elections, as the present A. L. P.
There are grave threats to the peace in South-.-st
Asia, with Laos in a state of Communist inspired civil war and
South Vietnam undr almost open Communist attack. One Co-mmunist
victory would lead to another, and we could w! ell become isolated 
9.
unless we maintain the strong and effective alliances in S. E. A. T. O
and A. N. Z. U. S. to which I have referred. Yet I cannot recall the
Labour Party saying a good ord about either.
There is also the great matter of the proposed entry of
Great Britain into the European Common Market, involving
negotiations in which the trading positbn of many Australian
industries is deeply involved. I have already explained the
Government's views in some detail in Parliament and elsewhere,
All I need say tonight is that we h-ve had oxpert officials in
London, in close conference with the United Kingdom for some
time; that we have Cabinet Committee and an official committee
regularly meeting in Australia; that I myself am in regular
communicatin with Mr. Macmillan; that we are seeking to
establish wa;. and means of securing an Australian voice on
appropriate occasions when our special interests are involved,
The time will certainly come, nobody c-n say how soon, when
Australian Ministers will need to go abroad to battle for the
Australian export industries and lend weight to the efforts of
our British friends. We are not novices. We are not unknown to
the leaders of other coLatries or their senior adviscrs, We
have, we hope, achieved some special capacity to influence
overseas thought and decision.
You will decide whether you wrant to dismiss us from
these matters and entrust them to our opponents.
As a Government, and as two Parliamentary parties, we
have a membership more closely identified with rural industry
than our opponents can hope to have. Of all the members of the
House of Representatives who represent rural electorates over
three quarters sit in or behind the present Government.
We have strongly supported rising rural production.
During our term the sheep population has risen by 40 millions.
Wool production has increased 50%, meat by 33%, sugar by
Farm life has been assisted by our provision for a
special depreciation allowance of 20% per annum on farm
employees' housing. IWhei this provision ends in June 1962, we
propose to renew it for a further period of five years.
Wj'e will, of course, continue orderly marketing and
stabilisation schemes in such industries as wheat, dairying,
dried fruits, canned fruits, and e'gs. We have extended the
present Sugar Agreement until May 1962, and will, when returned,
negotiate another agreement with the Queensland Government. Je
will negotiate further agreements with the Dairying Industry and
the Wheat Industry. In Wool, we await the report of the Special
Committee. Our guaran'ee to Cotton continues until 1963, when we
will be prepared to consider an extension on terms to be
negotiated. The Government will support an efficient tobacco
growing industry. The objective of the policy will be to provide
a market related to Australian demand and a satisfactory price to
growers for Australian-grown leaf of a quality acceptable to
Australian smokers.
. e have had much to do with research schemes in wool,
wheat, dairying, tobacco, beef and barley, and will devote
increasing attention to extension services folloahg upon
research. Our provision for C. S. I. R. O. has risen from œ 1.7m.
in 1949 to œ 8.6m. in 1961-62. 
I want to add something about the Commonwealth
Development Bank. This was established to provide finance for
the purpose of primary production and for the establishment or
development of industrial undertakings, particularly small
undertakings. It was to deal with cases ( such as those in which
long-term finance was needed) in which bank finance would not
other': ise be normally available. Particular attention was to be
paid to the personal prospects of the borrower. Especially in
the country, the function of the Development Bank is important as
an addition to ordinary banking facilities. In our recent Budget
we provided it with. an additional œ fn. of capital. From time to
time we will take steps to review its capital position so that
adequate funds may be available to it for its special but very
important fI-ction.
It is not always realised that, as a result of:
increasing tax reimbursements for years, followed by
the new and improved tax reimbursement formula
unanimously adopted at the Premiers' Conference of
1959, the substantial aid amounting to hundreds of
millions over recen% years given by the Commonwealth
out of its Budget to the S3ates Works programmes, and
the large special grants made to Western Australia and
Tasmania,
the States are being greatly and increasingly assisted to find
capital and current expenditure for primary and secondary
education. State expenditure on these matters ( which are State
matters) is large and rising.
The Coimmonwealth Government has, in addition,
voluntarily made many millions available for Universities,
under the advice of the Universities Committee which we set up
for this purpose. -We have also established a Special Committee
to advise on the future of tertiary education in all its forms.
Another Cormmittee, on medical training in teaching hospitals,
has just made a report which we will study when the new
Parliament has been elected. We have als. o assisted by a large
provision of Commonwealth Scholarships and by educational tax
deductions which are of great value to parents.
Not one of us would wish to be thought unaware of the
enormous importance of improved education in a country which is
building for a great future. gg: re at deal is being done; far
more than seemed possible only a few years ago. Beyond doubt,
much more will need to be done as the years go on. My own
Government, while quite opposed to any notion of transferring
educational authority to the Commonwealth, has quite a unique
record in Commonwealth assistance to education. No action, you
will perhaps allow me to add, has given me personally a more
lively satisfaction. The Government will continue its sympathetic and
pr. actical interest to the limits of its capacity.
I have already made a brief reference to our record on
Social Services. The-e will be plenty of time during the
campaign to dwell upon dramatic improvements in the Means Test,
the great Scheme for Homes for the Aged, Medical and
Pharmaceutical and Hospital Benefits, 
11.
But I do want to mention one specific matter. For
years the Australian law has teen that, to qualify for anl age
pension a person, whether Australian-born or not, must have
lived in Australia continuously for 20 years.
The great stream of migration since the Jar, so
valuable to Australia, has produced its own problems. One of
them has been that it is felt by elderly migrants, who have
worked and paid taxes in Australia for long periods falling
short of 20 years, that it is unreasonable that they should not
qualify for age pension. , Je have examined this matter. lWe
attach great impor': 2e-e to family migration, since it helps
assimilation in the new country. de will legislate to reduce
the 20 yea-s'period to 10. Naturalisation will, of course,
continue to ' e a condition for those coming from foreign
countries. Under the existing system of voting for the Senate,
no government can hope for a large majority in that House, and
every government may well be, from time to time, in a Senate
minority even though hLndsomely returned in the ouse of
Representatives. Yet the Senate has great powers. It can throw
out a Budget, or refuse Supply; it can refuse to pass any
legislation. If, therefore, you re-elect my government, but
after July 1st, 1962, when the new Senators come in, the
Government does not have a majority in the Senate, the nation's
legislation and finances will be at the mercy of the very
Opposition which you would have rejected in the House of
Representatives The only way to avoid such an absurdity is to give us
a majority in both Houses. If you do not, or if you vote
informally for the Senate you will find that, instead of
electing my own Government for three years, you will have
elected it effectively for six months only. When in December
1949 you sent us back into office in such a spectacular way. ve
faces a hostile Senate. It took eighteen months of frustrationl
and a Double Dissolution, before a legislative proposal approved
by you could pass both Houses and go on to the Statute book.
Your vote for the Senate is, therefore, vitale
I have dwelt upon matters of high policy which await
your decision. But a national election is not only a contest of
policies. It is a contest of people.
Under us, as your repeated choice, Australia has,
beyond question, developed and prospered. Its growth over the
last decade has been phenomenal, as nobody can fairly deny.
Abroad, its credit stands higher than ever before in its history.
it attracts in remarkable degree the practical interest of
investors and industrialists. In into national councils, its
voice is heard and respected. Its geographical isolation has
been countered by growing and successful diplomatic contacts,
and by international agreements.
Can similar things be achieved by our divided and
disorganised opponents, lacking experience, judgment, and
standing? There may be some I find it hard to believe who
would wish to see our foreign policy, our trade relations, our
territorial responsibilities, our financial and economic affairs,
put into the hands of our opponents.! But the remarkable fact is
that, if elected, the Labour Ministers and Members of Parliament
will not, if they obey their own rules, be in charge of these I 
12.
great affairs. They would have been elected by the people of
Australia, and should therefor? have a single and clear
responsibility to the people. 3ut the astonishing fact is that
their duty will be to a non-elected not elected by you)
outside body called the Federal Conference of the Australian
Labour Party. Rule 1 of the A. L. P's Federal Conference says:
" The Federal Conference of the Party shall be the supreme
governing authority and policy making body and its
decisions shall be binding upon all State Branches and
affiliates thereto, and upon the Federal and State
Parliamentar3 LTbour Parties and upon the Federal
Executive". I0 would almost seem that at this election you are not
in truth being asked by Labour to vote Mr. Calwell, and whoever
now either nominally or actually supports him in Opposition, into
power. You are being asked to hand over the international and
national policies of Australia to the obscure but powerful
gentlemen of the Federal Conference of the A. L. P! This is a
complete denial of Parl amentary Democracy. It provides the
final reason why we ask you to renew our mandate to go on
building a great nation for a groat people. 



BROA. DCAST NO. 1
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTEIR THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
ON N. :. IONAL STATIONS ._ Ti 7. I P. M.
THURSDAY. 16TH NOVEMBER, lL.
Another Federal Election campaign is on. During the
next few weeks you will no doubt, so long as you can put up with
it, be bombarded with arguments and appeals. Many issues will
be raised and disc-' s-d. Many claims will be made and rejected,
and a good deal of dust will blow about,
So perhaps I should get in early, before you are tired,
with a few broad remarks.
This is an election for the Commonwealth Parliament.
That means an election for every seat in the House of
Representatives, and for the retiring half of the Senate. On
Polling Day, therefore, we vote for individual men or women, but
for the most part we vote for them as the supporters of a Party
with a body of ideas; a Party which hopes to form a Government.
I am a Party man. After many years of experience I
believe that there can be no coherence and stability in
government, and no continuity of policy, unless Ministers have
Party allegiance. Every now and then somebody will ask you to
elect him as an " Independent". Why should you do so? A
Government that was made up of " Independents" ould not last for
a month, for there would be no common policy and no mutual
loyalty. And what becomes of the individual Independent? He
votes as he pleases; nobody can depend upon him from one week
to another; if his vote, because of a near equality in the
Parties is important, no government has any reasonable
expectation of life, nor can it engage in that long term
planning waich a modern and growing country needs.
So, the true question in this election is whether you
want to put my governmert out and put Labour in, or whether you
dontt. There is no middle course.
The business of governrment is the greatest business in
the nation. Some people try to separate business from
government; to set up hostility between them; to treat
politicians as if they were innocent of those economic and
financial matters which affect private citizens.
This is a complete fallacy. A government can, by its
financial and economic measures, create a climate in which
enterprise is encouraged, the resources of the nation developed,
much capital and technical skill invested, and future
employment expanded. A bad goverinment can discourage enterprise,
make the financing of development difficult, frighten off
capital and technical growth, and, by opposing those elements
which create employment opportunity, create the most acute
social problems. Government, in short, is in a basic sense, the
greatest business of all.
What you have to decide at a General Election,
therefore, is the broad business management of our country,
Having set up this test, I want now, quite briefly,
to apply it. 
The Commonwealth Governnent has been in office for
twelve years. They have broadly speaking, been twelve years of
remarkable national and Individual progress and prosper! ty, By
reason of good conditions at home and a vigorous policy of
migration from abroad, the population of Australia has grown by
at least a quarter. Production, both primary and secondary has
grown notably. This is important because increased production
is the essential condition of rising living standards. Savings
and investment have increased. The average household has, from
motor cars and refrigerators to radios and television sets, a
degree of equipmeni f. r civilised living which few thought
possible twelve years ago. Employment has been high, and the
degree of ' 9' ustrial peace remarkable. Our international
relations have added to our national security. We have means of
transport which are the envy of most countries in the world. Our
trade has grown so that we are one of the ten loading trading
nations of the world. -e have the most remarkable facilities for
enjoying our earned leisure. , Te are a free country and a happy
one. i. f Australia, as a , ihole, was your business, would you
change the management?
Perhaps you would if you felt reasonably certain that,
under new management, Australia, and you, would do even better.
Let us, therefore, have a look at the proposed new management,
and the new managers.
The new management is that of the Socialist State.
The new managers are the Australian Labour Party, acting under
the binding instructions of the Federal Conference of the
: 2ustralian Labour Party, a small body which y u do not elect at
all. Let me repeat the words of the operative rule; they
deserve to be well known
" The Federal Conference of the Party shall be the supreme
governing authority and policy making body and its
decisions shall be binding upon all State Branches and
affiliates thereto, and upon the Federal and State
Parliamentary Labour Parties and upon the Federal
Executive." The effective new managers who are offering to take
over the national business are, therefore, almost entirely
unknown to you. Those who offer themselves as the ostensible
managers, Mr. Calwell and his Parliamentary colleagues, are
notoriously divided into warring groups, with personal feuds,
with a left-wing so aggressive that the bird finds it difficult
to fly straight! My own government has enjoyed complete cohesion,
internal loyalty and a concerted policy. Our opponents cannot
even pretend to offer you these. They have never been able to
clarify their relationships with the Australian Communist Party,
the faithful local agents of the Communist powers which alone
threaten the world with suicidal war. How can they be trusted
to deal with your affairs?
I referred to the " new management" being that of the
Socialist State. For the Labour Party still stands for
nationalisation and for Constitutional changes to make it
possible. Before you vote for such a reactionary policy, and
abandon the existing management, ask yourselves a few questions. 
da 3.
Would the great basic industries of coal, and iron and
steel and copp r, and lead and zinc of engineering production,
of all those things, the recent development of which is one of
the great romances of Australian history, have grown so much or
so fast under Socialist nationalisation? Who . ave provided the
dynamic force in our development? Men and women who, under a
system of free enterprise, have used their skill and capital and
sense of adventure. You are all shareholders in Australia Unlimited. Will
you choose as dire-t: t-s:: people who believe in you in what you
can do given a fair break, and in the free spirit which has
wrought suc'&gt; wonders, or those who believe in the all-powerful
State, in whicih enterprise is discouraged, in which powerful
contributions of capital and skill from overseas are resented
and repelled, and in which the priceless independence of the
individual is to be replaced by a docile dependence upon
Government? These are gre. t basic questions. I hope they will not
be obscured. For your answer to them will determine whether we are,
as a nation, to go on in growth and progress, or fall back into
confusicn and stagnation. 
SUPPLEMENT.: RY
The following statements could not, for
reasons of time, be included in a Broadcast Speech
limited to one huar. But they are issued for
publi " tion conjointly , ith the main speech, which in
some respects they amplify and explain. 
COMyION JEALTH. AID OE ROADS
In 194+ 9-50 the Comaonwealth paid œ 8,852,000 to the
Stotes for roads. It is estimated that, in the present financial
year, the Commonwealth will pay œ 50 millions!
The present Commonwealth Aid Roads Act was passed in
1959 to give effect to a scheme proposed by the Commonwealth,
under which the Commonwealth undertook to provide over a five
year period a total sun of up to œ 250 million to the States for
roads. Under th". Lrrangement, which forms part of its
developmental policy, the Commonwealth is to pay to the States
during the five year period 1959 to 1964 " basic grants" of œ 220
million and n additional sum of up to œ 30 million which ( subject
to certain annaal limits) is to be payable on the basis of œ 1 for
each œ 1 allocated by the State Governments from their own
resources for expenditure on roads over and above the amounts
they allocated for this purpose in 1958-59. The distribution of
the grants over the five years is as follows:-
Matching
Basic Grant Assistance Total
œ' 000 œ' 000 000
1959-60 40,000 29000 42,000
1960-61 42,000 4,000 46 000
1961-62 44,000 6,000 50 000
1962-63 46,000 8,000 54000
1963-64 48,000 10,000 589000
Total 220,000 30,000 250,000
The amounts being made available by the Commonwealth
will be distributed among the States in each year in the
proportions of 5 per cent of the total for Tasmania and the
balance shared among the other five States on the basis of
one-third according to population as at the last preceding
Census, one-third according to area and one-third according to
vehicles registered at 31st December preceding the year
concerned. The States are required to ensure that not less than
per cent of the funds made available by the Commonwealth in
each year is spent during that year on roads in rural areas,
other than highways, main roads or trunk roads. The States may
among them spend up to œ f1,000,000 of the amount made available
by the Commonwealth in each year on works connected with
transport by road or water, other than the construction,
reconstruction and maintenance of roads. As under the previous
legislation, the States are free to allocate to municipal or
local authorities for roads purposes any part of the moneys
received by them from the Cormmonwealth.
UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS
In 1949, towards the end of the term of the Chifley
Government, there was much temporary unemployment caused by the
Communist-inspired Coal Strike.
In that year the basic wage was
œ 6 9. per week 
2. A.
For an unemployed man with a wife and child, the
unemployment benefit ( under tfl Labour Government's legislation
of 1945) was 10. 0 per week
In 1961 the Basic Wage was
œ l4. 8. 0 per week
Under the current legislation of the present
Government, the unt.., pjoyment benefit for an unemployed man, wife
and child, is œ 7. j 10. 0 per week
The improvement is clear!
HEALTH
In health and health services the story of the last
12 years is fantastic. In December 1941 there was no
Commonwealth scheme operating to provide medical benefits.
Today, no less than 7,000,000 people are covered by a
great voluntary and co-operative scheme. The total benefits
being paid out for no less than 35000,000 services is over
œ 22 million, of which the Commonwealth pays neaiy œ 10 million.
Under a greatly improved Hospital Benefits arrangement,
the Commonwealth and the registered organisations between them
are now finding over œ 32 million a year.
The Pensioner Medical Service, pharmaceutical benefits
for pensioners, has proved a godsend to pensioners.
The Pharmaceutic. l Benefits Scheme, as a whole, has
risen from a few pounds to over œ 27 million!
Our great contributions to the treatment of T. 3. and
mental ill-health are no doubt well-known, as is what we have
done in the manufacture and free provision of the Salk vaccine
against poliomyelitis. This is a short, but revolutionary, story. A growing
nation must be a healthy one. Our policy of strength and growth
is all pervasive, and expresses itself in many ways.
N2J GUINEA AND PAPUA
We continue to discharge our great responsibilities
for the advancement and good government of these territories,
The statement made a few weeks ago by my colleague, Mr. Hasluck,
on targets for future social and economic progress, has
attracted favourable interest both in Australia and abroad. oe
are spending more each year, and will continue to do so for a
long time. But our record in helping primitive neighbours in
this way will stand comparison anywhere in the world.
ABORIGINES
Despite some carping criticisms, our record in raising
the standards of the aboriginal peoples is a good one. Not long
ago we solved the problem of providing them with social services
of the normal character. In our oun special area of
responsibility, the Northern Territory, great strides have been
taken in the direction of catering for their hunan and social
needs. 
3. A
An all-party Parliamentary Select Committee
appointed on the motion of the Government, has recently brought
down a report on the problem of voting by aborigines. We will
give that report careful study and most sympathetic consideration
in the new Parliament. CO, 0STI TUTIONAL
An all-party committee made a close investigction of
the working of the Commonwealth Constitution, and recommended a
large number of ar-nrnentsø Time has not permitted us to reach
conclusions on such complex matters. I therefore need say no
more in a Policy Speech, than that should we decide to promote
any amendmn-' t or amendments, the constitutional procedures for a
referendum w-ll give the people the right to decide the matter.
We do not propose to have a general election confused by
speculative constitutional arguments which may or may not arise,
and which, if they do arise, will be decided by a quite
independent popular vote. HOUSING
The -rowing nation for which we are working, with
increased pcpulation and rising standards of living, must be
given a proper chance to be . rall-housed. Above all things, we
want a home-owning democracy. Though the problem of housing,
whether by governments or private citizens, is under the
constitutional distribution of powers, primarily one for the
States ( except in Commonwealth Territories), my own Goverilment
can present a remarkable record of voluntary performance, a
record which we would wish to add to in the next Parliament,
working as always, in co-operation with State Governments, who
are fully conscious of the needs.
Since 1950, 907,000 houses and flats have been
constructed in Australia, most of them being for ownership.
Towards this remarkable total, which will more than stand
comparison with any other country, the Commonwealth Government
has found no less than C780m' in * ar Service Homes alone, which
are our special and honourable responsibility we have found
œ 350million, which you may care to compare with a total of
œ 3 million over the previous thirty years of the Scheme, which
began in 1919. RESTRICTIVE Ph ICTICES
We desire, in co-operation with State Governments, to
do something to protect and strengthen free productive and
business enterprise against monopoly or restrictive practices.
The attorney-General has done a great deal of work both here and
in overseas countries, such as Great 3ritain and the U. SOAO,
where special laws exist. The matter is very complex and is in
Australia affected by the division of powers between
Commonwealth and States. It would be most undesirable to have an
elaborate system of government controls which restricted true
development, efficiency, and enterprise. On the other hand, the
public interest must be paramount; exploitation must not occur.
The Attorney-General's investigations and conferences
have not yet reached a point at which Cabinet decisions can be
taken. dhen such decisions are taken and legislation prepared,
we will, having introduced the legislation, allow it to be open
to public examination and criticism for six months so that no
proper consideration will be overlooked. 
INDUSTRIAL RBLFATI ONS
All the efforts we may make to secure a favourable
economic climate for investment and development can be largely
frustrated if a great deal of working and producing time is lost
by industrial disputes. Our opponents have regularly asserted
that only they, with their Union contacts, can secure
industrial peace. The facts are that in no year since 1951 has
the number of days lost from industrial disputes been as large
as those lost in any year from 1945 to 1949. There are many
thousands of young uen and women who will vote on December 9th
who were children ii, 1949, and who may be tempted to take for
granted the state of affairs which they have known for twelve
years. I ni them to know thiat such things as industrial peace,
continuity Q. work, do not happen by accident. Our industrial
policies, fitting into our whole conception of national growth,
have been directed to these ends. It is not out of place to
point out that today many thousands of employees are also
shareholders in the enterprises in which they work. This
broadens the co-operative spirit which is essential to success
and to continuity of woak. 



1173
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA
Embargo: Not to be published or broadcast
before 0400 hours Saturday 18th PR 108
November ( to coincide vwith November 1961
simultaneous release to be made
in London Kuala Lumpur and
Singapore). GREATER iMALAYSIA
Statement by the Miinistcr for External Affairs
SThe iinister for External Affairs, Mr. R. G. Menzies,
stated today that the Australian Government was greatly
interested in the concept of Greater Malaysia. If it proved
practicable, it could contribute significantly to stability and
progress in an area in whose development and progress Australia
was deeply interested.
The Minister for External Affairs expressed pleasure
that this imaginative and far-sighted concept would shortly be
O the subject of exploratory talks in London between Malayan
Miinisters led by the Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, and
the United Kingdom Government. 



PAM. No. 7/ l961
FLOODS IN NE'd SOUTH . IALES
Statement by-the-Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menlzies
I deeply regret to learn of the disastrous floods in
New South Wales and of the great personal hardship which has.
fallen on so many people in consequence of the floods. I
extend my i'arm sympathy to those who are suffering.
I have received a telegram this afternoon from the
Premier of Neu South W~ ales, Mr. Heffron, to whom I have
replied as follows
" Reference your telegram flood conditions in many rivers
your State on behalf of Commonwealth I wish to express
our sincere regret at damage occasioned by these floods
and deep sympathy for all who have suffered stop
Commonwealth is prepared to join your Government in
financing relief scheme stop In accordance with your
request a Commonwealth Grant of up to œ 30,000 has been
approved on a pound for pound basis with your State
subject to usual conditions namely that joint funds
will be used only for relief of personal hardship and
that expenditure will be certified by Auditor-General
in due course".
CANMBERRA9 November, 1961. 



61
NO. I TV RECORDING: " TALK TO ' THE NATION"
BY THE PRIME MINISTEli THE RiT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
NOVEMBER. 19o.
Ladies and Gentlemen:
Before this election campaign is finished you will
listen, if you have the patience to many arguments on many
matters; some arguments on grea issues and some arguments, no
doubt, on side issues.
But 1 t:. ought I would like to take a fairly early
opportuni'., 7 of putting this to you. Th~ re is one great issue in
this election and that is the issue of what kind of government
you want. You have had a Government headed by myself now for a
long time you may think rather too long. But that doesn't
matter, WhA-. t has happened in our time of government will, I
think, have a profound influence on what you -think on Polling
Day. Because if the truth is and I think it is that we
have enjoyed in Austra-ia 12 years of remarkable -rowth and
remarkable prosperity, with a remarkably high lc~ vel of
employment, notwithstanding small occasions, if these things
have happened and the nation is stronger, and the people
themselvos are better off, happier, freer, then I would doubt
very much whether you would want to change the goverrnent and
hand it over to whom? Hand it over to a collection of
people -and about those people I want to say this with great
respect -a collection of people wrio haven't been able to live
together, politically, haven't been able to yovern themselves,
politically? And now they are asking you to put us out and to
let themn goverr~ this country for you. That seems to me o be
the very great issue in this election.
Now having said that I just want to mention to you
because I can't mention everything a few matters by which I
invite you to test the position. b
First of all whatever may be said about-us and I
know we have our critics, I read them every day, I hear them
quite frequently, and no doubt there is a lot to be said for
them but whatever may be said by our critics we have been for
the whole of this time, although we have consisted of two
parties, the Liberal Party and the Country Party, we have been
completely united. .1e have never had any discord in my
government; we have had nothing but loyalty, one to the other;
and we have had nothing but loyalty from those who sit behind
us in Parliament. Now that is a tremendously important thing.
You can't really run the business of the country well if the
Board of Directors is engaging in wrangling and disputing.
waec t. e don't wrangle, and dispute. ge argue, we agrez. e,
And in these last 12 years, while it would be silly
for any government to pretend we did everything, the truth is
that a good government a loyally composed government, a
government that co-operates, one member with another, a
government that has ideas and has ambition for the future of
Australia, can produce and, we believe, has produced an
economic climate, a political climate, in which the country can I
go on getting stronger and stronger. That is the great task
of a government: not ? o try to run all the buSiness in the
community, but to make it possible for the community itself,
to grow and to develop. There: fore we have had stability of
government. 
You are being asked to change it for what I would
imagine would be the most unstable 8overnment representing the
most unstable Party that Australia has seen for a long time.
Then there is another tiiing that perhaps you might
recall. The public credit of this country is very high. Now
that is not just " high finance" talk. This is not intended to
say something that is a little mysterious and shows how
superior wae are. There is something quite simple about high
public credit if you can establishwitiiand maintain it.
Because it means that people will be willing to invest in
Australia, not only Australians themselves,' who are investing
in this country ma-, nificently, but people outside Australia
people who ' nave, over these recent years been investing hunareds
of millions, and an immense amount of accumulated skill in the
development of industry in Australia. I know that my opponents
say they don't like it. Presumably they will cut it off. IL
will be a s.-d ' lay for Australia if they do, because without the
investment of capital in this country our progress would be
slowed down almost im.-measurably. But there it is: high
public credit establisled and maintained over this last decade.
There is a third thing. I believe that even our
opponents regard us as having a decent sense of fair play. And
fair play the sense of fair play, translated into the
industrial world, means an enormous amount because it brings
about a sense of justice, and therefore continuity of work; in
short, industrial peace.
Do you know that thne days of work lost under my
Government have never been as great as the lowest number lost
under the preceding Labour Government? That's a very
remarkable thing. And all the moro remarkable because some of
you will remenbe:. i being told by our opponents, or by my
opponent, " Oh, of course they will never be able to ret on withi
the Unions, they'll never be able to get on with organised
labour",. But we have thie greatest record of industrial peace
that this country can point to. Now that is a good thing. 1
want it to continue, because it is only when people have the
opportunity of continuity of work and production that
Australia can develop more and more as it has developed over
the last 10 years.
Then, Sir you know I say " Sir" ~ because I'm rather
in the habit of that in the H-ouse, but I'll address you sir, as
" Sir" then Sir, think of what has g-one on in national
development, I will probably have more to say about this
before the campaign finishes, but really when you look north,
South, east and west in Australia at the enormous works of
development that have occurred, employing thousands and scores
of thousands of people, producing water for irrigation,
producing power for factory development, producing ports,
better ports for coal export, producing minerals, producing an
increased outturn of beef for export look I needn't dwell on
all thes~ e things because I hope you will hear a lot about them
before Polling Day. But when I look back over them I want to
tell you that whatever you do with me on Polling Day I shall
always be proud to have had some association with a process
which so far from having finished is only getting going, The
last 12 years will be really small compared to what can be
done in the next 12 if you have stable , overrb-ent, sensible
government, responsible g5overnment; and government that has
some imagination about the future. 
4 3.
Then finally, the only other thing that I have time to
mention to you is perhaps this: This country is more secure
than it ever has been before. That is a big thing to say. You
may say to me " Well, no country is secure". That is true
enough. None of us can feel entirely secure with Khrushchev and
the Communists beating the big drum, setting out to frighten us,
and to frighten other people by these crude demonstrations of
power. Nobody can feel utterly secure about these things, It
is a pretty good thing for this country of ours to have this
measure of security that its government has, in all these
years, set about making close, abiding friendships, not only
with Great Britain, not only with the mother country, and the
other British counruries, but also with the United States of
America, wl. h powerful allies in the South-East Asian Treaty
Organisation, with the United States and with New Zealand in
the ANZUS ' Treaty. These are all things that we have taken a
great hand in creating.
Our stocks, our personal stocks abroad are, as I
happen to know, very high. -de hal~ e powerful friends And in a
world in which trie threat and terror of force are to be
observed day by day, the most important thing for a small
country is to have powerful friends who stand by it, and by whom
it stCands. And of course we couldn't stand by our friends, even
in a small way, if it were not for the fact that our defence
preparation at this moment, is at the greatest pitch of
efficiency it has ever reached in time of peace. Even our
critics in Australia have ceased to criticise what has gOne on
in the Army, in the Navy and the Air Force, in research and
development, in the long range guided missile department, in
i'oomera. This has been a remarkable effort. At least I did
think that the Labour Party would say, " Well ve won't touch
that; we'll keep that; we do want to have that measure of
capacity to defend ourselves". But the only statement, so far,
made by the Labour Party, and of course one never knows what
will come along, has been to the effect that the defence vote is
too great, and ought to be reduced.
Now I come back to -,. here I began:. there are all
sorts of side issues, but the central matter in this election,
from the time it began until Polling Day, is " Do you want to
change your present government in favour of the kind of
government that is offered to you by our opponents?"
If we had a poor record of performance I could well
imagine you saying, " Well they've had their chance they haven't
done well, this is the time for experiment, let's try somebody
else".* But nobody really can honestly say that this country
hasn't been prospering, that this country hasn't been going
through a period of wonderful 5, rowth, that ordinary standards of
living haven't been rising, that we haven't enjoyed the
confidence and goodwill of the world, Nobody can honestly tell
you that. Therefore what you are really being invited to do by
our opponents is to take a wild experiment, a sort of excitable
act arising from the very prosperity of the country, " Well
we're pretty well off, let's see what we can do with the people
who now sit on the front Opposition bench at Canberra"
quarrelling with each other, mostly disliking each other, with
hardly an ounce of mautual loyalty.
Ladies and gentlemen, quite frankly, I can't see you
doing it, I profoundly hope you won't even think of doing it. 



DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
MINISTER FOR TRADE
LEADER OF THE AUSTRALIAN COUNTRY PAR
at
SHEPPARTON, Victoria
NOVEMBER, 1961
EMBARGOED: Do not broadcast or publish before
8 Monday, 20th November, 1961.
AUSTRALIAN COUNTRY PART
196l FEDERAL ELECTION
OPENING SPEECH
PART II
by
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JOHN McEWEN 
P. ART I I
EMBARGOED: DO NOT BROADCAST OR PUBLISH BEFORE:
8 MONDAY,. 20th NOVEMBER, 1961.
I have earlier outlined the major policies for
which we stand the policies for which our Government and the
Country Party stand., These policies we will pursue vigorously
in the future as we have in the past.
As I have said previously the record of more than
a decade of our administration of this country's affairs is, I
believe, an impressive one. It's a period in which we have paid
full regard to the overall needs of the nation. Of course, nothing
is more basic to the development of the Australian nation than
the safeguarding of the interests of the primary industries. Nothing
is more fundamental to the build-up of our population than the
safeguarding of the interests of the manufacturing industries.
And we have had both clearly in mind.
In regard to the primary industries we have been
aware that there'is a problem of costs producing in a fairly high
cost country like this and selling in competition with the outside
world. And the consciousness of that problem, inherent for
primary industry in Australia, is part of the explanation of the
economic policies of last year.
Primarily they were policies designed to arrest
inflation. There was in mind, the necessity to see that there
wasn't a continous internal spiralling upwards of costs, making the
competitive position of primary industries intolerable. In the
bank credit'squeeze, we had a curtailment of credit, but a
reservation that credit was not to be curtailed by banks, to
export industries. / 2. 
2-
We had a lift in the interest rate, but again
a direction to the banks that the interest rate was not to be
raised in the case of primary export industry. Here is the
awareness of the Government, and I think it fair to say here
comes out thie consciousness on the part of the Country Party
of its specialised role in this scene.
Taking the industries one by one we have policies.
Wie believe that our fellow Australians, for what
Sthey buy and consume at home, ought to pay a fair Australian
price, not the open world price which is often a depressed one.
So in industry after industry we have the concept of a home price.
Where itts necessary, we have a protective tariff for primary
industries, just as wve have a tariff to protect secondary
industries. Overall we are wanting all the time to sustain the
that the Government isn't the enemy of the people, the
Government is the partner of the people.
So in these primary industry arrangements vwe
constantly work as a government in consultation with the industry
concerned. In wool we have worked all the time that way, for
example, for the protection of the auction system 10 or 12 years
ago, or again in negotiation of the Japanese Trade Treaty, or
an endeavour to get the duties down on American wool.
If it is a problem of the costs of woolgrovwingq
or research to step up the efficiency of wool-groUing; if
there's a discussion about reserve price plan all the time,
we are working, not in insulation from the industry, but in
close consultation, and I believe with great and profitable results. 
-3
The Japanese Trade Treaty I am sure has put an
enormous amount of money into the pockets of Australian woolgrowers.
I've said, and I believe itt true, that the strength
of Japanese competition has added as much as œ C50 M. to the value
of the Australian clip in one season. That's w--hat has gone into
the pockets ef wool growers in one eeason from the transformation
of the Japanese from modest buyers into the biggest buyers in
the world of our wool.
Now we have the Woil Enquiry set up, and as soon as
the result of the Wool Enquiry is out, we will go into consultation
with the industry to decide what is the best thing for the
Government to do, what the industry wants, to protect the
future of this great industry,
And similarly, but differently, we've worked in
consultation with the wheat industry to establish a stabilisation
plan a home price; to discuss the overseas marketing arrangements
in wheat the International Wheat Agreement; the United Kingdom
Trade Treaty under which we have obliged the United Kingdom to
buy 28 million bushels of our wheat ayear and the Japanese
Treaty similarly. And so on, selling wheat or flour around the
world. What I now say is that as this present great stabilisation
plan draws to a close, we will in adequate time beforehand, go
into intimate discussion with the wheat industry, and the State
Governments, who are principals in the stabilisation scheme
and from those discussions, in this atmosphere of partnership,
we will work out with the industry the details of the stabilisation
plan to replace the present one. / 4. 
-4
In dairying the story is again as I say, th
sam but different in detail. Home price for butter and cheese,
constant overseas negotiations to safeguard the sale of our
dairy products overseas; support for the home market, encouraging
bigger consumption by subsidising the cost of butter and cheese
t4 the Australian consumier To stabilise this great industry and
to keep prices down to consumers here we have provided œ-180
million over 12 years.
Here's an industry that in certain areas has real
problems. We will work closely with it and vie will replace the
present dairy stabilisation plan, for another period with a plan
that will have been worked out with the industry itself and the
State Governments. And with the sua industry in Queensland again
the same kind of approach; a fair home price for sugar, negotiations
overseas to keep wol prices stable; special negotiations to
sell to the British, our biggest buyers; preferential sales to
Canada; entry to the high priced American market; sales to the
Japanese our third biggest buyer since the Trade Treaty all
the time negotiations for the sugar industry, to see that we are
acting to support this great industry along lines that the
industry wants. And in accordance with our Counitry Party and
our Government's policy all the time working with the sugar
industry. And for meat take the Long Term Meat Agreement
which has been of very high value to the beef industry. Not
only have we distributed œ 9qj M. collected from the British
Treasury under it, but the market price at auction has been 
sustained. I said a couple of years ago that the value of
beef herds in Queensland was, I was quite sure, œ C50 M. higher
than it would have been without the Long Term Meat Agreement.
Then when the chance emerged for the first time for us to break
into the high-priced American market with manufacturing beef,
that was negotiated. We negotiated sufficient flexibility within the
United Kingdom Agreement to enable entry into the United States
market. Everyone knows that the boom in values of beef which
followed, was not only enjoyed by the beef producers, but
benefited to a tremendous extent the dairy farmers, by getting
them a high price for their cull cattle and to that extent,
lifting the efficiency of the dairying industry.
Industry after industry has received consideration.
The cane fruit industry, here in this great
irrigation area, and the M. I. A. and dowm the Murray in South
Australia~ is very efficient both in the orchard and in the
cannery. It has a magnificent record as an exporter and
employer of labour. We wish to continue satisfactory arrangements
with the sugar industry, which contribute to price stability for
canned fruit growers. We will continue support for the sale of
its products overseas to preserve the stability of this great
industry. In a different but quite effective manner the
dried vine fruit industry has been supported by negotiated
arrangements at home and overseas. Ple are determined to preserve
the stability of this great industry which has a special
importance because entire communities are built around it. / 6.
7-
6
We are not without troubles in some of the
industries. Take the tobacco industry as an example. Here
is one that wie found, flat on its face in 1949 and we lifted it
by policies to a level of prosperity greater than that I think
enjoyed by any other primary industry; this produced an amazing
expansion 50% increase each year in the quantity produced in
recent years, and now unhappily there is trouble in the industry.
I am not going to devote myself in this speech
to details of tobacco. I shall speak again specially about
O this industry. Recently when the industry asked us to help them
in setting up a Committee of Inquiry we immediately acceded and
provided assistance, financial and other;! ise, to enable the
Tobacco Industry's own leaders to make their investigations of
the industry's problems, present and future.
I pledge that we will not let up, either Country
Party or Government, until the tobacco industry is restored to
a position of stability and progress once again.
Some Labor Party spokesmen are today trying to
secure the political support of tobacco growers with rash promises.
I know that all groviers who have been in the industry since
Labor was last in power will remember the peasant level to which
growers had been reduced by 1949, after 8 years of Labor
responsibility for the tobacco growers.
And, of course, there are other primary industries
that I haven't the tima to talk about now in detail but the
Country Party and our Government will work in co-operation with
every primary industry to ensure profitable stability. / 76 
I have been speaking of marketing aspect.%
There is alsn the aspect that has loomed high in our minds of
aiding in the efficiency of production. Here, no Government
has a record comparable with ours in the outpouring of millions
of pounds of money for research and for Extension Services.
This is our Policy. We have provided millions for research in respect
of wool, millions for research and Extension Services for
dairying, and enormous sums for tobacco.
Now, in more recent time, all of the major primary
industries, practically without exception, have come to accept
the idea that a Government such as ours in not an organisation
to hate or to fear or to doubt, but one to work with.
So, industry after industry has come to us and
said it would like to con-tribute something to this great work of
research and Extension and market development. Industry after
industry has asked the Government to pass a law to impose a levy
so that everybody engaged in dairying, or wool or wheat growing,
or w;. hatever it is, should contribute equally his share towards
this valuable research, production and marketing work.
Out of these approaches by the various industries
this idea of partnership betaeen Government and Industry which
I have been preaching for years has now been taking firm shape.
At the request of the variou-s
Now, all industries are making a contribution by levy.! industries vie
have legislated for a levy on wool; on wheat -1d. a bushel;
on dairy produce; on beef ( sugar levies itself) on tobaccos
on the canning fruit industry for promotion purposes; on the
wine industry all are now contributing in a partnership
with the Government, with the Government always also putting in
its balancing share of money. / 8. 
-8
So gigantic research activities are proceeding with
the industry concerned entitled to take a part in directing the
activity. The results of research are going out through
Extension Services, mostly through the agency of State Governments,
to get the results of research onto the farm. Market promotion
is going ahead at the same time.
So we have recognized the problem of costs at home.
VWe have dealt with price on the home market, with stabilisation
schemes, research, Extension Services, promotion, that kind of
thing, always developing the reality of partnership bet,.-een
Government and industry.
But there are aids to industry primary industry
of a more general kind.
I have already spoken of last year's so-called credit
squeeze, where our policy said that in respect of export industries
alone, there was to be no restriction of bank credit, and no
increased interest rates.
The Develop~ ment Bank, of course, emerges from the
old Country Party request of quite many years ago for a Mortgage Bank.
Now we have a Development Bank with, as I have said a little
earlier, capital and other funds that give it a lending capacity
of about fœ' 5 M. at the present time.
The rest of the problem of primary industry is, of
course, in the field of export promotion the right to sell; the
negotiation by the M, 1inister for Trade of the right to get into an
overseas market and of the terms upon which we get in; then the
Trade Commissioner Service to aid selling.
Trade Publicity in the United Kingdom is under the
direction of a Committee in London which includes representatives
of the Industries whose products are being sold, merchants and
Commonwealth officials. The Export Payments Insurance Corporation can insure
Export transactions which cannot be commercially insured. 
-9-
We aided the export industries in freight negotiating
with the shipping co mpanies. Since 1956 the Export industries
wanted to do it themselves. So we have put up money to help them
to have the strongest organisation to enable them to put their case
to the shipping companies,
Quite recently I have announced that the Government
has negotiated the commencement of two new shipping services to
South America, and to get them going we are for a period accepting
some financial liability.
This work for export continues all the time. The
Country Party and our Government believe that the great primary
export industries are entitled to the support of Government and
O that we want the job of export to be regarded as a partnership
venture in which we help.
Now there is overshadowing us this enormous problem
of the European Common Market.
I am going to make that the subject of quite separate
and specialised speeches to analyse it.
Of course, I am involved as the Minister for Trade,
in trying to safeguard our trading interests. What I say here in
* broad terms is that the whole resources of government w., ill be
devoted to safeguarding the interests of the Australian export
industries as the United Kingdom negotiates to join the Common
Market. We will not accept it that any single Australian
industry is expendable as a price for the preservation of other
industries. All will have our best efforts of protection, and
if any should unhappily be grievously harmed then I pledge that
we will stand by industries should they be so harmed.
So much for the general field of primary industry.
I shall make special speeches in respect of manufacturing industry
but let me say here that as in the case of primary industry,
manufacturing industry in our opinion, is entitled to protection
in the home market. 
10
That's our concept whether it be primary or
secondary industry. Again, whatever policy ought to be made -on time to
time, we want to emerge from relations of partnership between the
manufacturing industries and the Government and we have set up
organisations as a point of contact there.
As we are reaching out now, to put it to manufacturing
industry that national need requires them to engage more in export,
I am making it quite clear that I don't believe that manufacturing
industry will be able to export unless given a firm grip on the
home market. That's the only place where we can put our ovm price
put a fair price. To be strong at home, gives a strength to
export, whether it be a farm. or factory product.
The Country Party believes in this. I have
illustrated it in wh-at and dairying and sugar and all these other
thing7s. There are quite a number of primary industries that
actually depend upon tariff protection.
There is no tension today between the Country Party
or the primary industries and the manufacturers. It is a matter
S of historical fact that it was I, the Leader of the Country Party,
who came up with the idea of supr lementing the Tariff Board
S system with the concept of temporary duties, an arrangement under
which, with only a 30-day inquiry, an industry which could
demonstrate that it was in real trouble from import competition,
could get a quick and adequate protection. Quite a number of
industries have benefited from that, including the Bruck Hills
across in Wangaratta. But here basic Government policy is at stake. I have
said again and again that there is nothing that we count more
important in this development of Australia than that we build up
our population. Ten million isn't safe in a Continent like this.
We want 20 million. 1.7e want 30 million. / lie 
And we know perfectly well that we can't get tens
of millions on farms in Australia. Only peasant countries provide
a big proportion of population on farms. Ours is a high living
standard country. Where we will get the millions, tens of millions,
in this country is in and around great manufacturing industries.
It would be a contradication of all that I say and of all that we
as a Country Party and a Government stand for, if I, and the
Government, were not to give adequate Protection to economic and
efficient manufacturing industry.
Again, I pledge the wrord of the Government to see to
it that this is maintained.
As to the general effectiveness of our support for
manufacturing industry, there can be no doubt about that, for any
person who is willing to look at the facts.
In the last 12 years vwe have added 41% more factories.
Nowhere else has industrial expansion been faster.
The value of factory production today is 3-2t1i mes what it was when
we came into office 12 years ago.
The jobs in Australia are mostly jobs in or around
factories and the service industries. There are -J million more
O jobs in Australia today than there were when you elected us to
office 12 years ago.
This is the evidence that our Policy of building the
population of Australia, and building it with strong primary
industry, and a strong and expanding secondary industry, is net a
matter of words; it is now a matter of history. The results are
there to be seen and I have complete confidence that wie will
continue these policies of expansion just as effectively for the
future as we have done in the past.
That's what 1Mr. Menzies and I devote ourselves to.
Continuous development of A1ustralia is the high
ambition of my Australian Country Party. WUe bring to the
Parliament at Canberra a concentration on the problems of the
great primary industries of their export problems, and an / 12. 
12
awareness of their problems when costs rise against them at home.
At the same time we wvili maintain an equal consciousness that all
we plan for the great future of Australia will be at risk if
we don't continue to build the population of this country by
supporting manufacturing industry, so that we can sustain our
migration programme and grow as we have grown in the last 12 years
from less than 8 million people to 1021 million today.
Give us another ten years a nd our population will
be lifted to 13 million people on tho policies that we propound.
And don't forget that it is no good just voting the
Government back to office in the House of Representatives
we have got to have a majority in the Senate also.
And so in every State I put it very high in my appeal
that people shall not only vote for but work for the Government
Senate candidates. Give us the powor and we will continue to do the job
for this country.
O SHEPPARTON. VIC.
November, 1961. 



EMAROED: Do not broadcast or publish before
8 Monday, 20th November, 19619
AUSTRALIANCOUNTRYPRTY 196. FEDERA ELECTIO
OPENING SMEECH
by
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE JOHN McEg. YEN
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
MINTISTER FOR TRADE
LEADER OF AUSTRALIAN COM--TR PARTY
at
SHEPPT ON, Victoria
? Lth NOVEMBER, 126 
8 MONDA&amp; YO 20th NOVEMBER 1961.
As I address the Australian people tonight I'm conscious
that I speak with a dual capacity. I speak for the Government, as
Mr. Menziest partner and Deputy Prime Minister. At the same time and
without any sense of rivalry, I speak as Leader of the Australian
Country Party. For 12 years the Liberal Party and the Country Party have
* joined in partnership to compose the most long-lived, and the most
stable Government our Country has ever had,
Mr. Menzies is a very great Australian a world figure.
He's given leadership to this country during itts most dranatic
period of industrial and, economic development.
There's never been the slightest note of discord in our
partnership. Compare that with the deep cleavages within the Labor
. Party. This great partnership is dedicated to the pursuit of the
very broadest national policies, not narrow sectional ones.
Tonight I am to speak of the policies of our partnership
and the objectives we still aim at, and in particular of the
specialised contribution which the Australian Country Party brings
to the good Government, development and the general well-being of
Australia. When policies are being spoken of at election timne, the
formula for composing an or'thodox speech can become a very simple
one : to denounce the opposing party and its policies, and to
outline an attractive list of proposals, and then beg to be elected.
Ilm not going to do that.
I shall speak of course of the principles which will
always guide us. 2. 
.2.
And I shall stress how in our every action wetre dedicated
to the principle of partnership and co-operation for the coto~ on goal
of national progress and national security; partnership between the
political parties, comprising the Governnmcnt; partnership between
town and country; between primary and secondary and service industry;
and partnership between Australia and our great Allies and trading
partners around the world.
I shall refer to the Opposition only to bring out a point
of comparison.
POLICY OBJEC TVES.
Above all we're determined that this country shall be
free and remain free. And scarcely less important we want
Australians individually to enjoy the maximum of freedom to shape their
own lives within their own country.
Communism is the ultimate denial of personal freedom.
Therefore we denounce Communism. The Country Party was the first
political organisation in Australia to demand that Communism be banned,
Secondly, we recognise that the doctrines of Socialism, as
embraced by the Australian Labor Party, with the whole concept of
economic, industrial, and personal controls is contradictory to our
idea of maximum personal freedom. So we oppose Socialism as being a
contradiction of our concept of a free and self reliant Australian
nation. We support the United Nations as the international
instrument seeking to establish a world of law and peace, and we
reinforce our own strength by contributing in every manner to the
cohesion of the Q ueen's Commonwealth? and by Treaties and understandings
with our great friend, the United States, and our partners
in S. E. A. T. O. and A. N. Z. U. S. alliances to safeguard our part of the
world* / 3 
We want to be strong; we want to be free; we want to
be secure; so we abhor CGomunism abroad and at home. And we
vigorously oppose Socialism in Australia*
To have our country strong and robust, there's nothing
more important than that there should be a widespread sense of
pride in the country. So we aim to avoid disunity. N~ ational
cohesion and economic strength are greatest where there is full
equality of opportunity. ' f4tree constantly broadening the
opportunity for better education, and contributing by health policies
to the prospect of avoidance and cure of illness and disability.
Some Australians will want their security in jobs; others will want
to make their own employment in farm or business. Our policies cover
Oboth. Thatts our idea of a real land of security and
opportunity. That's the' kind of Australia wetre aiming to build*
I've been illustrating our policy objectives by talking
about what we see and plan for our fellow 10J million Australians
0their security and their happiness*
ECONOMIC FACTORS.
0 But let me now turn to the economic facts of life upon
which security and prosperity really depend. ', Ie live in a
competitive world maybe an envious world. And 10 million
Australians of our day have the job of developing a Continent. The
population of Australia must be built up fast7 and with the right
type of people. How better could I illustrate what we want to do than to
point out in the 12 years of this Government the Australian
population has grown with the aid of a record migration programme
from 7,900,000 people in 1949 to lO 2 million people today. And
today we find in every walk of life our new fellow Australians
con tributing most valuably to the progress of the nation. / 0 
.4e
The Country Party wants the maixiiuum number of migrants to become
landowners and bring stability, pride and skill to land o,,; nership.
Our policy is to aid that.
Where some displacement from employment has occurred it
has been in the course of building a base sounder than ever before
for real maximum employment opportunities, I undertake that we will
pursue industrial policies which do provide a job for everyone* ' 7e
know that jobs must come from expanding industry.
A real job is found in industry not in a politician's
* speech. There's no comparable instance in history where such a
0proportion of people from outside have been added to the national
population without creating friction or minority or nationalistic
groups. During the life of our Government the unsurpassed skill of
the Australian agriculturalist, backed by his scientific and technical
0 advisers, has raised agricultural output by nearly half with
practically no addition whatever to the rural workforce,
The average Australian farrier produces twice as much food
as his counterparts in the United States and the United Kingdom. But
this very efficiency in production does reveal that the land
industries are not the place where new jobs can be found for the
millions. But there must be jobs, and factories and service industries
must provide them* I have been pointing this out for years,
Manufacturing industries need adequate policies of tariff
protection. There's evidence that that has been sustained for today
there are 41/ 1 more factories in Australia than when we ca-lue to power,
and the value of factory production is running at a rate 31 times
greater than it was 12 years ago, and there are about three quarters
of a million more jobs* 
Incidentally increased employment in secondary activities
increases the farmers best market the home market.
Australia's rate of industrial expansion is phenomenal.
My colleagues and I have worked without stint for 12 years to bring
about a balanced development and a secure Australia. Tell not let up.
As a by-product of our growth, and economic and political
stabilityg industrialists throughout the Free World are increasingly
coming to Australia as a new base for their operationso and so adding
to the broadness of our industrial base and to the up-to-dateness of
Wur technical skills, making new products we previously imported.
Now our Government is putting it with ever increasing
Sirectness to manufacturers, that they must also export to contribute
to the nation's economic needs as well as to their own.
Last year we faced a real problem. There was concentration
upon speculative and non-essential activity with offers of very high
interest rates, inflation of costs and values a threat to our stable
* and solid base for expansion.
Over a period our export prices had been declining. If last
0year there had been the 1953 level of prices, the greatly increased
quantity of our exports would have earned us œ 400 million more than we
actually received. That in a nutshell is the situation which led us last year
to introduce the economic policies which have been distasteful, and
let me be frank. hurtful to many. But today we're confident that
these inflationary and speculative pressures at home have been arrested.
A policy about expanding Australia would be empty and
meaningless words without an assurance that sufficient overseas funds
will be earned to provide the import needs of Australian factories. 
6-.
This is essential for maximum employment. Without it migration could
not be sustained. This is why we had to act last year to curb
speculative spending and at the same time we've worked tirelessly to
offset low prices for primary products.
Take examples the Japanese Treaty has contributed
enormously to holding wool prices, and wie stand ready to discuss with
the wool industry its desires for the future as soon as the results
of the present enquiry have been studied by the industry and the
Government. The wheat industry has been protected by the Stabilisation
Plan, fair prices at home and overseas negotiations.
0 For the dairy industry, its Stabilisation Plan, with
Government subsidising both the industry and the consumer at home, and
* the Goverument doing all possible to sell to best advantage overseas.
Both the wheat and the dairy plans will ba renewed as they
expire, but after consultation with the industries and the State
Governments. The sugar industry is sustained by a fair home price and
overseas agreements. Indirectly the groat canned fruit industry is
protected by an arrangement with the sugar industry.
Beef producers have eivjoyed high local prices through
the support of the Long Term Mcat Agreement and the negotiated entry
to the United States high price market. The benefits of Government
help as mentioned have been worth scores of millions of pounds in
each case to the wool industry, to the dairy industry, and to the
beef industry. Under our policies Tobacco growing has been raised to an
important and profitable industry, with the result of very fast
expansion in recent years.
This year much leaf has not been bought at the auctions.
We will work with the Industry to ensure that there is established
a market at fair prices to growers for leaf acceptable to Australian
. smokers. Many other crops tobacco, peanuts, cotton, fresh
fruit, deserve and have received our consideration as has of course,
the dried fruit industry. All contribute valuably to production,
save imports, and provide employment. 
In these fields particularly our fellow New Australians
are demonstrating their skills and willingness to work hard.
FTUR1E OBJECTIMES. ? Te aim to continue in the future what we've done in the
past to support the rural industries and I include mining.
The special tax depreciation allowvances for rural
industries will be renewed by our Government for a further period*
We've established the Development Bank, Today it has
resources of capital and money borrowed for re-lending totalling
* about œ-50 million. It will be quite especially the job of' the Country
Party to see that this great new institution will be kept in necessary
funds to enable it to function.
The Country Party is.. pledged to-mnaintain-and-s-pport the
interests of country people and it is pledged to do this for no
narrow sectional reason. It's pledged to do it because the prosperity
and expansion of the farma sector forms the very basis of national
prosperity and expansion.
We'll maintain the concept of partnership with both
primary and secondary industry in export development.
Our Trade Comissioner Service is being expanded
continuously, Government funds to support overseas trade publicity are
at record levels@ Of major importance it'll be my job to press negotiations
with overseas countries to help our trade. Here, I think it is not
unfair to recall that every Labor spokesman in the Federal
Parliament spoke against the Japanese Trade Treaty, But this Treaty
has proved of monumental importance in supporting our exports, as
well as improving relations between the Australian and Japanese
peoples and Governments. 
.8.
Anclthe-safeguards provided to protect Australian
manufacturing industry against Japanese competition have proved to be
adequate. Such a major departure from previous pnlicy as the
concluding of the great Treaty with Japan cannot be undertaken by
people devoted to narrow sectional interests. Only a Government such
as ours will, strike out boldly and think in terms of' a new departure
when circumstances demand its
Efficient Australian agriculture doesn't carry a
* workforce of millions. For millions of jobs to sustain our migration
as well as for the young people growing up, manufacturing activity in
Australia must be strong and expanding, We will prAvide adoquate
0protection for it. Last year our Government supplemented the well tried
Tariff Board system with the new arrangement enabling a temporary
tariff to be proclaimed after 30 dayst enquiry.
Already important industries, such for example as the
WBruck Mills at' Wangaratta, have enjoyed the protection of this.
The great consultative bodies on e~ or and
W cur established by our Government provide a meeting point
where Government, manufacturers and farmers are constantly sitting
around the same table joining in planning the best for our country.
To encourage export, novel taxation incentives have
been devised. Under them, the cost of searching for and deveoping
a market overseas is predominantly borne by the Government. Success
in achieving increased exports to a certain formula brings a reward
ef complete freedom from all pay roll tax liability. 
.9.
Recently I announced that we'd successfully negotiated
the establishment of' two new shipping services to South America.
We believe we will feel justified in supporting the
establishment of warehouses to carry Auistralian goods for sale, in a
number of important centres around tho world,
' Ae look to the steel industry to become a more important
and continuous export earners And our decision to reconstruct the
railway line from the great iron ore deposits near Kalgoorlie to
Fremantle is related to this.
Likewise, having found enormous mnarkets for Australian coal
in Japan, we're now as a Goverment financially helping the ' State
Governments of New South W'ales and Queensland to improve harbours and
port facilities* In the same line of thinking wetve undertaken to aid the
construction of important roads right across North Australia so that
beef cattle may be brought economically to the meatworks on the coast
or to the fattening areas.
My own Country Party has long advocated decentralisation.
I'm in no doubt that if in appropriate areas New States were brought
into existence, this would represent a major contribution to
decentralisation. WAe believe decentralisation to be good, and safer,
for the whole country and we'd like to see the family growing up in
the country to be able to stay together by being able to find jobs in
the country towns and its industries.
COMMONMAKT But whether we live in the town or the country there's
one recent development which must deeply concern all of us.
Three months ago the United Kingdom decided to apply to
join the European Common Market., If she does join it, it'll be one
of the great events of history. Her action projects an absolutely / 10.0 
.11.
economy. And I put it to you that matters of such complexity and
importance affecting the future prosperity of everyone of us, can
best be handled by a Government as broadly representative and
as balanced in its interests as the present coalition between
the Liberal and the Country Parties.
Tonight Itm giving an account of 12 yearst work, of
the phenomenal growth of our country in that period.
It's the story mf transformation into a modern nation.
The transformation from long years of slow population increase
into a dramatic period of population growth. The transformation
of rural industries from conditions where so often they provided
only a precarious livelihood into a situation of Prosperity and
stability with amazing advances in productive capacity.
Today 72% of the people are voluntary subscribers
to a national health scheme. In 1949 Government funds DrAvided
fœ 300,000 worth of life saving drugs and pharmiaceutical benefits.
And last year under our Government œ-28 million was provided for
this purpose. This is the story of the transformation of a country
where there used to be continuous tension between Government and
industry into one where a new concept of partnership has been
deliberately developed and is operating.
The transformation of a country ridden by Socialism
into a country where people are free to shape their own way of
life with the broad aid of Government not under the tight
control of Government, This has had results. Australians now own the
biggest proportion of homes to population in the world
of the nationts families are home owners. Our Government
has provided œ C780 million for housing./ 1. 
.12.
We've seen the transformation from a Federation where in
1949 the State Governments were allotted œ-208 million from
Commonwealth revenue and Commonwealth Loans that year, to the
current position where last year they received œ 5 93 million.
And Australia is now the tenth greatest trading nation in
the world, and the Australian voice is heard, and increasingly
heeded, in the world's highest Councils.
Ours is a country where savings bank deposits have more
than doubled; where the production of steel has more than trebled;
where wool production has increased by 50%. It's a country whose
motor car ownership has been extended from 1 car to every 7 people
12 years ago to today 2 cars for each 7 people. Where television,
under plans already approved, will in a few years' time be acCcsible
to more than 90% of our people. Where aged and invalid pensions
and other social services are provided, not at the yearly rate of
million as in 1949 but at the present rate of œ 358 million a
year. The 1950ts have been for Australia a great and historic
period of unbelievable growth and prosperity.
For the Liberal-Country Party Government, the 1950' s
have been a period of remarkable achievement. We are fully
confident that this perofrmance will be equalled during the 1960' s.
By adhering to some general policies which produced the dramatic
expansion of the 1950' s I believe that by 1970 our population
will increase by another 2 million people, to give us about 12jmillion
Australians. I foresee then another million jobs
million Jobs by 1970. An increase in private investment by
about a third to a level of œ-2,000 million a year.
I see an increase in rural production taken at today's
values of from œ C1350 million worth to œ C1600 million worth by 1970.
I can see the value of work done in our factories increased by
and I predict a rise of two-thirds in the value of our
mineral exports. / 13-. 
.13.
What is our policy, you ask?, That is our policy.
It will produce results like that. It's there to be seen; to be
felt; to be experienced. It's not a policy of small devices. It's
a policy of broadq imaginative thinking not one to favour a section
at the expense of others* A policy to serve and benefit equally
and I repeat equally the whole nation. A policy of broad national
co-operation such as can only be achieved by a partnership in
Governmentt of parties representing every section of the community.
It's not a policy which has a beginning and an end. Itts a policy
which has no end, for there will be no end to our planning and our
work to develop this wonderful country of ours and keep its people
* free, prosperous and happy.
We really are working to try to shape Australia as we
* believe the Australian people want it shaped. Wetre certain the
prosperity and growth of Australia is inseparable from the stability
of the country industries. So we're sure that the Country Party will
continue to make its full contribution to the continuing success of
our Government and to the welfare of all Australians, no matter who
0 they are; whether they live in the town or the city; or work on a
farm or in a factory.
All I ask now is that you give our Government and the
Country Party the opportunity to continue to make our contribution
in our day to the security, health, happiness, and prosperity of all
Australians new and old, 
.14.
For the continued development and prosperity
of a free Australian people, we ask you to return our Government
to office. For the House of Representatives vote for Government
candidates the Country Party and Liberal Party candidates.
Do not forget the importance of the Senate on
this occasion. We must have a majority there to be really in power.
Vote for the Senate candidates of the Country
Party and the Liberal Party who stand as Government supporters. 



P. M. No. 58/ l96l
OPPOSITION ELECTION PROMISES ANALYSED
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
I take first the specific proposals made by Mr.
Calwell proposals on which he has made estimates of cost and
put beside them the departmental estimates. Calwell Departmental
: Cn. œ iu.
Social Servi -es 93. 83.5 223.
Heal'-h and Medical Benefits 30 33
Housilg 5 15-25
Local Government and Full
Petrol Tax 14.5 19
Smaller proposals 10 11
152.5 161.5 311.5
The higher figure reflects the estimated cost of
complete abolition of the means test for age
pension purposes.
But this is only part of the story.
Mr. Calwell's Education proposals
will cost
His Sales Tax proposals will cost
His proposal to allow travelling costs
as income-tax deductions will cost œ 28.5m.
The new totals are, at this point
Calwell œ 152.5m. Departmental œ 24Qm.-œ 39Om.
The story does not end even there.
It is clear that there are other very large items
involved in Mr. Calwell's Policy Speech. For example, if
proper estimates are made, establishment of a Conservation
Authority for Northern Developmnt similar to the Snowy
Mountains Authority may involve œ 25m. a year.
The proposal to charter ships for international trade
is equally clearly one which could not be performed except by
the outlay of many millions.
The vagueness of so many of his proposals makes cost
calculation very difficult. How much will it cost to give, as
he says, assistance to manufacturers to re-equip with the
latest machinery? An initial depreciation allowance at the
rate of 40% would cost annually some œ 70m. The introduction
of investment allowances at the rate of 20% would cost about
per year. How much to extend the Colombo Plan? How much to
establish an Export Credit Bank? How much to establish a
Commonwealth Insurance Corporation in the field cf external
trade? Mr. Calwell gives no answer to these and many other
questions. 
2.
It is clear from objective calculations that the
estimates he offers are far removed from the facts. I said in
Adelaide that the total costs would be of the order of œ E300n.
That was an underestimate. I am satisfied that to give effect
to the promises he has so freely made would cost the Australian
people considerably more than this figure and that these costs
could only be met either by widespread and severe increases in
taxation, or by a most inflationary call upon Central Bank
Credit. Everything that I have set out is, of course, over
and above the normal and inevitable annual increase in
Commonwealth expenditure on such items as Financial Assistance
Grants to the States,' Commonwealth aid for roads, and Social
Services, including health and medical benefits.
This year the increases in Social Service and health
and medical payments due solely to population growth will.
amount to about œ l15m, Financial Assistance Grants to the States
and aid fo-roads this year will increase by about œ C28m.
W~ hatever government is in office will have to meet
such increased expenditures as these.
Mr. Calwell's promises are therefore additional.
CANBERRA, November, 1961.
W 



BROADCAST NO. 2
BROADCAST BYTEPIEMNSIR THE RT. HON. RgG. MENZIES
OVEx NATIN,, L STA2'_ 1OjiS AT 2~ E D Y
RURAL POLICY
I have been at pains to point out, in various speeches,
the great importance of expanding our production and export of
manufactured and processed goods so as to strengthen our balance
of payments position and reduce the risks of special or emergency
mcasures, designed to reduce imports at times when export incomo
falls. But two things still remain true. The first is that
for many years to come our major exports, supporting our
inte,. nationa: solvency, will be of primary products. The second
is that no true and responsible national policy will disregard
the necessity of encouraging the productivity, efficiency, and
economic soundness of ou~ r rural industries,
It is of these industries that I now wish to speak.
'. Je have three great tasks affecting our rural
industries-1. To help cheapen production
2. To increase the quantity of production
3. To protect and expand our markets.
In a short broadcast, I can say just a few sentences about each.
1. COSTS. These always have a tendency to be pished up by
competitive wages and the cost level in the cities. But
the tendency can be resisted by scientific research (] ik3
that done in C. S. I. R. O) and extension services, When
we look back at the work done by the wheat-breeders, from
Farrer on; at the work of the researchers into the
nature and application of fertilisers; at the transformation
of hundreds of thousands of acres of almost
useless land by the trace-element discoveries; at what
myxamatosis has done -to put down the rabbit and put up
wool production; we realise that the best and most
enduring answer to rising costs is increasing efficiency0
As a Government we have never lost sight of this, and
have done much to assist it. Ole will continue to do so.
When our opponents were in office in 1949, the vote for
C. S. I. R. 0. was œ l. 7m. This year it is Over the
last 10 years, largely because of great scientific
investigation into soil deficiencies and animal
nutrition the area of scientifically improved pastures
in Australia lias increased from 20m. acres to 32r-n. acres.
I again remind you that of all the Members of the House
Of Representatives who represent and understand country
electorates, over three-quarters sit in or behind my own
Government, T11hey are not likely to overlook the -vital
importance of Australian primary production.
2. INCRE~ ASED PRODUCTION, Wdhat I have already said has a
direct bearing upon production. But we believe that
increased production of primary products is directly
related to maintaining a stable rural population enjoying
proper standards of living0 Our financial and taxation
policies have for many years been directed to this end,
and with advantage. I just have time to mention two
particular matters which will interest you particularly
at this time. 
My own government introduced a special
provision for a depreciation allowance ( for taxation
purposes) of 20% per arinum on moneys laid out on farm
employees' housing. 4hen this legislation ends in
June 1962, we will ronev; it for a further period of
five years. '-de want to see the complete end of those'
old days when, because of inadequate housing, it was
difficult to attract and retain competent farm labour.
Again, in the Banking Legislation ofl959, we
gave a special position and charter to the Commonwealth
Development Bank. This does not compete with the
ordina'. j Trading, Banks for vhat i will call crdinary
l~ arking t-siness. It was established ( and I now
speak of rural finance) to encourage rural development
by dealing with cases in which ordinary bank finance
would not commonly be available. Take an example
A farmer wants to improve his property and increase
his production. His personal security is good; he is
a competent and responsible man. But his cash
resources ar,: small;, lie wants a long-term borrowing
which doRs not fit into the overdraft system; his
actual assets are not adequate to provide a normal
overdraft security. Financial accommodation for such
a man is essential. For such cases, the Commonwealth
Development Bank was created, and furnished with a
limited amount of capital. In our recent Budget we
provided it with an additional œ Cm. of capital. In
future, we will take steps to examine its work and
review its capital position so that it may have
adequate funds for its non-competitive but very special
and important Pfnnctions.
3. MABKcETS. You know that both here and abroad we are
working hard on the problems presented to * Australia by
the negotiations for the entry of Great Britain into
the European Cormon Market. As you know, if Great
Britain were to accede to the Treaty of Rome
unconditionally ( which I don't for one moment think
she will) we would lose our preferential entry for
many of our primary exports into the British Market,
while similar products from Europe which now pay
duty would enter Great Britain duty-free. The
British Government has agreed to do its best to
protect the Commonwealth interests. We, in our turn,
will bend every effort towards protecting our vital
export trade. As my own Ministers have great
experience and not a little influence, we hope to be
able to achieve satisfactory results, We have been
at particular pains to establish one most important
point. It is this. We cannot take our primary
exports as a whole and feel pleased if we preserve a
certain percentage of trade over-all. For the truth
is that, in a large continent like ours, many
individual industries have a special local
significance, and are not to be lumped in with the
mass. Let me illustrate, by a single example, what I
mean, In Australia, dried vine fruits are produced
in limited irrigated areas. Whole communities
largely depend upon them. Their prosperity, indeed
their very existence, would be directly affected if
they lost the British market. Larger and more
widespread industries, with more widiespread markets
could, though wounded, survive. I want to make it
clear that we will fight the battles of all. ' Je are
a young and growing nation, and we must therefore
have bigger and better markets. In our negotiation,
no Australian industry is to be regarded as expendabe
NO rural industry, great or small, will be let tmnbyus. 
The negotiations are of historic importance. I
feel sure that you will wish them to be in the hiands
of people of experience, close knowledge, and
seasoned judgment.
We are a joint and united Government containing
Ministers from both the Liberal Party and the Country Party. We
have worked in complete harmony. Our policies are by our
common consent, joint policies. Undistracted by internal feuds,
personal differences, with no need to reconcile factions, we
have been able to present a common front to the problems of the
nation. a. rural matters we have worked in close
consultation with representative bodies. Our record in
stabilisation and extension schemes is clear,
A. e -ou going to vote for our opponents, who can claim
none of these things? 



2-TV RECORLDI: ~ LU~ PR~ k~ E 23RD ANOVE1v1BER0 196-1 ñ L~~ E'Z
Ladies and gentlemen,
I'm going to talk to you for a few minutes about the
development of Australia. I'm sorry if, standing here, I appear
to be rather of a school master about to give you a lecture--I
even have a sort of cane in my hand but there is a map and I
;;! ant to point a few things out to you on tile map.
But bernre I do that I just want to say this: the
business a Commonwealth Government is overwhelmingly to do
what it cal. to develop the country. If there is one thing that
we look back on with some satisfaction over the last ten years,
twelve years, it is the enormous growth of Australia, the
development of its resources. If there is one thing that we
put before you as our policy, it is to continue that
development to the greatest possible degree.
And in order to do that you don't want. to have a
Government that says " let it be done". You must have a
Commonwealth Government that knows that it wants to help to get
certain great things done; you want State Governments willi~ ng
and able to co-operate in the getting of them done and some
enormous work has been done in 0the States and in the thira
place you want to have a proper co-operation with large private
enterprise. I'll point that out to you in a moment on the map
when I refer to the railways project in Wiestern Australia, or
the Mount Isa railway project in Queensland. All three parties
must work together. They must have a co-operative spirit, and
they must have a clear idea in their minds of what it is they
want to do. Now we've been in office, as you know, for 12 ypars,
and in the course of that time tremendous things have been going
on in Australia. I'm going to mention one or two of them to
you by pointing them out or pointing their location out on
the map. And in particular I want to refer to a few of them to
which we have directed attention quite in the last few months.
Now let me just look at the map and point out one or
two things to you. I'm not going to pretend to exhaust the
list because time would not permit that, but there are a few
things here that weren't here a few years ago.
Down here in Victoria for example you see the railway
line running down to Melbourne. The unification of the'railway
line from Wodonga to Melbourne is a work of tremendous
importance: it means that you will have a standard gauge
railway available for great traffic from Sydney to Melbourne.
And of course there is already a standard gauge one that runs
up to Brisbane. Down here in this corner is Tasmania. Tasmania always
had a tremendous problem of shipping, because of course, it
depends on shipping. It has no land transport, obviously, to
the mainland: it needs shipping. And f~ or many years it relied
on a subsidised ship, plus rather uncertain shipping services
from other sources. dJe have, ourselves, in the last few years,
had built and put on to the run to Tasmania the Princess of-
Tasmania, a tremendous boon particularly to the Tasmanian
tourist traffic; the Bass ñ 1rader the roll-on roll-off ship
which greatly facilitates the handling of cargo; and we have
already had, in the last few months, a little to do with
roviding a new cattle ship for King Island. So that the
transport problem of Tasmania has been, in a large measure,
solve a, in the last few years. 
Another great problem that confronted us was the
problem of developing our exports, This is vital to Australia.
And we have looked at all these proposals that come up from the
States, largely in the light of whethtr they will develop export
business and improve our international, and therefore our local,
financial position. And so, in the last few months, we have
made arrangements with the Government of New South W4ales under
which we make available substantial financial assistance for
improving the coal ports in Newcastle, Sydney in Balmain in
fact and in Port Kembla; and also an arrangement with the
Government of Queensland in relation to the port of Gladstone.
Now all of these ports, the new facilities that will exist in
them, will give an increasing export trade in coal and how
important that is you will perhaps remember when I tell you, or
remind you, that when we came into office Australia was
importing coal. Today we are exporting it in large and growring
quantities. ) ii search has gone on, of course, and those engaged
in it are optimistic about ultimate results, here, and over in
the dest and around he-. e. And, well all I need say is that we
have some hope on this matter. But a great deal. of work haq
been done, and great financial encouragement has been given by
the Government of the Commonwealth.
Up here in Queenslanud is the major wfork the
reconstruction of the railway line from Mount Isa down to
Townsville arid Collinsville. Now that is a veizy big undertaking.
My Government has agreed by a contract signed only a
few months ago, to find œ C20m. of the initial cost of this line
for the Government of Queensland. The effect of the line will
be to make it possible indeed to make it certain that the
Mount Isa mine will become probably the greatest copper mine in
the world! The Company itself will spend scores of millions of
pounds; and the result will be to add, I believe scores of
millions of pounds to the export income of Australia.
Now I won't take time about Weipa and bauxite because
they go back a few years, although they are now in the process
of development. But up here we have, in the last few months, provided
money for the Government of Queensland to encourage the building
of beef roads, that is to say roads that will enable beef cattle
to come off in better condtion, and thereby add to our export
income. The same is true in the Northern Territory, where, of
course, in addition, as you know, we have these great deposits
of bauxite and the already substantially worked deposits of
uranium in Rum Jungle.
In the '. est up in the north we have found millions
ourselves for the development of the Kimberleys; and quite
recently more money for beef roads to take cattle into Wyndham,
Down here, the great scheme, a scheme that will cost
Governments œ C+ 2m. and the steel company at least as much the
great scheme of unifying the gauge from Kalgoorlie doi-mL
Kwinana, enabling iron ore deposits of great magnitude to be
worked in Koolyanobbing, and a new iron and steel industry in
Western Australia, something that will revolutionise that State.
These things have been discussed, and agreed upon, and put into
motion in the last few months.
In South Australia you may see, perhaps, the line of
the Murray the great problem, I believe, in South Australia is
the problem of water. And although the Snowy Scheme on which un
spend so much every year has, I believe assisted the supply of
water in the Murray, we now have under Aiscussion with New 
South ' 4ales, Victoria and South Australia a new dam about here1
at a place called Chowilla. And in relahoh to that which il
it goes on, and I believe it will, will be the biggest water
storage in Australia we, the Commonwealth Government, have
found, or will promise to find, a quarter of the estimated cost
just as we found a quarter of the cost in the case of the
H-ume dam and other works on the Murray.
Now that just gives you a sort of broad conspectus of
it. But there is a vary interesting aspect of it that I want tc
point out to you. My opponent, Mr. Calwell who, I must say has
an admirable faculty for coining a phrase every now and then,
likes to refer to-my Government and I suppose to me as
" tired an'. lazy". d~ ell I think that one is entitled occasionall~ y
to be tireu, but laziness is not something that I am accustomed
to being accused o. L,
Anyhow he says this is a tired and lazy governmlent
and it's t~ me you had a change. And here is the point that
want to make: In the last three months of this Parliament this
" tired and lazy" Govcr~ ment, instad of deferring works so that
it could promise them in a Policy Speech, got vith the job
negotiated with Queensland, negotiated with New South -dales,
negotiated with South Australia, negotiated with -Jestern
Australia. And the result is that in these last few months of
this Parliament we have put in hand, so that they will go
roaring along for the next three years at leas the works on
the coal ports, the Mount Isa Railway scheme the great iron r. nd
steel and railway and iron ore scheme in destern Australia the
dieselisation of certain railway lines in the State of South
Australia, the preliminary discussions on the technical level
for the great new dam at Chowilla, let's see, yes, the beef
roads up here, the beef roads in Queensland. I could, perhaps,
if I had time talk about half a dozen matters which, literally,
have been brought to their final stage of preparation, to the
stage of agreement, to a stage where the financial arrangemen+ s
are made and the work can be put in hand, all in the last three
or four months. I hope you will allow me to say that even a Government
that wasn't " tired and lazy" might be hard put to it to be
brisker than that, or to achieve so much as that in so limited a
time. But the work must go on that's the great point. And I
don't believe, do you, that it can go on unless you have a
feeling of co-operation, a feeling of confidence between the
Commonwealth and State authorities, between the 6ommonwealth and
the local authorities and the great private enterprises which
have so much to contribute to the development of Australia,
It is co-operation, stability of Government,
certainty of purpose, a willingness in a Government to go
straight forward with these jobs these are the thin,. s that
matter, these are the things that will be determined by your
vote on Polling Day.
Therefore having given you this very trifling survey
of some of the thVi ngs that are going on I leave it to you to
instruct the Parliament of the Commonwealth, through us, that
this work is to on and that Australia is to be bigger and
better; in other woras that we shall, as you may see on the
corner of the map, be buildingr for tomorrow. 



BROAD. CAS. T NO._ 3
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES)
ON NATIONAL STATIONS AT 7.15 P. M.
24TH NOVIE4BER9 1961
FOREIGN AFFAIRS
I will not take up your time by rehearsing what we have
done in the field of foreign policy. In my Policy Speech I made
references to the treaties to which we had become parties, such
as ANZUS and SEATO, which mean so much to our own security and to
the defence of South East Asia against Communist aggression.
On this occasion I will briefly say something about
four current world preLlems Disarmament, Berlin and Germany,
Laos and South Vitnam, and Indonesia and West New Guinea.
1. DISARMAMENT Earlier this year, the Commonwealth Prime Ministers, in
London, unanimously made a doclaration in favour of disarmament,
beginning with a suspension of nuclear tests. As you know the
Soviet Union ignored this, and quite suddenly resumed such tests
on a singularly great scale.
In srite of this callous and threatening action, which
cannot be ignored by the Wfestern Nuclear Powers, we believe that
negotiations should be resumed as soon as possible indeed
urgently, and that an agreement for suspension, under proper
control and supervision, should once more be sought.
Meanwhile, the Western Powers must be free to look to
their own defences. The proposal, made in some quarters, that nuclear
weapons should be abolished without a general disarmament agreement
is quite unrealistic. If accepted, it would be suicidal,
for the free world's great deterrent against Communist aggression
would disappear.
2. BE'RLIN AND GERMANY
This is one of the great issues in the Cold War which
the Communists have maintained so long.
Khrushchev says he wants peace. His followers in
Australia and their dupes or fellow-travellers, say they want
peace. o do you and I. But if Khrushchev wants peace over
Berlin, his course is quite easy.
He can recognise the position of Berlin as it was
established, between the Allies, at the end of the War, with the
Allies entitled to be present with troops, with free access9 and
with freedom. He can, through his satellite government of East
Germany, permit such access.
He can permit the free movement of freedom loving
people out of East Germany, as the Declaration of Human Rights,
to which the Soviet Union subscribes, requires.
He can join in promoting a free election by all the
German people to decide whether they want to be united or not.
He will do none of these thinas. He prefers threat and crisis,
because in such an atmosphere he thinks that Communism will
make headway. The West wants peace. It makes no threats. But it
will not surrender to bullying. We agree with the West. 
3. LASAD__ THY; % AZ
Win common with our partners q 1 SAO tn
Laos which is independent, self-governing on a
neutral, and not a sateLite of either side.
Why should such an obviously just solution take so long
to achieve? L-1. hy do the talks at Geneva go on indecisively?
Again, the answer is that the Communists while pretending to want
peace, are essentially concerned to acquire authority and control
over nations now outside their dominion.
South Vietnam, headed by a gallant fighter against
Communism, is a test case in the great cause of resistance. 4ie
believe that if Communism won in South Vietnam, South East Asia
could be lost to freedomz, and the isolation of Australia would be
ominous. That s why we h-ill stand up to our obligations under
ANZUS and SEATO.
4. INDOICZ-AIA AND WjEST Mij' GUINEA
The issues here need to be once more, explicity stated.
Indonesia is a near neighbour-, with her own political and economic
problems. , Ie want to be on The best of terms with her. We
profoundly sympL. thise with her desire for economic and social
, growth, for an assured independence, for resistance to Communist
control. We receive her students, and in turn do what we can to
assist her own development. There is no enmity between our
people, nor should there be.
The one matter of difference between us concerns West
New Guinea, over which the Netherlands exercises sovereignty.
,4e recognise that sovereignty, just as we expect other people to
recognise our sovereignty in Papua.
But we do not seek to perpetuate any form of colonialism.
We have for years made it clear that we regard ourselves as holding
East New Guinea in trust, aiding the development of its people ( at
no small cost) until the day comes when those people having been
equ4. pped for competent decision, decide their own future for
themselves. This is the principle of self-determination, We
have welcomed the promotion of precisely that policy by the Dutch
government in relation to 4est New Guinea. In the United Nations,
the Netherlands have made quite clear their willingness -to transfer
to the people of West New Guinea full sovereignty just so soon as
they are ready to assume it.
, That is wrong with this? 1o are told that the government
of , Iadonesia dislikes this attitude of ours, though it is one which
we have voluntarily imposed upon ourselves in relation to our own
section of the island.
All I can say is that Australia is a democracy, ard
therefore deeply attached to the principle of self-. government.
So far from being " colonial exploiters", as the phrase goes, we
put into Papua and New Guinea, in hard cash and hard work and
devoted service by many hundreds of Australians, far more than we
ever hope to get out of it. Our one great ambition is that, when
the day comes for these territories to determine their own des-tiny,
th'jir people will look on us as friends who have been faithful and
just to them. If this is how we feel and act, why should we deny the
same policies to the Netherlands?
So far, Indonesia has not accepted the principle of
self-determination for the people of West ' New Guinea. It says
that the area is; or should be, part of Indonesia, and that it
has no more righLt to delf.. determination than, say, Sumatra or the
Celebes. We would like to see the issue of sovereignty taken to
the International Court, by whose judgment all could abide. 
3.
We are not partisans in this matter, for we are not parties
principal. But, while legal sovereignty resides in the
Netherlands and is not legally challenged in the appropriate
tribunal, we must adhere to our support of the principle of selfdetermination.
We deprecate talk of war over such a matter. We want
peace and friendship. There is no occasion for hostility.
Living as we do so close to the great island of New Guinea, we
regard the interests of its people and their peaceful progress
as the paramount consideration. We hope that all concerned will
see it in this light. 



We2eklyj Index
No. 46
Week Ending November, 1961,
O 0a0
e
co
* H
I)
H 0
C) Nov. 20 No, 1177
23 No. 1192 POLYSTYRENE NEW MEMBERS FOR EXPORT DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
The Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt
Nov. 20 Noe1181
TThhee MMiinniisstteercr foorr
Nov. 21 No. 1186 RESULT OF AUSTRPiLIAN LOAN IN THE NETHERLANDS
FINANCING OF LKtOUR PARTY'S ELECTION PROGRAMME
iqational DeveloDment. Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner
FIVE MORE APPLICATIONS FOR OIL SUBSIDY
APPRO3VED.
The Minister for Defence, the Hon, Athol Townley, M. P.
Nov. 19 No. 1175
21 No. 1187 APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CHIEF OF THE AIR STAF
U. S. NAVY AIRCRA-iFT ARRIVING IN AUSTRALIA
ABOUT 26th NOVEMBER ON GEOMAGNETIC SURVEY
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck, M. P.
Nov. 23 No. 1195 PASTORAL LANDS FOR LEASING IN THE N. T.
The Minister for the Army, the Hon. J. O. Cramer
Nov. 23No. 1194 DIRECTOR OF MAINTENANCE VISIs3MALAYA
The Minister for Repatriation, the Hon. F. M. Osborne
Nov. 24 No1198 COMMISSIONER'S TERM EXTENDED
The Minister for Customs, Senator the Hon. Denham Henty
Nov. 20No. 1179 MAJOR IMPROVEMENTS TO AERODROME AT ST. THELENS
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Alan S. Hulme
Nov. 22No. 1190 UPPER ATMOSPHERE FIRINGS
The Minister for the Interior, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
Nov. 24No. 1197 SIREX WASP RESEARCH
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Nov. 20 20 21 No. 1178 R. A. N. ON VWAR GRAVES MISSION
No1180 FRIGATE SETS A RECORD
No. 1185 CHANGES IN SENIOR NAVY POSTS
The Minister for Air, Senator the Hon. Harrie Wade
Nov. 19 No. 1176 RAAF TO INVESTIGATE WARTIME WRECKS IN NEW
GUINEA
22 No. 1189 MALAYI'N ATC CADETS TO VISIT 1USTRALIA
23 No 1193 COMMiN4D OF RY'AF DSE IN VICTORIA
24 No1196 PAX CHUTEL DROP FOR SENIOR RAAF OFFICERS
The Department of Trade
Nov. 19 No. 1176A TRADE MISSION TO S. AMEIERICA IN APRIL
The Department of External Affairs
Nov. 21 No. 1182 VISIT BY INDONESIiAN TRADE UNIONISTS
21 No0184 AUSTRALIAYN ANTARCTIC TEAMS FOR 1962-3
21 No. 1188 AUSTRALIAN GRANT TO BRITISH HONDURAS
22 No. 1190Ai AU8TRALIA N ANTARCTIC TEAMS FOR 1962-3
COMiONTEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
: Inddx of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra.
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Nov. 21 No. 1183 APPOINTMENT OF SERVICES ATTACHE, MANILA.
25 No. 1196A FEDERATION OF MALAYSIA PROPOSAL
The Minister for Trade, The Hon. John McEwen
C) r
00
0
O
re
0 0
H I
o ie
F, 0) 24
0 P
4-' T 



_._ BROADCAST NO,
BROADCAST BY THE-! RIME EINISTER ( RT. HON. RG. MENZIES)
Over NATIONAL STATIONS at 7.15 p. m. MONDAY,
27TH NOVEIIER 1961
DEVELOPMENT
As the election campaign goes on, it becomes more and
more clear that there is a basic difference between Government and
Opposition in their approach to the national problems. I can best
illustrate this by referring to our well-known policy of national
development a policy which we have been pursuing with great
vigour, and in relation to which we have already accepted
substantial additional obligations over the next few years. I
refer to the West Australian iron ore, iron and steel, and railways
scheme, Beef Roads in the north, improved coal ports, and the like.
From our point of view, the great continuing policy of
works for development, particularly those calculated to earn more
* export income and save imports, is essential. It provides a
foundation upon which everything else stands. For when you
develop our country, whether in minerals or water supply or power
or transport or heavy industrics or more intensive production from
the soil, you are doing something which increases the national
Swealth and the national income and enables living standards to
rise and makes it financially possible for a Government to
increase social services and other cor= unity benefits. We regard
national development as the cause, and improving social benefits
as the result. Labour seems to start at the other end. Mr. Calwell
has been complimented in some quarters for putting forward a
constructive policy. Yet that policy is, in reality, a string
of financial promises and hand-outs ha" ing for the most part
little or nothing to do with the development of the nation's
resources. His approach is, therefore, fundamentally different
from ours. We have shown, and will show, that great works of
development must be based upon economic stability and the
encouragement of investment, and that only such a policy can give
rise to increased employment and wealth and growing social
advantages. The Calwell policy, so far fron being constructive, is
in reality destructive. It will check national development because
it is grossly inflationary, and will, therefore, lower living
standards and operate against effective saving and investment in
Australia. If he won this election it is quite clear that the
more he attempted to put his policy into operation, and the
greater the rate of inflation became, the slower would be the
rate of national progress and the greater the difficulty of
honouring the rest of his promises.
Now it must be said for us that we hxve very seldom
made election promises in relation to what I will call broadly
" social services". We have simply known . and determined that these
would be improved as the national capacity to provide them
becpaec greater. And wh. at has been the result?. 
2.
I hate to weary you with figures, but the ones I am
about to give you tare quite rum. rkablu. Wlhen the Labour Party
was defeated in 1949, having had up to that time a clcar majority
in both Houses of Parli-~ nt, and being therefore able to put its
policies into force, it . as spending œ 85n. on social services. In
the current year we are finding œ 273m.. But there are great
additional items. When they went out they were finding œ 6.3n. for
hospital beneofits wve re now finding œ 23n. They were finding
nothing for mldical benefits we are finding œ 16m. They were
finding less than half a million for pharmaceutical bunefits this
year we are finding There are other similar ite-s, such as
tuberculosis benefits and the nutrition of children. Add all these
up and the simple fact is that in the whole of what I will call
the " hoalth field" they were finding in 1929 we are, in
1961, finding œ 8mn. Those latter figures includu two remarkable
benefits for old age pensionors over nud above the actual amount
of their pensions of œ 4.8n. for mudical services and œ 9.3m. for
pharmaccutical bcnciits, or a total of œ 1. n.
Now I want to s-y to you that this record, which puts
La: bour's present electioJuaring protestations and pronisos in
their true light, could not have been achieved unless, und-jr our
overall policies of development and high public credit and
investmecnt, both domestic and fron abroad, the gross national
product had risen fromn 2,729-. in 1949 to œ 7,208. this year.
You see wha. t I man? The cxpansion of the resources of the
nation ha. s -ade it possible soundly and justly to increase the
benefits coming to citizens. You cannot, without inviting
d: ioa3lor, put tChriIt' p'Jp. pi) ico ' i. fln r:: t. nrtu by saying, as Labour
appears to say, that the individual benefits create the national
vealth. In our torn of office, as a result of these basic
policies, Lustralia has bccone, ong other things, the tenth
Sretcast traing nation in the world. For that is what has
enabled its living sta. ndardLs and its social services to grow.
To put this in the shortest possible t r s we believe
that a nation must create before it can distribute, and it . must
earn before it can pay out. We have . lr ady, as I have said,
plcdgod over the njxt three years vury largo sums of roney to
wiorks of national doveloprcent. Our oconomy will need to be strong
and stable to sustain and forvm. rd these enterprises, to say
nothing of others which will emerg. Yet, Calwoll lighth.
artedly proposes to add hundreds of : illions more each year over
and above the lready c om: iitted C-overn ment expcnditure iLnd, I
repeat, the great bulk of his proiscs have nothing to dc with
dcvelop-ment cr with the creation of vwualth at all. He seems to me
to be putting the cart before the horse. Indeed, so little
attention does he pay to the basic probloe of building up this
nation, that I begin to think that so long as his cert is full of
glittering gifts ho does not think that a horse is necessary at
all. 



ITO0. 3 TV REICORDING. " 1TAL. K TO TY2 NATTG~ IV~
BY THE PT1: 1 1 TbT. HON R G ,13
Ladies and gentlemen, I appear to be back once more at the schoolmaster's
desk but I hope you'll forgive me. But there are various
aspects of the election that I want to cover, so far as I can,
in these little talks.
Now in my Policy Speech, if you were enthusiastic
enough to listen to it, I said something about Foreign Policy
and the Treaties tha. t we've made with other countries. This
time I though' I might say something to ycu about four outstanding
problems in the international situation in the world.
The first of them is Di. sarm! ament. I have a map
here and I'll refer to it a little later on, but for the purpose
of talking about disarmament perhaps I don't need a map very
much, because there can be no disarmament in the true sense
unless you ca-a have the Great Powers of the world, facing up
to the realities and agreeing to something that is practical.
Now the Commonwealth Prime 1inisters, of whom I was one, earlier
this year met in London and we passed unanimously a resolution
about disarmament, indicating the broad terms on which we thought
it might be achieved and, in particular, we said that the
beginning should be a suspension of nuclear tests. In other
words, that none of the great Nuclear Powers and there are
three of them four of them including Frahco
should make any further tests, until arrangements had been made
to suspend them altogether, with proper inspection, with some
feeling of assurance on both sides that the other side wouldn't
be playing a ' rick. That's fair enough. ell the discussions
went on about the suspension of nuclear testing. The Western
Powers held up; Great Britain didn't make another test; the
United States didn't make another test; and after months of this,
all of a sudden, Khrushchev announced that the Soviet Union was
going to resume testing and since that day they've " fouped off',
I think the expression is, about 30 bombs including some bombs
of a size unparalled in modern history.
Now thut is a tremendously serious problem. Vwhat
are we to do about it? I for one would like to say to you, that
I see no reason why the United States of America should consent
to sit quietly while the Soviet Union goes on, and on, and on,
testing weapons. The time comes when the United States of
America, our powerful friend, will have to say, " Well we must
defend ourselves. We must not fall behind." Otherwise the
great deterrent of the bomb will cease to be a deterrent. But
I think the important thing, is that the Great Powers should once
more meet. They ought to meet before the end of this month in
Geneva, and get back into the Conference Room, because so long
as nations are testing these horrible weapons, so long wi]. l there
be a great tendency to provide them for other powers and the
more nations who have these weapons, the greater will be the
risk of an explosion. Nowi that broadly represents our approach
to this matter. Nowi the next matter that I want to mention to you is
one of the " hot spots", as they call it, of the world, and that
is the problem of Berlin and West Germany. If you can see this
__ A 
map, it shows in hatched lines here, West G'ermany; East Germany
is here; Berlin is inside the area of East Germany,, like an island,
with an air passage from it to the Western world, and with railway
access to the Western world. But in itself, it's an island in
the middle of what is now called East Germany.
Now I don't want to go into the history of this matter,
but I do want to say this to you, that the Western Powers have
precisely the same rights, and for precisely the same reasons,
in Berlin, as has the Soviet Union. They were the victorious
allies in the war, each of them assumed responsibility for a
Sector of Berlin with the right to have troops, with the right
to maintain contact and access. This is beyond argument.
Khrashchev himself doesn't endeavour to argue about it. But
of course, what has happened is that the Soviet Union has, in
effect, incc.-pora-Ged East Germany in the Soviet Union. They
pretend it's an independent country. Of course it isn't. It's
a satellite country. The best proof of that is that i~ n these
recent disturbances.. there have been Soviet troops to the nuamber
of many thousands, on the porimeter of Berlin, md now, fortifications
between one part of the city and the other, are being set
up. If Khrushchev If Khrushchev wants peace, as so many of his friends
in Australia pretend they want peace, he can get it quite easily.
He can say to the West " All right we will leave Berlin as it is.
Each of us with his ovm rights. Each of us with his own access.,
We will not prevent the people of East Germany from leaving East
Germany if they want to, because this is their right under the
Treaty of Human Rights." ( Under any conception of humanity a
man ought to be allowed to leave his own country). " And therefore
wea will agrce to free emigr'ation from East Germany into
West Germany", an emigration which you know has been going on,
until stopped by him recently, at a tremendous rate. And above
all, he can say 11' 1jo can settle the question as to whether Germa. ny
ought to be re-united. We'll agree to an election. A free
election, in which both West and East Germans will vote."
Now this may seem to you, or to me, pretty simple.
Those are the conditions of peace. He won't have one of them.
I tell you quite plainly, that in my view, in the view of my
Government, the responsibility for the tension in relation to
Ber-lin in Germany lies squarely at the doors of the Soviet Union.
And if you want our position summed up I'll say we are completely
on the side of the Wecstern Powers, on this matter.
Nov! in the meantime, down here in the south -ast of Asi",
in L-A-0-most of us call it Laos, but I believe correctly
it ought -6o be called " Louse", but anyhow there it is, and this
country is a peaceful rur! r'l country. Only wanting to live
by itself, and yet it is bedevilled today by civil war, by
Communist pressure from the north, by all kinds of agitations,
which I've no doubt are designed to make that country a satellLV. t,-
of the Communists, whether of the Soviet Union, or of Communist
China, perhaps is no great matter. VWe of the West, if I may
so dscrie us bu we include we of the South East because if
we include the SEATO the South East Asian Treaty Nations,
Pakistann, Thailand and thu Philippines and Australia and New
Zealand-to say nothing of Great Britain and Ame rica, and France-.
we have said that we don't want Laos to'be a satellite of any
group in the world. I.-le wiant that country to be free, to be
completely independent, to be neutral -and not to be aligned with 
any other Piwer. Tho-L again, that's pretty simplc, isn't it?
That's pretty straight forward. You couldn't find any fault
with that. But for months at Geneva the Soviet Union has
prolonged the negotiations and after all this time we now are
not much nearer to achieving that peaceable result than we were
three or four or five months ago,
The same kind of trouble arises in relation to South
Vietnam. A very gallant little country. An outpost:-of defence
against Communism. While nearer to us we have our other problem,
I hope that it's one that will be fixed up, and that's the problem
of our attitude towards West New Guinea and the position of
Indonesia in relation to it.
Now I just want to make it clear to you you'll read
some heate. statements occasionally we are on friendly terms
with Indonesia. We ought to bel We want to bel There is a
country which has development in front of us; a country that we
can help; a country, thousands of whose students we take into
Australia, we have every reason to be friendly with Indonesia,
but we have one difference of opinion, and that's about West
New Guinea, which Indonesia claims, and the soverignty over
which is at present in the Netherlands.
Now I'll make a long story short you've heard
politicians say that before today, but I have to because the
clock is moving on.-Our attitude towards the rost New Guinea
problem is exactly the same as our attitude towards our own
section of New Guinea. We believethat it is the duty of the
occupying power to bring the people, the native, indigenous
people of this island up to a state where they can govern themselves.
We want none of this Congo business in New Guinea.
We as kustralians are paying many millions a year to build up
Papua and New Guinea on our side of the island. The Dutch have
agreed that they are all for self-determination in the West, but
Indonesia has said this is not a case for self-determination,
" this part of New Guinea ought to belong to us and we are not
offering self-determination to the local inhabitants."
That's our difference. And you would think very
poorly of me, or of my Government, if I didn't take the
opportunity of making it quite clear that this business of
self-determination, of bringing people to a point where they
arc capable of governing themselves and then letting them
make their own choice as to where they are going, ts is
vital to us, because in a strange and rather democratic world,
we Australians are democrats. We believe in democracy, and we
believe that in due course, not too soon and not too late, but
at the right time when we've brought education to the right point.
health services to the right point; some understanding of local
self-government to the right point; when the day comes after all
those things, when the people of th-. t island, or our section of
it, are able to detrmnino t+ hr fntur-we say they must and
they should, and that's our view in relation to West New CGinea.
And all I need say is that, so far as we understand the position,
the Government of the Netherlands has exactly the same attitude
towards that problem in West New Guinea as we have in thl East.
And so you see in brief, peace, peace, the problem of
peace. Wve are on the side of peace, The little survey that
I've given you will, I hope, indicate to you that if there is any
desire to break the peace, it resides outside this country, and
outside those other great countries whose friend we are, 



BROADCAST BROADCAST BY THE PRIiME MINTISTER ( RT. HON. , ENZIES)
OVER NATIONAL STATIONS AT 7,1.5 om
THURSDAY, 3th NOVEiBER, 1961
In an earlier broadcast I spoke to you about rural
policy and about the great importance of maintaining and increasing
our production and export of rural products.
On this occasion I want to say something about our
secondary industries. It is of the greatest moment that Australia
should continue to develop her secondary industries which, I am
happy to say. have increased most notably during the last 10 years.
From a domestic point of view, the great development of manufacturing
in Australia has put us in a position to resist depressions much
more effectively than before. The great and terrible depression
of 1929-33 came about because our manufactures were under-developed
and, when the impact of the de-ression which began overseas reached
Australia, we found that our prices for wool and wheat and so on
fell away to a pathetically low level and thct great unemployment
occurred which the state of our manufacturing development did not
enable us to take up.
When I say great unemployment, I am referring to the
historic fact that unemployment in Australia in 1932 reached as
high as 30 percent. To put this position metaphorically, we were
not, as a nation, standing scuarely on both feet. Events since
have corrected this matter. Primary and secondary industry have
come increasingly to discover their inter-dependence. Australia
has now a broadly-based and well-balanced economy in which some
blow to one part of the structure does not imperil the structure
as a whole. One of my government's great policies is to develop
this same kind of balance in our export trade. Today our export
income is derived to a major degree from the export of primary
products. As they have prices which fluctuate in the world's
markets, and as, at home, they are subject to drought or flood,
so our export income tends to fluctuate and governments find it
necessary to adopt from time to time emergency measures to prevent
our overseas balances from falling too low. The ultimate answer
to this problem is to develop a large export of manufactured and
processed goods which, side by side with growing exports of primary
products, will give to us the kind of international balance which
we need. Having this in mind, the Government has initiated various
measure to encourage manufacturing export, That export must, of
course, be based upon a sound policy, at home, of protecting
economic and efficient Australian industry through the Australian
Tariff Board. Wo are very conscious of the need for such protection.
We firmly believe that the only reliable form of protection is
through tariffs made after investigation through the Australian
Tariff Board. Impoi: t Licensing is appropriate only to emergencies
affecting our financial balances, and affords no sound basis for
long-range protection. But the tariff system itself is quite
capable of improvement. Last year we established means for getting
temporary tariffs for industries which might suffer serious damage
if tariff protection was delayed. until the ordinary and necessarily
fairly slow processas of the Tariff Board had been gone through,
We will continue to watch this latter, particularly in relation
to some Australian industries which just cannot have effective
production and efficient and reasonable cost levels unless they
can maintain a continuing high volume of output. This particular
problem will engage our attention after the election when we
review the work of the Tariff Board. But one of the things that
will, we believe, help the manufacturer in his costs would be the 
Jncr-ase in his turn-over by the development of export business.
There can be no doubt that the Australian has skill and energy
not inferior to that of larger manufacturing countries. What we
want is in effect more business. It is for these reasons that
we have had trade missions containing businessmen go abroad,
organised trade ships, have greatly expanded the Trade Commissioner
Services and the trade publicity vote and so on.
We have also provided substantial tax incentives
to the export of manufactures, partly by remissions of pay-roll
tax and partly by special allowances for promotional expenditure
and activities overseas.
The Export Payments Insurance Corporation, which we
set up in 1956, has already insured export transactions into no
less then 10 countries.
The Export Development Council which we set up and
which contains distinguished representatives of Australian
manufacturing has felt that there are real prospects for increasing
exports by establishing Australian warehouses in selected markets
overseas. We are proposing to examine this as promptly as possible.
We are not, of course, contemplating that an Australian Government
warehouse will be set up in some other country so that the
Australian Government may do the export business. But there are
indications that exporters who would not feel justified in carrying
stocks in an overseas country in warehouses of their own,
might be willing to co-operate with other exporters in using
common warehousing facilities. Every businessman knows that
very frequently in another country the ability to make a sale is
contingent upon the ability to make further suuplies available
quickly if the first sale proves satisfactory. If it becomes
necessary to communicate with Australia and if there is some delay
getting further supplies further business may be missed. Thus,
from this point of view, we have been directing our attention to
this admittedly novel proposal. But by whatever means it can
be achieved, it is, we believe, essential that over the next
or 20 years Australia should develop a very large export market
for the products of her secondary industries. When that day
comes, two advantages will accrue.
The first will be to the manufacturing industries
themselves, which by an expansion of their total volume in
production will be able to keoe their unit costs on a comoetitive
basis. This is frequently difficult when their market is
limited and domestic. The other advantage will be to the balance of
payments, a matter to which I h,. ve already referred. It would
tend powerfully to eliminate those periodical fluctuations in
our overseas trade balances . ihich give rise to special measures
to restrain imports or, as was the case a year ago, special
economic restrictions at home in order to reduce the demand for
imported goods to a level at which our overseas funds can sustain
them. In spite6f its occasional vicissitudes, the history
of manufacturing in Australia has been one of immense achievement.
Without it we could never have sustained the immigration programme
of the post-war years, or the remarkably high level of employment
which has characterised our own period of office. The Government
is not under temptation to forget these matters or to ignore
the very great importance of developing sound and progressive
secondary industry based for the most part upon our rapidly
developing national resources. 



" TAK TO '. Tii T
BY THE, PRj? LTI. . T. R EIT HO R. oGJ. N Z]: TZE
Ladies and gentlcmcn, On this occasion I am going to talk to you for little
under a quarter of an hour about some aspects of our trade problem.
I won't be able to say very much about any part of it, but I hope
I can give you a reasonably clear survey, and so I want to start
with this map of E-ope, which contains the area which we call the
Common Market. This comprises the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg,
France, 7, est Germany and Italy,
These six nations back in 1957, made a treaty, The Treaty
of Rome, and tha' was a treaty which was designed to set up an area
of economic cc-operation in Europe, The main features of this
were, that irstead of having six countries, each with its own tariff
barriers against the others, the Six should, over a reasonably
short period of time, have a common tariff against the rest of the
world and, internally, free trade, which means of course, that
goods from France could pass into Germany within a few years free
of duty. But both France and Germany for example, would have,
as against the rest of the world, a cormmon tariff barrier,
There are many other aspects of it. It is a tremendously
important agreement. It has very big political implications.
It is going to have, I think, considerable effect on working
conditions, on economic policy, on financial policy. But time
will not perinit me to go into those details, I ask you however,
to take it from me that this European Common Market is, in itself,
one of the great economic developments of this century, and it
has become of particular importance to us, because Great Britain
is now seeking to enter the Common Market and other Nations no
doubt will follow suit. This means that Great Britain is seeking
to become one of the nations now called The Six,
Now why does this concern us? -ell, the answer is
that the whole pattern of Australian trade for many years has been
based on Commonwealth preferential trade. In other words, we
get a number of our commodities like wheat, butter and dried fruits
and so on, into Great Britain free of duty, while similar goods
from other countries pay duty, That gives us a preference.
And in the came way British goods, chiefly manufactured goods,
passing into Australia, have come in under the British pref'erential
tarifff Now this mutual preferential system in the Commonwealth
has, I think been, from our point of view economically, the
outstanding thing of this century.
Now we have to consider how you reconcile the one
with the other. How does Great Britain become a meber of a
Free Trade area, and at the same time preserve the substance of,
for example, Australian trade with Great Britain' 9 You see the
great imnportance of it.
There is a little cou': ntry up here, Denmark, which is
not yet a member of The Six, but I should think certainly will be,
And Denmark produces a great deal of butter and dairy products
generally. Today there is a duty against them, but Australian 
goods of the same kind go in free and also New Zealand goods
and it is very, very important for New Zealand go in free,
If Great Britain went into the Co. Anon Market
unconditionally just signed on the dotted line, and I don't
think for one moment she is going to do that the position would
be that our preferences would disappear, because she would have
to be inside the common tariff barrier herself. Our preferential
system would be converted into a free trade preference from
European countries, so that French wheat would go into England
free of duty, and our wheat would pay duty. You can see exactly
how tremendously important this is.
Niw we are in the closest negotiations with Great
Britain. We have put ourselves in close contact with the
countries of The Six, because we want her to be able to negotiate
terms and conditions for going into the European Common Market,
which will well how shall I put it? inflict the minimum of
harm on our trade, and, in particular, enable particular industries
in Australia which practically live on the British market, such
as dried fruits, to continue in existence, This we regard as a
great battle. We believe that you would want to have it
conducted on your behalf by people of great experience and of
some standing with the administering authorities in Great Britain,
and indeed with the leaders of these European countries.
Well the negotiations have only just begun. We have
done an immense amount of work in London, in Europe, and in
Australia and are continuing to do it. And you may take it that
we will regard it as our great responsibility to the export
industries of Australia to see that when the day comes that the
United Kingdom has concluded its negotiations, those negotiations
will have resulted in some special provisions for Coimnonwealth
trade which would be rather different froim the ones now existing
between the countries of The Six. I need not go into detail on
that matter, because you can see how tremendously difficult it is.
It is very complex. The negotiations will take a long time,
because there are scores and scores of individual items which
will have to be taken into account,
Recently, when Great Britain announced that she was
going into these negotiations, and that they would involve
agricultural products, it was something new from our point of
view. Comments were made in Parliament and elsewhere that we
should have anticipated this, and that we are starting off on the
business of building up our trade with the rest of the world too
late. Now it is very important that we should build up our
trade with the rest of the world. It is not likely that we
will come out of these discussions one hundred per cent as well
off as we are under the existing system, I think that would
be putting it a little high, optimistic as I am0 And therefore
it is of tremendous importance for us as a great trading nation,
to see that we are developing our trade all round the world, and
I am going to proceed to this other map in order to tell you
quite briefly how much we have done about that matter in the last
ten years, and in particular during the last five years, since
the Department of Trade was established for this very pu: rpose.
If you will look at tha. t map you will see that there
are certain countries marked, United Kingdom, Belgium, West
Germany, France, Italy, Tr~ n, India, Japan, Indonesia, New Zealand, 
3.
. the United States and Canada. These are the twelve countries
with whom we do the bulk of our overseas trade. Or to be more
accurate, these are the twelve countries which are our biggest
partners in trade, in and out. But in addition to that, we set
out some time ago, years ago, to develop our Trade Connissioner
Service so that we would encourage trade and not only with those
countries, but elsewhere. And on this map you will see marked
places like Stockholm and Bonn, London of course, and Paris and
Rome; courtries in Africa fromL Cairo through Nairobi, Salisbury
down to Johannesburg, across to Accra in Ghana; Beirut, Karachi,
Bombay, New Delhi, Calcutta, Colombo, Bangkok, up to Tokyo,
Hongkong, Manila, Kuala Lumpur in Malaya, Singapore, Djakarta
and of course New Zealand; and over here in Canada, Vancouver,
Ottawa and Montreal; and in the United States, San Francisco,
Chicago, New York, Washington; and in South America, comparatively
recently, Trinidad and Lima.
Now this is a very great establishment of Trade
Commissioners and as you probably know the work done by the Trade
Commissioner Service is in forwarding trade, in promoting trgde
missions, sometimes trad, ships, special surveys conducted by
organised groups of business men and this work is tremendously
important. I think that we can say confidently, that so far
from neglecting the business of building up our trade, wherever
we can get trade around the world, we have been remarkably active
in that field. '. NIe now have far more Trade Commissioner posts
than ever existed before in Australian history.
In order to encourage exports from Australia, in 1956
we established a special Insurance Corporation to insure people
in relation to connercial transactions in which there were certain
risks of a non-commuercial kind. This is a scheme which has been
adopted in Great Britain, and which operates in Canada and which
has gone remarkably well. It is a scheme which has been referred
to, approached by exporters, including manufacturing exporters,
so far that it has already insured transactions into 120 different
countries in the viorld. That is, I think you will agree, a
remarkable thing, and because we attach tremendous . importance to
developing an export of manufactured and processed goods, we
introduced only 18 months ago but before this Common Market
crisis developed a system of special tax concessions in relation
to export goods which I believe is very well received by the
vastly important manufacturing industry of Australia. It arose
in fact out of consultations that we had with eminent men in
that field. Now all that adds up to this. We are out for business.
Ic believe that we can do business more and more, and we will do
it of course, more and more if we have a stable Government with
experienced people to do the negotiations, with the good will
of the rest of the world, and with a high credit standing i the
rest of the world.
That is a very short summary. A very imperfect
summary of the most complex problem we have to deal with in the
course of the next twelve months. We will deal with it, with
your authority; we will put all our enthusiasm into it, because
we believe that in all these discussions we are battling for the
true interests of what we believe to be a wonderful country, and
above that the most promising country to be found in the Free
World. 



Weekly Index
No,. 4
Week Ending_
December 2, 1961.
COMMONIEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies.
No. 1208 AGHA. NAIAN AGRICULTURAL OFFICER TO STUDY IN
AUSTRALIA.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, the Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Nov. 26 No, 1200B 1961 TRADE DRIVE GETS RESULTS
28 No01206 Mr. McEWEN ASKED TO COMMENT ON REPORTS IN
BRUSSELS RE COMMON MARKET
Dec. 1 No. 1216A MR. McEWEN WELCOMES DECISION TO IMPROVE
INTERNATIONAL MAJRKET FOR AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS.
The Minister for D(, fence, the Hon. Athol Townley, M. P.
Nov. 26
Dec, 1 No. 1200
No. 1216 HIGHER R. A. A. F. APPOINTMENTS
UNITED STATES AIR FORCE TEAM TO VISIT
AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Territories, the Hone Paul Has] uck
Dec. 1No. 1215 TERRITORY OF PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
The Minister for Labour and National Service, The Hon. William
McMahon
Nov. 28 No. 1205 DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN INDONESIAN TRADE UNION
MISSION AND MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND NATIONAL
29 No. 1208B E PLVOE ENT
The Postmaster-General, The Hon. C. W. Davidson
No. 1206A
No. 1211 A THOUSAND MILLION STAMPS
APPLICATIONS FOR LICENCES FOR COMMERCIAL
TELEVISION STATIONS IN COUNTRY AREAS
4th PHASE.
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
Nov. 29 30 No 1208A
No. 1212 OUTLOOK FOR WHEATGROWERS
WHEAT GUARANTEED PRICE AND HOME CONSUMPTION
PRICE 1961-62
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
No. 1v. 28No. 1204ROYAL MILITARY COLLEGE INTAKE FOR 1962.
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. F. M. Osborne
Noy. 27 No. 1201TOYS FOR CHRISTMAS
The Minister for Customs and Excise, Senator the Hon. Denham Henty
Nov. 30 No. 1210 AMENDMENTS OF THE CUSTOMS REGULATIONS
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G, Gorton
Dec. 1 No, 1214 SEA TRAINING FOR NAVAL RESERVES.
The Minister for Air, Senator Harrie Wade
Nov. 26 No. 1199 GOLF IN THE ANTARCTIC
28 No1202 RAAF " STANDBY" FOR PROJECT MERCURY
30 No, 1209 PERTH SQUADRON WINS CUP FOR MOST EFFICIENT
CAP UNIT
The Department of External Affairs
Nov. 28No 1203ANTARCTIC SHIP TO LEAVE FOR MACQUARIE ISLAND
ON DECEMBER 1
The Department of the Navy
Nov0 29 No 1207 NiVY OFFICE MOVES TO PERMANENT HEADQUARTERS
The Department of Primary Industry
Nov. 29
Nov. 28
30
O E
0 0c
-P 0
ir-i Q
E i c
0 D*
U &gt; r-Nov. 30 -No* l213 If_
ECPORT SUGAR RE,' BATE 



BROADCAST NO. 6.
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( RT. HON. R. G. LI: ENZIfES
OVER NATIONAL. ST. TIONS AT J_ 175_
MONDAY, 41th DECEBER, 1961.
Ladies and gentlemen,
In my Policy Speech I made two statements which I will
repeat. The first was:
" After 12 years, the AoLP. can easily make a series
of brand new offers without saying where the new
hundreds of millions are to come from, though they
will, of course, come from you."
This forecast was completely borne out on the following
evening when Mr. Calwell produced a series of promises, the cost of
which on authoritative calculations runs into hundreds of millions;
anywhere between œ 24Cm and œ 390m on his specific offers and many,
many more millions on those which were more vaguely stated. It
has been very interesting for me, going around Australia, to discover
how widespread is the realisation that the people themselves would
have to pay, since governrznts have no money to spend except that
which has bejn earned and paid over by tax or loan by the men and
women of Aurtralia. I gathered the impression from the Labour Policy Speech
that Mr. Calwell thought that it could all be done without increasing
taxeso Mr. Calwell's predecessor, Mr. Chifley, so frequently
quoted by Members of the Labour Party, said quite plainly in
Paliament, with reference to a much smaller proposal:
" It is of no use attempting to fool the people with promises.
These things can be done only by the imposition of additional
taxes,"
But today's Labour men don't quote that remark.
The second statement in the Policy Speech was;
" We offer you good government. The essential quality
of good government is that it should have sound and
intelligible principles, that it should pursue great
national and social objectives with resoluteness, that
it should be able to meet the storms that arise from
time to time with a proper sense of navigation, that
it should have cohesion in its own ranks and a strong
sense of mutual loyalty,"
I stand by that definition. Good government is what
Australians are entitled to, When you vote on December 9 you will,
I know, exercise your judgment as to which side can give you good
government in the sense that I have described.
Do you really think that the present Labour Opposition is
capable of giving it to you? What are its sound and intelligible
principles? I had thought that the major plank in ito platform
involved the nationalisation of industries., The Member for Yarra,
a member of Labour's front bench, an absolute certainty to be a
Minister if Labour won this election, wrote in June this year, only
months ago, that economic power must be transferred " by controls,
by public enterprise and by nationalisation". Mr. Calwell is a
determined advocate of Constitutional amendments which would enable
this objective to be achieved. Yet, for purposes of this election,
he has declared a moratorium on the great socialist principleø He
cays to you, in effect: " Don't worry about our great socialist
principle by which we live and move and have our being; just vote
us into office and we will forget about thct principle for the next
three years" o 
Can the deeply divided Federal Labour Party profess to
have cohesion in its own ranks, to say nothing of mutual loyalty?
The very idea is r~ dictlous. For on the great matters which will
determine whether government is good or baa, it is almost impossible
to obtain a concerted view from our opponents0
They profess to be opposed to Communism0 Yet they
resisted our secret ballots law which restored proper democrati~ c
rights to trades unionists, and if they honour the latest instructions
they have had from outside, they will repeal the legislation
and leave the way clear for a great Communist revival.. Where do
they stand on the threats to world peace presented by the bullying
and aggressive tactics of the Communist Powers? That many Labour
members are profoundly opposed to the Cotmunist strategy is, of
course, quite clear, I do not question Mr, Calwell's personal
attitude, But he has sitting close to him prcepective ministers
who are sel,-m heard to voice a criticism of the Communist Powers
but take a good dual of time in attacks upon the United Kingdom
and the United States of America, without whose s%' aunch friendchip
completely re-established by us, Australia's security would be in
danger* Where do-Is the Labour Party stand on such great
associations as those in the ANZUS Pact with America and New
Zealand and in SEATO which includes three Asian powers and is
powerfully backed by the United States, United Kingdom and France?
I remind you that they have never once had a good word
to say about either arran,,, ment.
What are their pDrinciples on defence? Every time the
defence estimates have been before Parliament for years they have
criticised them. it is not long ago that they were proposing that
we should heavily reduce our defence expenditure. All this is
graciously concealed from you in the present election.
Where does the Labour Party stand on the vital principle
of responsible government?
That is a system under which the people elect a Parliament
and may dismiss it at the next election if they think fit, while
the Parliam~ ent produces through the normal processes a Prime Ministel.
and Ministers who must accept responsibilities for their policies
in the course of Parliamen~ tary debate. The Labour Party cannot
possibly pretend to believe in this system for, as I have frequently
pointed out, the Federal Labour Party is absolutely bound by the
decisions on policy of the Federal Conference of the Australian
Labour Party which is, of course, not elected by you and has no
responsibility to you,
It is the simple fact that you could elect Labour on
such policy as it now presents to you, only to find that in the
course of the life of the Parliament this outside body could, as
the isuapreme governing authority and policy making body" give
different orders and compel their performance,
I could go on like this for a long time if I had the time
or you had the patience, but what I have said to you is designed
to emphasise that, with the complete mutual loyalty which has
existed among Ministers and Members on the Government side for the
last 12 years, we can offer you a continuance of good government
with no qualifications, with no reservations, and with a record of
performance to back it. The short survey of the Labour Party's
position which I have put to you will, I think, satisfy you that
labour cannot offer you good government in this sense, It is no
doubt for this reason thrat in this election they have offered you a
series of inducements in cash or credit hoping that if they cannot
persuade your minds they may at any rate have a chance of appealing
to your pockets. 
Time after time you have rejected this offensive
approach. You have with sound common sense refused to be
bought with your own money, I am confident that the current
attempt to get you to reverse this judgment and to forget the
essential character of good government will once more fail. 



NO. TV RZCORDING: " TALK TO THE NATION"
BY ' THE PRIME MINISTER T" HE 1FlT.' HON. R. G. MENZIES
6TH DEMBER, 1261
Ladies and gentlemen,
This, you may be glad to know is my last appearance
on Television in this election campaign, and it's a very brief
one five minutes I think. Therefore all I need do, all I
can do, is to give you a very quick summary of what I beieve to
be the issue in this election,
Now I've been all around Australia I must say I have
had some f the best meetings I have ever had in my life and
I've been delighted to find wherever I go that people are not
only conscious of the development of this country in recent
years, but they are very proud of it and they are looking
forward to the next period of development because they know
that this means everything to them; not only in terms of
national strength, but in terms of individual advancement,
rising living standards, high and rising employment.
Now what has been done in these recent years has
been done by what I will describe as a system of co-operation,
Commonwealth Government, State Governments private enterprise
hardly any of t. hese big things that are going on in Australia
fail to reflect that particular friendly co-operative
association. And of course we have been aided in all this by
the fact that into Australia there has come a vast amount of
capital, a vast amount of skill and a great number of people.
And all these things have worked together, in an atmosphere of
good credit, and good repute, and stable government, to
produce the results that we have seen and to produce tose even
greater results that will be seen in the years to come.
Now on the other hand we have our opponents tthe
Socialists of the Labour Party, who offer you very li te in
terms of development. They haven't had so much to say about it,
but they offer you handouts, very attractive offers, on the good
old socialist principle. But where they stand on the matters
that are essential to development is another question.
They appear to object to investment, here from
overseas. All they have to do is to cut it off like that, and
the result will be seen before very long in a slowing down of
the national progress. dhere do they stand on industrial
peace? Because the high level of industrial peace has meant a
great deal in these recent years to national progress, and one
of the elements in it has been, for example, the democratic
control of the trades unions by the secret ballot, So far as I
can make out Labour is pledged to repeal the Secret Ballot
legislation. I certainly know that when it was before
Parliament they voted1 to a man, against it. Where do they
stand on these other ' Matters?
I've said something about overseas investment
something about secret ballots, but dhat happens under their
inflationary system of finance? Rising costs, great damage to
the export industries, consequently a considerable loss of
national income consequently a considerable tendency for the
real standard ol living to fall, and, as these things go on, a
considerable building up of unemployment on the large scale.
Not a moderate amount of unemployment, temporary, and in a
volume that will undoubtedly disappear in the course of next
year, not that; but massive unemployment as a result of loose
expansionary finance and rising costs. 
2.
Now that is as much as I can say in this time it by
no means covers the ground. But it's your choice and I don't
mind telling you that, not so much for my sake, as an
individual, but for the sake of this country, I hope you will
choose to go on with sound government and sound national
advancement. 



FINAL BROADCAST.
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER ( THE RT. HON. R. G. MNZIES)
OVERNATIONAL STATIONS AT 8 Dm0
WEDNESDAY. DECEMBER 6~~
In a very remarkablo series of meetings and in my previous
broadcasts, I have dwelt upon thn great national tasks in hand, the
wonderful growth of the last decade, and the immense prospects for
the future, provided we adhere to the policies that are serving
our country so well0
In this final broadcast, p. most at the end of the
campaign, I want to put to you some of the elements which should
determine your vote.
Our opponents, by common consent the maost unimpressive
and divided. Opposition ever to sit in the Commaonwealth Parliament
even our recently converted newspapers critics have always
conceded this! are asking you to vote out of office myself and
my oxperionced and loyal band of i 1inisters, and hand over to them
the government of Australia for all purposes local and international.
It is your choice, and I know that you will make it with
the true interests of our country at heart.
The only way in which you can express your choice is by
your vote in your particular House of Representatives seat, and
your vote for the Sonate. if, for some reason you vote for a
Labour candidate on personal grounds, though you support the
Government in general, you are voting to put the Government out.
Think that over*
In making your choice*, I suggest that you look first at
Australia's position in the world, at our relations with other
countries, and at what your present government has done about
these matters, Our policy and record are quite clear. While loyally
observing our duty to the United Nations, and playing a substantial
part in Colombo Plan aid and in the civilised development of
Papua and New Guinea, we have sought to assure the safety of
Australia by developing treaty agreements with the great democratic
powers and by bringing our own defences to a modern and efficient
condition not previously equalled in time of peace. Our relations
with the U. S. A. have become close and intimate. In both London
and Washington, our views are constantly sought and offered.
Australia's standing in significant quarters overseas is both
high and useful. Would you trust Labour to imnprove this state
of affairs? Or will Labour's position be as ambiguous in office
as it has been in opposition?
We are not a neutral or unaligned government. We know
what side we are on, and have always recognised that if we are to
look for help and protection to great powers, we must accept
mutual obligations. But in the present Labour Opposition there are
influential members and aspiring Il1inisters who are deeply tainted
by neutralism, uncritical of the Communist aggressors, sometimes
their apologists, constantly critical of our allies, by no means
favourable to SEATO and ANZUS.
I want to tell you, with great gravity, that I believe
it would be a disaster for Australia's relations with the free
world to be handed over to the present Labo-ur Party.
Let me illustrate by saying something about the
position of Commnunist China. It is well-known that any diplomatij;
recognition of that aggressive country, or any movement to instal
it in the United Nations would be unacceptable to the Communists
unless it conceded China's claim to Formosa, Yet our Labour 
opponents have regularly, in Parliament, advocated the recognition
of Red China, knowing that this would involve recognising its
right to take over the anti-Communist nation of Formosa! The
adoption off such a policy would, of course, damage our relations
with the U. S. A. Worse still, it would give a diplomatic victory
to China which wculd gravely weaken SEATO, encourage Chinese
aggression in South-East Asia, and discourage res~ btance to
Communism in those Asian nations which are our nearest neighbours.
Are you going to vote for this?
Turn back home, to this happy and prosperous land.
Mr. Calwell is, as usual he has done it before every
election making great play of unemployment, which he appe~ ars to
want me to make the dominant, if not the sole issue in this election,:
I have refulied to play his game for him. That there is, in total
terms, some small degree of current unemployment is true, The
special financial provisions we have made for housing and State
works are already producing a marked improvements The great
national works in various States to which we have already agreed
to make massive Commonwealth contribution will undoubtedly lead
to further employment. In his policy speech, Mr. Calwell promises
" to restore full employment within 12 months" t. Without any of his
grossly inflationary policy, we expect the same position to be
achieved under our administration,
We do not forget that the over-all statistical position
of employment, so much better here than in the U. S. A. and Canada,
provides no comfort to the willing and competent man who is at
present without a job.. We want to see him in a job as soon as
possible. Meanwhile, we have made a great improvement in
Unemployment Benefits
The conditions for obtaining it are today precisely
those laid down and operated by the Government in which Mr. Calwell
served. The one difference is in the amount paid.
Under Labour, in 1949. the Basic Wage was Z699.0 por
week. For an unemployed man with a wife and child, the
unemployment benef'it was Z2.10.0 a week, or a little over
of the Basic Wage.
Under us, in 1961, the Basic Wage is œ C14.8. O per week.
For an unemployed man with a wife and child, the
unemployment benefit is œ 7 per week, or just under half of the
Basic Wage. Yet we are told that we are indifferent to the plight
of the unemployed., But I will go further. The Labour Policy, if cai'ried
out will increase unemployment. My reasons for this statement
can be shortly stated.
Labour's programme will add hundreds of millions to the
already steadily rising Commonwealth expenditure. I understand
that Mr. Calwell says " no increased taxation". What then, is he
going to use for money, unless he forces upon the Reserve Bank
the creation of vast sums of new money, not matched by new
production., The effect of this can be imagined. Inflation
would gallop. Costs would rise rapidly, The export industries,
which cannot pass on inflated costs, and upon whose solvency
Australia's solvency largely depends, would suffer. Labour's
proposal to restore automatic quarterly adjustments of wages
would accelerate the process. These things would inevitably
lead, in the absence of strong corrective measures, to loss of
confidence, collapse and unemployment. 
But the truth is if Labour wants to spend real money,
created by productive effort, it must, to honour its proi-ised
expenditures, increase taxation veir much. What would be the
effect of this on savings, industrial investment, and employment?
But the whole story is not yet told. One of the
reasons for record high eimployment in Australia over our term of
office is the high degree of indtlstrial peace and therefore
continuity of production thait nave beer maintained. A gr~ e;
contributor to this has been our legislation to help to get rid
of Communist influence in key unions. The Secret Ballot
legislation, which Labour opposed in Parliament, and which
Labour is under direction to repeal, provides that a substantial
group of union members can apply for a court-conducted secret
ballot for union office. This was designed to gez rid of the
stand-over tactics of Communist minorities. It has had a great
deal of su -ess, and would have had much more but for the
discouraging attitude of the and its feeble treatment of
Unity Tickets. Labour's policy uo repeal it would give great
pleasure and encouragement to Communist leaders, and would jsher
in a period of Comranist-promoted industrial disorder. Has
Mr. Calwell forgotten that in 1949, when he was a Minister, a
Communist-led coal strike did such damage that 118,000 people
the highest number ever were on umremployment benefit?
But on top of all this, Labour, again yielding to a
Communist uampaign which, as you all know, has been going on for
years, has promised to repeal the laws providing for penalties
for industrial offonces. Such a repeal would be a direct
incitement to strikes and lock-outs. Over-all production would
fall, and employment with it,
I have time to deal with just one more element.
Great industries, and employment for many scores of thousands of
Australians, have over these years been provided by the industrial
investment in Australia of hundreds of millions of pounds and
much technical skill from outside, chiefly from the U. K. and the
U. S. A. Labour is very critical of such investment, and will
discourage it. Yet without this much-needed capital a large
country like Australia, with a relatively small population,
cannot be rapidly and adequately developed. The political
and economic climate which has attracted investors to come here
has taken years to establish. It can be destroyed over-night,
with growing unemployment th_ inevitable consequence.
In short, Labour's so-called attractive policy of gifts
all round is both dangerous and deceptive. It is dangerous
because it will create the very evils which Mr. Calwell wrongly
charges to us. It is deceptive because you, who are offered the
gifts, will in one way or another, pay for all of them yourselves.
Our continuing policy, the notable results of which
you have seen and appreciated for a decade, is not, I hope and
believe, lightly to be abandoned by you. If you want it to go
on; if you want to be represented in the councils of the world
and in the Common Market negotiations of which I have had much to
say during the campaign, by your present experienced leaders; if
you want the credit of Australia to continue to stand high; if
you want the outside world to go on regarding Australia as one
of the most attractive countries in the world, building, growing,
full of opportunity for people of enterprise, you will vote for
the Government in both Houses, Senate and Representatives, and
send us once more to our great tasks, 



1237
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA
Released only in Canberra. PR 120
AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATION Al TANGANYIKA
INDEPENDENCE CELEBRAT IONS
Statement by the Minister for External. Affairs
The Minister for External Affairs, Mr. R. G. Menzies,
announced today that A) ustralia' s congratulations and good wishes
will be conveyed tomorrow to independent Tanganyika by Sir Eric
Harrison, *. ustralia's representative at Tanganyika's independence
celebrations. Tanganyika, which attains formal independence Qn
December 9, will become a full member of the Commonwealth.
Mr. Menzies said that Tanganyika's independence was an
Pevent of great significance both to Africa and the Commonwealth of
Nations. usrlalooked forward to increasing contact with
Tanganyika and to the development of relations of friendship and
goodwill more especially because of the close association which it
was hoped the two countries would enjoy as full and equal members
af the Commonwealth. Sir Eric Harrison is presenting the Prime Minister of
Tanganyika, Ivir. Julius Nyerere, with an oil painting as a gift from
Australia to the Government and people of Tanganyika, together
with a sand glass presented by the Commonwealth Parliament to the
Tanganyikan Parliament where it will be used to time divisions.
A library, of Australian constitutional, historical and literary
works will also be presented to Tanganyika. 



Weekly Index
Jo, .48
Week Ending
December 9, 1961
COMMON*! EALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon.' R. G Menzies
Dec. 6 No. 1225 APPOINTMENT OF SERVICES ADVISER, NEW DELHI
8 No. 1236 APPOINTMENT OF SERVICES ATTACHE, TOKYO
8 No, 1237 AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATION AT TANGANYIKA
INDEFEED EC CEEBR TIONS
7 No, 1233A R C HIA IN UNITED NATIONS
The Minister for Trade, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
Dec, 3 No, 1217C FIRST SHIPPING SERVICE TO WEST AFRICA
6 No, 1230 FORMER AMBASSADOR TO HE,, D SOUTH AMERICAN
MISSION
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.
Dec. 7 No. 1234 OIL SEARCH PUBLICATIONS
The Ministerifor Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley, M. P,
Dec. 4 No. 1220
5 No. 1222
7 No. 1235 VISIT BY CHIEF OF THE GENERAL STAFF TO
INDONESIA
H. M. S. BULrWARK TO VISIT AUSTRALIA
IMPERIAL DEFENCE COLLEGE 1962 COURSE
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator the Hon. Shane Paltridge
a)
o 0 0
0 o
r o
r-t
E o
Hr l 0
r P
00
14-
-r
r! Dec. 5 No. 1223
8 No. 1242
The Minister for
Dec. 8 NEW LINKS IN iUSTRALIA'S AVIATION
COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK
THIRD AIRLANE BIETWEEN SYDNEY AND BRISBANE
Health, Dr. the Hon. D. A. Cameron.
No. 1238 SALK VACCINE SUPPLIES
The Minister for Army, tlhe Hon. J. O. Cramer
Dec. It I I No. 1219
No. 1227
No, 1228
No. 1240
No. 1243 MILITARY FREEFALLING
ARMY FIRE PREVENTION
COMMANDING OFFICER BACK FROM MALAYA
CHANGES IN REGULAR AirMY APPOINTMENTS
BRITISH SURVEY CFFICER'S VISIT
The Minister for Repatriation, the Hon. F. M. Osborne
Dec. 6 No. 1226 RETIREMENT OF MR J. J. D. LFATHART
TheS 3M inistNeo r 1f1o7r SuCppHyN. G, E Sh eIN . EonP. A TRI. AATIaOSnN. HAuDlMmIeNISTRATIUI
Dec. 7 No. 123348th SKYLARK CARRIES FOUR EXPERIMENTS
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Dec. 3 No. 1217B NAVY FINDS NAVIGATIONAL HAZARDS
8 No. 12 SEVEN NAVY SHIPS RETURN TO AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Air, Senator the Hon. Harrie Wade
Dec. 3 5 7 No, 1217D
No. 1221
No 1232 RAAlF OFFICER EXCHANGE SCHEME
GOVERNOR-GENERAL AT RAAF GRADUATION
RAL. F APPRENTICES GRA'DUATE TOMORROW
The Department of External Affairs.
Dec. 4 No. 1218
7 No. 1231 C'WEALTH AFRICAN AID PLAN TRAINEE IN CANBERRA
ANTAIRCTIC WEATHER STATION ESTABLISHED BY
AUSTRALIN ANTARCTIC PARTY
The Department of the Treasury
Dec. 5 No. 1224
The Department of
Dec. 3 No. 1217A
8 No, 1239 CONSOLIDATED , EVENUE FUND AT NOVEMBER 30, 1961.
the Navy
NLVY HEADQUARTERS BEGIN MOVE TODAY
FL'G CEREMONY AT NEW NAVY OFFICE
m 



PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIAvE MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R. G. r.' ENZIES, IN MELBOURNE, ON
13~ TH DECEMBER, 1961
PRIME MINISTER: I would just like to start in my own way, if I may.
As you know I have a long established practice of not
making a comment on election results until they are
reasonably clear, and in a normal election they would
have been reasonably clear by now. But it seemed to me
that if I refrained from saying anything too long it
might lead to misinterpretation so, while the results are
not final, perhaps I ought to say something about them.
It would be foolish to say I am not surprised by the
vote. So is Mr. Calwell, and so are you. de are all
surprised. It was reasonable to assume " Chat after 12 years and
with the argument that had gone on about the economic
policy there would be some losses on the part of the
Government that was to be expected, and we all expected
it. But t~ñ e odd thing about this election not so odd,
well I' 11 use the wiord " odd" is that in ? I4estern
Australia, in South Australia, in Tasmania, and in
Victoria, the movement of votes has been no more than you
would expect after a Government has been in office for 12
years I don't know yet what the final result is in
Kal. goorlie or in Stirling, I don't know, But Kalgoorlie
was one of those miracle wins in 1958 in a Labour stronghold
and if Mr. Browne is defeated which he doesn't
concede yet~ and I don't concede It will be by a very
narrow margin; and similarly with Mr. Cash in Stirling.
Also in gestern Australia the prospects Ithink, are
very high that the Government will win three Senate
seats, In WJestern Australia the changes are mer'ely
fractional, if any. dell, they exist of course, but they
are very, very marginal. The same in South Australia,
same in Victoria, On a big swing against the Government
who would have thought we would hold Maribyrnong? Yet
Maribyrnong looks like being held, Seats once regarded
as marginal like Corio zare strongly held and so on.
Tasmania, no change. So that in four States out of six
the movement in the voting has been no more than one
might have sensibly expected
New South . Iales, where the Government's economic
policies. I think were more violently resented than in
other States, well there were a couple of marginal seats.
I admit that I am very concerned about the position of
Mr. Osborne in E~ vans. I don't yet know finally any more
than anybody else what is going to happen in Hume. And
there is Cowper. Yes, let's face up to it, the losses,
or prospective losses, in New South " Jales are greater
than I would have expected.
But the key State has been Queensland. And the
Queensland vote is not to be explained on the basis of
the little lag that comes at the end of a 12 years'
term; nor is it to be explained more than fractionally
by the economic policy. It is not reasonable to assume
that its impact in Queensland would be more violent than
in New South 1ales, or in Victoria. But undoubtedly in
Queensland the electors had come to believe, as I think
quite wrongly, that Queensland had had a poor deal in the
treatment of the States by the Commonwdealth, I don't
want to argue about that I may be arguing about it
quite a lot before I am all that much older, 
I think there was a -wide misunderstanding on this
matter, but unquestionably on Polling Day and no doubt
for weeks and weeks and 4ieek-1-s before it, the people of
Queensland -felt that *.'. ueenslarid was a neglected State.
N othing else could explain this phenomonal overturn of
votes, particularly concentrated, in quantitative terms,
on Ministers like Mr. Hulme and Dr, Cameron, each of whom
has done a splendid piece of vork in his own right, but
who were between them held responsible for what was said
to be the neglect of Queensland,
And in the result, well I don't yet know wuhat is
going to happen maybe 50-50, myeavr iemjrt
resolving a f' w doubts, perhaps, rather imp-Crobably, out.
All right, well, if we are out we are out. I'm not
saying we are out I don~ t think we're out but if we
aie then all I can say is the eople of Australia have
given me their confidence for a long time and therefore
I have no 2ers onal grievance, none at all. I don't say
that we ar.. out I would think that the worst was 50-50
or, 9 to be more precise, 61-61. I suppose that by the end
of the week we will know what the results are they have
been rather long drawn out. I feel rather like King
Charles, you know, who apologised for being such an
unconscionable. time a-dying. But the time has gone on
and no doubt we will know by the end of the week.
Whichever way it goes a dead-lock or majority T
am inviting my Ministers and my Members, that is to say
the surviving Members, to meet me in Canberra on Tuesday
of next week. Members have to meet because they have to
deal with such matters as the election of a leader and
deputy leader; and of course Ministers will need to meet
because we will need to concert our ideas on what we do.
And I don't profess to know the ., nswer yet.
Suppose we were even 61-61. All right, well, you
might very properly say that that will inevitably lead in
due course to a dissolution and another election, since
neither side could carry on an effective Government in
the House with 61 all. We put a Speaker into the chair,
we are out-numbered; th-e other side put a Speaker into
the chair and they are out-numbered: we are in exactly
the same case if it's 61-614 But you can't dissolve a
new Parliament, of course, until the Parliament has been
created and that depends on when the writs are returned
and the procedures for calling a new Parliament
together I ': ontt prophesy about that, but no doubt that
would be relatively early in the New Year,
If, on the other hand, we have a majority in the
new House, well, we have a majority, and we go along.
it is very interesting to recall you know that
after the 1954+ election, ihen Dr. Evatt produced. his
promises, and we were not long after2 a spate of
unemployment and the budget, which was called the
" horror budget", you remember, by somebody or other, and
we were a little bit unpopular a " little bit" is a
euphemism I think we did win in 1951+: we had a
majority of seven. Well, there it is, it was a small
majority. In the next election it was seventeen, and in
the next one it was 32. So that one mustn't become too
dogmatic about the size of majorities. The one thing I
am interested in at present is to have one. And, as I
say, I don't yet know. 
It's all very well to say that in a campaign. you
must expect casualties of course you do but I do feel
very sad about losing good colleagues. If I might talk
particularly about Ministers I have said something
about Mr. 1-ulme of Supply, and Dr. Cameron of Health, for
he has a wonderful record of achievement for this
country, and I am told today that Mr. Osborne is in grave
danger he has boen doing extraordinarily well at
Repatriation it is a great pity that such men should
be lost to the service of the country. But still we have
elections so that people may say what side they want
and being a democrat I am all for it so I must have my
sorrow for my colleagues in private; and in public
recognise that it is not for me to complain I have won
five elections up to this one so I can hardly accuse the
people of being unkind or ungenerous.
I am not going to repeat the speectes that were made
during the campaign: I think it is tremendously
important that the Government should remain in office;
but I thirKc it is very important that Australia should
have a Government with authority, because, overseas in
particular, there are questions to be thrashed out in
the next six months in the resolution of which the voice
of Australia oughit to be clear and powerful.
If it turns out that we have a majority, all right,
we naturally will go on. A majority is a majority. Anu,
i: you might allow me to say something that is quite
homely, a majority is better than a minority, from the
point of view of a Government. If it turns out that it
is a dead-lock then quite plainly, at the appropriate
time, and I don't profess to know because I haven't
looked at the prescriptions on this matter you know
about the reassembling of Parliament and so on then it
will become very important that next time the people
should produce a Government that is in possession of a
majority. And of course the whimsical part about that
is that it means that if there is another election
somebody will have to change his mind, or his vote,
because if everybody votes in the same way and we are
back again in a deadlock, the only sufferer will be
Australia, because it will have-committed itself to
having no Government. Anyhow, ' Tuesday morning I will
talk to my Mvinisterial colleagues and Tuesday afternoon
to the Members.
QUESTION: Are you suggesting, Sir, that the election would be
perhaps in March?
PRIME MINISTER: Look, I don't know. Anybo. y can work that out as
well as I can. You see a lot of people think that you
can at once proceed to have an election. Of course you
can't. The old Parliament is dissolved and the new
Parliament hasn't been created; and the new Parliament
is created -when the writs are returned and Members are
sworn in. I don't, off-hand, know Akn that is. I am
going to Canberra I will be there tomorrow and I
will have an opportunity of looking into that. But
until the new Parliament is assembled and created,
officially, you know, technically, then there can be no
question of dissolving something that doesn't exist.
I'm not going to offer a view on the dates. 
QUESTION: Do you concede, Sir, that a possible majority of
only one, after providing a Speaker, is a -working
majority, that could be carried on indefinitely?
PRIME MINISTER: If we have a majority of two, and one goes into the
chair, then we have a majority of one on the floor of
the ' House. These are interesting speculations. You
know there was a time in the history of the Commonwealth
Parliament when a Government existed for quite a time on
the casting vote of the Speaker not a very satisfactory
state of affairs, I would pray to be delivered from it.
But if it came to me I would accept it being a
realist on the principle that a majority of one is a
majority.
QUESTION: When was that Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Befere the
1914+ wasn't it?
majority of' one
casting; votes.
QUESTION: First World War you must check it up
( 1913 or 1914+, something like that). A
and the Speaker got worn out making
But of course in this Parliament, which has even
numbers they were odd numbers at that time 759 You
s'e) e, 38 to 37, so they were even-ateven on the floor of
the House the Speaker had to give the casting vote.
But if you have 62 60 then the Speaker, if everybody
votes, does not have to cast a casting vote, the
Government wins by 61
Wouldn't this create extreme difficulty in cases of
the Prime Ministers' Conference?
PRIME MINISTER: I would think so. Of course we have the practice in
the House of Representatives of having pairs and if you
have a majority you can adjourn Parliament for long
enough to permit of an attendance. So that technically,
it's all right, but substantially I agree with you: I
wouldn't think it a very happy state of affairs.
QUESTION: If you had to approach another election, Mr. M~ enzies,
would you take the optimistic view that a greater number
of people had voted at the last Polls to frighten you
rather than to encourage Labour?
PRIME MINISTamj.. You know I am neither a prophet, nor the son of a
prophet. Of course there are factors in this matter. No
doubt there were a lot of people who said, " We'll give
him a fright", " They need a better opposition", " W~ e'll
stir them up". You know, and I know, that there are lots
of people like that, but whether they represent a
determining factor in an election I wouldn't like to say.
I admit their existence. There may be other people '-Ath
quite different views, but I don't think you know, that
a second election at a relatively early late would
necessarily be a Chinese copy of the current one, no.
But I would hope that that election would decide the
problem so that ordinary Australians would know where
they were, and what Government they had. That is the
important thing.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTE'F Would you care to further define a Chinese copy?
Is that one of those expressions 1 use that is
capable of misquotation? You know you would almost
think I was stirring up the Immigration policy. It is a
phrase with which you, I know, are very familiar. I'm
not at all sure you weren't the first fellow to teach me
years ago. Well let's call it a literal copy. 
QUESTION: I remember once making a statement about something
and saying that I thought I detected the fine Italian
hand of Mr. so-and-so in this statement, and there was a
frightful uproar. " He would have me know that he had no
Italian blood whatever..." 1 One must not use these
literary allusions, you must make a note of that.
All right, well, you know the old biblical
instruction, Mr Tebbutt -Itm speaking to you because I
know that you're susceptible to these things " Watch
and pray lest ye enter into temptation". I don't know
what that means in effect, but Douglas Wdilkie he knows
everything heill tell you. Any more macabre
questions? Just one more, Sir, on the Common Market, Does it
affect your immediate consideration, your immediate
pians?
PRIME MINISTER: Well it doesn't affect mine, if you are asking
about mine, because I had not contemplated that I might
have to go there before March, April, or whatever it
might be. But if it's 50O-50 and if, therefore, we are
all getting ready for another election, well, of course,
it would become inmpossible for Mr. McEwen to be there.
I had always thought that he might be there ahead of me,
because he is in very close contact with these matters,
and that I think would be a pity, but still...
What do you think of Mr. Calwell's view that if
the result is 61-61, the Labour Party has a manda~ e
because of the majority of primary votes and therefore
should ask the Liberal Party to supply a Speaker and
form a caretaker Government?
PRIME MINISTER: Well I think that i~ s exactly what I would expect an
Opposition Leader to say but of course it is useless
observation. Parliament makes or unmakes Government.
Why, how amusing it would be if I said, " Well, yes, I'm
very impressed by that", so I resign and I tell the
Governor-General to send for Mr. Calwell and then M~ r.
Calwell elects a Speaker in the new Parliament and I
toss him out on a vote of no confidence. Let's talk
practical sense that is a very unreal remark. I don't
blame Mr. Calwell for making it because he is as
surprised as I am by the results and is therefore,
perhaps, a little excited. Oh, no, that shot is not on.
QUESTION: Sir, the Leader of the Opposition Mr. Calwell, has
also said that this will be the first time that either
the Liberal or Country Party has had to face sustained
pressure and he feels that the Liberal/ Coun~ ry Party is
the kind of Party that crumbles on pressure'
PRIME MINISTEi: I notice he said that, Well, all I can say is that
his Party must be the greatest authority on crumbling in
the history of Australia, and I'll. always bo willing to
take his expert opinion.
QUESTION: Do you think that perhaps his g-ains in these
elections have 6, iven the Labour Party a new sense of
power unity?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. Who am I to explain the mind of the
Labour Party? I have been trying for years to
understand it without success. He needn't worry about
my side of the House crumbling.
QUET ION: 
QUESTION: If itts 61-61 then, Sir, you will remain in office
and have an election, tht is the general thought in
your mind?
PRIME MINISTER: If itts 61-61 we will meet the Parliament, the
Parliament will make a decision you're guess is as
good as mine as to what this decision will be then I
think you might lay a reasonable shade of odds that we
will be out electioneering in the summer, in the
tropics 2
QUESTION: Will you use television this time?
PRIME MINISTER: WJell I did last time, Whether one uses television
or whether television uses one, I wouldn't like to sayr,
it's a very difficult medium. Well go honB boys, thank
you very much.
Do you know this is the fifteenth election Ive had
personally, do you know that? Fifteen. And I thought I
knew e-: ery noise an election campaign made and could form
a pretty rough idea as to whether the tide was coming in
or out, I confess to you this one was a surprise this
was a dumper, in Queensland. Is that the right
expression? I'm not a surfing character.
QUESTION: Are you being kept in touch continually with the
results or are you just waiting,...?
PRTME MINISTER: Oh, about half a dozen times a day we find out what
the last thing is, But you see there are very curious,..
Now Maribyrnong: I'm told that nothing more will emerge
from Maribyrnong until Friday night, and there you are.
And of course other seats Maranoa. Well, of course
Brimblecombe will hold Maranoa because Maranoa is running
true to the pattern. You see they will all come in.
H-ume, we won't know finally about for some days.
QUESTION:. Would you say it all supports Churchill's thesis
that preferential voting is unsatisfactory?
PRIME MINISTER: No. I believe in preferential voting I do indeed,
I am a gr:.. at sceptic about proportional voting, but
preferential voting for the Lower House is, Ithink,
first class. Quite frankly I've never understood why
they don't have it in Great Britain.
QUESTION: Proportional voting has gone on for the Senate
throughout your 12 years of office?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I know. Once the system of voting for the
Senate is established, it is very difficult to change it
because only half go out at a time. And to have half
elected under one system and another half elected under
another system is very difficul-t, and there it is. But
make no mistake under the system ofvoting for the Senate
no Government will have a Senate majority, no Government
that lasts more than a year or two will have a Senate
majority for all its time, You look back on it, From
19 + 9-51 I had a minority in the Senate and we got out of
that on a double dissolution; from 1955-58 I had
in the Senate and there: fore under the Constitutional rule
that where the voting is equal in thie Senate the negative
prevails, I wasn't in command of the Senate in 195' 5-58,
but we got along.
QUESTION: The Senate is not your major worry in any case?
MR. ! vNZIES: No. 
QUESTION: Do you feel that the original purpose of the Senate
has been lost?
PRIME MINISTER: Do you want to buy me into a brawl with those two
fellows you know about? No thanks, no. This is not a
time for philosophising about the Senate. It is a time
for being philosophical about your on position.
QUESTION: Mr. Calwell said he thought since democracy is
better served by a clear-cut two-Party system instead of
a multiple-Party system...
PRIME MINISTER: Well was that blow directed at me or at the DLP?
We'll save up all these reflections until after
Christmas.
QUESTION: When are you going back to Canberra Sir?
PRIME MINISTE,: I was going back this afternoon but it turns out
that I cant. I'm going back in the morning.
QUESTION: May I ask one personal question, Sir? What is the
symbolism of that tie? It isn't one of your collection
that Itm familiar with.
PRIME MINISTER: , Idell when I -, 1as in Jestern Australia in this
election he Party chartered a plane from MacRobertson
Mil. ler's to take me up to Geraldton with a number of
your brigade you know to a big meeting there, and they
presented me the Captain of the aircraft presented mewith
a MacRobertson Miller tie. And there it is: it's
red that gives me a bit one way; and it was : iven to
me for nothing that's very satisfactory; and they tell
me that Ansett controls the MacRobertson Miller so that
gives me a bit the other way. I put it on this morning
thinking this was a very happy compromise 61-61.
QUESTION: Has this been your most tiring election, Mr.
Menzies?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I don't know, I did about the same campaign as
I did last time. I find flying very tiring and when you
do about 12,000 miles you're weary. And of course I
don't like great heat. But still I must keep my mind off
that because if there is another election, and if it's in
the summer, I shall have to carry an air-conditioning set
under my waistcoat.
QUESTION: You said that Mr. Calwell is as surprised as you are
Sir, When did this surprise start? Can you tell us what
day, or the result, that started this surprise?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, on Saturday night at about 10,30 or 11 I
would have put down the losses at 8 or 10. I then
listened ir, until midnight and I then " rumbled it in my
brain" as I lay in my bed and on Sunday morning I sat up
and said, " By jove, thinking it all over, this might be
14 or 15%. And so my surprise you might say, was a subconscious
one between midnight and 8 o'clock on Sunday
morning.
QUESTION: This was before you heard a radio or read the paper
on Sunday?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, yes, You can't read a paper on Sunday in
Melbourne, except the Sydney papers which go to bed the
ones we got when there are about 600 votes9 400 votes,
200 votes, 
QUESTION.-Are you finding it possible to relax now, or is it
still a
PRIME MINISTER: I'm a good sleeper. When I put my head on my
pillow I believe in going to sleep. And I have had many
strange and some bitter experiences in my political life,
and I've always put my hoad on the pillow and said,
" That's that". That is why I remain outside thie Lunatic
Asylumr, I suppose, or whatever they call it nowadays.
QUESTION: Could we take a quick shot at this small kite you
obviously deliberately flew a little earlier, Sir, about
Members having to elect a Leader and Deputy Leader? Have
you any new thoughts on any leader or deputy leader there
might be?
PRIME MINISTER: No, no, no. But still it has to be done because
yr-1 must, in whatever you are doing, be able to speak
with authority. I haven't heard of somebody who is
going to oppose me, but still they have a perfect right
to. It's free country.,
QUESUI ON: Sir, are these results likely to change your
thinking the Government's thinking as far as the
economic policy is concerned?
PRIME M-' INISTER: You mustn't ask me anything about policy because
that is the kind of thing thatomy colleagues and I wi] ll
ha-e to consider in the light of the circumstances as
t hey emerge. No, I have nothing to say.
All right, boys, now, you have bashed me into the
ground, that's enougha. 



Weekly Index
No. 49
Week Endin
December 16, 1961
COMMON VIE.. . LTH Or i1ST. 1LIA
Index of Ministcrial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Doc. 10 Nc. 1244 13th ANJIVE21S'ARY OF ' JTIVERSAL D" C. P&amp; TION OF
HUMAjN RIC-. HTS.
14 No. 1252 USTAULIAN CONSUL-GENEIRAL, GENEVA.
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
Dec. 14 No. 1254XIITH WORLD'S POULTRY COYGRESS
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
Dec. 13
It 15 No. 1249 1, M VIY TO RELESE MORE LA" ND
o. 1256A POST GRADUi'ATE TRAINING FOR NEW ZEALAND CADETS
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
12 No. 1246
14 No. 1250
14 No. 1251 T IETTY-NINE NTEVI AiRTIFICERS FOR NXVY
NA VY SELECTS HELICOPTER OBSERVERS
NAVY FOR COMMONWEALTH CJ* MES
The MVinister for Air. Senator the Hon. Harrie Wade
Dec. 13 No. 1248SQU1, DRO11 CMOPMAN1D AIPPOITMENTS
_ Th(!-partMent of External Af fairs
Dec. 15 No. 1255. AJTA-RCTIC SHIP RETUIRNING FROM M, CQU; RIE
I SLAND
Department of Health
Dec. 14 No. 1253
ti 15 No. 1257 ADMISSIOTN OF HORSES FROM NEW ZEALAND
INVESTIGA'-TION OF LIVE POLIOMYELITIS VACCINES
Mr. N. C. Carroll, Assistant A'ustralian Government Trade
Commissioner, Paris.
Dec. 10 No. 1245 AUSTRALIA,: N M,* 1NTLTF;., CTUREFlS' INTEREST IN
FRENCH MA. RKET
Department of Suppl
Dec. 15 No. 1256 BALLOON L* 1UNCHED FROM ROCICT A'IT WOOTMEMZA
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relnta~ ns Office,
Parliament House,
CI\ TBErju, i. C. T. 



1264
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA
RELEASED ONLY IN CANBERRA PR 125 1
GOA
0 The Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Menzies, said
today that he regretted the use of force by the Indian Government
to pursue its claim to Goa, and other Portuguese territories
in India. Mr. M'enzies recognised that Indian public opinion
felt strongly about the dispute, which was of long standing.
However, it was the responsibility of nations to seek their
objectives through legal processes or by peaceful negotiations
in accordance with the United Nations Charter. Under the
Charter all members have expressly undertaken to refrain from
the threat or use of force in their international relations
except in self-defence, individual or collective. 



P. M. No. 59/ 1961
DEATH OF SIR EARLE PAGE
Tribute-by the Prime Minister, the lit. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Sir Earle Page was a very distinguished Australian.
He was one of the founders of the Country Party. His long
partnership with Mr. Bruce ( as he then was) covered a period of
great national advancement.
Always fertile in ideas, he played a great part in
the establishment of great institutions like the Financial
Agreement and the Loan Council, and great measures of social
welfare like the current Commonwealth Health Scheme. He
will be long remembered for his constructive work in the
modern political history of ustralia.
My colleagues and T e xtrnd our drop symnpafhy Lu
his widow n vi. to hi s family.
CANBERRA, December, 1961 



EMBAR~ GO: Not for publication or broadcast befo, 6,, 1 -p~ m.
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. MeRZies
The Government now has a majority in the House of
Representatives, and the probability of a stronger position in
the Senate than at one stage seemed likely.
Ministers met yesterday. They frankly reviewed the
election and its results, and the causes of the set-back the
Government sustained, particularly in Queensland and New South
Wales. Subsequently, we had a meeting with private members, and
were supported in the views which we had formed.
In this brief statement, therefore, I speak with the
authority of all Ministers and Members on the Government side.
. We acknowledge with gratitude and appreciation tbhe
support which we received from those who stood behind us in
difficult and unpopular policies, These policies have already
had, in importLnt fields of the national economy such as the
trade balances anc the arresting of boom inflation, notable
results. But we are quite prepared to face the facts of the
ele ction. It is clear that we have been opposed in the
electorates by many people normally our supportcrs. They
appear to have felt that our economic measures of last year were
too severe; that we acted in too much detachment from those
actually engaged in industry and banking and commerce generally;
that full weight was not given to human considerations; and
that we were not sufficiently conscious of unemployment. W4e
pleaded and plead ' not guilty' to these charges; but the verdict
of the jury almost went against us.
Facing the position in a realistic and democratic way,
we do not propose to take up rigid attitudes, or to ignore the
currents of public opinion. This does not mean that we will
abandon the twin policies of stability and national development
which we have been applying, with, we believe, benefit to
Australia, for the last 12 years. They are vital to true human
progress. But in the application of those policies, modificatia. is
of method and approach should clearly be made.
To this end, we will at the earliest practicable date
set up closer contac ts and discussions with leaders in the
manufacturing and business and banking fields, to secure their
first-hand views on their prob-lems and those of the men and
women employed by them, and their suggestions on how they can be
solved, i'Ie will particularly desire to discuss with
manufacturers the problem of tariffs and imports.
We continue to desire to have full employment, and
will give special and urgent attention to ways and means of
getting rid of such unemployment as now exists.
The question of Northern Development is one on which
there has clearly been great public confusion and misunderstandkr,
I hope that we may have an early opportunity of personal
discussions with State Ministers on this important problem.
We will of course, devote the closest attention to
the problems involved in the Common Market negotiations, with
the object of safeguarding the rural industries, whose
prosperity is so vital for the nation. 
2,
Complete economic recovery depends upon the restoring
of private industry to full activity. As the spirit of private
enterprise is the dynamo of national progress, we will look to
the encouragement of that spirit by such means as are available.
The issue still remains a liberal economy or a socialist
economy and we will fight it out with vigour and determination.
We are confident that 1962 can be a great year of advancement
for all. These general observations will, of course, be given a
more detailed expression and application as soon as possible in
the New Year.
CANB.' JRA, December, 1961. 



EMBARGO: Not for publication or broeic': is: cP
IWEDNESDA P. M. No. 61/ 161
Statement by thie Prime Minister, teRt. Honl, R. G. Majgi
The Government now has a majority in the House of
Representatives, and the probability of a stronger position in
the Senate than at one stage seemed likely.
Ministers met yesterday. They frankly reviewed the
election and its results, ma the causes of the set-back the
Government sustained, particularly in Queensland and New Soutih
Wales. Subsequently, we had a meeting with private members, and
wiere supported in the views which we had formed.
In this brief statement, therefore, I speak with the
authority of all Ministers and Members on the Government side.
We acknowledge with gratitude and appreciation tb. e
support which we received from those who stood behind us in
difficult and unpopular policies. These policies have already
had, in importLnt fields of the national economy such as the
trade balances and the arresting of boom inflation, notable
results. But we are quite prepared to face the facts of the
election. It is clear that we have been opposed in the
electorates by many people normally our supportcrs. They
appear to have felt that our economic measures of last year were
too severe; that we acted in too much detachment from those
actually engaged in industry and banking and commerce generally;
that full weight was not given to human considerations; and
that we were not sufficiently conscious of unemployment. We
pleaded and plead ? not guilty' to these charges; but the verdict
of the jury almost went against us,
Facing the position in a realistic and democratic way,
we do not propose to take up rigid attitudes, cr to ignore the
currents of public opinion. This does not mean that we will
abandon the twin policies of stability and national development
which we have been applying, with, we believe, benefit to
Australia, for the last 12 years. They are vital to true human
progress. But in the application of those policies, modifications
of method and approach should clearly be made.
To this end, we will at the earliest practicable date
set up closer conta'~ s and discussions with leaders in the
manufacturing and business and banking fields, to secure their
first-hand views on their problems and those of the men and
women employed by them, and their suggestions on how they can be
solved. We will particularly desire to discuss with
manufacturers the problem of tariffs and imports.
We continue to desire to have full employment, and
will give special and urgent attention to ways and means of
getting rid of such unemployment as now exists.
The question of Northern Development is one on which
there has clearly been great public confusion and misunderstankg
I hope that we may have an early opportunity of personal
discussions with State Ministers on this important problem.
We will of course. devote the closest attention to
the problems involved in the Common Market negotiations, with
the object of safeguarding the rural industries, whose
prosperity is so vital for the nation. 



P. M. No, 60/ 1961
STAJE FJNERAL FOR SIR EARLE PAGE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
A State Funeral is being arranged for the late Sir
Earle Page. The Church Service will take place at St. Andrew's
Cathedral, Sydney, at 10.30 a. m. on Friday, December 22nd, and
afterwards the cortege will leave for the Northern Suburbs
Crematorium, The Service at the Crematorium will be conducted
by the President of the ivethodist Conference in New South lales,
the Rev. Norman Lickiss.
In the absence of Archbishop Gough overseas the
Service at St. Andrew's Cathedral will he conducted by Bishop
Kerle. CANBERRA, December, 1961. 



PRESS CONFER' NCE GIVEN BY T'E PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. R, G. MENZIES, ON THJiSDAY, 21ST
_ DECE4M ER. L AT
PRIME MINISTER: I was just about to say that I suppose I will have
to alter my Who's Who entry by including among Hobbies
Cabinet-making. That seems to be my chief job for the
last two days.
QUESTION: Can you announce the result yet, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No. but Ill. be in a position to, I have to do
something on this between now and lunch time tomorrow
and I've secured the Governor-General's permission to
because as you know I don't like to announce these
things without his approval. I should think I can have
this out by lunch time tomorrow. And the Swearing-In
will be at 4 o'clock tomorrow afternoon. That gives
unbridled pleasure to the evening press,
QUESTION: How many at the Swearing-In Mro Menzies?
PRIME MINISTER: A few. Yes, a few.
Well, who wants to know something that I can't say.
QUESTION: When will. you hold the first of these conferences
that you mooted yesterday, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I would hope by the middle of January. I
gather that there is a widespread belief that every man
is entitled to three weeks holiday a year. Is that so?
Not having had any for ten years I thought I might take
a week or two off at the beginning of January.
QUESTION: The question has been raised whether you ae likely
to speak with the A. oCT. U. or Trades Hall people
PRIME MINISTER: I can't answer that at this stage, I used,
advisedly, fairly general terms. Those are matters that
we will discuss when we meet, and I would hope to have
a meeting of Ministers by, or possibly before, the
middle of January. And I certainly want conferences
that will occur to occur before the end of January.
QUESTION: '. ill you indicate, Sir, the machinery you will use
for these conferences, the machinery of selecting
people, and topics to be discussed,
PRIME MINISTR: No. I don't think, however, that there will be very
much difficulty.
QUESTION: Have you got anything like a sort of standing
arrangement, standing link, in mind, Sir, as an outcome
of the conferences?
PRIME MINISTER: I t. iink that will depend on the conferences., I
don't exclude that possibility at all.
QUESTION: Do you propose to limit the representation, Mr,
Menzies?
PRTME MINISTER: Look, I haven't begun to work this out yet, I want
to have a talk with say the Bankers, I want to have a
talk with, say the manufacturers and so on. But
really I haven t worked out any standing orders yet. 
QUESTION: When you say conferences, Sir, do you include
conferences on Northern Development as you suggested, by
the end of January. Do you think that you can see the
Queensland Government, say, by the end of January?
PRIME MINISTER: I would hope to have all the consultations that I
have indicated, somewhat generally, before the end of
January. It would suit me, Maybe they would run into
February, But I don't regard it as a matter that
admits of leisure. I mean, subject to your kind
permission, to have a week or two, myself.
QUESTION: Any possibility of a supplementary Budget early this
year Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I haven't the slightest idea,
QUESTION: Can you see sufficiently far into the crystal bowl
to see a date for the opening of the Session?
PRIME MINISTER: No, but it will be before the end of February. But
wLen I don't know, I haven't really discussed that
with the -eader of the House. I would think somewhere
in the third quarter of February I haven't looked at
the dates.
QUESTION: Can you give any indication at all, Sir, at this
stage of any proposed changes in economic policy that
you have in mind?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I was surprised to read in one paper this
morning that we were abandoning the policy of stability
and development: I didn't say that, or anything like it.
QUESTION: Can you tell us anything, Sir, from official
channels about the situation, Indonesia vis-a-vis the
West New Guinea argument?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I think that you probably know as much about
that as I do because the newspapers have carried a
report of what Soekarno had to say. We have had some
discussion about this matter, of course, in the last
few days, Our attitude on all these matters has been,
first, that we have had now, both from President
Soekarno and Dr, Subandrio categorical assurances that
force will not be resorted to
QUESTION: Have you had that in the last 24 hours Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No We've had it before publicly announced, And
nothing has been said to us that would modify that,
In the second place we, of course have the
greatest desire to live on the friendLiest of terms
with Indonesia. Indeed, we have only one matter of
difference and that a difference of opinion about
the sovereignty of West New Guinea, ' eW would desire to
maintain that position.
Third, we think that in the United Nations the
Netherlands made proposals which went a long way. They
involved, at the appropriate time, transferring
sovereignty to the people of West New Guinea by a
process of self-determination, * Je are deeply attached
to the principlc of self-determination and it is
interesting to recall that in the United Nations General
Assembly when the Netherlands proposal came up, 53
nations supported ito In other words without going
into detail a majority of the nations in the General
Assembly found the general apprcach satisfactory 
We still adhere to the principle of self-determination;
and we still hope that out of whatever discussions may
occur, self-determination for the inhabitants of West
New Guinea will be respected, just as we look forward to
and respect it, in the case of our part of New Guinea.
So that we stand firm on that principle: we have
stated it from time to time quite plainly, both here and
in the United Nations, through Mr. Plimsoll, and
earlier through myself last year, and we adhere to it.
de think it is a sound principle, and that it is to
us one of the inevitable steps in passing from a
stage of colonialism to a stage of self-government. Je
have expressed these views to all the relevant parties
and they remain our views, But they are not put forward
in a hostile way, They are put forward by Australia as
a subscribing member of the United Nations, recognising
tha-the Charter provides for self-determination, and
rddhering to it ourselves, for our part, in New Guinea,
and profoundly hoping that it will be respected. in the
case of West New Guinea.
QUESTION: Do you think it is only a political threat rather
than a ph; sical threat,,.,?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, don't ask me that, I don't know. I don't know,
Threats have been made before.
QUESTION: Sir, could you say whether you have received in the
past three years requests for special Commonwealth
development aid from the Queensland Government which
the Commonwealth Government has rejected?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't recall any,
QUESTION: During the campaign one of your Ministers, Mr.
Hulme, was attacked by one of Mr. NicJ. lin s Ministers.
Did you know of that and have you any comment to make on
it Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: NoneI non. e, I don't think that it is useful for
Queensland, to engage in post-election recriminations.
They are not very helpful. The main thing is to
develop the country so I will go into discussions I
have without prejudice, and without hostility,
qJESTION: Is it possible, Sir, that there may be scope for
further development action et the Premiers'
Conference or Loan Council meeting in February?
PRIME MINISTER: Is there one due in February?
PRESSMAN: Well around about that time,
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know. I don't think that a date has been
fixed,
PRESSMAN: Well it has been stated that there will be one early
in the new year.
PRIME MINISTER: Wh: ere has it been stated? In the Mirror? Look, I
don't know when there is going to be a Conference. I
can't say,
T EST ION: Why the Mirror, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Because the Mirror has a greater capacity for
inventive genius than any other newspaper in Australia.
That lets you out lad but only just, only just, 
QUESTION1 Could you tell us, Sir, if there are any impending
developments on the European Ccmmon Market the
possibility of a Ministerial visit?
PRIME MINISTER: ITll put it this way: I don't exclude the
possibility of a Ministerial visit, but nobody can say
that dogmatically at this stage, because the situation
develops. There is no doubt that we must have the
closest possible contact with it and I don't exclude the
possibility of a Ministerial visit,
QUESTION: V In that case, Sir, would you make arrangements for
" pairs" with the Opposition?
PRIME MINISTER: I would hope so. VIe have never had difficulty in
the past about pairs and I have no reason to suppose
tVat the Leader of the Opposition will want tc depart
0rom that practice. He knows the importance of these
matters. We have not had trouble in the past about
them, and I don't anticipate any. I mean, I can't
imagikne for one moment that an experienced
parliamertarian like the Leader of the Opposition would
want to deprive Australia of having a voice on these
great matters at the appropriate time0 Of course it is
not thinkable to me. I haven't the slightest doubt that
Mr. Calwell will behave with the usual propriety or,
those matters. I don't doubt it for one moment.
QUESTION., I was just wondering, Sir', because there has been
opposition to Mr. Holt's trips abroad in recent yea' sf
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, well now you are getting on to a different
matter. I know about those arguments, but when it comes
to overseas negotiations affecting the interests of
Australia I have never found that the Opposition was
unwilling to make those things feasible, because, after
all if it had won the Election it would necessarily be
in the same position as we are now. And I wouldn't
hesitate to say " Certainly. If anybody has to go to
discuss these matters he's paired". There's no
question about it. And I don't anticipate the faintest.
0.0
QUESTION Tradition lives you an automatic pair with the
Leader of the Opposition, doesn~ t it Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I have a standing pair with the Leader of the
Opposition.
QUESTION: Do you expect to go yourself, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I dontt know. I don't know. My mind doeen't
precipitate itself so far into the futu:' e at the moment.
Here we are, I've just had a birthday. Twelve
hours work in the office is an interestin~ g wtliof
celebrating a birthday and I shall do exactly the same
number tomorrow. I think I will wait and ace how the
Davis Cup goes0
QUESTION: Who's going to win Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I havenft well I have a clue, but it doesn't
matter.
QESTION: W4ill you have much legislative business for the
first Session, the first sitting? How long do you
expect it to last? 
PRIME MINISTER: God. bless my soulT Are you going to ask me for a
list of the legislation and for a time-table? I haven't a
clue but I will, of course, but not now, not now. " I do
r ot ask to see the distant scene. One step enough for me".
Do you remember that? It shows that you had a proper
upbringing in your earlier days.
QUESTION: Have you thought about the obligations to do some
re-distribution, Sir? You should be getting a Certificate
through from the Statistician soon.
PRIME MINISTER: No, I've had people whistle that into my ear but so
far it would be flattering myself to say that I have
thought about it. I've had other things to think about.
But they tell me I don't know, you're the expert that
we are probably due for one next year. I've even had
people tell me what the result of it will be, State by
State. But I don't know, I don't know. I have a
considerable faculty for remaining uninformed until I want
to 1, e.
QUESTION: Do you intend to make any arrangement, Sir, with the
DLP to ensure control of the Senate?
PRIME ". iNISTER: Not uhat I've ever heard of. I don't contemplate it,
Ie've never made any before. ihy should we start now?
QUESTION: I was just wondering, Sir, now that you are back
with a hostile Senate.
PRIME MINISTER: Well, how hostile the Senate is remains to be seen.
QUESTION: What particular time of the year do you think is the
most important to Common Market discussions?
PRIME MINISTER: Well look, nobody can answer that question because
that will depend on the stage that negotiations have
reached in January or February or March or April, or whatever
it may be. No doubt when the stage has been reached
at which the United -ingdom feels that there are crucial
matters that fall for decision and that a Prime Ministers'
Conference ought to occur, then it will occur. I used to
think to myself that that looked like being about April,
but I don't know. Because it is very hard to tell how fast
the negotiations will go or what form they will take. You
have to remember that there are scores of items involved in
this thing and quite a considerable number of nations
involved. But I would think that that is a question that
might be answered with some more accuracy by some ti. e in
January. It can't be answered nov.
QUESTION: Do you think the consultations will be multi-lateral
at the Prime Ministers' Conference?
PRIME i1INISTERS Well I dcn't know, But if a rIime Ministers'
Conference is called then of course they become multilateral.
Just as Il've had an election they tell me, so
Mr. Diefenbaker, I think, has an election coming up some-
*, here.  hen is it, May? I don't know.
QUESTION; Do you have any special measures in mird, Sir, for
dealing with unemployment?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I don't want to say anything about that yet. You
see we met only, what the day before yesterday. It's no
use rushing at propxitions on two hours' notice, that's no
good to anybody. All know is that we recognise that
problem and this will de one of the first things that we
have to consider. But don't ask me about the details of it.
I may have some ideas but Ilm not announcing them.
QUESTION: Are you still confident that you can re-absorb a
great number of them within 12 months?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, 



The . i t of ! inisters, some of whom will . beesworn in this
afternoon, is as follows
* PRTrE MINISTER
* 14TN* T5TTF} 0: Ui TRADE
* TPREASU1EJ'; RL. tG. G . IonE. . YIII: S C. H Q. CP it4* Pe
-Rt. Hon. J. hclven, 2, P.
RXt. Hon. T ' H olt,
* VICE-PREI D-! T OF 7771 EX ECI-3TI'V1E
COUNCIL, and L RFOP NATIOMAL enator the Hon. f. M. Spooner,
DL* V7LOPi'IiTT
*-JTNISTER FOR DEFENCE
* I-INISTER FO TLJ,; RITORIES
yil-ISTik POLRA J30UR P0D N;'. TTONA. L
SERVICE
HINISTER FOR CIVIL AVITION
POST12i. STEjR-GaTERAL
vIITNISTER FOR IiIIGRTION
0* . IThTISTLR FOR EXTEThAL AF2AIRS and
ATTORNEY -GENERAL
1.* I. ITISTER FOR PRIMhRY IDUSTRY
-MNISTER FOR TIE . PjiY
11 I-NISTER FOR, SOCIAL SERVICS
1INISTMR FOR CUSTOMKS AND EXCISE
INISTT ER FOR TIM ITERIOR and
. iIIISTER FOR ' ORKS and
1l'inister assistin, the U&gt; QENE1RL
JNIST2-POP TE NiVY and
W inister assisting the M-inister
for EXTERNqAL AFFIRS
flqTSTLR T-O'R71 PPiNG TRAN S PORT
1iINISTER FOR -H-EALTH
MINISTER FOR ZUPPLY
IINISTEIR FOR AIR and
Minister assisting the TK,'-' SUJRER
i1iiIISTER iOIR REP! T1L. TOJN Ion. A. G. Tovnley, ii. P.
Hon. Paul Ha. sluck, i. P.
lion. d &amp; ic-iahon. P.
Senator the Hon. Shane Paltridge
Hon. Davidson, 1111P.
1.. Do,. ner, . P.
Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick,
Hon. CF. Aderrai-n, i. P.
Hon. J. O. Cra) mer,
Hon. R" oberton, iI. P.
Senator the Hon. N. H. D. Henty
lion. Gordon Freeth, E. P.
Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
HIon. Hubcrt Qpperman, O. B. P, H. P.
Senator the Hon. Harrie 4ade
Hon. Allen Pcdarhall, ) H. P.
Hon. L 1L0mri r. y , H. P.
Hon. PC Swartz, 1K1.3, I. P
The Chief Government W; Yhip will be appointed later.
I propose to appoint a small Cabinet Committee of senior
Ministers, including the Treasurer, to work on the formulation of
economic policy. It will conduct discussions with representatives of
industry in its various aspects, and will put itself in a position to
report to and advise Cabinet upon any proposed economic measures.
The first twelve ministers named will constitute the Cabinet.
CANBERRA. 22nd December, 1961
Ministers in Cabinet 



Weekly Index
No Week Ending
December 23 1961
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Dec. 18 No. 1264 GOA
The Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon. John McEwen
Dec. 21 No. 1280 GLYCERINE
20 No. 1268 DEATH OF SIR EARLE PAGE
22 No. 1286 AUSTRALIAN LIQUOR INDUSTRY PROMOTED IN
SOUTH EAST ASIA
The Minister for Fational Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.
Dec. 22 No. 1285A OIL SEARCH PUBLICATION WIRA ANTICLINE
GRAVITY SURVEY, PAPUA 1959.
The Minister for Libour and National Service, The Hon. William
McMahon
Dec. 18 No. 1260 REVIEW OF THE EMPLOYMENT SITUATION
NOVEMBER 1961.
The Minister f or_ Civil Avia mn _ Senator Shane Paltridge
Dec. 19 No. 1267 INTERNATIONAL JET SERVICES FOR PERTH
The Minister for Immigration, The Hon. A. R. Downer.
Dec. 21 No. 1274 ALLEGATIONS ON IMMIGRATION PROGRAMME BY
LEADER OF OPPOSITION AND CERTAIN SECTIONS
OF PRESS.
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
Dec. 21 No. 1281A XIIth WORLD'S POULTRY CONGRESS
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
Dec. 18 No. 1262 NEW ROLE FOR ARMY MEN
19 No. 1265 MALYAN OFFICER TO TRAIN IN AUSTRALIA
20 No. 1271 SPECIAL METUS FOR1 TROOPS AT CHRISTMAS
20 No. 1272 TNEW ARTILLERY WEAPON FOR iUSTRALIANS IN
MALAY
21 No. 1276 SENIOR AR'IY APPOINTMENT CHANGES
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. F. M. Osborne
Dec. 20 No. 1270 NEW REPATRIATION DEPUTY COMMISSIONER
Dec. 22 No. 1285 MR. F. M. OSBORNE CONGRATULATES HIS
OPPONENT, MR. MONAGHAN
The Minister for Air, Senator the Hon. Harrie Wade
Dec. 20 No. 1273 CHANGE IN IMPORTANT RAAF COMMAND
21 No. 1281 RAIAF ANNUL PROMOTIONS
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Dec. 17 No. 1258 R. A. N. HELICOPTER TEST PILOT FOR U. K.
21 No. 1275 NAVY DOCTOR STUDIES UNDERWATER MEDICINE
21 No. 1278 U. S. TO SEE NiVY FILM
22 No 1283 NAVY CHRISTMAS 
-2-
Department of Externa1 A~ ffaLirs
No. 1259
No. 1269
No. 1277 !, Ur" EP2iLI-'. NS MEA SULE A, NTARCTIC ICE CAP
0. T. 0. RESEARdLCH FELLOVjSIIPS FOR 1962-63
ATTTAli CTIC SHIP TO LEAVE F'CIR VILES ON
DECEMEER 22.
Mr. C. A. ALLEN, Senior A', ustrali-: a Govorment Trade Commissioner
in New Zealand
No. 1261 NEW ZEALD MARKT SCOPE FOR AUSTRALIAN
EXORTERS
The Department of Trade
No. 1263MI. W. 7ARREN McDONALD TO HEA D MIDDLE EA ST
T. RADE MISSION
Department of Supply.
No. 1266 N W FIRE CElITRE DETECTOR DEMAONSTTED
The Department of the Navy
Dec. 21 No. 1282
tl 22 No. 1284 BROTHTE OFFICE. S IN THE R. . N.
S4j* TT CLAUS IN WARSHIP0
The Australian Atomic-Enery Comm . s sion
Dec. 21 No, 1279 AWAR1132DS FOR NUCL'". R RESEA; RCH IN UNIVERSITIES 0
With the Cnmpliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
arlijament House,
CA" NBERIV, C. T.
Dec. 18 20
21
Dec. 18
Ded. 18
Dec. 19 



Weekly Index
No 51
Week Ending
December 31, 1961
CCMMONv'WELTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Pt.. Hon.
John McEwen
December 29No. 1290TEXTILE HANDKERCHIEFS
The Minister for External . ffairs, Sir Garfield Barwick
December 28. No. 1289 AUSTRALLIAN REPRESENTATION AT WESTERN
SAMiOAN INDEPENDENCE CELEBRATIONS
30 No. 12900 NETHERLANDS NEW GUINEA
The Minister for the Interior, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
December 28No. 1288 SALE OF LOG TIMBER TO J1PAN
The Minister for the Navy, Senator Gorton
December 28No. 1289A R. A. N. OFFICER TO SERVE WITH U. S. NAVY
29 No. 1290A EUROPEAN MIGRANT QUALIFIES AS NAVAL
OFFICER
31 No. 1291A SILVER DRUMS AS NAVY JUBILEE TRIBUTE
The Department of External Affairs
December 30No. 1290B ANTARCTIC SHIP TO LFEAVE FOR MAWSON AND
DAVIS ON JANUARY 3.
The Department of Primary Industry
December 31
No. 1287 No. 1291 EXPORT SUGAR REBATE.
CANCELLED
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CINBERRA, A. C. T. 



WODONGA-MELBOURNE STANDARDISATI ON
Message for " AGE" Supplement by the Prime Minister, the
Rt. Hon. R. 6. Menzies
The completion of the standard gauge railway link
between Wodonga and Melbourne is an event of great significance
for Australians everywhere.
The immediate advantages which it confers on the
industrial south-east of our great continent are apparent, for
elimination of the break of gauge between New South gales and
Victoria should considerably enhance the volume of commercial
traffic and the speed of shipment and handling which are so vital
to an expanding economy. Further, the convenience to inter-
State travellers of an unbroken and restful journey between our
two greatest cities should win unreserved approval and greater u.. a
But beyond these benefits to travellers or to commerce,
this consummation of a long-held dream is a symbol of the new
Australia which lies in the near future.
The Wodonga-Melbourne rail link is but one of a great
number of development projects standardisation from Kalgoorlie
to Perth is another designed to win from our country greater
productivity to the greater good of all our citizens.
I believe that if we see this event in that light we
will have a truer appreciation of its importance. In the years Wc
come, those of us who are lucky enough to be here will see changes
wrought across the face of our land in which we will properly take
immense pride, as I do in the project which this supplement
celebrates. R. G. Menzies.
CANBERRA, 3rd January, 1962. 
FOR THE PRESS: COMPOSITION OF THE AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION
TO ATTEND THE SECOND COMMONWEAITH
EDUCATION CONFERENCE IN NEW DELHI THIS
MONTH.
The Prime Minister announced today the composition of
the Australian delegation which will attend the Second
Commonwealth Education Conference to be held in New Delhi this
month. The Prime Minister of India will open the Conference in
VIGYAN BHAWAN, New Delhi, on Thursday morning, 11th January,
and Dr. K. L. SHRIMALI, Minister of Education, will be its
Chairman. About 200 delegates from 13 Commonwealth countries
and from colonial territories are expected to attend. The
Conference will end on 25th January,
The agenda for the Conference has been drawn up by the
Commonwealth Education Liaison Committee in London and the
Governments concerned. This Conference will discuss ways by
which educational co-operation between the countries of the
Commonwealth can be made more effective. Following the First
Commonwealth Education Conference, which was held at Oxford in
July, 1959, a scheme of scholarships was initiated and other
forms of Commonworlth c:-oror'ition in oducntion wuor plnnned..
inob-ia lin has underbaken to provide 100 scholarships at any
one time under this scheme and has made arrangements for
sending educational experts to other countries of the
Commonwealth and for special visits and courses for
educationists in Australian universities, technical colleges
and education departments.
The Australian delegation will be as follows
Sir ALLEN BROWN, Deputy High Commissioner, London
( Leader).
Professor J. P. BAXTER, Vice-Chancellor, University of
New South Wales,
Dr, H. S. WYNDHAM, Director-General of Education, New
South Wales.
Dr. T. L. ROBERTSON, Director-General of Education,
Western Australia.
Dr. J. T. GUNTHER, Assistant Administrator, Territco.
of Papua-New G: unea. Administration,
Mr. E. J. B. FOXCROFT, First Assistant Scoretary.
Prime Mihister's Department.
Mr. J. J. PRATT, Deputy Director, Commonwealth Off:-:
of Education.
Mr. H. S. AMOS, Assistant Secretary, Department of
Treasury.
The delegation will be assisted by officers from the
Office of the Australian High Commissioner in New Delhi,
CANBERRA.
8th January, 1962, P. M. 


The Prime Minister announced today that the Government had decided to establish a centre for Aboriginal studies.. The centre would be known as "The Australian Institute for Aboriginal Studies".
Opportunities for further study and understanding of the unique culture of Australia's aborigines are dwindling rapidly with the passage of time. With this in mind, the Government has decided that it should help to stimulate further studies in the field. The Prime Minister stressed that it was the scientific, cultural and anthropological aspects of the field to which the new body would direct its attention.
&nbsp;As a first step, an Interim Council has been appointed to handle and develop these activities until a permanent body is established, and to advise on the functions and scope of the new body. The Interim Council will work in close co-operation with State authorities, with museums and with Universities.
Members of the Interim Council are:
Professor A. D. TRENDATL, C. M. G. ( Chairman) Master of University House, Australian National University.
Dr. W. E. H. STANNER, Department of Anthropology, Australian National University.
Professor A. A. ABBIE, Professor of Anatomy and Histology, University of Adelaide.
Professor G. LAWTON, Professor of Geography, University&nbsp;of Adelaide.
Dr. A. CAPELL, Department of Anthropology, University of Sydney.
Professor F. J. FENNER, Professor of Microbiology, Australian National University.
Mr. A. F. DEER, General Manager, the M. LC, Assurance Co. Ltd.
Mr. F. D. McCARTHY, Curator of Anthropology, The Australian Museum, Sydney.
Emeritus Professor A. P. ELKIN, Former Professor of Anthropology, The University of Sydney.
Professor R. M. CRAWFORD, Professor of History, The University of Melbourne.
Dr. D. F. THOMSON, Department of Anthropology: University of Melbourne.
Professor J. BURKE, Professor of Fine Arts, University of Melbourne.
Mr. W. C. Wentworth, MP.
Mr, J. N. NELSON, M. P.
Mr. R. J. RANDALL, Department of the TREASURY.
Mr. E. J. B. FOXCROFT, Prime Minister's Department,
The Prime Minister expressed the hope that the appointment of this widely representative Interim Council and the establishment of an Institute of Aboriginal Studies would lead to fruitful combined efforts to preserve and increase our knowledge in this important field.&nbsp;
CANBERRA.9th January, 1963


The Prime Minister announced today that Mr. RUSSELL DRYSDALE had accepted an invitation to become a member of the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board,
The Prime Minister recalled that Mr. DRYSDALE had begun painting in 1935 under GEORGE BELL and that he had gained a reputation in Australia and abroad for his work. He is represented in all Australian Galleries,&nbsp;in the Tate Gallery, London, in the Metropolitan Museum of New York and in private collections in Australia, Europe and America.
CANBERRA.11th January, 1962
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


P.M. No. 2/1962
1. The Cabinet has devoted a long time to a review of the more recent developments affecting Indonesia and West New Guinea. It was greatly assisted by a full factual review submitted by the Minister for External Affairs. The President of Indonesia has not only repeated his nation's claims to the sovereignty of Wes* L' New Guinea, but has made statements of intention to assert those claims by force of arms unless the Netherlands gives ground.
2. We are not a party principal to this dispute, but we have a lively interest in its settlement. As good friends and neighbours of the Dutch, and good friends and neighbours of the Indonesians, our great desire is for a peaceful settlement, not one compelled by threat or duress.
3. Looking at the matter in a world setting, we point out that the Charter of the United Nations requires the peaceful settlement of international disputes, and imposes obligations upon member nations to refrain from the threat or use of arms for the enforcement of territorial claims.
4. Australia, as a loyal member of the United Nations and as a nation vitally concerned with the preservation of peace in South-, Last Asia and the South-West Pacific, believes that it is essential for civilisation that all nations should settle any differences by negotiation and not by force or the threat of force.
5. In the matter of West New Guinea, we have repeatedly made it clear that should the Netherlands and Indonesia come to an agreement, without force or duress, we would respect that agreement; and that we were and are deeply attached to the attainment by under-developed peoples, after adequate and helpful preparation, of the right to choose their own future. We ourselves have for many years followed and will, of course, continue to follow these ideas in the Australian territory of Papua and the Australian Trust Territory of New Guinea.
6. Our support of these ideas is not based upon hostility to any other nation, for we wish to live at peace with all. In our own case, we apply them out of a humane desire to raise the standards of living and of government among people for whom we feel a great moral responsibility.
7. We are &nbsp;on more than one occasion pleased two receive and to accept from the Government of Indonesia explicit assurances that arms would not be employed ' to enforce territorial claims to * Jest New Guinea, and that Indonesia did not and would not make any claim to that portion of Papua and New Guinea for which we have direct responsibility. feel that we are entitled to rely upon the performance of those assurances, to which we have attached and still attach the greatest importance,
8. We are reluctant to believe that the threats of war now being made by the Indonesian Government, in breach of these assurances, are to be followed by action, War in this corner of the world is quite unnecessary, for the doors to free negotiation are wide open. Such a war would solve no problems, but would create animosities from which nobody except the Communist powers could profit, The paramount interests of the people of New Guinea, both Jest and East and indeed of South- East Asia generally, cannot be served but must be damaged by war.
9. This is not a time for either bellicose or extravagant comments. The Government of Australia simply says that it recognises and will discharge its prime responsibility for the security of Australia, its territories and its people. Having regard not only to our treaty rights and responsibilities but also to the hard facts of international life, we act in close consultation with the great free powers, particularly Great Britain and the United States of America. No responsible Australian would wish to see any action affecting the safety of Australia on the issues of war or peace in this area except in concert with our great and powerful friends.
10. It is for this reason that we are in constant contact with London and Washington and the United Nations Headquarters, steadfastly maintaining the basic principle that the peaceful settlement of disputes is the central theme and the supreme mission of the . United Nations and indeed of any civilised order in the world, and that we are therefore deeply anxious that the West New Guinea problem should be resolved. by negotiation, not under threat, but with a desire to do the best for the human beings who make up the population of the disputed territory.
11. We are constantly exploring with our principal allies the possibilities of securing United Nations activities in bringing about free negotiation and a peaceful settlement.
CANBERRA,12th January, 1962.


P. M. No,. 3/ 1962&nbsp;
The Government has now issued a series of invitations to industry and commercial organisations to attend meetings in Canberra with Ministers. These invitations arise from the decision which I announced in December, to the effect that the Government would wish to have discussions with industry representatives, in order to obtain their views in a direct fashion on current economic matters and generally to set up closer contacts with industry in its various aspects.
The details of the invitations issued are as follows:
Associated Chambers of Manufactures to meet Ministers on 18th January at 2.30 P. M.
Associated Chambers of Commerce 19th January at 10.30 a, m.
Australian Council of Retailers 19th January at 2.30 pm..
Australian Council of Trade Unions 24th January 10. 30 am
National Farmers' Union of Australia 30thi January at 10.30 a&nbsp;m.
Australian Bankers' Association 30th January at 2.30 p. m.
Invitations have also been issued to the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the Export Development Council, but dates for meetings with these bodies have not so far been proposed,
CANBERRA,15&nbsp;January, 1962.


P. M. No0)., 4L96VICTORIAN BUSHFIREJSStatement by the Prime Minister, the Pt. Hon. R. G. MenziesThe Commonwealth Government has made available to theVictorian authorities the services of the Army, Navy and A -4irForce to assist in any wi~ ay they can in the fight against bushfiresin Victoria. Yesterday the Treasurer Mvr. Holt, on behalf of theCommonwealth Government informed the Victorian Government of theCommonwealth's concern and its anxiety to help.Late last night the Deputy Premier of Victoria Mr. Rylah,sent the following message to the Prime Minister's Department inCanberra: " 1MR. RYIJLAH THE DEPUTY PR.* MI;.] 2-L THANKS THE PRIME~1INISTZc FOR Hi OFF&amp; C-R OF A2S SISTANcCE ' OR BUSH FIRE Ri! LIEF.iNR . RYLJAH ASTK\' S THAi2 NBCESS: INSTRUCTIONS BE IoSUED TO THETHREEE DEFE~ NCE SEiRVICES ARMY, NAVY and AIR FORCE TO ENABLETHEM TO GIVE ASSISTANCE :. EQUIRZD F6R 1SJSH " 112 PU1APOSES ' ONTH11E REQUEST XZZE BY THE CHI-. 2F CO1, IvIVIISI OF POLICE,VICTORIA". I ha: e this morning despatched to the Victorian Premier,Mr. Bolte, a teleg; ram in the following terms:" YES T1ER.:; DAL MlY COLLEAGUE THE T', i ASURER ON MY BEHTLALFCON TEYED TO0 YOUR GOV-; xNMENT ' THE CONC. , RN FELT .3Y MYGOVERNMiENT A RISING FROM YOUR DISAS0' TROUS HUSH Y~ IRE EXPERiENCEIN JICTORIA. HE EXPRESSED OUR SYMPATHY FOR ' THOSE ',, JHO HAVESUFF R. LD 3ERFEAVaMENT, LOSS OF THEIR HOMES OR DAMAG'E IN OTHERAYS. HE INDICATED OUR ADINE~ ioS TO DISCUSS APPROPRIATELY, jI! TH YOUR GOVERNM:% VENT ANY PROPOSALS YOU MAY BRING FOR lARD FOR4IEF OF D. A1MAGE AND HI. RDSHIP. LATE LAST NIGHT THEFI. DANG% i "-PPEARED MvORE JIDESPREAD ANTD INCE1ASINGLYTHREATENING WvE Iiv2/ 1EDIATELY . iGlcEED 1O . A R. 1QUEST FROM YOURCOLLEAGUE TliE, CHIEF SECI , TARY THAT YOUR GOV.' ERN] ivENT BE GIVENFULL -UHORITY IN THE j-MErGENCY TO AEqUISITION ITS NEEDS FROMCOI~ hONW-*-L ALTH SERVICES iIND I'GENCIES. IJE AiE RELIEiVED TOLEARN THAT HEAVY RAI N 2HIS MORNING HAS -i'ASED T-r. E POSITION ATLEAST 113: MPORARILY, NO DOUBT THE. LZ 4IL. BE A V R IETY OFMATTIL3 CO " NECTED 4ITH SA'FETY A ND R~ ZHABILITATION IN .4HICH YOUW1ILL 6TILL 3E SEEKING SOME COILf4OLAL TH ASSISTANCE ANDCO-OPE'LTION. SO THAT' THESE CAN BE PLOMPTLY A'ND EFFECTIVELY. DEALT lI TH I HAVE ARRANGED FOR THE ivINISTER'-FOR NA~ VY SENAT ORGORTON TO ACT ASACO-ORDINATING REPRESENTA* 1TIVE OF MYGOVE-1RNMrENT" 1CAiN BE RR A,17th January, 1962.


62/ 009P. M. No. 6/ 1962
The Prime Minister and several of his senior ministerial&nbsp;colleagues discussed today with representatives of the Associated&nbsp;Chambers of i. anufactures of Australia, the current level ofactivity and trends in Australian manufacturing industries. Theviews of the Associated Chambers were presented by Mr. John N.Walker, Federal President; Mr. T. M. Ramsay, Vice President,Victorian Chamber of Manufactures; Mr. Allison, President,South Australian Chamber of Manufactures; Mr. Ashton,President, , Western Australian Chamber of Manufactures; Mr. H. N.Herford, President, Chamber of Manufactures of N. S. Mr. J. D.Ferguson the immediate Past President of the Australian Chambersand Mr. Ri'. C. Anderson, the Federal Director.On behalf of Australian manufacturers, the industryrepresentatives submitted a three stage plan namely a short termstimulus and medium and long term developments.The short term prcposals are:the immediate re-imposition under Article XIX of GATT ofQuantitative import Restrictions to cover the products ofparticular industries. This should provide by far the mostimportant and immediate stimulus;a firm statement by the Government of its w1ill to safeguardAustralian industrics;acceptance by the Government of the principle ofanticipatory duties, anda statement by the Govenment confirming that a clearpreference will be given to Australian made goods by theCommonwealth Government in its purchasing policies.For the Medium Term, the Associated Chambers suggestedthe introduction of certain financial measures designed tostimulate manufacturing activity.In the Long Term, the Association asked for a restatementof the obJ3 ctives of Tariff Policy and consideration ofimproved protective techniques. The Associated Chambers alsoaffirmed that an assurance by the Government of a continuing highlevel in the flow of migrants into Australia is essential tomaintain a climate favourable to industrial expansion.Mr. d. D. Ferguson, who is also Deputy Chairman ofChrysler Australia Ltd referred to the position of the motorvehicle industry in Australia and the desirability for somestimulation and assistance.At the conclusion of the meeting, the Prime Ministerand Mr. ialker agreed that there had been a most valuablediscussion and exchange of views. Mr. Menzies said theGovernment would give close consideration to every proposalsubmitted by the Associated Chambers when the conferencesarranged with other representative bodies have been held.CAN3. LRA,18th January, 1962.


BUSH 1PIRES IN TICTORIA
The tragic bush fires in Victoria have shocked us all,&nbsp;and I extend my sympathy to those who have suffered bereavement,&nbsp;loss of their homes or personal distress in other ways.&nbsp;
I have received a request today from the Acting Premierof Victoria, Mr. Rylah, through Senator Gorton for Commonwealthfinancial assistance and I have replied as foliows" You have requested Cowmonwealth grant towardscost of providing relief to persons in distress as resultof disastrous bushfires. On behalf of CommonwealthGovernment I wish again to extend deepest sympathy to allpeople affected by this disaster. -Je are readily preparedto join with ycar Government in contributing towards thecost of a scheme designed to provide for the immediaterelief of persons in distressed and necessitouscircumstances. I assume that at the ea liest opportunityyou will furnish details of the damage and provide anestimate of the cost of relief measures. MeantimeCommonwealth funds will be made available if required onthe usual conditions, namely ( one) for with StateGovernment ( two) the joint funds are used only for reliefof personal hardship and ( three) expenditure is in duecourse certified by State Auditor-General."In November last, the Commonwealth made a grant of upto œ 30,000 on a for basis with the State of New South ; alesfor the relief of personal hardship resulting from the recentserious floods in New South Wales.
The Premier of New South Wales, ir. Heffron has now&nbsp;informed me that additional funds will be needed for this purpose&nbsp;and he has asked the Commonwealth to provide a further œ 20,000&nbsp;to match a similar amount to be made available by the State.&nbsp;7e have agreed to provide a further grant of up to œ 20,000. as&nbsp;sought by the Premier.
CANBERR. A,18th January, 1962.
P. M. No.&nbsp;5/1962


P. M. No, 7/1962
This morning representatives of the Associated&nbsp;Chambers of Commerce of Australia submitted to the Prime&nbsp;Minister and other senior Commonwealth Ministers their views oil&nbsp;the present state of the economy, and their suggestions for&nbsp;future action by the Government in both the short and long term.
The Associated Chambers were represented by Mr. CohinC. Verco, their President, Mr. H. C. Thomas, Honorary Treasurer;Mr. J. P. Macneil, President of the Melbourne Chamber of Commerce;Mr. G. MA. Hastie, President of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce;Mr. Colin C. Baird, President, Australian Wholesale SoftgoodsFederation; Mr. A. F. J. Smith, President, Associated ChambersExport Council; and iMr. R. -Rowe, Director,The representatives of the Associated Chambers ofCommerce submitted forcefully that, in their opinion, there wasan urgent need for Government action aimed at a reduction in thelevel of unemployrnent and in restoring the confiaence ofconsumers. The Associated Chambers of Commerce are of theopinion that an increase in Local Government expend-iture wouldhave an immediate benefiuial effect on the employment position.They also advocated fiscal measures designed, in particular, toencourage and permit increased expenditure by families in themiddle and lower income groups.
The Associated Chambers also suggested that somestimulus be gzven to home building because any expansion in thisfield would have far reaching effects on the demand for a widevariety of materials and equipment.Mr. Menzies said that this had been a truly valuablediscussion which would be of great benefit to himself and allhis Cabinet colleagues. The views expressed and the proposalssubmitted by the Associated Chambers of Commerce would be verycarefully considered by the Government as soon as the presentseries of talks with representative sections of the Australianeconomy was concluded.
Mr. Verco said that he and the other members of his&nbsp;delegation were pleased with the discussions they had had.
Canberra19th January, 1962,


CONFERENCE -WITH AUS3TRALIAN COUNCIL OF TA K
This afternoon representatives of the Australian Council&nbsp;of Retailers discussed problems currently facing the Australian&nbsp;economy with the Prime Minister and other senior Cabinet Ministers.
The Council was represented by Mr. T. A, Pettigrew, President, SirNorman L. Nock and Messrs Frank Munro, R. OtLoan, C. C. Burfield,Cr. Leo Curtis, Messrs Griffin and C. H. Langley.
All those present thought the discussion and exchange ofviews was most useful. The Prime Minister stressed the importanceof the retail viewpoint which was most valuable because of itsclose contact with the public.
The points stressed by the retailers were the importantneed to stimulate the economy in order to engender publicconfidence and to raise the level of employment. The retailersrecommiended that the Government should take immediate steps toincrease family endowmnent and pensions. In particular, "-here wasa need to raise the income level to enable the family man -to meethis household budgct commitments. They felt that action of thisnature would provide a quick stimulus to business activities.The retailers also urged that more money should be provided forthe construction of low cost homes through organizations such asthe State Housing authorities, Co-operative Building Societiesand the gar Service Homes Division, and that the terms of financebe made a good deal easier. This should also have stimulatingeffects on industry generally.
The question of imports of merchandise u. as freelydiscussed. The retailers assured the Prime Minister that therelatively high level of imports which followed the release ofmany items from import control had tapered off substantially.They believe that expansion in consumer spending would notmaterially alter that situation. Retailers fully appreciated theimportance of supporting Australian industry and would doeverything within their power to encourage the purchase ofAustralian made goods.
Mr. Menzies said that all the suggestions put by the&nbsp;retailers would be weighed carefully by the Government as soon as&nbsp;the present series of consultations ended.
Mr. Pettigrew thanked the Prime Minister for the&nbsp;opportunity to place the views of retailers so freely before him&nbsp;and for the very frank discussion on current economic problems&nbsp;that had taken place. He was certain that these would have a&nbsp;most beneficial result.
CANBERRA19th January, 1962.
P. M. &nbsp;NO.&nbsp;8/1962



Weekly Index
Week Ending
January 20, 1962
COMMONW EALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
Minister for External Affairs. Sir Garfield -Barwick
Jan. 14 18
19 No. 32A
No. 47
No. 51
The Minister for COLOMBO PLAN CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEE REPORT
APPOINTMENT OF SERFICES ATTACHE, RANGOON
INDONESIAN ACQUISITION OF HERCULES AIRCRAFT
Trade, The Rt. Hon. John McEwen
Jan. it itf No. 39
Noo40 No. 48
No. 53
The Minister for C'WEALTH TO HELP TOBACCO GROWERS
PENICILLIN AND STREPTOMYCIN
DISCUSSIONS WITH WHEATGROWERS
NEW TRADE COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED
National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M.
Jan. 19 No. 52 QUEENSLAND COAL CONTRACT
The Minister for Labour and National Service, The Hon. Will:
Jan. 15 No. 38 . M.
iam
McMahon
REVIEW OF EMPLOYMENT SITUATION DECEMBER 1961.
The Minister for Civil Aviation Senator Shane Paltridge
Jan. 17 No, 44 VISCOUNT ACCIDENT
The Minister for Immigration, The Hon. A. R. Downer
Jan. 19No. 54SIXTY-FIVE BRITISH FAMILIES TO SETTLE IN
WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
Jan. 17 17 No. 42
No043
The Minister for
Jan. 19 DAIRY BOARD CHAIRMAN TO GO OVERSEAS
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL TO MEET IN
SYDNEY
Repatriation. The Hon. R. W. Swartz.
No. 49 MINISTERIAL OFFICE FOR BRISBANE
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G, Gorton
Jan. it It II No. 37
No. 45A
No. 50
No. 33
No. 35
No. 41 R. A. N.' S DIVING EXPERT FOR MALAYA
NAVY MINISTER COMMENT ON œ 31-MILLION FERRY
SURVEY HELICOPTERS FOR R. A. N.
FIRST ANTI-SUBMARINE HELICOPTERS DUE THIS YEAR.
W. R. A. N. S. POPULAR CAREER FOR YOUNGER GIRLS
ASSISTANTS FOR SERVICES ATTACHES
The Minister for Shipping and Transport, the Hon. Hubert Opperman
Jan. 17No. 45 NEW SYDNEY/ HOBART BASSENGER VEHICULAR VESSEL
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
Jan. it No. 34
No. 36
Noo 46 RAAF BANDSMEN TO TOUR TASMANIA
RAA' TO INTRODUCE 7.62 MM. RIFLE
RAAF MERCY FLIGHT
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House, CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


&nbsp;P. M. No. 9/ 1962
We have now had conferences with three groups of&nbsp;representatives of industry and commerce, and have several more to&nbsp;come. These conferences are not regarded by us as formalities.&nbsp;On the contrary, they afford a splendid opportunity for Ministers to&nbsp;receive both criticism and constructive proposals and to have some&nbsp;frank discussions on what are essentially common problems.&nbsp;I cannot at this stage anticipate the judgments which the&nbsp;Government will form when these special conferences are completed; but&nbsp;they will be formed and announced promptly.
Meanwhile, it may help us all if, in what is a purely&nbsp;interim statement, I say now that already, on some aspects of the&nbsp;matter, certain lines of approach seem clear.
1. The existing volume of registered unemployment cannot be&nbsp;allowed to persist. œ here are unused resources of manpower,&nbsp;of plant and equipment, and of money. We want to put them&nbsp;to work.
2. These undoubted facts require at least two sets of decisions;&nbsp;those to operate in the short run, i. e. long before the next&nbsp;Budget, and those to operate in the long run.
3. It is already common ground that there are people available&nbsp;and eager for employment; that the Banks have a high level&nbsp;of liquid assjts; that private savings2 as expressed inSavings Bank deposits, are rising; that the Loan market is&nbsp;buoyant; but that industrial capacity could employ many&nbsp;more operatives.
4. Business has begun to improve, but the general improvement&nbsp;is too slow, and short-term measures are needed to accelerate&nbsp;the improvement.
v. hile various measures have already been put to us, it hasbeen generally accepted that the object to be achieved is tosecure a normally expanding level of production and business,but to avoid a recurrence of boom conditions which couldre-activate inflationary pressures or cause a new and highdemand for imports.But this object cannot be fully achieved ::. ithout a markedimprovement in confidence about the future.
6. We are addressing ourselves to these problems with certain&nbsp;central principles in mind.As secondary industry is a great employer of labour, witha real capacity for quick expansion, we are determined to give it aproper degree of protection, and a proper sense of security for itsfuture growth. As there is always a danger that a restoration of buoyancyin business may tend to increase quite sharply the demand for imports,we have, in addition to what I have said about the protection ofsecondary industry welcomed the assurances of the Retail Trade thatit is determined To see that the demand for Australian-made goodsis given priority. This is essential, for a growing demand for
Australian products means rising employment in Australia. Suchrising employment is essential to achieve the twin basic objectivesof a maintained migration prograrnmme and the full development of ournational and natural resources, both primary and secondary.It will, of course, not be forgotten that the&nbsp;maintenance of monetary stability and the consequent avoidance ofupward pressures on the price and cost level is essential for thegreat export industries and for the encour-gement of those investiblesavings which are essential for capital expansion in basic Governmentworks and private enterprise.
We have acknowledged the existence of some urgent problems.&nbsp;But it is proper to recall that our economic policies have secured&nbsp;important results in the halting of inflation and the building up of&nbsp;our international reserves. Our exports have risen and our imports&nbsp;have fallen. The " credit squeeze" is now over.&nbsp;It will, I hope, prove useful, in what remains of our&nbsp;consultations, to have stated these admittedly general principles andto expose them to close examination.
CANBERRA21st January, 1962.



Citizenship Convention 23rd January, 1962
MR. DOU-ER.-Thank you, Your Excellency. I am sure
we all agree that yours was a most charming and telling speech.
It has been a great honour to have you here. It gives me great
. pleasure to ask the right honourable the Prime Minister to ad ress
the gathering. TK2 1 RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MIENZIES, Prime
Minister of Australia.-Sir, Your Excellencies, ladies and
gentlemen: I feel almost embarrassed to come, even for a few
minutes, betw-en you and the memory of the remarkable speech
that has been addressed to us by His -Excellency the Governor-
General because I am sure it did our minds good and our hearts
ood to listen to it. There is really very little that needs
to be said by me on an occasion of this kind. This is the
thirteenth of these conventions. I daresay you have had
speeches galore made to you in the course of that time. Some
of you, as I can tell by the still optimistic expression on your
faces, are here not for the first time.
On the last occasion when I spoke here, I took the
op ortunity of saying something that I hope you will let me
repeat, not in words but in substance. ior a variety of
reasons, we in Australia have become accustomed to talking about
iew :% ustralians. It is a very sobering reflection that if, at
the end of a few years, the Governor-General became so enamoured
of life in Australia that he decided to stay here, he would be
a New Australian. He would be a migrant. In fact, I do not
want to prejudice the interests of the Treasury, Sir, but yo.
might perhaps be able to a) ply retrospectively for an assisted
passage. But we here who are old Australians, are all noo"
migrants. ciy grandparents came here. They migrated to
Australia. Some of the more distinguished among us are able
to trace our ancestry back further than that. Some of them
prefer not to. But it is interesting to recall that all of us
B2. 
who are, you might say, the old brigade, are poeople whose
parents or grandparents or great-grandparents or whatever it
may be came out to Australia seeking a new life in a new
country. They lived tlhe-n under iuch more primitive conditions
than exist today.
Therefore, I do not like these artificial distinctions
very much. ' Jo in Australia ought to recall ns I am~ sure we
do that we are a very young country. I do not uvcan that we
are young geologically but we are a very young nation. It is
not so long since 1788. It is only a few generations when you
cote to think of it. Therefore, tmis, of all modern and
civilised countries, is perhaps the youngest. le are nearer to
each other, from whatever generation we cove, than are thc
) eople of perhaps any othc~ r country in the world.
Even in the case of G-reat Britain there are blanks
in history. I have never quite discovered, Your ilxcellency,
what happecned between the time when the Rom~ ans left and the
Angles and the 3axons came. Thore are silent passages in
history. But with. us, over this relatively short period of
tin1e, there is continuity of history and a tremendous surge
of growKth. All periods of our history in Australia have had
their owm turbulent and someti es confused activity. " e had
tha old pastoral days, the old mining days, the agricultural
era and the manufacturing era. These things have come, one
on top of an~ ther, an in the result, this is a country full
of life and hope, achievement and ambition. It is therefore
easy and, indeed, natural for us to rcceive into the
population people whfo possess this sameo spirit; who are the
same kind of people as those wuho originally created this
spirit.
B3 
It is easy for us to welcome them, and I believe I can say
that it is easy for them to live here and to feel that they
are among friene. s and living in a lively family atmosphere.
We in Australia as Sir W-ins ton Churchill once
reminded me, are rather disposed to conduct our political
affairs with a fine eighteenth century vigour, and I dare
say that that is quite right. Being before this audience,
I speak no party politics. It is very seldom in Australia
that you can get the great political parties the great
political bodies of thought to coincide precisely on some
topic, but on migration we are as one. The great movement of'
migration which began in substance after the war was created
by the Labour Administration and has been carried on by my
own. It has, up to a point, changed the face of Australia,
and it will continue to have the most profound effects on the
intellectual development, the cultural standards, the
scientific achievements and the social consciousness of people
in Australia. We will, in 50O years' time, be a different
people not detached from our old anchors, not detached from
our old traditions, but enriched by new ones. We will be a
different people I believe, a dynamic people a people with
much to contribute to the world. One of the great factors
contributing to that is that we have received so many hundreds
of thousands of people from outside Australia who have come
here not to be dependent and not to be different, but to be
part of Australian society and contributors to the overall
wealth, happiness and future of Australia. That is one
reason why many of us, as we look at this remarkable process
and get such comfort and such hope from it, always hope that
those who come here, for example, from various countries of
Europe, will not form colonies and will not segregate
themselves from the rest of the community. I do not want
Cl. 8. 
U to be taken as exaggerating on this matter. I believe it is
essential for Australia that there continue to be powerful
Scottish and Caledonian societies. I insist on that. I am
willing to concede to His Excellency tite Governor-General
St. George's society. I think it is a very good thing that
we from time to time remind ourselves of our inheritance, but
it would be a bad thing indeed if, in a country like this,
racial communities tended to separate themselves out. The
great thing about building up Australia through a programme
of this kind is that we should become one people. These are
the immortal words of the younger Pitt: " You must be one people."
And one people we must be or we shall be in perd..
These splendid bodies such as the Cominonwealth
Immigration Planning Council, the Commonwealth Immigration
Advisory Council and the Good Neighbour Movement that is an
organization which has so much to do with this matter know
that so well. They have done such superb work and they know
that they are not dealing with an academic problem. A
convention of this kind is not an occasion for a collection
of rather philosophical reflections. The real business is to
see that we become, steadily, one people. You are a good
neighbour because you prefer your neighbour to yourself. You
are a good neighbour to a new citizen in Australia because
you want him to feel that he is your neighbour and that you
are his, and that you both are members of one people.
Therefore, I regard the work that is being done as being of
the highest order of practicality. This is a splendid thing
to be doing. Looking at it with a broad view, one can say
that before very long there will be occupying high office
in Australia people whose names will fall unfamiliarly on the
ears of the Australians of this generation. It would
C24 
, A n be indeed one of the great triumphs of the migration policy
that we so weld all new elements in with the old as to produce
an alloy which will be of power and significance and achievement
in our own country.
We all, on whichever side of Parliament we sit, are
tremendous supporters of this programme. We all are conscious
of the fact that, if it were not for the work of hundreds, and,
indeed, thousands, of people like yourselves, who devote much
time to the practical affairs of integration in Australia, the
programme could not succeed so well and could not endure so
long. It does endure I repeat that word because it does
not create internal hostilities. Allow it to create internal
hostilities, allow it to create some sort of differences between
one community and another or one race and another, and you will
find the whole object of migration frustrated. The fact is
that that has not happened. The fact is that, so long as there
are people like you, ladies and gentlemen, who will bend your
minds to these great problems, it will not happen.
Sir, it is a very great pleasure to be here and a
great pleasure to be allowed to say something to this
distinguished audience.
C3. 


P. M. No ,. 11/ 1.962CONFERENCES JITH INDUTRYStatement by t0e Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. R. G. MenziesThe Government has decided to extend the range of itspresent consultations with industry on the economic situationin Australia. Arrangements have accordingly been made for threeadditional meetings. The first of these -iill be held tomorrow( Thursday, 25th January) at 10.30 aom. with representatives ofthe Australian loolgrowers' and Graziers' Council, and theAustralian /, ool and Heat Producers' Federation. On Monday29th January at 2,30 p. m. discussions will be held withrepresentatives of the Federated Chamber of AutomotiveIndustries, and on Tuesday, 30th January at 8.30 p. m. with theMaster Builders' Federation of Australia.Meetings had already been announced but no datesspecified with the Export Development Council and theManufacturing Industries Advisory Council, These will now takeplace on Thursday, 1st February, at 10.30 a. m. and 2.30 p. m.respectively. The remaining two meetings yet to be held will be-jith the National Farmers' Union on Tuesday, 30th January, at10.30 a. m. and the Australian . Bankers' Association on Tuesday,January, at 2.30 p. m.CAN BEiRA,24+ th January, 1962.


PM No 10/1962
CONFERENCE WiITH A. C. T. U.Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. KoEG. MenziesMr, Menzies and other Commonwealth Ministers metrepresentatives of the Australian Council of Trade Unions inCanberra this morning to receive their views on the presentemployment situation. During the course of the discussionsthe representatives of the Unions submitted certain proposals.The Australian Council of Trade Unions wasrepresented by Mr. Albert Monk, President, Mr. H. J. Souter,Secretary, Mr. J. D. Kenny, Senior Vice President and i~ r.3vans, Junior Vice President.After the meeting the Prime Minister said that heunderstood the Union representatives proposed to issue asummary of their proposals to the press. There had beenconsiderable discussion at the meeting of some aspects ofthese proposals which included some valuable information.The views expressed by the Union representatives would beconsidered closely by the Government. It had also beendecided that certain of the proposals would be discussedfurther with the Minister and senior officers of theDepartment of Labour and National Service.CANBERRA, 24th January, 1962.



AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
By the PRime MinLster_ Hon. R. G. Menzies
We celebrate today the foundation of our country.
It is a time to remember the courage of those first settlers,
to take a just pride in their hard-won achievements and the
achievements of those who came after them, But it is also a
time to think about our nationhood and of the contribution
which we, who are the inheritors, can add to what has been
done. We are growing in numbers and we are growing in
wealth of production. Our progress has been great and there
is no limit to our horizons.
Whether we are of the farm or of the city, employed
or employing, newcomer or born here, we can, in a spirit of
national co-operation, help to build a still greater nation
where, under the rule of law, equal opportunity will continue
to exist for everyone. R. G. MENZIE3
CANBERRA1 January, 1962. 



FOR THE PRESS DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
CANBERRA
Released only in Canberra PR 16 h
WEST NEW GUINEA STATEIENT BY THE I. IINISTER
FOR EKTERNAL AFFAIRS
The inister for External Affairs, Sir Garfield Barwick,
referred today to reports claiming that the Australian Government
was due to change its attitude on the West New Guinea issue. " These
reports, acknowledged to be unofficial, are speculative", Sir
Garfield said. " The Governnent's position in respect of the
dispute was set out in a staterent made in Canberra by the Prime
Minister on January 12 after Cabinet had discussed the natter.
That statenent makes it clear that the government desires settlement
of the dispute by peaceful reans and not under duress or
threat of war. The Prime Iinister's statement also makes it clear
that Australia pre-eminently desires that the Papuans of West New
Guinea should, in due course, be given the right to choose their
own future. The Government has made no other decision.
In conformity with this unchanged policy, on the one
hand steps have been taken to persuade the parties to go to the
conference table, and on the other the Government has expressed its
disapproval of resort to war or threats of war. Hovwever, the
ultimate resolution of the matter is one for the parties themselves
with the assistance, the Australian Government hopes, of
the Secretary-General of the United Nations. Australia, not being
a party principal to the dispute, is not itself involved in these
negotiations. It has made it abundantly clear that it will
respect the voluntary agreement of the parties in conformity
with the principles of the Charter." 


This morning representatives of the Australian&nbsp;Woolgrowers' and Grazierst Council and the Australian Wool and&nbsp;Meat Producers' Federation had a frank discussion with the Prime&nbsp;Minister and several of his Ministerial colleagues on&nbsp;developments in the economy and the effects on the wool and meat&nbsp;industries of possible measures to expand employment.
The Australian i. Toolgrowers' and Graziers' Council wasrepresented by Mr. Scott, President; Messrs ToL. Bull,D. L. McMaster and R. I. McAuley, Members of the ExecutiveCommittee; Mr. G. D. Chislett, Economi. st; and Mr. I. P. Nicholas,Executive Officer. The Australian Wool and Meat Producers'Federation was represented by Mr. L. M. Ridd, Mr. J. Kerin, andMr. A. Laidlaw, Vice Presidents; and Mr. A. R. Johnston,Executive Dfficer.The Council representatives said that there was a lackof evidence that tth current flow of imports is, in fact,depressing secondary industry, although the effect of importsmay be contributing to unemployment in a very few sections ofsome industries. The Council also doubted whether there-introduction of import restrictions could be expected tostimulate consumer demand, Unless consumption rises, very largereductions in imports would be necessary in order to create anappreciable increase in the demand for local manufactures.Moreover, re-introduction of quantitative restrictions forprotective purposes would handicap the export sector by theincrease in costs and loss of efficiency which such controlswould engender. In the Council's view the Tariff Board is theappropriate body to determine the protection required byindustry. The Council believes that Section 17A " Emergency"tariff hearings are being as promptly ezecuted as is compatiblewith the maintenance of a semblance of judicial inquiry andconsidered findings. These views were also shared by theFederation's representatives.Representatives of the Council drew attention to thefact that the rise in prices and costs in Australia had beensevere relative to similar movements in other countries. Forthese and other reasons the Council requested an expertindependent inquiry into the problems of ensuring a balanceddevelopment of the Australian economy through the pricemechanism. This could lead to the adoption of new principlesfor wage and tariff making, together with the introduction ofanti-restrictive practices legislation.Both the Council and the Federation representativessaid they believed that as time marches on a growing proportionof the community will come to realise that the measuresintroduced by the Government in November, 1960 have had theeffect of producing a cost and price stability which provides asound basis for further development. At the same time theyrecognized that there is an immediate problem of unemploymentwhich must be corrected,Representatives of the Federation mentioned that intheir view it appeared necessary to provide a time limitation ontariff duties so that. after a specified pericd, these could beautomatically re-examined in the light of existing circumstancesin the industry receiving protection.
Both organizations expressed the view that availability&nbsp;of long term credit in primary industry was inadequate and&nbsp;requested full examination of this matter.&nbsp;Mr. Menzies said that he and those of his colleagues&nbsp;present found it extremely valuable to hear the views of wool&nbsp;and meat producers whose activities are responsible for such a&nbsp;large proportion of our export earnings. He assured thosepresent that the Government would give close consideration to all&nbsp;the views expressed as soon as the present series of&nbsp;consultations was concluded.
CANBERRA,25 January, 1962.


P. M. No. 13/1962
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) DeputyPrime Minister ( Mx Mce) an Prelier ( Mr, Nicklin)
The Prime Minister and Mr. John McEwen this&nbsp;afternoon had a most valuable discussion with the Premier and&nbsp;the members of his Cabinet.
As the Commonwealth Government, like the State&nbsp;Government of Queensland, is made up of both Liberal Party and&nbsp;Country Party Ministers, the discussions represented what mightbe fairly described as a " family" political conference. Variousmatters which have been under discussion in the past wereclarified by the exchanges, to a genuine mutual satisf~ action.The Prime Minister made it clear that theCommonwealth Government, being determined to make an early andsubstantial reduction in unemployment was not proposing todelay action until the meeting of Parliament. On the 3-ontrary,it would announce some urgent decisions at the earliest possRblemoment after the cnclusion of its industry consultations nextweek. Long range measures are already under examination butthis is not to prejudice or postpone short-term measures.Queensland Ministers put several views of greatimportance. One was that 1960, though it was a boom year formost of Australia, was not one in Queensland; and thatQueensland had in consequence been more affected than otherStates by the impact of the anti-inflationary measures taken bythe Commonwealth. One of the results of this, they said, wasthat at present unemployment is much more serious in Queenslandthan in any other State. Ways and means of making a quickimpact upon unemployment, particularly in the centres mostaffected, were discussed and several constructive pr-oposalswere made by Queensland Ministers. These will be conveyed toCommonwealtL-h Ministers by the Prime Minister and Mr. McEwjen andwill be examined. In addition to what have been referred to as " shortterm"measures, action was taken to look at the longer termdevelopment of the industrial potential of Queensland,partiai larly in relation to the providing of employment and theearning of export income. It was agreed that both the need andthe opportunity exist, but that Parther detailed talks areneeded before ultimate conclusions can be arrived at.
The Prime Minister said that he would facilitate &nbsp;early visits or conferences by the Treasurer ( Mr. Hoolt), the&nbsp;Minister for National Development ( Senator Spooner) and the&nbsp;Minister for Shipping and Transport ( Mr. Opperman), In addition&nbsp;of course Queensland Commonwealth Ministers, Messrs Davidson,&nbsp;Adermann and Swartz will be available for frequent consultations." We all thought our discussions were invaluable", said&nbsp;Mr. Menzies and Mr. Nicklin after the meeting,.~! believe thatwe have established a splendid basis for co-operation in theinterests not only of Queensland as a political unit but of the&nbsp;great actual and potential Australian resources which lie within&nbsp;the boundaries of this State. It is unreasonable to supposethat every suggestion made hereafter can be accepted by one side&nbsp;or the other, but we are quite satisfied that we ! iave taken steps&nbsp;to eliminate misunderstandings arnd to enable each of us to helpthe other in our cormcon tasks. The immediate task is to restore&nbsp;confidence, whicth is tthe vital, condition of renewed prosperity".
BRISBANE26th January, 1962,


P. M. No. 14/ 1962
CONF. RENCE " L FLD R. L C. njJR OF AUTOMOTIV, IIDUSTRIES.
The Prime Minister and several of his Cabinet uolleaguestoday met representatives of the Federal Chamber of AutomotiveIndustries. The Chamber was represented by J. Dickson, President;Mr. B. L. 3urton ( Ford Company), Vice-President and Chairman of theExecutive Committee; Mr. J. D. Ferguson ( Chrysler), Past President andMember of the Executive Comm-ttee; iMr. J. H. Horn ( General Motors),Immediate Past President and Meimber of the xecutive Committee;Mr. H. J. Graves ( 3ritish Motor Corporation); Mr. Daunt,Chief Executive Officer.The discussion ranged over the present state of themotor v. hicle industry and the importance of employment in thisindustry to the economy in general.The representatives of the Federal Chamber said thatthey were most satisfied rith the opportunity given them to expresstheir views. Mr. Menzies told those present that he was now muchbetter informed on the position and prospects of this mostimportant Australian industry, and that the views expressed by theFederal Chamber on behalf of the industry would be carefullyconsidered by the Government.CAN3ERRA. 29th January, 1962.



P. M. No. 1 j. 2.
CONFEENCE _ WITH BANKERS
Statement by the Prime Minister Hon, RoG. Menzies)
This afternoon Mr. Menzies and several of his Cabinet
colleagues had a most frank discussion with representatives of
the Australian banks.
The Australian Bankers' Association was represented
by Mr. G. C. Hill., its Chairman; Mr. C. R. Darvell and Mr. H. C. C.
Marshall, The Commonwealth 3anking Corporation was represented
by Mr. E. B. Richardson.
The opportunity was taken for a very far-ranging
discussion of the present state of the economy in the light of
the experience of the trading banks. The BanzKers made a
number of suggestions which Ministers received with interest.
After the meeting Mr. Menzies said that he and
those of his colleagues present were now much better informed
of the thinking of the trading banks and assured the
representatives present that their suggostions would be
closely considered.
CANBERRA, January, 1962. 



D. No1196
CONFEiNCE WITH FARME_-S' ORGANISATIONS
Statement by the grime Minister, lt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
This morning the Prime Minister and several of his
Cabinet colleagues met representatives of the National Farmers'
Union of Australia and the Australian Primary Producers' Union.
The National Farmers' Union was represented by Mr. A. F. Havard,
President, Mr. L. H. Heaslip, Australian Wool Meat Producers'
Federation; Mr. J. P. Cass, Australian Wheatgrowers' Federation;
Mr. C. S. J. Conroy, Australian Dairy Farmers' Federation; Mr, T.
L. Bull, Australian Woolgrowers' Graziers' Council; Mr. R. H.
Belcher, Australian Cane Growers' Council; and Mr. A. S. Norquay,
Secretary. The Australian Primary Producers' Union was
represented by Mr. S. Donelan, President; and Messrs J.
Heffernan and I. T. Serjeant.
The representatives of the National Farmers' Union told
the Ministers present that the Government's economic measures in
remedying boom conditions in 1960-61 had generally been
appreciated by prirmary producers. While, naturally, a recovery
to better employment levels was earnestly hoped for, the farming
industries were somewhat apprehensive of the possibility of
injudicious remedies re-introducing the unhealthy conditions
from which the economy had escaped only with some difficulty.
The National Farmers' Union representatives reminded
the Government that Australian export producers were unable to
pass on rising production costs because their overseas markets
faced world competition. However, more exporting was necessary
in order to strengthen the balance of payments and finance
imports necessary for the expanding economy.
The National Farmers' Union said that the economy
would be strengthened by
encouraging increased use of fertilisers by granting a
subsidy
arranging for the supply of bank finance under more
appropriate condi. tions, possibly a 10-year ucirm
ensuring that Australian industries received protection
only after reference to the Tariff . ro) ard and not by
quantitative import restriccic..
avoiding the possibility of costly rr.: r-' y declining the
use of anticipatory duties based 1. osn timation, and
reducing the magnitude of transpor-i .7 xaminring the
possibility of securing a unifor-rice n.:
exploring the practicability of .: L. kii g c: pcial provision
for capital charges on State raiW: , y systems, The
National Farmers' Union said tha only implementing
such a proposal could costs be r-; uced a ride
front
an inquiry by independent authorities into the question of
what policies need to be pursued over the next ten years
that will most closely achieve high living standards and
full employment. 
4 I 22,
Representatives of the Australian Primary Producers'
Union expressed agreement with the broad views put to Ministers
by representatives of the National Farmers' Union. In
particular, they stressed that a sound e: ternal economy is the
first essential because internal prosperity and expansion depend
mainly upon ability to export, and so to pay for all essentials
for the maintenance of Australian industry and for development
and expansion. They also stressed the need for a net inflow of
oversea capital for long-term investment.
The Australian Primary Producers' Union also emphadLsed
that Australia's ability to export is closely related to the
level of internal production costs, transport charges, the
maintenance of a sound domestic market and our continued
willingness and abil. ity to buy from countries which buy our
exports. The Australian Primary Producers' Union also recommended
the reduci ion of those taxes ihich have a multiplier effect on
costs throughout dndustry.
At the ccnclusion of the meeting Mir. Menzias said that
this had been a most useful and valuable occasion. He told the
representatives of both Unions that the suggestions they had
proposed would be carefully considered.
January, 1962. 



P. M. No. / 62
CONFERENCE ITH KT. TLP,
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. R. G. Menzies
This evening representatives of the Master Builders!
Federation of Australia discussed with the Prime Minister and
other Commonwealth Ministers recent and prospective developments
in the building industry.
The Federation was represented by Mr. J0Bryant
President; Messrs H. tilckens and A. V. Jennings; and Mr. LR.
Dudley, -xecutive Director.
Representatives of the Federation emphasised the
desirability of a quick lift in employment. They submitted a
number of short term and long term proposals designed co
stimulate home building activity, and also commercial build. ing.
The short term proposals were:
Injection through Housing Societies and Savings Banks of
funds to lift construction,
An immediate release of overdraft accommodation by the
Banks, and
An increase in the size of maximum loans.
In the longer term they recommended the establishment
of a Federal Home Finance and Mortgage Bank to perform specialisfunctions
in the home building field, encouraament of self-help
through greater savings and housing bonds rith special
conditions, and the announcement of 5-year targets.
The Federation also proposed the immediate
introduction of a depreciation allowance on income-producing
buildings. Mr. Menzies said that the story told by those with
practical experience in the building industry was most valuable,
and that the proposals submitted by the Federation would be
taken into consideration by the Goverr: rent in formulating its
short and long term plans.
CANBEPRA, January, 1962. 


P. M. No.-2Q/ 122CONFE-IENCE WITH MANUFACTURING INDUS I'BIESADVISORY COUNCILStatement by the Prime Minister, ( Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies)This afternoon the Prime Minister and several ofhis Cabinet colleagues met representatives of the ManufacturingIndustries Advisory Council. The Council was represented bySir James Kirby, President; Mr. John Burnett, Mr. R. A. Irishand Dr. J. Vernon,Mr. Menzies said that he and his colleagues had hada most interesting and valuable discussion about variousaspects of the Australian economy and, in particular, ofrecent and prospective developments in the manufacturingindustry. He expressed thanks not only to those members ofthe Council present, but also to all the other members who,over the past few years, had tendered advice on mattersaffecting the development of Australian manufacturing industry.CANBERRA,1st February, 1.962.


P. M. No. 19/ 1962RE-APPOINTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN HIGHCOMMISSIONLR IN LONDONStatement by the Prime Minister ( Rt, Hon. R. G. Menzies)Sir Eric Harrison, has beenre-appointed as Australian High Commissioner in Britain fora further term until 25th October, 1962. Sir Eric wasappointed as High Commissioner on 25th October, 1956, for aperiod of five years. The current extension will thereforeincrease the term of appointment to six years.Sir Eric agreed in 1961, in view of theapproaching general election in Australia, to remain inoffice for some months beyond the time of expiry of hisappointment. He has now agreed at the request of theGovernment to an extension of a full twelve months.I am grateful to Sir _ ic for his agreement toserve the Government for this further period,CANBERRA,1st February, o962.


P. M. No. 18/ 1962;
This morning the Prime Minister and several of his Cabinet colleagues discussed with representatives of the Export Development Council some of the issues confronting the Government, esp3cially where exports are involved.
The Council was represented by Sir John Allison, Chairman; Mr. Armstrong, Deputy Chairman; Mr. L. F. Atkinson, Chairman, Overseas Trade Fromotion Committee; Mr. C. G. McGrath, Chairman, :] port Consciousness Committee; and Mr. R. G. G. Parry Okeden, Chairman, Export Finance Committee. Mr. Menzies said that the Government attached great value to the work of the xport Development Council which, since it was appointed in .1958, had made a number of very useful suggestions, and that he and his colleagues welcomed the opportunity for frequent consultation with this body. He said that the Government would pay a great deal of heed to the suggestions made at the meeting of means by which exports might be expanded.
CANBERRA,1st February, 1962,



FOR PRESS 97
VICTORIAN GOVERNMENT THANKS " OR BUSIIFIRE
AID
Statement by the Minister for Supply, ( Hon. Allen Fairhall)
The Minister for Supply, Mr. Allen Fairhall, has
received from the Deputy Premier of Victoria,
Mr. A. G. RYLA. H., a letter.
Praising the work of Department of Supply officers
in the recent bushfires in the Dandenongs, Mr. Rylah
expressed the sincere approciation of the Victorian
Government. He said that the tanks and trucks provided by the
Department of Supply had been of inestimable value in
controlling the fires. Without them, the situation could
have been worse.
" The Chief Fire Officer of the Country Fire Authority
has spoken very highly of the efforts of the officers of
your Department and the fine spirit of co-operation they
displnyed", Mr. Rylah wrote.
He asked that his personal grateful thanks, and the
sincere appreciation of the Victorian Government, be conveyed
to all Department of Supply officers concerned for the part
they played in the disaster.
Mr. Fairhall said that it was most gratifying to receive
such praise of his Department! s officers.
CANBERRA February 2, 1962 P. M. 



FOR PRESS. ( Statement by the Minister for Trade, Mr. John McEwen, M. P.)
Mr. MoEwen said today that he had a sympathetic
understanding of the serious problem revealed in President Kennedy's
message to the United States Congress proposing curtailment of the
production of food and other agricultural products. The President
indicated that this curtailment would need to be either through an
arbitrary reduction in production or, indirectly, through reduced
governmental price supports.
Mr. McEwen said that the United States dilemma was
the production of many commodities, through from wheat to cotton,
much in excess of the home demand and in excess of commercial export
opportunities. This has come about through governmental price support.
Not only was this a financial problem for the United
States Administration, but the great surpluses remaining unsold
represented a serious factor overlying international commercial trade
in these commodities.
0 ~ Mr. McElwen said that, while understanding the United
States dilemma, he thought it would be a matter of even greater
concern if the richer, highly developed countries had to
deliberately curtail agricultural production when so many in
underdeveloped countries had insufficient food or clothing.
Mr. McEiwen said he believed the Western World could
make a vital contribution to the needs of great masses of people in
underdeveloped countries by making foodstuffs and some other
essential commodities available on less than commercial terms to the
hungry people and the needy nations, This would be a factor in
sustaining political stability ond offsetting the blandishments of
Communist countries in the underdeveloped countries.
Mr. Mc1lwen said he had always advocated a solution
of commodity problems on a world-wide basis. In cases where 
a .2.
surpluses in the wealthy agricultural countries went side by side
with need in underdeveloped countries, it should be possible to make a
further significant contribution towards meeting this need, while
farmers still received overall a satisfactory price for their produce.
Mr. McEwen said that he believed that this could be
achieved if farmers receiLved a more realistic price for what they sold
for consumption within the areas of high living standards. If in
such countries, ranging from Australia, Argentina, United States,
France and the United Kingdom, which are all great food producers,
the Governments were relieved of the great burden of price support
of their farmers, these Governments could devote the same funds
towards supply of food and materials at less than commercial prices.
Further, he belie-\ ed that if farmers in these producing
6countries received, for wihat they exported to Europe and the United
StaZtes and high living standard countries, the same price as was
received by their local producers for the same products the
exporting farmers could, and he bIelieved would be prepared to sell
Wo underdeveloped countries at something less than the price received
from high standard of living countries.
Such an arrangement would establish a most enduring
basis of help for the needy people, and overall, be in the interests
of the farmers. The whole Western World would gain a moral and diplomatic
diplomatic uplift and the costs would be more equitably borne
among the Western Powers than had been the case in recent years.
Mr, McEwen said that he thought the greatest
opportunity to examine such thinking could come about when the
special meeting of certain G. A. T. T. countries, including Australia,
~ occurred in Geneva in a couple of weeks' time to consider grains,
particularly wheat, on the initiative of a French proposal.
Canberra, 3rd February, 1962, Y-



Weekly Index
No, Week Ending
February 3, 1962
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon. John
McEwen
Jan. 30.
Feb. 2 3 No. 84A
No. 93
No. 100A TRADE MISSION SUCCES' IN EGYPT
UNITED KINGDOM BUTTER MARKET
PROPOSED CURTAILMENT OF PRODUCTION
BY PRESIDENT KENNEDY.
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
No. 82
No. 84 Spooner, M. M.
OIL EXPLORATION STANDARDS IMPROVE
ANOTHER FIVE APPLICATIONS FOR OIL SUBSIDY
APPROVED
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley
Feb. 1 No. 88
2 No. 96 FRENCH NAVAL VISIT
VISIT BY U. S. ANTARCTIC SHIP
The Minister for Immigration, The Hon. A. R. Downer
Feb. 2 No. 92RECORD ARRIVAL OF SPANISH-ASSISTED MIGRANTS
The Minister for External Affairs, The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
Jan. 31 No. 86NIGERIAN MINISTER TO VISIT AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F, Adermann
No. 91ASTUDENTSHIPS FOR DAIRY RESEARCH
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
No. 94PACIFIC ISLANDERS TO TRAIN IN AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Interior, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
Jan. 31 No. 87
Feb. 1 No. 91B A. C. T. BANKING
WATER TREATMENT PLANT FOR CANBERRA
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Jan. 29 30 No. 81A
No. 83 NAVY TO CHART NEW SHIPPING ROUTE
R. A. N. VISIT TO SOUTH VIETNAM
The Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert Opperman
Jan. 31 No. 87ATHE MINISTER'S MESSAGE TO THE MA. TER OF THE
ELIOS
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
Feb. 1 2 No. 89
No. 99 WARNING ON ECLIPSE
VISIT TO NORTH QUEENSLAND
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall.
Jan. 31 No. 87B BALLOON'S AUSTRALIAN PAYLOAD DROPS IN LAKE
Feb. 2 No. 97 VICTORIAN GOVERNMiENT THANKS FOR BUSHFIRE AID
2 No. 98 QUEENSLAND FIPRM WINS œ 45744 CONTRACT FOR
SHOES
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
Jan. 29 No. 81
The Department of
Jan. 31 No. 85
Feb. 3 No. 100
The Department of
Jan. 31 No. 90
The Department of
Feb. 1 No. 91
No. 95 PASSIVE DEFENCE TRAINING FOR RAAF
External Affairs
NEW COASTAL FEATURES IN ANTARCTICA
AUSTP rLTANS CELEBRATE JUBILEE AT SIR DOUGLAS
Lj'WOEMN S ORIGINAL STATION.
Primary Industry
EXPORT SUGAR REBATE
the Navy
ADMIRAL SAYS FAREWELL
CANCELLED
Jan. 30 30 OF FOOD
Feb. 1
Feb. 2
0cC
0
0 0 M
-r
O -o U 0
o 0) 0
O 0Q)
+ 2 d
0 Co
4-3
* H
* sc-



FOR PRESS. No. 110
COMMlVON MARKET DISCUSSIONS
( Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade,
Mr. J. MoEwen)
The Minister for Trade, Mr. McEwen, today confirmed
press reports that Australia was seeking the right to be present
and to speak during the negotiations between Britain and the
E. E. C. countries at times when matters affecting Australia's
trade interests were under discussion.
" This question," said Mr. McEwen, " is regarded as one
of very great importance by the Australian Government. We
discussed it with Mr. Duncan Sandys the Secretary of State for
Commonwealth Relations, when he was in Australia last July.
The communique which described the talks between Mr. Sandys and
Australian Ministers made it plain that the Australian Government
considered that Australia should be in a position to negotiate
direct on Australia's behalf when details and arrangements
affecting items of Australian trade were being discussed."
The Australian Government, Mr. McEwen explained, felt
that the case for Australia's export industries could not be
put by anybody as well as by Australia. It was not enough to
be consulted from a distance. Australian Ministers believed
it essential that when the discussions in Brussels got on to
wheat or dried fruits, or other commodities which Australia
exported to Britain, then Australia should be inside the
negotiating room, aware of what was going on and in a position
to explain the nature of Australia's trade interests.
Mr. McEwen said that the British Government had readily
agreed that it would, at an appropriate time, raise the question
with the Common Market countries of Australia's participation
in the negotiations. " Of course," said Mr. McEwen, " Australia does not
and cannot claim to take a full part in the negotiations which
concern the conditions of Britain's possible entry into the
Common Market. The sta; tus which Australia seeks, and which 
-2-
Britain supports, is one that would give Australian representatives
an appropriate basis to speak on matters that
bear directly on Australian trade interests that stand to
be affected by the possible entry of Britain into the
Common Market." Mr. McEwen said that the Governments of the Six
had been made aware of the views of the Australian Government
on this matter. They would know how strongly the Australian
Government felt about it. They would, he hoped, see advantage.
to themselves as well as to Australia and Britain in having
Australian representatives present when the discussions
concerned arrangements for products involved in Australia's
trade with Britain.
p " Last week," said Mr. McEwen, " Britain raised this
matter of Australian participation at one of the regular
meetings of the senior British and Common Market officials
carrying on the negotiations. It was agreed at this meeting
that the matter would be taken up at the next meeting,
scheduled for February 22nd, of British and Common Market
Ministers," " Australian producers and exporters,"' Mr. McEwen
added, " can be essured that the Austra-, lian Government has
spared no effort to secure the right to be present and to
speak on appropriate occasions during the negotiations in
Brussels. " The A'ustralian Government appreciates the support
being given by Britain to Australia's desires in this matter
but clearly it now rests with the Common Market countries to
decide whether to accede to the reasonable request that has
formally been put forw-rd by Britain on Australia's behalf."
Canberra, 7th February, 1962. 14/ 62 T 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES, C. H. Q. C.
N A T 1I OKA LE C 0 HI 0 M Y
WEDNESDAY. '/ TH FEBRUARY'. 6. 
NATIONAL ECONOMY
Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Wednesday, 7th February, 1962.
Cabinet has, after valuable consultations with a wide range of
industries and interests, reviewed the present state of the Australian economy.
It has closely considered policy and appropriate action.
There are certain very important matters which should not be forgotten.
The base of our economy has been significantly strengthened. Great
and indeed dramatic improvements have been effected in our trade balances. In
consequence, our overseas reserves, which were running down a year ago, are now
sound. The internal price level, as reflected in the Consumer Price Index,
has been brought to a remarkable stability. The Loan Market is buoyant.
This buoyancy is of great significance for the public works programmes, and
will result in a smaller call upon the Commonwealth Budget for the supplementing
of Loan funds.
These highly satisfactory results have increased the capacity of
the Commonwealth to play an effective part in dealing with current circumstances.
We acknowledge that the promise of recovery which appeared late last year has
not been realised sufficiently in practical results, and that it must now be
promoted with greater speed. We find ourselves confronted by two problems
which are, we believe, closely associated. They are:
1. The existence of a level of unemployment which represents a serious
human problem for thousands of people and a material economic waste
through the existence of unused resources of men, materials and
installed industrial capacity.
2. A weakness of confidence; an uncertainty about the future which
is limiting buying and production. We are in particular conscious
of the fact that the manufacturing industries, in which employment
can rise or fall quite substantially, and whose prosperity is so
significant to the migration programme, have expressed a feeling of
uncertainty as to whether the Government will protect their
activities and give reasonable assurances of their future. This
presents a problem to which we, as strong supporters of Australian
manufacturing, have directed close attention. It is common ground
that the business problem is to-day not one of financial or credit
stringency, for the money holdings of the public and of the business
community, and the liquid assets of the banks, are, in general, high,
but one of reluctance on the part of many to spend on commodities or
to invest in expanded enterprise and production. 
2
I propose, on behalf of the Government, to set out, as clearly as
possible: the national objectives to which we will direct ourselves;
the measures by which we will seek quick results in an attack
upon the unemployment problem, and
some longer-range measures which are designed to encourage a
strengthening of confidence.
Before doing so, I want to emphasise that we are not attempting
at this stage to anticipate the nature of the 1962-63 Budget, or such longrange
problems as will fall for decision hereafter.
OUR NATIONAL OBJECTIVES:
Upon the present solid foundations of the Australian economy, we
aim to build a great nation, with expanding production and trade and rising
standards of living. We must promote and achieve growth at a rate which will
provide employment and a stimulating future for a constantly growing work
force. We must maintain a constant stream of migration so that those engaged
in the planning and execution of productive and business enterprise shall see
before them expanding horizons and a growing demand for what they produce or
sell. We look to private enterprise to play the major part in our expansion.
As the essential condition of such growth and expansion, we must
develop our basic national resources of land, water, power, minerals, science,
and skill. The achievement of these objectives will require a sense of
dedication, a wide realisation of their vital importance, and a high degree
of co-operation from all sections of our community.
None of those who interviewed us wished to generate anything in
the nature of another inflationary boom; nor do we. But we make it clear
that, so far from desiring stagnation, we are determined upon growth. We
believe that this can be reconciled with a reasonable stability of the
Australian cost and price structure, and with a strong external position.
IMMEDIATE MEASURES: It is true that, as usual in the past, the number of those
registered for employment rose sharply in December. They will rise further
again during January ( the figures for which will be shortly known). This
is the time of the year when scores of thousands of boys and girls leaving 
-3-
school register for employment. It is also a time when seasonal unemployment
is considerable. But we must all do what we can to see that succeeding
figures come down as fast as we can make them. In short, we have looked for
measures producing the quickest possible results, putting into a second category
( which I will deal with later in this statement) those measures which
will carry forward and enhance these results.
We have decided as follows
1. We will put before the meeting of Premiers next week an offer to
provide forthwith a special non-repayable grant of œ ElOi. for employment-
giving activities, mainly in the works field. The detailed
application of this sum, as a supplement in the current financial
year, will be discussed with the Premiers. It is our intention
that it should be supplied and allocated mainly on the basis of
meeting employment needs.
2. We will, over the balance of the current financial year, advance an
additional œ 5m. to the States for housing. This allocation will be
discussed with the Premiers mainly on the basis of meeting employment
needs in the building and associated industries.
3. We will propose to the States that semi-government and local government
borrowing authorisation for this financial year be at once
substantially increased. Much quick employment could be provided
in this way.
4. The problems created by the recent Census in relation to financial
assistance grants to the States will be approached by us in a helpful
fashion. We estimate that the acceptance of these proposals will, over the
next four to five months, add some 125m. to the spending resources
of the States and their subsidiary bodies. Concentrated as they
will be into a short period, these expenditures should give, directly
and Indirectly, a quite powerful stimulus to employment and to
business.
6. Recognising the personal and family problems of those compelled to
rely upon Unemployment Benefits, we propose to make certain increases
as follows-. Present Rate New Rate
Weekly Weekly
Adult or Married Minor 13.15. 2. 6
Wife œ 92.12. 6 œ E3.
First Child 12. 6 15.
Subsequent Children Nil 15. each ch il1d. 
4
All of these payments for children are additional to the normal
child endowment payments.
We will introduce, in the first session, legislation to provide
that these increases will operate as from March 1st. The provision
for children after the first is new, and will give added
material family assistance.
7. We will introduce a measure to provide a rebate of 5% in personal
income tax for the income year 1961-62. This will be made effective
( in reality retrospectively) by reduced P. A. Y. E. deductions as from
March 1st, 1962, appropriate adjustments being made in relation to
provisional tax payments. In the case of P. A. Y. E. taxpayers, for
example, this will mean that the deductions to be made in the concluding
four months of the current financial year will be reduced
to an extent which will make the overall 5% rebate effective.
To provide an overall 1961-62 rebate of in the of tax,
the rebate would, in the four months March 1st June 30th, be 3/-
in the of tax). The effect of this measure will be to add
to the disposable income of the community over these four months.
8. A review has been made of the Commonwealth's own works programme
to see what further scope there may be for accelerating works now
in progress or bringing forward projects on which an early start
could be made. This has disclosed some useful, if limited,
possibilities for such action in fields like Defence, the Post
Office and civil works generally and these are being put into
operation urgently.
9. Sales tax on motor cars and station wagons and other motor vehicles
now taxable at 30% will, as from the date of this announcement, be
taxable at the reduced rate of 226.
On commercial motor vehicles, motor cycles, and motor vehicle parts
and accessories, the present rate of 162/ 3% will be reduced to 1206.
In the field of Housing, and additional to what I have said about
advances to the States, we have made the following new decisions
War Service Homes. We will propose to Parliament that
the maximum advance be increased in all categories from
œ 2,750 to œ 3,500. Applications for loans on the new
basis will be received from the date of this announcement.
The actual making of the loans will of course await amending
legislation in the forthcoming session.
Steps are being taken to promote further increased lending
for housing by the Commonwealth Savings Bank and other
financial institutions. 
LONGER TERM MEASURES: The measures I now announce are not to be taken as covering the
whole field of future action. For instance, we are putting in hand a complete
review of tariff policy and the functions of the Tariff Board. In the case of
the rural industries, so vulnerable to costs, further encouragement of productivity,
already notably increasing, is essential. We are investigating
such problems with all speed.
But in the meantime, and to assist in a restoration of confidence
and therefore employment, we have made the following significant decisions:
1. We have decided to introduce, for manufacturing activities, a system
of Investment Allowances at a rate of These allowances are to
apply to new plant and equipment used in manufacturing production.
Naturally there are many details to be settled matters of technical
definition and the like and the Treasurer will make a comprehensive
statement on this at an early date. Subject to this, all I shall
say here is that we intend the concession to be available on plant
delivered and installed after the date of this announcement.
Legislation will be brought down in the forthcoming session of
Parliament. We have thought it right and timely for several reasons to introduce
a measure of this kind just now. One is to provide a general
encouragement to investment in manufacturing industry to which we
must look, perhaps more than to any other industry, for increased
employment opportunities, not only in the months ahead of us but in
the longer term. A second is that we see a vital need to assist
and encourage the pursuit of higher efficiency in this great sector
of our economy so that it may produce what we ourselves need at lower
costs and in greater volume. It is also most important that our
manufacturing industries should be, in this way, helped to meet on at
least equal terms the industries of other countries in the markets
where we are trying to win a foothold.
The third reason is that we want to make it plain to manufacturing
industry that it has not only our confidence but also our practical
backing in the great expansion it must undertake if our national
growth is to go on at the rate we want to see.
2. Confidence is important, for while Australian industry can be affected
by import competition, it can be affected even more by a falling off
in general customer demand in Australia. Should it, at any future
time, become necessary to impose any check upon such demand, imports
must take a due share of restriction. 
C, -6-
We have no intention to re-introduce import licensing as we have
k~ nown it. But recent experience has suggested that in some
industries,, or some sections of some industries, an inrush of
imports has done real damage. Where any such case is established,
special and temporary measures are justified, pending the operation
of the machinery we propose. Certain motor vehicle components,
certain chemicals, textiles, paper products and categories of timber
may be examples.
A competent independent Special Adviser on whose advice we will consider
imposition of temporary Quantitative Restrictions upon a
particular commodity will be appointed.
The intention would be to make Legislative provision to bring this
Special Adviser within the Tariff Board framework. We will take
legislative steps to make it clear that in future the Tariff Board
may, in the special circumstances of any particular case before it,
recommend a Quantitative Restriction if it thinks fit, where such a
recommendation would not conflict with the The Minister
for Trade will take an early opportunity of elaborating these ideas.
3. We had a valuable discussion with the Trading Banks about various
important matters which affect their operations. We are examining
these in a sympathetic way. Further discussions will be needed
before we reach finality. The Treasurer has since carried on these
discussions with the representatives of the Trading Banks and the
Governor of the Reserve Bank, Special attention is being given in
these talks to the problem of longer term lending particularly for
rural development and for certain classes of export sales. Meanwhile,
I want to emphasise that we want these Banks to be able to
play an increasingly important role in our progress.
4. At the time of our last Budget the Government considered the position
of the Commonwealth Development Bank, which has shown itself to be a
useful supplement to other sources of finance for primary and secondary
industry, and said that it wished the Bank to be able to maintain its
important functions. An amount of œ Sm. was provided in the Budget
by way of additional capital for the Bank, It undertook then to
keep the funds position of the Bank under close review and it has now
decided that, to ensure that the Bank will be able to maintain its
current volume of lending to industry, a further amount of œ 5m. should
be provided for it in the current financial year.
The measures which the Government has decided upon, and which I
have now announced, are far-reaching. They proceed from our unqualified faith
in the future of Australia, and from our desire to give tangible reasons why
this faith should be shared and acted upon by Australian industries and people. 
4 1 7
Our emphasis is upon national growth. A vigorous policy of
expansion with migration can, of course, create challenging problems. But
it is part of our policy and firm intention that should there arise in future
symptoms of undue pressure upon our resources of manpower and materials, we
should be in a position to deal with such matters by specifically designed
measures. To facilitate the taking of any such action at an appropriate
time, we intend to engage in periodical consultation with those engaged in
practical production and business.
We live in a great country. It is our task to see that it becomes
better and stronger as the years go on.
Canberra, 7th February, 1962. 


GOVERNZNT TASURES FAR REACHING.
( Statement by Sir John Allison, K. B. E.,
Chairman of the Export Development Council)
Sir John Allison, chairman of the Export
Development Council today made the following comment in
Sydney on the economic proposals outlined by the Prime
Minister ( Mr. Menzies) last night.
" The measures adopted are wise and far-reaching.
The vital first step of consumer spending will be encouraged,
and this will be followed by industrial and business confidence.
The Government's determination to have growth
with reasonable stability will have the endorsement of
export bodies. It is just the stimulus the economy needs".
Sydney, 7th February, 1962. 



FOR PRESS No. 111
QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS
( Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade,
Mr. J. McEwen.)
The Minister for Trade, Mr. McEwen, said today that
the Government had no intention whatever of re-introducing
import licensing as previously understood. The Prime Minister
had intimated that in respect of a quite restricted category
of Australian manufactures it appeared that an element of
quantitative restrictions could be a most useful addition to
other tariff protection.
Mr. McEwen denied that he would detail rigid quotas
on a number of imported items within the next few days.
He was referring to certain published reports of what
he described as of a purely speculative character, that there
would be the imposition of quantitative restrictions on about
items. Mr. McEwen said there was no intention of substituting
a widespread system of import licensing for the temporary tariff
system. He added that he would make a statement within the
next few days in further explanation of the Prime Minister's
announcement that the Government intended establishing a
Special Adviscry Authority. Mr. McEwen stated that the
Governm~ nt's policy in this regard was designed to operate
within the framework of the Tariff Board but in such a manner
as tc -armit decisions being quickly reached and quickly applied.
Canberra, 7th February, 1962. 15/ 62 T 



PRESS CCNFERENCE GIVIEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER9
THE RT. HON. R. G. i4ENZIES, AT CANBERRA, ON
THURSDAY, 8TH FEBRUARY. 1962, AT 3 P. M.
QUESTION: Sir, Mr. Calwell appears to have made a take-over
bid, and he gives the impression he doesn't think much
of you. Will you reply to him?
PRIME MINISTER: ; Well as far as my memory can carry me, he's made
a take-over bid every day sinc. the election. It's
been very interesting. This time he seems to have
excelled himself because yesterday he announced to the
Press that there was nothing new about my statement,
it was the same old policy. But today, no doubt having
taken counsel with his principal advisers, he has
decided the opposite. Uell, I must leave it to him to
find it out for himself. I am deeply concerned about
what we are doing ourselves.
QUESTION: Who do you think would be his principal advisers?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, I should think the Sydney Morning Herald. That
seems a reasonable guess together with its juvenile
child.
QUESTION: Would you care to comment on his claim that your
statement adol Labour's Election Policy, and even
takes it farther, Sir?
PRIME MTNTST. R: I don't think it does. I thought my statement was
very plain. I pointed out the results that had been
achieved by our policy, and then went on to say I
thought categorically that the results that I
indicated had happened, or had been achieved, in the
trade balances, in the consumer price index and in the
Loan Market, were good. Then I went on to say we
acknowledged the promise of recovery which appeared
late last year had not been realised sufficiently in
practical results, and that it must now be promoted
with greater speed. I referred to the problems; and I
referred to what we were going to do; Our proposals will
stand or fall on their own merits.
QUESTION: Sir, on that basis of price stability do you
regard your present short-term programme of making
available something like œ 70m. in the cash stream in the
next four months as being inflationary, or likely to be
inflationary?
PRIME MINISTER: It depends entirely on what the results are. If,
in fact, not in a hurry it won't happen tomorrow
morning or something of that kind but if, over the
next few months there is a material iiqrovement in the
employment position then that won't be inflationary:
that will represent the taking up of what, at present,
are unused resources. And that is what we are hoping
because that would help to produce, or to
re-introduce, a state of normality not a state of
infation, but a state of reasonable normality, And as
we thought that ought to be encouraged to continue, and
the wday to help it continue was to relate your shortterm
measures to a restoration of confidence in the
community, we are hoping that there will be a
sufficient restoration of continuity to carry the
cormmuunity along without a constant repetition of
injections. Here is a particular injection for a
particular purpose.
mr* 
QUESTION: Does this mean, as some have suggested, that the
Government is more interested in economic growth than
in stability?
PRIME MINISTER: v'ell, I don't think that it ought to be put in that
fashion. We are essentially interested in economic
growth. Perhaps the great mistake we made in the last
election was to allow ourselves to be represented as
being not interested in econo. ic growth. I made it
quite clear in the Policy Speech that we were but then
an atmosphere developed in which we appeared to be in
favour of some kind of stagnation, not of growth. We
were, and are, emphatically in favour of growth, Ve
don't think that growth is irreconcilable with as I
said in my statement a reasonable degree of stability.
We may have li,: tle fluctuations here or there.
QUESTION: Even though that growth emphasis may mean some
risk in balance of payments, you are still prepared to
take it?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, in the present state of affairs you must
accept some risks if you are going to make a sufficient
impact on the current state of the economy to get rid
of these matters that I referred to in my statonent: a
higher rate of unemployment than anybody could
contemplate as acceptable a rate clearly requiring
special measures to get it down. All these things
involve, I suppose, some risks but we are not
incompetent to deal with the risks. We have indicated
that what we want to do is to get rid of this
unemployment and to stimulate confidence in the
community. If, in fact? at some time in the future
and I am not expecting it very soon there were
pressures developing on the economy, then we have
indicated that we intend to deal with those by
specific measures as far as possible, and not by
general ones. I think that is the drift of what I
said the other day.
QU: STION: Have you an estimate of the total cost of your
programme, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, well... you mean in the current financial year?
, Jell let's see. There is, in a direct sense,
for the States, because you remember that we don't
find the money on semi and local government they have
an authority to borrow but coming from us œ 10n. nonrepayable
Grant, œ 5n. advance on Housing. iJell, that's
On the Income Tax concessions I've heard various
estimates running betwTeen œ 25m. and œ 30, m. In the short
run, in the next four months, these other items are not
easily calculated, but I wouldn't think were very
massive in that period. For example, nobody can tell
yet how much will be involved in investment allowances:
it depends entirely on what happens in the manufacturing
field. You can't expect that to happen over-night,
The improvements, particularly the family improvements
and the unemployment benefits, well I don't know, but
again that's not, I would assume, a massive figure
over the next four months.
QUESTION: Sir, it would come down to something like about
to œ 6am?
PRIME MINISTER: I wouldn't think more, but I haven't worked it out
with precision. But those figures would represent, I
would think, the top limits. 
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: Can you be any more specific, Sir, about the
at this stage? Can Queensl. r. d expect special
treatment? Well, there are two propositions we are putting
up. Let's take them in order.
First, œ 5m. on Housing. JeIll, we'll have to
discuss that with the State Pr3miers. I thought it
proper to indicate the total amount, but I don't think
it would be very agreeable to be saying in advance " and
this is how it's going to be distributed". You know
they might perhaps think it's not worthwhile coming.
But we'll have to discuss with them the housing thing,
very largely on the basis of -1hat the needs are in the
various State-, no doubt at least that will be an
important factzr.
As for the œ 1Om. 1 which is a straight-out grant by
the Commonwealth, and quite a substantial one that
being a voluntary grant by us under Section 9 we,
technically, can determine its allocation. Buz we
don't as a rule try to do that we may have to in the
long run. In the past when we have done anything of
this kind we have discussed it with the States, but we
will ourselves indicate what we think are the broad
principles. And as this is to be a grant for
employment-providing activities, then it is quite
obvious that one of the factors, one of the principal
factors, to be taken into account is the relative r7e
of unemployment in the various States. At this time
Queensland, I am informed, has the highest rate of
unemployment. Therefore it is not to be assumed that
we will just distribute this money on a population
basis. This is designed to relieve unemployment, to
enable work to be put in hand swiftly for the relief of
unemployment, and therefore the unemployment position
in each State is a very important factor. VWe have had
a few cases of this kind before in past years. I
remember one I've forgotten what it was about but
one in which we found some extra money. On that
occasion half of it was distributed, according to the
existing formula, and the other half arbitrarily
allocated by the Commonwealth. But I don't prophesy
that. All I want to make quite clear is that the
position of the States with the most serious unemployment
problems will certainly not be overlooked in the
distribution of this sum.
QUESTION: Do you intend, Sir, to try to get that money spent
quickly on small works to take up unemployment in
semi-skilled.....?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, speed is the essence. You see this is a
grant for this financial year, not for the next 18
months or something of that kind; this is a grant for
the remainder of this financial year. The whole idea,
to use the co: mmon phrase, is to give the system a
" shot in the arm" because the employment position has
not turned out to be as satisfactory as we had hoped.
There it is. And it must be improved. And it is very
important, under those circumstances, to make a quick
attack on it. That is why we are concentrating, into
these few months, the amount of money that I have
indicated. Therefore it follows that we are not
looking to the States to say, " Well, this will enable
us to begin planning some long-term operation". We want
jobs in which they can be putting people on the job in
the next week or two. I know there are such jobs in
Queensland because I have been up there; and I have
no doubt there are in other States. 
QUESTION: Will you impose any conditions, Sir, as to the
class of works to be undertaken, or will that be left
to the States?
PRIME MINISTER: Well we haven't discussed this yet, and I don't
like to take up the attitude that we are imposing
something on the States. But it is quite clear that if
the principal object of the exercise is to provide
employment, particularly in places where there are
pockets of unemployment and to do it quickly, then
naturally I would expect everybody to give priority to
works with the highest labour content.
QUESTION: Mr. Calwell has also said, Sir, that he is goinj
to force you to an Election as soon as possible.
PRIME MINISTER: Well I nc-ver doubted it.
QUESTION: Would you care to estimate how soonø..?
PRIME MINISTER. No I haven't a clue, I haven't a clue. But he
would be a very poor Opposition Leader if he didn't
have the ambition to put us out as soon as he could, T
take that for granted. I think it is an admirable . Ji
QUESTION: He has also predicted, Sir, that you won't fight
another " ection?
PRIME MINISTER: Has he? Oh, well.... he must think Parliament
going to last a long time.
QUESTION: Sir, coming back to your statement the other
night on the Banking ouestion, you rather suggest that
you are thinking in terms of a more competitive bank. nq
system, perhaps something like the pre-war system. Is
that the kind of thing you have in mind?
PRIME MINISTER: Don't broaden this out too much. We saw the
Trading Banks and they had... I said " Wiell now here's
your opportunity to tell us about your problems,
direct, you iknow, where you think the system isn't
working effectively". And broadly speaking there were
two problems that wee under discussion. One was the
interest rate structure. That is not, at present, the
subject of deternination bocause further discussions
are going on in that field, and I don't prophesy what
the result of it will be. But it is not to be assumed
that that matter is disposed of. That remains a matter
of active consideration.
The other one was how far the Trading Banks cald
go into longer term lending. This is of lively
interest, particularly in the country, and, as you
know, arguments have gone on as to whether the Banks
provide finance in country areas to the extent that
they should, or the extent that they can. One of the
reasons why the Develop! ent Bank was established was to
fill in what was thought to be a gap in that field.
Now the Banks themselves are quite interested in this
problem of longer-term lending. And we welcor. D that of
course. But it is early days for them to arrive at a
conclusion. They indicated to us that they were having
discussions about it, and they have confirmed that
since, as I said, in talks with the Treasurer. But I
can't prophesy what the result of this will be. And of
course if it turned out that the Banks found
themselves able to go into longer-term lending in that
way it would be of material advantage to rural
development, and perhaps, to that extent would reduce
the drain on the funds of the Development Bank. Ido krw 
that they are interested in that aspect of the matter.
But all that being on the knees of the Gods we are
satisfied that the Development Bank must be able to go
on with its job, and that is why we are providing a
further œ 5m. capital which we will do in the autumn
session. I mean this is not a forecast of the future.
It will be one of the financial measures.
There is one other aspect, you know, of my
announcement the other night I think I ought to refer
to in corxmon justice-to the peuple concerned. I -oted
that in his first lucubration on this matter the
Leader of the Opposition persuaded himself that what
had been done had been done over the bitter hostility
of the Treasury, and the Treasury officials, T Li, I
want to say, is arrant nonsense. ' e had a very
strenuous fortright of consultations which I found
tremendcusly v-. uable. We had the meeting of a small
group of Ministers, first without, and then with
officials, and then we agreed upon recommeniations and
we put them to the Cabinet on Fiiday of last week. And
they were agreed to, after some hours of discussion.
I want to say that the proposals that we evolerc,
and which I subsequently announced, were, so far as
can judge. and I'm not in a bad position to judge
proposals which represented the complete agreement of
all the departments concerned. Certainly, there was no
indication that there was opposition by t he Troasury,
This little bit of underground propaganda that goe: s
to try and create some state of war between the
Department of Trade and the Treasury is just nonsenc.-'. e.,
utter nonsense. I thought they all behaved very wel. l
And, of course, naturally, as the proposals that were
announced were entirely agreeable to me who wrote t
down I felt they were all very intelligent by produclJ..
unanimity on then.
QUESTION: Is the investment allowance intended to be a
permanent reasure Sir?
PRTIM MfINTSTR'i: I think you can treat it in that way. In a sense
it may be experimental, but it is not being put on for
some limited period of time. Though, I suppose, from
the point of view of future years something may depend
upon how it works, whether it produces the effect. Of
course, at some time in the future, if it turns out to
be successful, as I think it will be, then the rate is
capable of variation according to the circumstances.
But I want to say that I think Mr. Holt is going to say
something, isn't he, in a supplementary way about the
Investment Allowances, because there are some nice
technical questions that they are working on which
prevent us, at the moment, from putting a specific date
down. We certainly...
QUESTION: I don't think this is a technical question, Sir,
but after a long period of prosperity in which firms
have had an opportunity to build up reserves why has it
become necessary to give them a virtual subsidy to
nodernise their plants?
PRIME MINISTER: The great advantage of modernising the plant, from
the point of view of manufacturing, is this: they are
not the masters of the wage structure, they are not the
nasters, overall, of the economic policy, yet they have
to work within those limits, and it is terribly
important that their efficiency be so increased that
they can move more and more into the export field. 
6.
The greatest thing to increase the efficiency of highly
mechanised industry like manufacturing is to enable
them to keep abreast of the latest developments and have
the most modern plant. Under the existing scales of
depreciation it is not easy for them to follow that
line because they depreciate, yes, but they depreciate
over a term of years 100% of the particular plant.
They might want, very much before that time is over,
to replace it by something so -much better that if tvey
don't have it their competitors in the world will uat
them out of business. Therefore this is a direct
encouragement to raodernise plant, and thereby to . eep
down unit costs and increase their capacity to
from Australia and their capacity to compete J"-ide.
Australia with goods that come in. We examined this,
it's been und,.. consideration one way or another for
some time, but this time we examined this with
particularity. ; Je saw what was being done in other
countries and we came to the conclusion that what
amounts, in substance, to a subsidy to re-equipment, a
subsidy to modernisation, would be a very, very good
contribution to the efficiency of the industry.
QUESTION: Jouldn't this also tend to encourage investmen;.-;
from overseas in Australian industry?
PRIME MINISTER: Oh, well it very well might, it very well migh!:,
I wouldn't distinguish between the two things.
QUESTION: Your statement the other night, Sir, divided yu'r
proposals into two groups, one of which was descri 1..
as short-term, or interim. Is it to be inferred fr,.
that that those proposals may come under review fa
soon, or may they continue?
PRIME MINISTER. Some of them expend themselves in their own
performance, don't they, like the payments to the
States, you see. But the question of income tax, well
I'll say nothing about that at this stage because this
is a matter that we have to consider when we are
approaching our overall annual provisions.
QUESTION: dould that apply to sales tax on cars Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Do you mean will it come on now and go off on
June 30th, or something like that, eh? Or go up?
QUESTION: Should we buy a car now?
PRIME MINISTER: Look, I don't think I actually distinguished
sharply between short-term and long-term. I thought I
used a different expression, and I did it deliberately,
to indicate that some of these are designed to produce
quick results, and some of then are designed as a sort
of follow-up, to encourage confidence and restore the
general tone of industry. Apart from those that expend
themselves in their own performance, like the grants to
the States, the others... don't roead any inference into
it at all. They are of quick operation, true, or we
hope so.
QUESTION: You mean we should think in terms of purpose
rather than character?
PRIME MINISTER: That's right. I can't give you the slightest idea
as to what will happen in the long run on these matters.
We don't put an ear-mark on them and say, " Ucll those
are things that are going to be done and are going to
stop on Juno 30th", or something like that. 
QUESTION: Mr, Menzies is there anything you can say on the
Indonesian situation, and ' Jez. New Guinea? Do you think
the situation is easier at all now?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, I wish I knew. In one cable you get a little
optimism about having negotiations; and in the next one
there's no optimism. It depends largely from what side
of the fence the message comes. All I can say is that
we are still hoping that there will be negotiations -; d
not war, because the institution of hostilities 1'.
matter of this kind, in this part of the world, is not
very agreeable to 99 people out of 100, though, I
gather, fondly hoped for by the 100th.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzins, there is a Space Club project o.:
way which Britan and France have sponsored and tli:
Australian Govurnment has been asked by France and
Britain to ratify a treaty. Do you know what stage ti: is
has reached?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't, I don't. But Mr. Fairhall may knov, t lake
a chance of asking him. I know in a genera] ; ay ; c.' at
stage they are at, but as to the particular stage-;
the moment, I don't. it hasn't come back to us
final decision.
QJESTION: Going back to Indonesia, Sir, if the Dutch
Government asks for permission to land on AustraliJa:-.
territory, flying these re-inforcements or replacei: 3to. rc
PRIME MINISTER: I never answer hypothetical questions.
QUESTION! Have you had such a request, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: Not that I'm aware of, no. But those are matters
you deal with when they arise, if you've got any sense.
QUESTION: Have you had any indication, yet, of the date of
the Prime Ministers' Conference, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't even know whether there will be one. I've
had no hint of one yet.
QUESTION: Mr. Menzies will you move as quickly as possible
after the State Elections in South Australia and Now
South Wales to get this conference going on the
Chowilla Dam?
PRIME MINISTER: That's a matter I'm going to have a talk to Sir
Thomas Playford about when he's over here next week.
Personally, I would like to do something. Even if it's
only a preliminary discussion on the matter, I would
like to get it under way. But I will be talking to the
Premier of South Australia about it. He's got an
election coming on hasn't he? Everybody seems to have
an election.
QUESTION: Mr. Calwell referred to the " Menzios myth", Sir...
PRIME MINISTER: Did he? But he referred also to the myth of the
boom. Don't you remember? Jell, I'm like the boom in
1960, I'm a myth. 3ut I've been a " myth" for some time. 



Weekly Index
No. 6
Week Ending
February 10, 1962
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRA LIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Feb. 4 No. 104 RECORD NUMBER OF EXHIBITORS FOR 1962 TRADE
FAIR IN JAPAN
7 No. 107 TARIFF CHANGES ONIOIS AND LACTOSE
7 No. 108 MORE AUSTRALIAN FIRMS FOR AUCKLAND EASTER
SHOW
7 No. 11 QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS
9 No, 115 TARIFF BOARD MOVE TO CANBERRA
7 No. 110 COMMON MARKET DISCUSSIONS
The Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
Feb. 6 No. 107A COMMONWEALTH LOAN
7 No, 109 INCOME TAX REDUCTIONS.
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley
Feb. 8 No. 113 JOINT iUSTRALIA/ NEW ZEALAND ARMY EXERCISE
The Minister for Labour and National Service, the Hon. William
Mc ahon, M. P.
Feb. 7 No. 111A STUDY OF EMPLOYMENT FIGURES.
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge.
Feb. 9 No. 119 MR. JUSTICE SPICER TO HEAD BOARD OF ACCIDENT
ENQUIRY INTO SYDNEY VISCOUNT ACCIDENT.
The Minister for External Affairs. Sir Garfield Barwick
Feb. 8 No. 112 RETIREMENT OF SIR ALAN WATT, C. B. E.
Tlie Minister for the Navy, Senator Hon. J. G. Gorton
Feb. 4 No. 102 NAVY SURVEY TO HELE TUNA INDUSTRY
6 No. 106 RETIRING NAVY CHIEF LOOKS TO FUTURE
8 No. 114 NEW Ni. VAL ATTACHE FOR WASHINGTON
9 No. 118 NEW COMMODORE FOR NAVY'S MAIN TRAINING CENTRE
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W, Wade
Feb. 4 No. 101 TUBERCULOSIS EXAMINATION FOR PRISONERS
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. R. W. Swartz.
Feb. 4 No. 103 CADETSHIP IN BACTERIOLOGY
The Department of the Treasury
Feb. 5 No; 105 CONSOLIDATED REVENUE FUND AT JANUARY 31, 1962.
The Department of External Affairs.
Feb. 9 No. 117 DIFFICULT WEATHER CONDITIONS FOR AUSTRALIAN
ANTARCTIC EXPEDITIONS.
The Department of the NHavy_
Feb. 9 No. 116 ADMIRAL VISITS MELBOURNE
With the Compliments of
The Government Public lRelations Office,
Parliament House,
ClNBERRA, A. C. T. 



EMBARGO ETKhARGO EMB~ ARGO
Not to be published or broadcast before
7pm, Sunday, 11th February, 1962.
FOR PRESS ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE PROCEDURES
( Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Trade, Mr. J. McEwen)
The Minister for Trade, Mr. J. McEwen, today elaborated
the measures the Government proposes to take to extend the
protective machinery at present available to Australian industry
both primary and secondary which are affected by imports.
He stated that these measures accord with the Government's
policy of continued growth of the economy with employment for a
continuously growing workforce.
Mr. McEwen gave details of the machinery which will be
set up by the Government to deal with requests for temporary
protection to supplement the present temporary duty provisions of
the Tariff Board Act. Mr. MeEwen pointed out that the present
temporary duty arrangements had given effective results but -the
Government felt that there were circumstances under which, as a
temporary measure of protection, the quantitative restriction of
imports may be desirable, combined with, or as an alternative to,
temporary duties.
" As made clear by the Prime Minister, the announcement of
a willingness to use import restrictions under these circumstances
does not signify any intention to revert to import licensing on a
wide scale unless required by serious balance of payments
difficulties. " There appears to be a misapprehension in some quarters
that the Government itself intends to identify the range of items
which require added protection by quantitative restriction and
make decisions accordingly. Provision of protection to Australian
industries has never been accorded on the initiative and judgment
of the Government itself. The initiative is always with industry
to request protection.
" No departure from thi~ s -principle is intended. 
-2
" Broadly, two considerations are in mind. Firstly, as
visualised in the Prime M~ inister's Policy Speech in November, the
Government has recognised the particular difficulties of certain
Australian industries where production efficiency and a reasonable
cost level req~ uire the maintenance of a continuing high volume of
output. Where an inflow of imports has reduced the Australian
industry's share of the market so as to make an otherwise stable
industry unlrofitable and even perhaps uneconomic, it may be more
appropriate to apply quantitative limitation of imports, rather
than a temporary duty.
" Another circumstance wihich may warra~ nt temporary
protection through import restrictions may be that substantial
reduction of domestic demand resulting from general economic
circumstances operat ing in Australia, may reduce an Australian
industry to a serious situation unless the volume of imports is
temporarily diminished.
" The principle was established when the system of
temporary duties vwas introduced that an immediate reference by
made to the Tariff Board for normal consideration when a temporary
duty is imposed. This provision will also apply if import
restriction is provided as temporary protection.
" As the Prime Kinistor has already announced, a Special
Advisory Authority will bc established to advise on any request
for orotection by restriction of imports. Vnhere it is established
that imports are causing or threatonin3 to cause serious damage
to a particular industry, the Special Advisory Authority will be
able to recommend that any temporary protection shown necessary,
be given by means of temporary duty and/ or import restrictions.
This would not conflict with tho commitments Australia accepts
under the G. A. T. T.
The advice of the Special Advisory Authority could be
sought also in a situation in which a serious run-down of overseas
balances was threatened. This is an aspect of what the
Government has in mind, referred to in the Prime Minister's
statcment, that pressures which may develop should be dealt with 
-3-
by specifically designed measures.
" Action will be taken, Mr. 1-ci Ewen said, " to bring the
operations of the Special Advisory Authority within the a-mbit of
the Tariff Board Act. However, if real urgency exists, the
Special Advisory Aut. ority would be asked to advise the Government
on these matters even before the necessary legislative action is
taken." " In connection with the normal functioning of the Tariff
Board the Government proposes to amend the Tariff Board Act so
that under certain circumstances the Tariff Board after a full
inquiry may recommend that protection should include import restrictions
where the tariff alone would not give the necessary measure
of protection." Mr. IicEwen mentioned that representations had been made
recently to the Government, during its consultations with
various organisations, that it should be prepared to afford
protection to industries in respect of proposed extensions into
new manufacturing, or industries proposing to sot up manufacture
in Australia for the first time.
" If the Government feels that the question of protection
of a now industrial venture should, in the interests of the
economy, be considered in advance of actual production, it will
forward the matter to the Tariff Board for its consideration."
Mr. McEwen stated also that consideration is being given
to amending the Tariff Board Act, to ensure that requests for
protection are considered with a minimum of delay. For instance,
one opportunity would be to provide that evidence can be tendered
to the Tariff Board in writing, under a statutory declaration, and
made available to all interested parties unless accepted by the
Board as confidential, as an alternative to the existing
requirements that evidence be given in public on oath. The
existing procedures result in a considerable time -loss, especially
when witnesses have to read very detailed and lengthy evidence. 
4
" The Government regards the Tariff Board as an important
advisory instrument in enabling the Government to achieve the
national objective of continuing growth of the economy and employment
of the workforce. believe that industrial expansion at
a rate which will make an appropriate contribution to employment
can, as . the Prime Minister has said, be reconciled with a
reasonable stability of the Australian cost and price structure
and with a strong external position.
" The introduction of investment allowances in connection
with the establishment of new plant and equipment used in manufacturing
industry represents an encouragement by the Government
to the installation of the most up-to-date equipment. By world
standards the Australian home market is a small one and nothing
is more critical to keeping costs of production low in today's
industry than that our factory equipment should be abreast of the
world's most modern.
" Those investment allowances will, of course, embrace the
equipment of industries processing primary products, for example,
meatworke, butter factories, fruit and fish canneries, flour
mills and the like.
" The Gcvernment desires to sustain the rate of investment
in manufacture, for today's investment increases tomorrow's
productive resources and employment. Modernisation of equipment
and the modification of our policies of protection, combine to
better enable Australian industry to hold an adequate share of the
home market, produce at lowest achievable costs and so be bettor
enabled to reach out into export.
" While the Government is extending additional aid to
Australian industry, it is imperative that industry itself should
explore every opportunity to reduce costs. This should include
consideration of aspects of rationalisation and standardisation
so that productivity may be increased and costs kept low which
is so essential in a small volume market. 
" The Government is anxious that the resources and services
of C. S. I. IR. O. should be availed of by Australian industry in
pursuit of greater productivity and cost reduction.
" The decision by the Government to re-inforce its existing
policies by the measures detailed above should be taken as an
earnest of the Government's intention to give effective support
to Australian industry in its essential role in fulfilling the
national economic objectives.
" The Government has shown it is prepared to play its
part". Mr. McEwen said the Government wishes to strengthen the
concept of partnership between Government and industry in pursuit
of the nation's high objectives.
Canberra, 11th February, 1962. 16/ 62T 


P. M. No. 22/ 1962
AUSTRALIA AND WEST NEW GUINEA&nbsp;
There are plenty of words in Mr. Calwell's statement,&nbsp;but not much common sense or, for that matter, understanding of&nbsp;the facts. I will deal briefly with his central proposition, the" key note" so to speak, around which the whole of his very longstatement turns. It is that " if Indonesia seeks Lo usa forceto create a potential threat to Australia's security, then I say,with all due regard to the gravity of the situation, that thethreat must be faced".What does this mean?If it means that Australia should be ready and willingto protect its own territories, i. e. Australian New CG'in: oa andPapua, the answer is that I said so in plain terms instatement of Government policy on January 12th a state. centwhich stands. If his statement means that an Australian gcvernmentshould convey in relevant quarters its views against agr. cessionand in favour of self-determination, the aswer is that rcmy ownGovernment has done so on vjry many occasions by personal contactand through diplomatic channels, over the last 12 months andindeed long before that. This applies not only to the Netherlandsand Indonesia but also to the United Kingdom and the U. S. A. withwhom we have had very frequent exchanges. ie have also maintainedclose contact with the Secretariat of the United Nations. Itwould not be proper for me to state the attitude of either thegovernment of the United Kingdom or the administration of theU. S. A. But they are most familiar with our desire that everypossible pressure should be exercised to deter the use of force.If Mr. Calwell's statement means that, without anyregard to what might be the attitude or action of these greatpowers, Australia should, in the event of armed Indonesianaggression against Dutch Now Guinea, declare war againstIndonesia, it is clearly crazy and irresponsible.For it is the inoscapable fact that, though we havethroughout recognised Dutch sovereignty in West New Guinea, everynation in Asia supports the Indonesian claim.Mr. Calwoll's vaguely bellicose attitudes do nothing butharm. No nation has more to gain by peace and the peaceful andjust settlomant of disputes in and around South East Asia thanAustralia. No nation has given clearer evidence of its attachmentto the principle that under-developed peoples should have, afteradequate and helpful preparation, the choice of their own future.No country has done more in an endeavour to secure a persuasion ofIndonesia against the use of force.Whatever the result may be and we do not despair of apeaceful and just solution Mr. Calwell appears determined tocreate an atmosphere which would make it difficult in future tolive in a state of harmony with our neighbours.To call our policy and actions " appeasement" is totrifle with the facts and to gamble with the future of ourcountry.
CANBERRAllth February, 1962.


FOR PRESS FINANCE FOR STATES FOR EMPLOYMENT-GIVING ACTIVITIESCOMMONWEALTH PROPOSALS FOR ALLOCATIONEmphasising that the first aim of theCommonwealth proposals for giving State Governmentsand their related authorities excess new additionalmoney for expenditure during the remainder of 1961/ 62was to improve the employment situation, especially inareas where it was weakest, the Prime Minister quoted thefollowing figures as giving the approximate number ofpersons registered as applicants for employment in theseveral States: N. S. W. 47,000VICTORIA 30,800Q1LD. 30,400S. A. 10,200W. A. 72500TASMA1N IA 52300TOTAL 131,500Stated as approximate percentages of the workforce in each State, these represented 2.9% of the workforce in Now South Wales; 2.5% in Victoria; 5% inQueensland; 2.5% in South Australia; 2.6% in WesternAustralia and 4% in Tasmania.The Commonwealth proposed that the additionalit was offering to advanae to the States for housingconstruction in 1961/ 62 should be distributed as follows:
2 millionNew South Wales 1.61Victoria 1.28Queensland 0.60South Australia 0.69Western Australia 0.47Tasmania 0.Its proposal for distributing an increase ofœ 1Om. in the borrowing programmes for semi-governmentaland local authorities in 1961/ 62 was: millionNew South Wales 3.01Victoria 3.66Queensland 2.06South Australia 0.49Western Australia 0.44Tasmania 0.3410.00As to the special non-repayable grant offor expenditure on employment-giving activities in thisfinancial year, the Commonwealth proposed that a specialallocation of œ 2.5m. should be made to Queensland and aspecial allocation of to Tasmania. The remainingœ 7m. would be distributed between all States on the samebasis as the Works and Housing Programmes for 1961/ 62.The resulting figures would be: millionNew South Wales 2.24Victoria 1.80Queensland 3.34South Australia 0.97Western Australia 0.66Tasmania 0.9910.00CANBERRA FPbruary 15, 1962



6P/ 030
LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Minister ( Rt. Hon. RoG. Menzifsj
The Commonwealth, after discussion writh the
Premiers, has amended its proposals to provide that the
amount it would advance to the States for housing
construction in .961-62 should be increased by œ 7-mi, instead
of In place of the earlier proposal that total
borrowings of smi.-government and local authorities for
1961-62 should be increased by œ 10m. it now proposed an
increase of .œ 7mo in the programmes of authorities intending
to borrow more than œ 1l00,000, during the year. At the same
time it suggested that smaller authorities with programmes
less than fœ 10,000 should be permitted to borrow as much
during the remainder of the year as they found themselves
able to do. The Coimmonwealth proposal for the distribution of
the fOœ 0,, non-repayable grant remains unchanged,
CANBERRA,
1? th February, 1962. 



NATIVE FLORA Dl.-jINGS ACCEITD BY THE
GOVERN, 1ENT
The Prime Minister yesterday accepted, on behalf of
the Australian Government, a set of 20 botanical water-colour
drawings of Australian native flowers eyecuted by the botanical
artist, Miss Margaret Stones. It is hoped to display the
drawings in King's Hall, Parliament House, for about a week
commencing on 20th February.
The drawings, which were commissioned by the
Commonwealth Art Advisory Board, include studies of Kurrajong,
Banksia, Flannel flower, Kangaroo paw and Eucalypt.
Miss Stones, a Victorian by birth, now resident in
England, visited Australia especially to paint the series. Most
of her work in London is done at the famous Kew Gardens Herbarium,
She is the illustrator for Curtis's Botanical Magazine, which has
been published since 1789 and is the oldest publication of its
kind in existence. In addition, -he has illustrated numerous
other publications. She is currently engaged in illustrating
African " Flora" being produced at Kew Gardens. Among other
recent publications she has illustrated, are three books on
rhododendrons, shrubs and trees for the English publisher,
Nelsons. She is also working on an important series of Lily
studies for the Royal Horticultural Society, which are being
published as a supplement to the standard work Elwes " Lily
Monograph" first published in l880o
FOR INFORPMATION: Miss Stonries is in Canberra until 4 pono on Friday,
16th February. She is staying at University House and may be
contacted there. If photographs of some of the drawings ay.: o
required, they can be made available for this purpose in the
Prime Minister's Departiment. The Socretary Art Advisory Board
can be contacted on UI411 or U1443 or ( at home) 7-8398.
Commonwealth Art Advisory Board,
CANBERRA, February, 1962o P M No^ Ui 



8TH D11I310fi 630OCIAT12gla gi4aL J; iApgR&amp; DIN~ t huaa
16th Fera 1962
USnmeeh bZ the kZimWMinsterO te ! iL. Rk. t Mnl
sirs I am very greatly honoured and very riatterad by your
invitation to be here. I'm afraid tldat 1 haves been something of a
nuisance over this matter because at first a date vas fixed your
date, the 15th and then it turned out by the inscrutable wisdom of
the electors ( Laughter) that certain things had to be done and I
needed to have a conference of the Premiers, and so I had to put you
to the sreat inconvenieance of altering, for this purpose, yesterday
for today. 3ut all of you notable izarriors will undei stand that I
eculdn't be here last night because, like tne apostle, I was
" fighting wild beasts at Sp~ eus". Laughter$ applause)
And even when we had rinished the Conference of Premiers
this morning rather unexpectedly from my point of view because
there dere a few Items st1u1 efst I pointed to the most important
remaining one at five past one today and said, mNov I have a
Conference this afternoon with the First Sea Lord of England" -who is
visiting us on matters that are quite germane to your experiences
" and I must be lown in Sydney to . ight, I have an Important ongageowt,
so could vie meet at 2 o'clock*. Then, you know, remarkably enough,
it tuned out that on* Iremier had to catch a plane at twop another one,
had to catch a plane at 2.30 because,, you know,, when you ha-ve the money
in the beg Y u don't hang around ( Laughter) You might be robbed,
( Laughter) And I gave my celebrated imitation of a man to whom time
was no object so long as It finished by four o'clock. In the result
at ten past on e had concluded all our businessl ( Laughter) And
went home and packed my bag and cam back to the office and tried to
clean up some of the accuulations of le,; Itimat* business over the last
two days, and then say the First Sea Lord, and then case down hers.
Tomorrow morning I go back I's happy to tell you that I've made no
appointment tomorrow until noon ( Laughter) and that, It'a happy to say,
will not be with any 1' remier who wants money. ( Laughter)
Sat tonight first of all I deeply approciate the honour you
have done me In inviting me to ame I know of no trualific ition tVat
I have to be here. -3ut in the second place Iviant to tell you how much
I1 have enjoyed being here so far because e have heard two
speeches which, to so, were very moving speeches by Dr. Fisher and by
the famous and celebrated Gen. Gordon Jeto lpplause)
Sir, the one concession that I must make be ' or* I say a few
things that may matter a little more Is thist that having sat in
conrerence with the Premiers and the Treasurers and with Treasa&amp; ry
officials, viearing one suit all the week a~ nd -, ligrather baggy in
it, as you might 1zuaginet I brought down a freshly pressed suit with
ms and when I dent over and put It on tonight I found t . at the pockets
4~ o 9 rull of papers. I thought " Now how odd. Zhat jaupers have I?"
And all of a sudden ihen I looked at them I roalised that this must
have been the coat I was wearing on polling night, ( Laughter) because
the first piece of aper showed what at 10.30 was my 2.. stimate of the
rnumor of seats I was losing; and at Ul o'clock I crossed that out
and added a flow names to it; by midnight 1 had no more saats to add.
It -was obviously a season of prayer 4nd faating. ( Laughter) And I
thought " Now that's very intert-3ting" because this has all remirdled Me
of what It is like to be on the verge of dereat -and perhap.,; that is
something to r member on a night like this.
I hope, you will allow me to say without making any invidious
distinctions, how delighted I was when I arrived at this Tiotel tonight
to be received by that great and pood marie Charles '-nderson. ( Applause) 
I am, as you know, the last man to engage in party politics. ( Laughter)
This is completely foreign to my nature. But I am told remotely that
you have an election on in New South Wales not mine, tut somebody
else's. I hope that without trespassing in the arena of party polities
you will allow an to say that I don't understand how any electorate
that had the honour to be represented by Charles Anderson should foigo
it at a General Election. However, whatever happens to me, he'll be
back. ( Applause) Now, Sir, General Bennett has tonight referred to a number
of histori events all of which I know I can confirm. I thought
perhaps I might just say this to you about them and I want to develop
this because I want to demonstrate to you, if I can, how what appeared
to be defeat has turned out to be of the most enormous significance to
Australia. At the very end of 1940 we had a report by the military
experts on the position in Singapore and in Malaya and it was so
disturbing that that was the very reason why, at the end of 1940
having a shrewd idea that I wouldn't remain in office too long alter I
got back because my majority was even sketchier than it is at this
moment, I went off to snland, The prime purpose of the Journey was
to see whether we couldn t strengthen the defensive position in
Singapore in relation to Malaya and the Far East because there was an
enormous deficiency of aircraft and there was a great weakness in
landward de ence. There was a naval base there were all sorts of
provisions of that kind for sea warfare, Lt there was a tremendous
deficiency, particularly in aircraft. I don't think I've mentioned
this before but if I grow old enough and silly enough to write any
memoirs I will have to state in some detail that the prime obJet of
that journey was to secure air defence, particularly by fighter
aircraft, in and around Singapore and Malaya.
Of course, at that tine, it turned out to be impossible.
It's easy to forget these things, but at that time, when I vas in
England in early 1941 there was no second front except the fronts
that the British were fighting on with their Commonwealth allies
America was neutral, the Middle East presented a dreadful problem, we
had all the problems of getting things through the Mediterranean, and
in the result you couldn't succeed in getting modern aircraft, or even
sub-odern aircraft, for the Far East. All t at they had were needed
in the battle for the old country, or for the battles that were being
organised in the Middle East.
The result was, as we all know that when the Japanese came
in and at that time, frankly, I thought they would, that was why this
expedition was taken on there was such a deficiency in air cover that
their tactics on the land and by the sea succeeded. dell this was a
tremendous tragedy, I don't blame anybody for it. I think that as the
facts then stood it was an unavoidable one,
But I don't think we ought to stop there. I don't think we
ought to say that this is just the final history of the event. If,
Sir, on the 15th February of every year you Just celebrated a defeat,
this would be a depressing event. But I don't believe it myself,
because 1 want to give you two, or three, outstanding reasons why the
efforts and the sacrifices and the suffeings of the Division, and of
the Air Force attached to them and of the Navy which served so
heroically in the defence as the Japanese came down, are immortal
events, and -hy I believe that they have not been thrown away.
The first reason that I ive you is one that has been
referred to by General Bennett himself. I have never been able to
understand why anybody, at any time, doubted his courage.( Applause)
He had shown his courage far too frequently to be ancused by other
people, and lesser people, of a lack of it. This is too silly. He's
long since forgotten it. I refer to it only to assure his that people
like myself have never, never entertained such nonsensical ideas. 
3.
Irememier -I fasn't the ?. rime Ministers I had been relieved of that
post by a discrimna~ ting group of people,, before theso events -sitting,
as an Opposition mamm) er 0or the Advisory lar C uncil when he produoed
his training manual on jungle darfare and I can cofr everything
that he says about it* This became of supreme Importance in the Nov
Guinea and the Islands campaigns, and ias a tremendois contribution to
ultimate victory. B3ut may I go oeyond that? You have all been reading lately
about the proposals that -ure on foot for ai greater Malaysia Malaya$
plus jingapore, plus North 13ro PlU3 Ja. rawaic plus Jruei -those
proposal3 promoted by the Tunku A1dU1 Rahmans our zrecit and friendly
leader of Malaya to establish on this crescent a realfter Malaya which
would represent a friendly group of nations closely integrated with
each other, 3tanding betvaen us, peoaphically, &amp; nd more than
georaphicaily, and the Communist throat coming down from Asia. This
is a ramarkable coniception,
And why ha-! it been promoted by halaya as a friendly power,
as a membe.-of the Commonealth? AW has It been promoted with the
whole of those ideas in mind? It has been promoted be~ cause behind you
you lert in Malaya an undying stmnsa of comradeships of mzutual help,
of admiration. has only to go to Maiaya today, as I've had to
myself ) nee or C. dtce, to realize how high the tocksof Australis and
of Australians are in that country. ! md 1 vouldit have you underestimatLe
for one moment the significance of that in these great moves
that are now occurring to iestablish a1 greater Malaysia which under no
circumnstances would tolerate becoming Cotrsiluit but wvbichs inl the
broad sweep is on our side, and on the s2. de of the free iorld.
Nov I ask you to remember that ladies and 4entlemen. This
is fro~ c the point of view of a pra.-tising working politician, who has
had saae responsibility for the affairs o! his country. This is a
great thought that joa ought always to have in your winds. It must
have been God knows that people like myself can't und-. stand it it
xust have been a bitter inoiat to r the point avlaodleda
defeat. 3ut to ackcnowledge defeat for the time and to go for the rest
of your lives thinking that that das the ~ iial defeat, would be the
greatest tru&amp; gedy of all. And I be&amp; of you, throw it out of your minds,
Because all those events have left their indlible mark on our friends
in these countries, and, I believe., on the fiature of 33outh-2. ast Asia.
1ir, that is my ateonj to * atim~ te the . mpset 11 these
things on the minds of the leaders and member3 of these countries in
south-east A-sia.
fiat I now iunt jou tocoo~ e buiCA. Wu .) ar oen coia., try. .4e are
not al-ays as interested in foreign -ffT4irs ais do might be; though
rather more than we 4erea T-4 we are more itareated ia :~ rign.
affairs than we 4ere it is lar~ ely baoxaase 4e ti.. ve as a nation, become
conscious of the signifcan~ ce ) f -; outli-.3L: the signiilicanoe of
these countries lying close to us with the throat lyingo behiLnd them.
This is one of the Treat reasons Arhy A~ us~ ralla has be.-omo more
conscious of foreign affairs, more onscio-is in 1jarticular, of South'-
. ast : 45jaf affairs than It ver wjas ov oreo
In the result . ihat has hapened? ,, tie Lf Vae early' things
that my own deplorable ;-vrnent did to ao one of tlli , rToaoters
of the South-.: Ast Asia Treaty )~ rganisation; and todai J-, t Is
something of enormous significinco to ere h; rAre a
def'ensive origanisation of mutual help,, of Iatual un4' rAtarndi'je of
mutual economic asisistance, vwth esnbracet nqt ; rmly ; rua~ t Zr-taln and
the U. nited 3tates and France and Australia and Ned Zealand, but also
' sian countries Pakistan, and Thailan~ d, oral the k K lipjpines. This,
is a unique organisation. So long as it exists, so long as all its
members stand up to it, , re have, in this corner of the world, a
de ' n17e -i harlis! 1 i 1-4ich we cm-n17. oe our most tremendous reliance.
Lt Is a rgional agreement in a reg; Ion bout which few pe~ ople thought,
and friw people cared, only 20 years ago, 
h~ ow If it is true$ as I &gt; eiiev* it to be, that today we are
deeplyr concerned in this area that today qof are deeply concerned to
see that we take our part in this great joint organisationt that this
is something that anab1e-is to hold up our hevads In the company of our
great anid pwrful friends like t he United Kin gdom and the United States
then I wan t say., Sir, to you, tonigtst and to all your aembers, that
what wan done by our forces, apparently so umaucoessfUlly, ap ontly
ending In some form of disaster, has in fact boen one o' the great
things to bring the Australian mind to understand how important this
g; reat soutfi.. last sian .) rpnisation is. ( Applause)
in other words, AIrq you can go through two periods on these
matteres you can go through a feeling in 4hich emotions are highi anid
sentiments are high; you can become accustomed, If I may just mention
a row names at random to think with pride of peopl&amp; like Albert Coates
and " Weary* Dunlop aund the miracles that they performed; you can think
of Charles Anderson; you can think of' Clordon Bannett up thera with very
little knoledge alroady acquired, until the e-'; ents, happened and they
had to oe lea; neA by hard practice, fou can think of all these things,
and there is a high rfeeling about Lhem, there is R deep emotion about
tiem. I share them; you share t hem. jut In t he long rian, in the eye
of history it becomes nec.-ssarylp after a while, to say " das all this
wasted?" " Did all this comie and 4o and be forgotten exoept in a few
warm hearts anda few ! ively memories?" " Or were these awents events
whiich actually altered trw course of' history in this part of the
world?' It is because I believe that they did alter the course of
history in this part oi the . torld it is because IL believe what I have
been saying to you about our relation to South-East of Asia, to our
groat allies to whom I have referred it is because I believe that that
I also believe that your annual cel9? v~ tion is niot to be reearded so
much as a melancholy 0eet In which people look beck wiith sorrow
though of course we do -but as an event from which you look forward
with pride and with a realisation that these were great things, done
fur Austraia, arid, as I firmly believe, dlone for the world.
61r, I don't want to detain you any longer, It would have
been sufficient, from my point of view', to come down perhaps,, and to
say, and say trulyt Lhat I think It is a tre . endoux compliment on your
part to Invite me to be here. I would have hated to miss being here,
zsut above and beyond that It has given an opportunity to mo what you
might call the more or less precarious head of the Governmient -to tell
you something whuich perhaps only7 a an who ims 2rime Minister around
that time and who is now, by the Mc~ wcy of i~ rovldv. noe, ' rlme Minister
again some 17 years after It all ended can sre in proper retrospect,
and who could tell you what I have toll you tonight. I believe It;
1 mean it; and I hop* you vil accept it. 


QUEENSLAND BEEF ROADS
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) and&nbsp;the Premier of queensland ( Mr. Nicklin)
The Commonwealth Government has approved a proposal&nbsp;of the Queensland Government for the construction of five new&nbsp;beef roads in the State. They are
Georgetown &nbsp;- Mt. Surprise - &nbsp;Hann HighwayMount Isa &nbsp;- DajarraDajarra &nbsp;- BouliaWinton &nbsp;- BouliaQuilpie &nbsp;- Windorah
The roads will qualify for assistance under the&nbsp;Queensland Grant ( Beef Cattle Roads) Act 1961, as does the&nbsp;Julia Creek-Normanton road to which approval has already been&nbsp;given.
The Commonwealth Government has indicated that the&nbsp;nature and extent of the work to be carried out on each&nbsp;particular road is a matter for the State Government. Similarly&nbsp;the Commonwealth Government believes that the State Government&nbsp;is best qualified to determine the standards of construction&nbsp;and will therefore leave such decisions to the Queensland&nbsp;authorities.
CANBERRA,16th February, 1962. P. M. No06


PM. No 26/1962
At the Premiers' Conference today, the Premiers&nbsp;accepted a Commonwealth offer to pay financial assistance grants&nbsp;to the States in the present financial year as follows:
New South Wales œ 99,2499000Victoria 73,01, 000Queensland 43,730,000South Australia ' 3,225,000Western Australia 30,085,000Tasmania _ 12 83 oœ 292,140,000
These grants include special payments to VictoriaC1,024,000); Western Australia (œ 339,000) and Tasmania (œ 97,000),These amounts represent the difference between the grants thoseStates expected to receive on the basis of estimates of theirpopulation before the census results were known, and theStatistician's official determination of the grants payable forthis year on the basis of the census results. The Commonwealth,in offering to make up those amounts this year, took account ofthe fact that these States had based their Budgets for the currentfinancial year on the estimated, and not the finally determinedfigureos Under the Statistician's final determination, the otherthree States receive more than the grants estimated in relation tothem at the beginning of the current financial year, as followsNew South Wales œ 175,000Queensland œ 1,003,000South Australia 43,000In effect, the Commonwealth's offer was on a " no loss"principle, each State being offered either the full amount of itsnow entitlement under the cunsus results, or its full expectationunder the earlier estimated population figures.The States regarded this offer as eminently fair,As the census result showed that estimates of Victoria'spopulation had been considerably overstated, the application ofthe Statistician's final determination for 1961-62 to the formulagrant for Victoria over the remaining three years of the 1959Agreement would have caused a considerable reduction in thegrants payable to that State for those years. It was agreed that,for the purpose of calculating Victoria's grant for the nextthree years, a new " base amount" of œ 72,730,000 should beadopted. CANBERRA,16th February, 1962.



No I46o
FOR PRESS LOAN COUNCIL
STATEMENT BY THE TREASURER, THE RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT, M. P.
The Commonwealth Treasurer ( Mt. Holt) announced today that
the Australian Loan Council has approved an increase of œ 7,500,000
in the borrowing programme for housing purposes in 1961-62 compared
with the programme approved at the June, 1961 Meeting. This
means that the total borrowing programme for States' works and
housing for 1961-62 is now œ 247,500,000.
Mr. Holt said that the Loan Council also agreed to an increase
of œ 7,5O0,00 in the programme of semi-government and local
authorities with programmes of œ 100,000 or more.
The allocation of the new progr=_ mos is s-ot
Governmeirntal1
State Commonwealth-
Works State Housing Total
Agreement
œ' 000 œ' OO œ 00
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania 52,298 50,075 25,500 25,148 19,581 14,498
197,100 17, O03
13,527 4,200 9,03b 3,706 2,928
50,400 79,301 63,602 29,700 34,184 23,287 17,426
247,500 out -e low:-
Semi-Government and
'-Loc aH Authorit ie s
with Programmes of
œ 100,000 and over*
30,365 39,713 21,093 5,802 3,520 3,549
104,042 ( 28,1) 9)
( 36,972)
( 19,547)
( 5,430)
( 3,193)
( 3,291)
( 96,542)
Previous programme in brackets.
The Loan Council decided that, subject to the approval of
the State Government concerned, semi-government and local authorities
with programmes less than œ 100,00 would each be permitted to borrow
up to a further œ kl0O, 000 during the remainder of the financial year
if they were able to do so. Prior to this Loan Council decision, 
e* the 1961-62 programmes of these smaller authorities were as follows:-
œ' 000
New South Wales 6,782
Victoria 5,324
Queensland ', 360
South Australia 427
Western Australia 1,863
Tasmania 702
Total 19,458
The Treasurer further said that, as proposed by the
Prime Minister yesterday, the distribution between the States of the
special non-repayable grant of œ 10 million for expenditure on
employment-giving activities in this financial year would be as
shown in the following table, which also indicates the amounts added
to the works and housing, and the semi-governmental and local
tLrthCW. LILy p-ug.-UX iTn. e Addition to
Semi-Government
Special Non-Addition and loal
Re payable to Housing Authority
Grant Programme Programmes
o œ 110o0f 0 O
and over
œ' 000 œ' 000 œ' 000
New South Wales 2,240 2,403 2,256
Victoria 1,800 1,927 2,741
Queensland 3,340 900 1,546
South Australia 970 1,036 372
Western Australia 660 70 327
Tasmania 990 528 258
Total 10,000 7,500 7,500
Canberra, A. C. T.
16th February, 1962 


P. M, No. 25 /1962
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced&nbsp;today that he has appointed Senator the Honourable&nbsp;J. G. Gorton, Minister for the Navy, as Minister-in-Charge&nbsp;of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial ResearchOrganization. Since the changes in the Ministry, late in&nbsp;December last, the Prime Minister has, himself, been&nbsp;responsible for the C. S. I. R. O.
CANBERRA,16th February, 1962.



WEEKLY INDEX NO.
VlEEK ENDING FEBRUARY 17,1962
C 0 M M 0 N W E A L T H OF A T S T R A LI A
Index of Ministerial Statements Issu. ed in Canberra.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Feb. 11 No. 121A ADDITIONAL PROTECTIVE PROCEDURES
12 No. 122 APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL ADVISORY AUTHORITY
ON TEMPORARY PROTECTION
15 No. 136 CANADIAN TRADE MISSION TO VISIT AUSTRALIA
16 No. 148 BIGGEST LUETRALIAN WINE AND FOOD DISPLAY
IN S. E. ASIA.
16 No. 151 COTTON TEXTILES ARRANGEMENT
The Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt.
Feb. 14 No. 134
15 No. 137
16 No. 146
11 No, 120
The Minister for
Feb. 15 No. 144
The Minister for INVESTMENT ALLOWANCE FOR PLANT USED IN
MANUFACTURING PRODUCTION
APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN OF TAXATION BOARD OF
REVIEW No. 2 MELBOURNE AND OF CHAIRMAN OF
TAXATION BOARD OF REVIEW No, 3 BRISBANE
LOAN COUNCIL
THREE NATIONS IN AIR DEMONSTRATION
Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley, M. P.
SENIOR ARMY OFFICER FROM PAKISTAN TO VISIT
AUSTRALIA.
Labour and National Service, The Hon. Wm. McMahon
Feb. 12 No. 124
The Minister for
Feb. 13 No. 132 EMPLOYMENT
Irr'igration, The Hon. A. R. Downer
75th IANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS OF RENMARK,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
o* a
0 4
0 WI
oC 0H
r
U) P4 4
S03 Feb. 13 No. 131
The Minister for
Feb. 15 No. 141
15 No. 143
The Minister for
Feb. 13 No. 130
15 No. 142 NO APPROACH TO GOVERNMENT OF ANY BOEING 707
CHARTER.
External Affairs. The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
WEST GERMAN MINE DISASTER
. USTRALIA TO BUY UNITED NATIONS BONDS
Primary Industry. The Hon. C. F. Adermann
NEW MEIMBERS FOR AUSTRALIAN DRIED FRUITS
CONTROL BOARD.
WHEAT, SECOND ADVANCE ON No. 24 POOL
The Mnister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
Feb. 15 No; 138 FIRST BIG ISSUE OF NEW WEiAPON
16 No. 147 GREATER EMPHASIS ON ARMY PHYSICAL TRAINING
The Minister for Social Services, the Hon. Hugh S. Roberton
Feb. 11 No. 121 APPROVAL OF ADDITIONAL œ 1j-MILLIONFF giLR , A S. f4ES
The Minister for the Interior, the Hon. Gordon Freeth
Feb. 16 No. 150 CHARGES AGAINST POLICE
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon, J. G. Gorton
Feb. 4 No. 121B NAVY SURVEY TO HELP TUNA INDUSTRY
13 No. 129 NAVY ALERTED FOR PROJECT MERCURY
15 N. 140 NAVY GUARID FOR PARLIAMENT OPENING
16 No. 145 U. S. THANKS FOR FILM
The Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert Opperman
Feb. 13' No, 125 THE TUG " YUNA"
13 No. 127 NEW SHIPS 7OR COASTAL TRADE
The Department of the Treasury
Feb. 15 No. 139 FINANCE FOR STATES EMPLOYMENT-GIVING ACTIVITIES
The Department of External Affairs
Feb. 12 No. 123 AUS. EXPEDITION IN N. Z. ANTARCTIC TERRITORY
13 No. 128 AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC SHIP FREED FROM PACK ICE
15 Nc. 135 NEW CALEDONIAN STUDENTS TO VISIT CANBERRA
The Department of the Navy
Feb. 14 No, 133 FORTY-SEVEN YEARS WITH NAVY DEPARTMENT
S 16 No. 149 INTERNA'ITO NAL NAVY VISITORS
No. 126 CANCELLED. 


CONDOLENCE MOTION THE LATE SIR EARLE PAGE"Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies,in the House of Representatives,Tuesday, 20th February, 1962
As Honourable Members know, Sir Earle Christmas Grafton&nbsp;Page died on December 20, 1961.
He was born in 1880. He became a notable surgeon. He&nbsp;served in the first A. I. F. as a surgeon, in Egypt and France.Urged on by an enthusiasm ; rhich marked the whole of his&nbsp;public life for national development, an"* particularly ruralgrowth, he entered this Parliament in 1919 as the member for&nbsp;Cowper, a seat which he held continuously until the recent electicn.He became leader of the Country Party in 1921, an officewhich he held until 1939. On February 9, 1923, he becameassociated, as Treasurer, with Mr. Bruce ( as he then was) in theBruce-Page Government, uhich held office until October 1929.During this period, in 1924-25, he led an Australiandelegation to the United Kingdom and the United States ofAmerica, to examine banking, electricity, and road and railtransport. In 1923 and again in 1926 he was Acting Prime Minister.In 1934 he entered the Lyons Government as Minister forCommerce, an f fice which he retained until April 1939 doing muchsignificant work in the field of orderly marketing, and wasMinister for Health from November 1937 to November 1938. He wasthe leader of Australian Ministerial trade delegations to Londonin 1936 and 1938.He acted as Prime Minister in 1935 and 1937.On the death of the Rt. Honourable J. A. Lyons, SirEarle Page became Prime Minister from April 7 to April 26, 1939.From October 1940 to October 1941 he was Minister forCommerce first in my own Government and then in the FaddenGovernment. He aas a member of the Australian 4ar Cabinet fromJanuary to May 1941, and of the Economic and Industrial Committeeof Cabinet from June to October of that year. In 1941-42 herepresented Australia in the British War Cabinet.He was a member of the Australian Advisory Jar Councilfrom August 1942 to September 1943 and again from February 1944to August 1945. In December 1949 he became Minister for Health in my ownGovernment, and retained that portfolio until 1956, when heexpressed a wish to retire from Ministerial office.From July to September 1951 he visited Canada a-d theUnited States of America to study problems of healthadministration. In August-September 1953 he visited the United Kingdomand the Netherlands, and attended a conference of the WorldMedical Association at the Hague.He represented the Government at the inauguration ofthe Republic of Pakistan in March 1956.
2.Over a long puriod, from 1923 to 1934, and again from1937 onwards, ho was a rmember of the Standing Orders Committee.His public career, oven as stated in this summary form,was a very remarkable one. Few ren have served Australia withsuch distinction in so many ways over so long a period of time.But the record does not end there. It is a difficulttask to select the outstanding features of the versatile % vork hedid. But perhaps I might venture to refer briefly to three of anumber of matters which should be on the record.The first is that, conscious of the need forstrengthening the rural economy, he was ? argely responsible formany special taxation and other provisions designed to encouragecapital improvement on the land, and with it the essentialimprovement of efficiency and production.The second is that, as Commonwealth Treasurer, he was aloader in the creation of the Financial Agreement and the LoanCouncil, each of which has had a permanent and far-reachingeffect upon the financial relations of the Commonwealth and theStates. The third is that he was the prime author of anddriving force behind the Commonwealth Medical and Health schemeswhich are now successfully operating in Australia.His labours wore recognised when he was made a PrivyCouncillor in 1929, a G. C. M. G. in 1938, and a Companion of Honourin 1942. But even more importantly he will be honoured andremembered with gratitude for his great contributions to thedevelopment of the Australian Nation, its institutions and itspolicies. All Honourable Members, both new and old, and ofwhatever party, will join with me in expressing appreciation ofhis public service, and in expressing to the family our sense ofrecognition and of loss.Mr. Speaker, I move that this House expresses its deepregret at the death on 20th December, 1961, of the Right HonourableSir Earle Christmas Grafton Pago, a Member of thisHouse from 1919 to 1961 and a former Prime Minister of theCommonwealth, places on record its appreciation of his long andmeritorious public service and tenders its profound sympathy to


P. M. No,, 28/ i962SPACE FLIGHTStatement by the Prime Minister Hon. R. G. Menzies)The Prime Minister has sent the following messa-eto President Kennedy through the Australian Ambassador inWashington " CO INTGRATUT ATIONS TO CO" ON" 2L GLEN, ANDTHE AMERICAN PEOPLE UPON MAGNIFICLINT 3UCCESS OF PROJECTM--iCRY. IT IS TRRnvi1PH OF GREAT SCIENTIFIC AN4D TECHNICALSKILL, MAGNIFICENT TEAM : JOF-d( A' 11D PREPARA'' TION, AIM OUTSTAZINGH-ILjAN COURAGE. " E : JrRE HI. PPY TO BE ABLE TO TAKE SOME PARTIN TH SAFETY AaRANGEi. 4' ENTS THAT JL IRE M1, ADE", R. G. MENZIESCANBERRA,21st February, L962.



WEEKLY qNDE) X No. 8
WEEK ENDING FEBRUARY 24a1962
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra.
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
Feb, 19 No. 159FIGHT FOR FAIR PRICES John MoEwen
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H. Spocner,
Feb. 22 No. 178
The Minister for M. M,
AMERICAN PHYSICIST TO LECTURE IN AUSTRALIA
Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley
Feb. 19 No. 154
19 No. 155 STUDY COURSE ON PROBLEMS OF INDUSTRIAL
MOBILISATION.
C'V'EALTH MARITIME EXERCISE
The Minister for Territories, The Hon. Paul Hasluck.
Feb. 19 No. 156
19 No. 158
23 No. 183
The Minister for OPINION IN PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
SUPREME COURT OF THE TERRITORY OF PAPUA AND
NEW GUINEA APPOINTMENT OF JUDGE
DIR. OF INFORM. EXT. SERVICES TN P/~ PUA AND N. G.
Repatriation, The Hon. H. C. WJ,.-a. a-t.
Feb. 20 No. 162
21 No. 169
The Yinister for
Feb. 22 No. 175 IRONWORKERS TO GIVE SCHOLARSHIPS
MINISTER SUPPORTS STATE SECRETARY
Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge.
CHAIRMAN OF T. A. A. REAPPOINTED
The Fostniaster-Gernern,_ The Hon. C. CW. Davidson
161
162A 170 177 POST OFFICE FOR L1OOMBA STAMP DISPLAY
AUSTRALIAN STAMP dlGHLY COMMENDED
COMMUNICATIONS FOR ORBITAL FLIGHT OF THE EARTH
SUBSCRIBER TRUNK DIALLING FROM CANBERRA TO
SYDNEY.
The Minister for External Affairs, The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
Feb. 18 No.
19 No.
23 No.
The Minister
Feb. 20 No. 154A AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATION ON U. N. ECONOMIC
AND SOCIAL COUNCIL.
157 AUSTRALIAN ANTARCTIC PARTY EXPLORES OATES LAND
182 ANARE HELICOPTER STRANDED
for Primary Industry. The Hon. C. F. Adermann
163
The Minister for
Feb. 22 No.
22 No.
The Minister 173 174 DEVELOPMENTS IN TOBACCO INDUSTRY
the Army. the Hon. J. O. Cramer
NEXT ARMY TRANSFER IN iAY
SCHOOL CADETS TO SEE ROYAL MILITARY COLLEGE
for Social Services, the Hon. Hugh S. Roberton
Feb. 20 No. 164EARLIER PENSIONS FOR MIGRANTS
The Ministeo for the Interior, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
Feb. 22 No. 172
The Minister fcr REDISTRIBUTION OF STATES INTO ELECTORAL
DIVISIONS.
the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
R. A. N. ENGINEER OFFICER FOR U. S. A.
NAVY ALERTS SIXTEEN SHIPS
W! ORK BEGINS ON NAVY SURVEY SHIP
iNAVY'S VETERAN SHIP CELEBRATES
Feb. I, 11 No. No. No. No.
Feb. 11 18_ No.
20 No.
21 No.
23 No. 152 16.' iA
164B
181 / 2
r W 
Si V* 2
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
Feb. 18 22 No. 153
No. 171 DOCTORS TO STUDY SMALLPOX
MASS CHEST X-RAY SURVEY IN A. C. T.
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
Feb. 21 No. 165 SUPPLY DEP. RTMENT PROUD ROLE IN PROJECT
MERCURY
21 No. 166 SUPPLY MINISTER CONGRATULATES N. A. S. A. ON
PROJECT MERCURY SUCCESS.
21 No. 167 LUSTRALL' THANKED FOR PROJECT MERCURY
SUPPORT.
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
Feb. 22No. 176R. A. A. F. IN SUPPLY DROP ON PACIFIC ISLAND
The Department of Immigration
Feb. 19No. 160MISS AUSTRALIA 1961.
The Department of the Navy
Feb. 23 23 No. 180
No. 179 CHIEF OF THE NAVAL STAFF RETIRES TODAY
BIRTHDAY CAKE RENDEZVOUS
The Chairman of the Export Development Council, Sir John Allison
Feb. 21 No. 168EXPORT INCENTIVES GIVE BOOST TO INDUSTRY
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House, CA TERRA A. C. T. 


S3PIEC'i BY LMR PRIME~ MIISTER ZltE RTo HON. R. G.MENZIES9 AT J441SH 4A1R MEJ4OIAL ; AN&amp; WqO26, ai F~ 4~ W~ di 1 142Sirg ladies and 6entlemen,There are a couple of aspects of today's proceedin,,, s that Iwould like to mention right away. The first is that 1 wa3 toldyesterday that my friend, Mr. Smith had levoted a fortnitght topreparing a magnificent speech and that Mr. 1foffuan was coming backfrom abroad just in time to deliver it. Wiell that tarmed out to be aegloomy prophesy., . Lhe se* cond fact that i want to mention to you is that thismornin4, into m~ y offices came, among others9 the Chief RabA, Rabbi3rodi., -iho has I regret to tell you, a formidable memory because hereminded me that 10 years ago I made a speech In his presence on anoccasion not entirely dissimilar to this arid9 what's worse, heroaeibered what 1 had said. Now this, of course is most embarrassingbizuso no doubt on tiagt occasion I : iaid all that I had to 3ay; andthe trou~ le Is that he re. wbers It and th. orefore9perhaps, I can'tsay It again. That was an ocoasion v'hen we were celebratin-P a verynotatble event in the history of the Fustralian Jewish oowvanity inMelbourne, My old friend Jaron Snider will no doubt remiember it very-ioll. i bad a few -iords to say on that o,: casion, as I. tvie today.Herle we are on a splendid site -we're join-, to have asynagogu', a ommunity centre -strategically placed next door to thePresbyterians. That's very 3-' tisfactory to weo very sitisfactory.(' aughter) Jut 4hen I looked ait the book of tfie words that I wasgiven I was really surerixed to find that the total Jewish corn-unityin Canboerra nmmredi 1W peoplet something around 100 adult ptrsons,i-" hat is a very simall number in a city of 96,000 or 57 000. And inthose circumstanoes one might not have been surprised to hind"" that thisrelative handful of people anxious though they might be , nd Properlyso to preserve the symbols and practice of their ancient faithanxious though they might be to provide rior their children a training,a bringing-. up in that faith anid in its educational methods, said,I" veUl sorry, ) ut it can't oe done; there aire so fewo Of -, Mt theyi'erenit deterred by the fact that thay were so few, They m~ ade, whatI will always believe to be one of the most imaginative de~ isions Lkadein recent years in this place. They saidt * This Is the capital ofAUstr~ jaia. This -11 on , rowing aind roving in numoers and inimportancet and we must set out to~ impress upon the conscience of theJewish comm~ unity all over Australia how important It is that thereshould be, in this places a shrine tind a schiool and a place of mooting",Now this was a m,-gnificent and ima~ giniative conceltion. It isa matter of *., reat satisf'actioni to me, and i'M 3ure to all of you, torealise ho4 it wdas seized upon as an lini 4, native Idea by -,-' ople of theJewish community all over Istralia, The result Is that ,. oday we havethe privilee, of being present at the laying of a 2tone# at thebe~ inning of a buildings at the oe,. innhig of a ci-. ntre, 4hich will someday cater for the needs, not of 160 pe~ ople but, I imagine, of thousandsor people in a 4reat, Iforiard-looking, national capital.Now jir I t'iink that that is a splendid idea. ' n4 becauseit is a splenlid ila. I hope that all over f~ srlapeople of yourcomnmuniity will. rally to it and be proud of it ' tid do so-' ething forit; and that " eople not oIt your cmunity wrill have enough imagdnationto see the significance of it and, in their turn lend their aid,lend their recognition, lend their encoura.; mexnt lor something that hassuch great spiritual and educational signifficance in Australia,
There is Just one other thing that I vould like to say toyou and it is this. The fact that here we are at the beginning of theconstruction of a Synagogue, a school, a centre is not to be taken asmeaning that the Jewovish community in Australia feels that it issomething apart. That is not true; any more than the existence overthe road here of the Burns Club means that the Scottish community reelthey are something apart. Now as a man of Soots origin I have neverthought that we were something apart; I've Just thought that we werein the business, but rather better. ( Laughter) And that is thewhole approach. Here is a comunity not I'm happy to say, torn asunder byracial dispute# by disputes of religion. Here is a community in whichI'm* happy to say I find, overvhelminly, a broad tolerancet a broadsense of the oamon aim that we all have to leave a better country thanve found. In such a country it isn't right to suppose that some ofthese old things that occur in an old world, and in a worse vorldp arebeing perpetuated. If a J3ow in Australia devoted himself entirely tothe retrospective study of ancient history and medieval history hecould find much to sorrow about, much persecutions much deprivation ofrightst muoh deprivation of liberty. All those things are part ofhistory; but they are not part of Australia. have the greatpleasure, the great honour, the privilnge that puts responsibility uponus to live in a country in which all th.:: t history is forgotten, acountry in which we are not anti anybody, but pro somebody: tornasunder politically ' y parties engaging every now and then in theluxury, if you care to look at it that way, of elections. This isvery spirited; this divides all churches, all schools of thought,dut when it comes to the basic element there is no decent Australianwho worries about soebody'else's derivation of race, somebody else'sreligious adherence; on the whole, he prefers to have a man of faith,even though it be not his faith, to a man of scepticism and unbelief.Therefore -e can all meet here whoever we may be, to whatever churchwe may subscribe, happy and proud to think that once more in thehistory of Canberra we are attending the setting up of a symbol offaith, of hope, atnd as I believe, of aharity.Sir* it is a very ; reat privilce for me, and for my wife#to be present here this afternoon. It has been a particular pleasurefor me to renew my acq'. iaintance with the Chief : iabi. And if I anstill around somewhere in anothir 10 years' time I shall look forwardto meeting him and we can put our feoot up and, on that occasion, recallwith reat advantage the speeches that wo have neaver male. ( Applause)



195
DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
FOR THE PRESS CANBERRA
PR. 33
Icleased also in :' ashington
and : llin ' rton. 27t. i . E . r i.
ANIZUS COUNCIL TO MEET IN . USTRALIA
Statement by the Minister for External Affairs.
The Minister for External Affairs, Sir Garfield Barwick,
announced today that on the invitation of Australia a meeting
of the ANZUS Council would take place in Canberra on
May 7 and 8 this year.
New Zealand would be represented by the Prime Minister
and Minister for External Affairs, Mr. K. J. Hnlynake.
The United States representative would be Mr. Dean Rusk,
Secretary -f State.
The ANZUS Treaty entered into force in 1952.
Sir Garfield said that Australia attached very much
importance to the Treaty as a pact ^ f mutual security between
the United States, New Zealand and Australia.
He noted that the Council of Foreign Ministers established
under the Treaty provided a forum for the exchange of views on
matters of coimmon interest affecting security in the Pacific
area in which Australia, New Zealand and the United States wpro
vitally concerned.
The forthcoming meeting, which would be the eleventh,
was of particular interest in that it would be the first to
take plac0 in Australia. It was also the first since
Mr. Kennedy became President of the United States.
Sir Garfield added that the Government welcomed the
visitof Mr. Holyoake and also that of ir. Rusk who had not
previously visited Australia. 0: 3 0 


MESSAGE FROM_ PRESIDENT KENNEDY
Statement by the Prime Minister ( Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies)
I have today received the following letter from the President of the United States:
"Dear Mr. Prime Minister:
The Australian Embassy&nbsp;i n Washington has conveyed to me your generous comments on the occasion of Colonel Glenn's flight.
We are, of course, highly pleased at the success of our first orbital flight. I am confident that this flight is but the beginning of a great new adventure for the peoples of the world in which we will all participate and from which, I sincerely hope, all of us will benefit.
As you know, the tracking facilities in Australia were a key factor in Mak: ing this historical flight possible. My countrymen and I deely appreciate the valuable assistance of the government and people of Australia in our manned space program and we look forward to our continued close association in the further conquest of the space frontier.
Thank you for your inspiring comments, and with warmest personal regards,
Sincerely,John F. Kennedy"
CANBERRA,1st March, 1962.


P. M. No. oz112MINISTER FOR ZFLADE TO GO _ OVERS LaISStaterment by the Prim. e Mtnist2r the RtHon , R. G MenzisThe Minister for Trade, Mr. MeEwon, will be leavingon Sunday on his visit to North Imerica aind Europep f ordiscussions concurning the prbesfor Atustralia of theUnit(:--King dom's request to jc~ in the Cu) rimon Market, and alsofor consultation on -ther irijr-r tant rol. Itod pr-obler. ms dealin.,with our commu-odity exprrts.Mr. iMcEwen has arrangod fir a-final bricefing, sossionon the Wiost C:-ast o) f L-lrica withi theo Doputy Secrketary of theDepartm., ent of Trade0, ( Mr. G. ~ aw~ kSrith) and ,-tfterAusralian officials. Mr. G. Uarwich Sm,., ith has boon engpa; gedfor somer 6 uoieks in Europe on work cloisely rclatod to thepurpose of Mr. McD-. ionls visit * nd will be on his way bac toitustralia where ho, will be Ictinc, S cru) tary of thO Depa,-, rtme. ntof Trade while the, Secrotary ( Dr' Jostarian) is ovorsuaswith the Minister. 7.1hen Mr. Me3 rcn's .1iscusiofs in *... ashin tnarjcomletdhe will then visit Ottawa before proceeding to theTiniteci1 Kingdom and1 Eiuro-o.1st March, 192



SPE2CH BY 2HE FRIYE I4ISTER T. HON. RG.
ITTHE 7OUOS0 ? P1-LSNT. TIVES
THJURSD-Y. lbT M . RC, 1962
I think I shiuld like to begin by cnplirenting the
honourable member for Phillip ( Mr. Einfeld) who has just sat
down, n his maiden speech. He will not be surprised to find
that there are some passages in it with -hich I do not agree,
but I did think that he shuld be conplirented on the way in
which he put it.
This is a very important debato. It is a new Parliament
and it is a very narrowly divided Parlianont. Whatover
division occurs in this House will be a close division.
Thorefore, I propose to address myself to the first challenge
which has been very &gt; roperly made by the Loeader of the
Opposition ( Mr. Calwoll) at an oarly stage, to the continued
existence of the Govcrnm. ent. I Ido not 4uarrel with that at all.
That is exactly the course that I uould ha ve taken nyself in his
place because it is of great nonent, not only to Parliament, but
to the people of ustralia that the broad position of the
Governmient in this Parliament should be determ ined at the
earliest possible nmoment.
Having said that, I ar. bound to confess that the
speech made by ny honourable friend, the Lead-r of the
Opposition and it was far-roaching and the amendment that
he has moved do not soon to mc to be entirely closely related.
In the course of his speech he contioned a few of the points in
the namendment but certainly not all of then. I do not conplain
about that because within the limits of any decent time
allowable in Parliament it is not possible to cover too wide a
field. But the difference between the speech and the amnendrmnt.
was, I thought, worthy ) f passing comrment, as we say
occasionally in this H. use One night aluost have thought that
they had been 2Grafted by different people.
In what I have to say to: night I propose to deal with
matters of substance or, at any rato, with a sufficient number
of matters of substanco to fit within the reasonable c-npass of
one speech. I begin by saying that wo are not here, I imagine,
to fight the last election. I have had . n enormous number of
elections in Uy time. and I have swanted up and own the
country in the course of thea. Ihen they are over I do not want
to have to do thom agDain. I hope that I nay be forgiven this
rather ch! arling ihuman woaknoss. lle are net here to fight the
last eloction, That has booeen fought and there has been a
sensational result, 1whether you look at it either from the
Gvornment point of view or the Opposition point of view. But
what we are here to detormine is whether in this now Parliament,
on the Govern o-r-General's Speooch and our recently mnnounced
economic measures, wre deserve the censure of this H-uso. It is
the censure of this House that is being sought, not a rahash of
a general election. On that kind of issue the onus is on the
Opposition, and th. o attack is properly maeo by the Leader of the
Opposition. As I will demo: nstrate ' before I conculc, he has not
made up his nr. ind as to the . r. un1s of his attach: or the
principles u; o-n which he attacks. Everything that he said in
the course of his sreech here I iwant to pay tribute to his
durability because he has said something , very day since polling
day can be undcrst')-d nly if it is roLbored I comle to
this right away that he is deeply influencod by his rich and
powercrful friends in the well-nmown Fairfax-Hend rs on-Calwoll
axis. It is rather an agreablo tli. ought that the prince of
s:) cialists, even though he has voluntarily abdicated that
position for three years, should now find h-' mself in such sweet
communii on with the rich, All-the old battles that he has had
have been forgotten temporarily. 
My friend and colleague, the honourable ue. bor for
Moreton ( Mr. Killen) mrde some rofurence to this rather
unkind, I thought, but rmuch enjoyed oy people here. But all
those old battles are now forgotten. I would almost say to my
colleague " Pray do not disturb the p) ace; these are forgotten".
" The Old Curi.. sity Shop" and Charles Dickens are forgotten,
Indeed, " The Old Curiosity Shop" with its iimn.. rtal description
of Mr. Quilp has been iineffect, burned, by the comnJon han:; an.
Dear Arthur and Dear Rupert now see each other in a kindlier
light. All passion is spent. There is a new unity ticket.
They are united by the contemplation of a cormmon enemy. Of
course it is in that capacity, as ell as in the trifling
capacity of being the Prinm Minister, that I ad ross the House
tonight. The process of roadjustmrent has had its painful non: ents
but it has been concluded, I an happy to record, in a
gentlemanly way. On their part, the " Sydney Morning Herald"
masters publicly co2.--itted thensolvos to the view that though
being professed anti-sDcialists, they would sooner support a
true blue socialist , gover: enn t than the Liberal Governrent which
they accused of some socialist practices. This is an exercise
in logic which, I an sure, will engage the study of people in
the philosophy schools of the universities for years to come.
At a certain stage some one I think it was one of my
colleagues very rudely said that there Must hcve been some
contract between the socialist leader and the capitalist
" Sydney Morning Herald". They rejected this. The " Sydney
Morning Herald" iasters even went to the dangerous length of
writing a special article on their political principles and
that had all the charm of novelty. In the course of this
article I copied their very words which is what they seldom
do with me they said
" There could be no contract with Labour unless the " Herald"
that is the " Sydney Morning Herald", the Labour paper
" were prepared to subscribe to the platfor-m of the Labour
Party but this, as overy one must know, is out of the
question".
This was a stateent of profundity and piety, was it not. " For
us to subscribe to the policy of the Labour Party is out of the
question". Of course, it takes two to make a bargain. When I
read that statement I recalled at once that after all the
Leader of the Opposition had done his part because in his policy
speech he had said that if elected he would forget all about the
socialist objective the policy of the Labour Party for three
years. His very words were
" We pronise not to raise the question of nationalisation
during the lifetine of the Twentyfourth Parliaent".
I believe I am right in saying that this is the Twentyfourth
Parliament. So there we are. The " Herald" said, " We could
never support Labour because we object to its policy." Pray
forget itdear boy, because we will forget about the policy for
three years. On this happy note of harmony the business went
on. A kind of entente cordialo was then established and the
Government, having suffered heavy losses at the election, as I
publicly, freely and obviously confessed, ny distinguished
friends, the Leader of the Opposition becane excited, and made
strange statements daily. 
On the economic question which hy ban selected for this
censure amondhent there is a most curious sequence of events to
which I want to direct the attention of the Parliament. On 7th
February this year I issued a statement containing the Cabinet's
decisions on a variety of matters to which I shall refer later
in detail payments to the States in the form of grants which
are not repayable; borrowing by somi Government and local
government bodies; unemployment benefits; income tax rebates;
motor vehicle sales tax; war service hones loans; housing
loans by savings banks; Commoiw ealth works; investment
allowances; quantitative restriction of imports and Development
Bank capital. This was a wide range of matters on which I made
the statement arising from very close Cabinet discussion after a
long series ofconferences with properly interested people in
various sections of Australia. The first comment made by my
friend he rushed in at once to make it was that the
Government's announcement disclosed no basic change in policy.
I ask honourable members to remember this. There is no
basic change in policy, and this gets the headlines. It is a
quick commaent; but a day later no doubt enriched by alvice in
the appropriate quarter, he switched his grounds. He said that
we had reversed our policy. That is a pretty good performance,
is it not, for a man to say one day that it is the samo policy
and in reference to the same sto. tcment, to say 24 hours later
that you have reversed the policy? He said we had now adopted
his policy, and indeed my jesting friend the honourable member
for Grayndler ( Mr. Daly) repeatod this and somebody else that I
heard this afternoon repeated it that we have stolen Labour's
policy. 3ut so that he should not go too far in that direction
he said we had done it too late. That was the second edition.
There was the authorised version, and the revised version and
this must be the new one, because on Tuesday last in this
Parliament he turned around again and set out to prove not that
we had stolen Labour's policy but that our proposals were
worthless. It is a little bit hard on his followers, mixed as
they be, to tell them that Labour's policy is worthless.
Really, this comes a little hard, does it not? I sympathized
with my friends opposite when he said it " Our proposals are
worthless" He is in a dilemma, of course, which is no novel
experience. He cannot say that we have adopted his policy
because he has condemned every proposition put forward in my
stateuent of 27th February with wihich he dealt in the course of
his speech. If honourable members will just check for
themselves they will see how completely right that is. I will
illustrate it.
He attacked our tax cut. He will not have it. He says
it is loaded in favour of the rich. So that is wrong. That is
not the Labour policy. He finds the added money for the States
and for local governr-ent and semi-governmental bodies a total
of œ 25m. in four months, grossly inadequate. And unlike the
Premiers who came here to receive it he doubts and I again
quote his words " Whether there will be any increase in the
rate of spending on public works at all." Every Premier who came
here, of whatever party, was able to say " This will enable us to
put a lot of things into operation and give a lot of employment".
But the honourable . entleman, the Loader of the Opposition, whose
profession it is to live on unemployment, gloomily says that it
will not make any difference at all.
Then we turn to the investment allowances, I hope that
the manufacturers of Australia wore paying proper attention to
what he said last Tuesday, because he rejects the investment
allowance. On what grounds? Because it is a hand-out his
very words to the large ranufacturers whose employees
apparently do not matter. This is a hand-out to the large
manufacturers. An investment allowrre, a novelty in Australia 
designed to enable manufacturers to re-equip themselves on modern
lines and thereby keep down their unit costs and go into the
competitive world. This is thrown out. It is just a hand-out
to the large manufacturers. Ho found that our added provision
for unemployment benefits, particularly for the family nan, was
miserable, . although I take leave to recall to the memory of all
people concerned that this is one matter about which he said
exactly nothing in his policy speech. Nothing so we did not
steal that from hir, but we did it, and it is miserable.
He attacked the quota restrictions, or quantitative
restrictions for sections of industry particularly affected in
their oeployent by imports, as proofs of sectional pressure by
big conpanies. References have boon made tine after time by all
the people who cane to see us, and by many honourable members,
to the particular problens of the timber industry or sections of
the textile industry, or whatever it night be. Everybody is
familiar with the short list of industries particularly
affected, and when we propose to have a scheme which will enable
a prompt decision to be made a holding decision which will
affect these industries, this is rejected and despised by the
Leader of the Opposition and the Labour Party as a mere
concession to sectional pressure by big companies. I wonder how
many Labour iembers in this House genuinely subscribe to that.
ind then, to take the only other example that I have
time to mention, he says we are leaving the motor vehicle
industry to flounder and lanuish. In the course of his whole
speech I was waiting for the authentic Calwell touch and this
was one of the few allowing this industry to flounder and
languish. Does he corplain about our decision already put into
operation about sales tax on motor vehicles? I would have
thought that at any rate he night have found something good to
be said about a policy which he began a month ago by saying we
had stolen from the Labour Party. But no; on this occasion, no
" floundering and languishing". The facts, over the next few
nonths, will demonstrate the absurdity of that cormiont, as I
have no doubt. This astonishing reversal of form would seem to me to
represent a blind and blundering Opposition guided by no
principle and uninforned by any understanding of the nation's
true economic problems and yet, interesting as I hope that
story is, that is not the whole story. Wo must look at what is
not in the c. endment. Since polling day the most vigorous and
filibustering efforts of his journalistic friends of the
" Sydney Morning Herald" group have been directed to attacking
what they are pleaed to call the " appeasement policies" of this
Government in relation to West Now Guinea and when they did this
fantastic thing the honourable the Leader of the Opposition took
the opportunity, as I will show, of joining in. Yet, Sir,
this natter, an appeasement policy, a policy con. 1orl: ed by the
Leader of the Opposition if by no other member aoit, finds no
mention in the no-confidence motion. These things, which were
the very Ark of the Covenant three weeks ago are now rejected.
They find no place in the ni-confidence amenonent, and that is
a very remarkable thing, because, let me remind the House and
the people, if the election had turned out differently the Labour
Party's foreign policy, as expressed by its loader, would now be
operating. Now our ne. arust neighbours, Dutch New Guinea and
Indonesia are there, and have been, of course, for many years
at variance over territorial claims the territorial clain to
the sovereignty of West Now Guinea. Je are not a party
principal in that matter but we are deeply interested as a
neighbour interested in the peace of this part of the world and
our position has been repeatedly stated over rany years. 
J I do not want to weary the H-ouse unduly by repetition on this
matter but this policy this approach of ours has been
re-stated as recently as 12th January of this year by myself
after a full examination by the Government. In effect, we said
let me put it quite shortly that the dispute about West New
Guinea should be settled peacefully and not under threat or
duress; that we have been repeatedly assured by Indonesian
leaders that force would n. t be employed; that we have a right
to expect the honjuring of those assurances; and that, should
the Netherlands and Indonesia come to a free agreement a free
agreement we would respect that agreement; that we are
deeply attached to the attainment by under-developed peoples,
including those of West New Guinea, after adequate and helpful
preparation, of the right to choose their own future this is
the policy we are pursuing in Papua and the Australian Trust
Territory of new Guinea; that the policy that we apply in
Papua and New Guinea is based upon our great sense of mroral
responsibility for the welfare of the people to whom we stand
in a special relationship; that we are not a colonial power in
the old sense. We do not seek to exploit. Our aim is to create
and develop the capacity of independent self-government.
So far, Sir, it would be surprising to be told that the
Australian Labour Party disagrees with this. If we are to be
told that, let therm stand up before this debate ends and say it.
To take it further: Suppose and I take it no further
than to say " suppose" Indonesia made war on West New Guinea
and suppose the United Nations took no action, either because of
the veto in the Security Council or because the Assembly did not
have the requisite majority; and suppose it was not known
whether Great Britain and the United States would act
militarily against armed intervention by Indonesia. What should
Australia do? The answer was clear, I thought, in the statement
that I made on 12th January. I said three things and I just
sunmarize them. First, we will discharge our prime
responsibility for the security of Australia, its Territories
and its people; sec. ndly, in matters affecting West New Guinea
we will act in close consultation with the great free powers,
particularly Great Britain and the United States of America;
thirdly, we will constantly maintain in the United Nations and
with our particular friends, the basic principle that the
peaceful settlement of disputes is the central theme and the
supreme mission of the United Nations,
Does Labour quarrel with those riews? Does anybody on
the other side quarrel with those views?
No-, Sir, before Igo further I want to dispose of the
ludicrous and ignorant suggestion made by the " Sydney Morning
Herald" on 30th January and since theafaithfully repeated by
the Leader of the Opposition. It said
" The truth is
This is their idea of truth
" that no Australian initiative over New Guinea has ever
been pressed in the highest places of United States
Administration".
It is wonderful with what boldness people tal when they do not
know, because the facts are as they could have discovered by
the simplest of inquiries to confine myself to the last
twelve months and as honourable members know, this unhappy
business has gone on for years that scarcely a day has gone by
withoutcabled exchanges on those matters between the Department
of External Affairs in Canberra and the Australian Embassy in
Washington for discussion with the U,, S CG oev mrLet in Washington. 
6,
Our Ambassador has had prolonged and close and specific
discussions on those matters at least six times in the last
twelve months with the Secretary of SlCte, Mr. Dean Risk. The
present Minister for External Affairs ( Sir Garfield Barwick) has
had discussions with the American Charge d'Affaires in Canberra
and I, myself, not to put too fine a point upon it had long
discussions on this matter with Proeident Kennedy himself and
with Mr. Rusk, Yet we are told that our vies have not boon put
forward. So, Sir, I come back to the Labour attitude. I had a
press interview on 21st December, It was a-tor the groat day,
as the boys will remember. I had that inter vi ew on 21st
December, 1961, in which I re-stated our Weot New Guinea policy
along the lines that I have just summarized to the 1ous On
the following day this is ging back a li-title in time the
Leader of the Opposition and I were both taken to task by this
war-like Sydney journal. Having made the usual rather
dyslogistic references to myself I hc e they will not misspell
that word this journal went on to say
" Mr. Calwell is just as unhelpful"
Oh dear! " All he can suggest, after much preaching against sin,
is that the question be settled in the U. N. If the U. N.
sends a force to intervene, he says, Australia ' should
provide its complement'".
Then the paper goes on, after that rath.; r agreeably sensible
remark and says
" What if the United Nations does not send a force?
This is the crucial question. He ignores it. So does
Mr. Menzies",
You see. If that means anything and one must not unduly
attribute sense to some of those blurbs it means that if the
United Nations failed to send a force to which Australia
contributes Australia must provide the force by itself. If it
does not mean that it is sillier than usual,
On 1st January, 1962 coming up to modern times now
the " Sydney Morning Herald" came back to the matter. It said
" What is required from the Government at this critical
time is something more. In the interests of peace, and of
future relations between Australia and Indonsia, the
Indonesian Government should be left in no doubt that
Australia is not prepared to stand idly by if President
Sookarno carries out his threats.
Now, Sir, may I interrupt myself to remind the House if I do not
trespass too much on the occasion that this great journal, aided
by my friend opposite, had duvoted a great deal of time last
year to telling me I was too , nxious to be friends with Great
Britain and the United States and that I ought to be
cultivating the Asian nations. Do honourable members recall
that? I think they do. Now, of course, they attack me because
I do not want to go to war with Asia. This is a very odd
reversal of form because they know if they know anything
that every mainland Asian country supports the Indonesian claim.
They know that,
On 4th January, 1962, the Loador of the Opposition, in
order to pour oil on the troubled waters, made a violent
personal attack on Presidont Soekarno, with side references to
Hitler and this and that. This did not improve our relations
with that country. 
7.
Later came the great conversion. Saul on the road to
Damascus, if I may speak with all reverence, was not in it.
This was the great conversion. Disciplined by his newrspaper
backers, the Leader of the Opposition came out loud and clear.
On 10th February there was a groat front-page story in the
" Sydney Morning Herald", reproduced at s'ome more moder. atelength
in so. m other papers, headed
" Calwell Defines A. L. P. Policy on IKw Cluinea dispute"
I read the statement with great interest. I woke up. I said,
" Ha. This is it". I read it with surpise, W, ithout boasting,
I want to say that I have had the numbor of inn oriJ.. s t
calculated. There were 2,855 words in this -tat mient. ev-ery
one of which was in the journal. The newspaper report
commenced in this fashion on the front page.-
" In a dramatic statement today the Leader of the Federal
Opposition, Mr. Calwell, definod ' h ' I. abour Party's
attitude to the West New Guinea crisis, He said if
Indonesia seeks to deny the . rinciplos of the United
Nations Charter and to uso. fi ;. ce to create a potential
threat to Australia's secu-i i. y then I say with all due
regard to the gravity of the situation that the threat
must be faced".
What did that mean? It is a fair cuestion. I wanted to know
the answer. Therefore, naturally, I asked it in a public
statement. I said
" What does this mean?
" If it means that Australia should be ready and willing
to protect its own territories, ie, Australian New
Guinea and Papua, the answer is that I said so in plain
terms in my statement of Government policy on January
12th a statement which stands,
" If his statement moans that an Australian government
should convoy in relevant quarters its views against
aggression and in favour of self-determination the
answer is that the Governnmnt has done so on very many
occasionso...
" If Mr. Calwell's statement moans that without any
reg-rd to what might be the attitude or action of these
great powers, Australia should, in the event of armed
Indonesian aggression against Dutch New Guinea, declare
war against Indonesia, it is clearly crazy and
irresponsible".
Those were fair questins,, The answer to them, of course, is a
motion of no confidence in which the New Guinea issue does not
even receive a mention not a word. The " ship of wa' has sunk
with all hands. I should like to take the rest of my time in turning to
another aspect of this matter. I have dealt with what is not in
the motion, I want to say a few more words about what is in
the raotion, I said quite a bit about it earlier but I am now
coming back to it. I want to say something, quite briefly,
about the true nature of the Government's economic policy and
the reasons why changes of tactics are not to be taken as changs
of strategy. Our policies havo, over a long term of years,
produced notable results for Australia. Honourable members may
now feel themselves rather whipped up over this matter but may
I assure then that the people of Australia felt that they
wore notable results because, in 1951, 1951 1955 and 1958, they 
8,
said so emphatically. I admit freely and agreeably that when
they said so in 1961 they did it with what Gilbert would have
called " modified rapture". I give you that,
We have stood and we stand for national growth and
economic stability. Our opponents appear to believe that you
can have one or the other, but not both. This is a dangerous
fallacy. I hope it will be understood by the people as a
dangerous fallacy. It may very well be necessary, under
special circumstances, to accept calculated risks for the sake
of growth. We have just been dealing with some of those
circumstances. But, as a continuing permanent policy,
stability can never be abandoned. Stability, Sir does not mean
and can never be allowed to mean, stagnation, Ntional and
industrial growth require imports of people to which eloquent
references were made by the honourable member for Phillip
( Mr. Einfeld) and imports of producers' goods. To achieve such
imports and to grow and these are both of immense importance
we must export. To export either prima y products or
manufactured goods we must prevent our costs from rising. The
Australian Country Party and the Liberal Party are the only
parties in the Federal Parliament which have shown and will
continue to show an awareness of the central problem of high
production costs-,
Our principles apply to both sides of industry. There
is no mystery about this. The maintenance of primary exports is
essential to our international solvency, yet they cannot be
maintained if costs rise faster than prices. The development of
manufactures is essential for population growth. But
manufacturing efficiency must go up and costs be kept down if
manufacturing is not to be a burden upon the farmer and push his
costs up.. This, in the siZplest possible terms, is the analysis
that we make of these matters.
Now, Sir that is why the present stability of the
consumer price in ex is so valuable. It has been referred to
before and I need not repeat it, but it is significant and
remarkable. Our broad economic strategy is, thorefore this:
To keep upward pressures on population by migration hat is,
population growth; to develop the resources of Australia as
speedily as possible that is, resources 6rowth; to encourage
productivity and efficiency in primary and secondary industry;
and to do these things in such a way as to restrain inflation,
maintain our balance of trade and payments and employ our people
and physical resources to the full, ' Jithin this strategy our
tactics, of course, must be flexible. Our recent announcements
illustrate this approach. I can do no more than take a few
examples because, already I have been longer than I intando to be.
Our 1960-61 policies, let us agree, bit too deeply into
manufacturing and, therefore, into employrment. To correct this
without re-creating inflationary boom conditions a point of
the greatest possible importance means had to be devised which
were temporary or non-recurring. For examplo, the non-repayable
loans that we have made to the States over the last four months
of this financial year amounting to have been nonrepayable
and non-recurring. There they are, They achieve
their object and we are all happy. They exhaust themselves and
leave us to discuss the next year in a normal fashion. So the
means d; vised had to be, where feasible, temporary or nonrecurring.
They also had to be capable of quickly providing
employment such as, for example, semi-governm-nt and local
government borrowings. Nobody came before us in the course of
our discussions without saying that that was one of the quickest
ways of getting people to work. As y-, u know, a great deal was
done on this matter at the meoting of the Australian Loan
Council. 
9.
Then there we. a housing aid, particularly -where it could
be put to work quickly, as we . rere assured by the States could
and would be done. Then there were other means to be devised.
Take the third category those likely to encourage spending at
the consumer end, thus, of course, aiding both production and
confidence. An example of that is the income tax rebate for
1961-62. Honourable members will see how all these things are
related to a specific problem not an unlimited problem but a
specific and limited problem in order to get rid of some byproducts
without creating new problems.
Another category was calculated to aid the production
and efficiency of manufacturers and, therefore, their capacity
to employ people, without resorting to general import licensing,
which I would think few people would want to see come back with
all its arbitrary and bureaucratic characteristics. For that
reason, we put forward though the Leader of the Opposition
does not like it a specific proposal that a very highly
respected special consultant should, after inquiry and report,
recommend quota restrictions in special cases and not for an
unlimited period of time.
The other aspect of the same point is investment
allowances. I have said something about this aspect. Does
anybody in Australia with a sense of responsibility for the
future suppose that we could go on with a great immigration
programme, building up our population and manufacturing
industries, unless we could find our place with manufactured
goods in the markets of the world? How do you suppose we are
going to find our place in the markets of the world if our cost
level is non-competitive? How do you make the cost level
competitive? You do so by taking every conceivable opportunity
to facilitate the re-equipment of factories with the most
modern plant; and investment allowances are specifically and
powerfully designed for this purpose. On the other side of
industry that is too frequently forgotten by those who are not
interested in costs and I refer to the primary industries
we look for measures calculatod to aid rural development and
production. That is : rhy we have put forward in this categoiy
of provisions the express provision for increased capital for
the Development Bank.
Each of these propositions and examples comes
squarely within our economic strategy. There is no
contradiction and there is no abandonment. J'e all seek of
course, to learn from our experience unless we are fools, and
to make adjustments when and where they are needed, ie should
properly stand condemned if we stood flat-footed, not responsive
to new circumstances or losing sight of the great objective that
we keep constantly before us the full and effective use of all
our resources in a growing nation. 



OPENING R. S VIL: LAGER , CHELTENHAMi
: D MARCH 1. 62
S. eech by the Prime Minvster the nt. Hon R. Gr, Men i3.
Sir George, and ladies and gentlemen,
I think I ought to begin by telling you that my
appearance here today, and that of my :. ife, are the result of a
long negotiation. Most of last year we were trying to fi:-. d a date,
When we found one that suited George Holland it turned out it
didn't suit me5 and when we found one that suited me it turned out
that it didn't suit somebody else. Je got to a point, finally,
wrhere we both began to wonder whether, if the event came off at the
beginning of March 1962, I would be here in my official capacity
at all. ( Laughter3 But with his usual magnanimity Sir George took
a chance and I did too. Anyhow on a photo finish here we are
and very pleased I am to be able to be here,
Sir George's referring in generous terms to the Aged
Persons' Homes Act is a very interesting conjunction of the planets
I may tell you today, because this particular scheme originated in
one of those rather abrupt remarks that one's wife makes
occasionally at breakfast time. My wife put her finger on this
years ago and said, " This is the great problem and why don't you do
something about it, the problem of providing proper living
accommodation, not in barracks, or institutions, but in an
ordinary human way for people who are up in years?" I was stunned
by this, but my rmind, for once, was quite active, and cut came the
scheme as we now know, it, which of course, has since been
improved. I'm interested to tell you that in her favour because,
without any fall realisaticn of it, when the date for today's
function was fixed Iforgot, you see, that it's her birthday today.'
Now, Sir George, there are two or three reasons I won't
be long why I'm delightedo to be here and one of them, if I may
start off with yourself, is because you are presiding here today,
and have had a great deal to do with this achievement. You know,
contrary to the public impression ladies and gentlemen, it isn't
all beer and skittles being a Prime Minister. I know there are
plenty of applicants for the job at any given moment, but it's
really not all that fun, you see. I've been a Prime Minister,
now, as anybody can tell you, for too long, for about 12 years
and a bit, on my recent term. During the great bulk of that, for
the first 10 or 11 years of that, the Federal President of the
League was George Holland. That means in the course of events
that he and I, over a long period of time, have seen a lot of each
other. It's been a very, very happy association not because I
found it easy to say " No" to him, I occasionally said but
quite frequently, as he'll agree, he got away with a certain amount
of loot rightly or wrongly, and we've had a very, very happy
personal association. Now no Govrnment in Australia will be as effective in
its work as anybody would expect unless it has representing great
groups in the nation competent and responsible people. A Federal
Government charged with responsibilities for repatriation, i. ith
responsibilities in relation to a mass of things affecting exservicemen
and ex-service women, wiould find it difficult to
discharge these responsibilities on a merely departmental basis.
So much depends on the quality of the service organisations and the
responsibility or irresponsibility with which they put forward
their case. I went to say about the League that in my
protracted experience as a Primo Minister and as a Minister, I
know of no organisation which has so firmly and agreeably asserted
what it believes to be the rights of its members and has so
scrupulously refrained from being a mere pressure group. 
2.
This is a wonderful record. Of course, although I pay tribute to
many many scores and hundreds and thousands of people for it, I
would like to say that the people who are at the top themselves
can do much to make or mar the relations between the League and
the Government. That is my second reason for being delighted to
be here. The third reason is that I am really delighted, time
after time, with what is being done in this field not in
creating gloomy institutions, not in giving people an idea that
they are put away into a corner and as long as they can eat they
are all right. The whole basis of this Village, the whole basis
of so many of these Homes that have been referred to is that they
reconcile a sort of community life of an agreeable kind extremely
agreeable here with the Bowling Green, with individual life, with
a capacity for being private, with a capacity for being at home
and visiting your friends, and being visited by your friends,
but never just a number in an institution: hiuman beings with
every right in the world as all of us hope to have a home of their
own as they go along past the active working years of their lives.
This has created something that is completely new.
I remember never tired of saying this I remember
when I was a boy in Ballarat I lived with an old Scots grandmother
in a little cottage opposite the Benevolent Asylum which we
youngsters knew, irreverently, as " tae Benev". From the Benevolent
Asylum there came out a trickle of old men, diefly, with corduroy
trousers on, looking a little bit dejected, the whole thing rather
sad., rather pitiful, because in those days people didn't
understand that you don't cease to be a human being when you reach
a certain number of years of life, On the contrary, you become
more and more a human being, and you have your own requirements and
interests, and you want tu live your orwn life.
What has been going on in Australia I shall always be
proud of having had anything to do with and I have had a
little to do with it, I'll never cease to be proud of the fact
that w-. e have taken all of that atmosphere a! ray and we have now got
to a point : 0rhero, as this village demonstrates, fellow citizens,
ourselves, those who are here, meet on normal human terms, and are
able to live happily and enjoy the company of each other and the
company of their friends, not fooling that they are a drug on the
market, but feeling proudly independent individuals, It's very
interesting to me. I've been to a few such places well, fairly
recentlyo At the last one I looked at I met a man Id known many
years before in Mildura. I didn't know that he was living in this
particular place, He was always a cheerful chao, and he was still
a cheerful chap: life and soul of the party, all his friends,
comfortable home, comfortable circumstances. This to me was such
a tremendous improvement on the old idea in which a man could grow
old and unfortunate and just sort of disappear from sight,
So we have 6ot rid of all the elements of condescension
and of charity. We've substituted for these a feeling of goodwill
and of individual responsibility, and of friendship, and of
perpetuating a home atmosphere, and a home life. No Govcrnment
can create those things it can help to bring them about, But
they can be created in physical, terms only by -the enthusiastic
people of the kind who thought of this Village and who hLave
brought it to construction and to completion. I am greatly
indebted to them, as you are. I hope that for i: any, many
generationia to come this will be a centre of a happy life for, in
the long run, hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of men and women.
Sir I have a very great sense of privilege in
declaring the Village open. 



Weekly Index No, 9
Week Ending March 3, 1962,
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon,
Feb. 28 28 John Mcewen.
No. 207 TRADE MISSION TO SOUTH AMERICA
No. 208 GOVERNMENT TAKES ACTION TO ASSIST TOBACCO
INDUSTRY
The Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
Feb. 27 No. 199 COMMONWEALTH CASH AND CONVERSION LOAN
The Minister for
Feb. 28 28 National Development. Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.
No. 209 NUCLEAR REACTOR EXPERT TO VISIT AUSTRALIA
No. 211 REPORT ON MOONIE NO. 2 OIL WELL
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley, M. P.
Feb. 27
27 No. 196
No. 197 AUSTRALIAN/ NEW ZEALAND DEFENCE PLAJ'NNING TALKS
FURTHER UPPER AIR SAMPLING IN AUSTRALIA BY
UNITED STATES AIRCRAFT.
The Minister for Labour and National Service, The Hon. William
Feb. 28 McMahon
No. 212 LESS TIME LOST IN INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES L961
The Postmaster-General's Department, The Hon. C. W. Davidson
Feb. 28 No. 212A CONCESSION RATES TO H. M. A. SHIPS MELBOURNE,
QUEENBOROUGH AND VOYAGER IN S. E. ASIAN WATERS.
The Minister for Immigration, The Hen. A. R. Downer, M. P.
Feb. 25 No. 184 IMMIGRATION SUNDAY
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
Feb. 27 No. 195 ANZUS COUNCIL TO MEET IN AUSTRALIA
March 3 No. 218A UNITED STATES DECISION TO RESUME NUCLEAR TESTS.
1 No. 216 AIIM ERICAN THANKS FOR SPACE FLIGHT CO-OPERATION.
The Minister ror Primary industry, tbe Hon. C. F. Adermann
Feb. 25 No. 187 NEED TO DOUBLE NUMBER OF VETERINARIANS TO
PROTECT LIVESTOCK HEALTH.
25 No, 188 CO-OPERATION TO IMPROVE DRIED VINE FRUIT PACK.
25 No. 189 XIITH WORLD'S POULTRY CONGRESS TO HAVE SPECIAL
POSTMARK.
28 No. 206 GIRL SCHOLARSHIP WINNERS PLAN TO BE VETERINARIANS
Merch 1 No. 21$ A NEW DAIRY STABILISATION PLAN PROPOSALS
The Minister for the Army, the Hon. J. O. Cramer
Feb. 26 No. 192 MILITARY SCIENCE NEW SUBJECT FOR OFFICER
TRAINING.
25 No. 205 NEW COMMANDING OFFICER FOR PACIFIC ISLANDS
REGIMENT.
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gortono
Feb. It
Mar. I No 186
No. 191
No. 202
No. 213
No. 218 NAVY SHIP BEGINS INTERNATIONAL SURVEY
R. A. N. OFFICERS FOR COMMONWEALTH EXERCISE
FLEET SHIPS SAIL FOR SINGAPORE
SEVEN NEW SHIPS FOR THE R. A. N.
THREE U. S. ANTARCTIC SHIPS VISIT AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert Opperman
Feb. 28
March 1 No. 204
No214 AUSTRALIAN FOR UNITED NLTIONS POSITION
LIGHTHOU1ES TO BE ELECTRICALLY POWERED
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie Wv Wade
No. 201 SIREX , WASP CAMPAIGN / 2
Feb. 27 
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
Feb. 27. No. 196A TASMANIAN FIRM'S œ 16,213 CONTRACT FOR
R. A. A. F. BOOTS.
28 No. 203 DEFENCE SCIENTIST'S DEATH " A SERIOUS LOSS
TO ;, USTRALIA.'
28 No. 210 AUSTRALIA'S TRACKING OF ASTRONAUT JOHN
GLENN WA. S BEST
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
Feb. 25 No. 185, NEW MARITIME RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT FOR
R. A. A. F,
26 No. 193 RAPF TRIALS OF SURVIVAL GEAR
26 No. 194 RAi~ F TO FORM HELICOPTER SQUADRON
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz
Feb. 25 No. 190 BRISBANE OFFICE NOW PERMANENTLY OPEN
ME. rch 1 No. 217 REPATRIATION PAYMENTS OVERSEAS
The Department of External Affairs.
Feb. 27 No. 200 CLEAR WEATHER FOR OATES LANTD EXPLORATION
The Department of the Navy
Feb. 26 No. 194A NEW R. A. N. CHIEF TAKES OVER
27 No. 3.98 R. A. N. DEMONSTRATES AUSSIE RULES IN
COLOMBO.
The Department of Primary Industry
March 1 No. 215 EXPORT SUGAR REBATE
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
1ANBERRAg, A. C. T. 



Weekly Index No
Week Ending 10th March, 19b2
COMMON EALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The RG. Hon. John
McEwen
March 4. No. 220A STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON HIS DEPARTURE
FOR NORTH AMERICA
8 No. 239 NORTH AMERICAN WOOL TEXTILE MISSION
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
March 9 No. 249 MINISTER'S VISIT TO SNOWY SCHE EOneM. M.
11 No. 251 SAVING OF œ 9 MILLIONS IN EXPENDITURE ON
SNOWY MOUNTAINS SCHEa2ME
The Minister for Labour and National Service, The Hon. William
McMahon.
March 6 No, 225 PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVING THE APPRENTICESHIP
SYSTEM
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
March 8No. 243 ASSESSORS APPOINTED FOR VISCOUNT CRASH
INQUIRY
The Postmaster-General, The Hon. C. W. Davidson.
March 8 No. 237 EXTENSION OF TELEVISION SERVICES IN CAPITAL
CITIES
7 Noo238A QUANTITIES ISSUED OF RECENT COMMEMORATIVE
STAMPS
8 No, 240 INCREASED EMPLOYMENT IN THE POSTMASTERGENERAL'
S DEPARTMENT.
9 No. 248 COAXIAL CABLE SYDNEYV/ ELBOURNE
The Minister for External Affairs, The Hon. Sir Garfield Barvick
March 9 No. 246 AUSTRALIAN GRANTS TO TANGANYIKA, KENYA AND
SOMALIA
The Minister for Army, the Hon. J. O. Cramer
March 8 No. 24L LETHAL LAMP RECOVERED BY ARMY
7 No. 230 THAI ARMY OFFICER TO TRAIN IN AUSTRALIA
The Minister for the Interior and Works, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
March 5 No. 222 CONTRACT LET FOR DEFENCE PROJECT
8 No. 242 SATURDAY BANK CLOSING
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hone J. G. Gorton
March 4 No. 220 " TIDE AUSTRAL" CAPTAIN APPOINTED
5 No. 221 RESERVES PREPARE TO MAN MINESWEEPERS
7 No. 231. SYDNEY RECOMMISSIONS AS TROOP CARRIER
7 No. 234 R. A. N. VISITS CHRISTMAS ISLAND
8 No. 241 FIVE R. A. N, SHIPS IN SOUTH EAST ASIA
9 No, 247 VISIT FROM NEW ZEALAND'S NEWEST WARSHIP
The Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert Opperman
March 7Noo227 AUS. MOTOR VEHICLE STANDARDS COMMITTEE
TO BE HELD IN SYDNEY MARCH 27 and
The Minister forSuoply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
No. 229 AUSTRALIAN DEVICE USED IN SKYILRK ROCKET
EXPERIMENT
The Minister forAir. The Hon. Leslie Bury
No. 219 FRENCH LANGUAGE TRAINING FOR RAAF FIGHTER
SPECIALISTS
Noo228 PRLAF TO DEFEND MALAYA BASE IN MOCK ATTACK
No. 250 CONTROLLER NAMED FOR RAAlF E. D. P. CENTRE / 2
March 7
March 4 7 9 Y 
' D ' a The Minister for Repatriattion The Hon, R. W. Sartz
March 6
It 7
i' 7
I' 7
I? 7 No. 226
No, 232
No. 235
No. 236
No. 238
The De~ rtment of B;. BY HA-SS PROGRESSED 1 ELL
ADELI-Ii) E GIRL GETS CADETSiIIP
M. L. 1A2s DAUGHTER FOR SOCIAL WORK
DRUGS H;' VE IiD BIG EFFECT
C? EALTH WILL HELP PERTH GAMES
External Affairs
March 7No. 235 RETURN OF THE " THYI. d DAN" FROM ANT1RCTICA
The Department of the Treasury
March 5No, 223 CONSOLIDA. TED REVENUE FUND AT FEB. 28. 1962.
TheDepartment ofthe '-rmy.
March 8No. 245 MUSIC DIPLOMS IN ARMJuIY
With the Compliments of
The Goverment Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANdiBETR 9j,. C. T.
The De-oartment of 



EXHIB'TION OF AUSTRALIAN iRT
ADELAIDE ART GALLEJ D L. l " I ACH 12
SPEECH BY THE P. RME IN Sp THE R N. . G MENZIE,
Sir Lloyd, ladies and gentlemen:
I must say at once that Sir Lloyd( Dumas) does me far too
much honour, but I certainly plead guilty to the charge that I had
a little to do with the origins of this collection. But before I
tell you about that I would like to say that I think I am right
am I not? in telling you that this is the first ixhibition to be
put on in this new wing. This is a new and wonderful wing in a
Gallery which has always been a distinguished gallery.
I know that many of you when you look at politicians
like me, and recall some of the things you've said ( Laughter) or
that you've heard, and repeated ( Laughter) seldom give us any
credit for having any of the more civilised characteristics. But
I want to tell you that for years, whenever I came to Adelaide, I
used to walk along the terrace, come in, sit down opposite John
Longstaff's portrait of his wife the greatest portrait I venture
to say that he ever painted remain there for a quarter of an
hour and go out again if not wisor, better, and if not better,
wiser than when I 7. en in.
This Gallery has formed a real part of the life of
Adelaide, intimately placed as it is here, with the city,
presided over, as it is, by people of distinction in this State.
Putting size on one side, I think this Gallery has a special
quality and a special position in the life of this State.
Of course, on this occasion, thoro is another reason why
it is appropriate that this collection should be here. No man has
had more to do with getting it together, arranging it, than Mr.
Robert Campbell the distinguished director of this Gallery,
( Applause) And getting this collection together, I want to warn
you, has been almost as difficult as winning an election;
( Laughter) and much more difficult than picking a Senate team,
( Laughter) From the very beginning it was designed to be
arranged historically beginning with some of the fine artists,
the fine wolkers of the very early colonial history of the
country, one or two of whom had fallen foul of the law, but
continued to have their own qualities, running right up to the
present time when you get into that period of semi-abstract
painting which, I confess, as a miserablo philistine, I have never
yet understood. ( Laughter) So the xhibition had to run on a
line, a theme the historic development of Australian painting.
Therefore as you go around you will see many pictures with which
you are familiar; you will miss others' tht you might have
expected to seo. It is one of my minor griovances tahat the
modesty of Sir William Ashton, who is one of the selectors of this
collection, has prohibited him from having one of his own
distinguished landscapes. But still that is very charactoristic
of him. The matter began in this fashion. I had some taks,
initiated by Sir Colin Andurson, the well-known shipping man, who
is the Chairman of the Tate Gallery in London, Now Colin is a
great exponent of the very very modern; and I, as everybody knows,
am a reactionary and a traditionalist. fnd so we very happily
met we're old friends. But we were able to meet at opposite
polls and gradually make an accommodation in the middle somewhere.
He took this matter up; he thought that it would be a splendid
thing to have at the Tate a really first-class collection of
Australian work. He was prepared to concode to me my oldfashioned
ideas in favour of impressionism; and I was able to
concede to him his rather boyish outlook, as I thought, on other
things. 
I took it up with our own Art Advisory Board which, a
little known body though it may be, has done splendid work for art
and artists in Australia, That Board is presided over, of course,
by '! ill Ashton and it contains other people of whom you know, like
Mr. Dargie and Sir Daryl Lindsay, Mr. Pratt, Robert Campbell and,
now IPm happy to say, the newly appointed member, a very very
famous artist of a more recent vintage, Mr. Russell Drysdale,
( Applause) That Board got to work. It laid its predatory hands
on the collections of the Galleries; and if you've had anything
to do w. ith Gallery Trustees, or Gallery Directors, you will know
that to get anything out of them is as hard as getting avery
very difficult cork out of a difficult bottle. ( Laughter) But ; we
wore rather aided on this occasion, of course, by the fact that
Robert Campbell, himself, was a Director and accustomed to holding
trustees in the palm of his hand; while Daryl Lindsay has been a
Director and is equally skilled in this technique. Behind it all
there was the frowning look of the Prime Ministor who, at that
time, had a majority of 32. ( Laughter)
,. ell I want to say that we are deeply indebted to the
Galleries for having made this collection possible. You won't
have a chance this morning of seeing it as you would like to but
even at a quick glance coming through it's plain to me that this
is a most exciting collection of work and that it will make a
tremendous impact upon viewers of all sorts of schools of thought
. ihen it is put on at the Tate in London, And so it is a happy
event. But in addition to rifling the Gt'lleries it was decided,
quite early, after a little discussion, that private owners ought
to be put under duress in order to produce some of their treasures.,
I must say that although there was a divided opinion on this
matter I, being accustomed to plundering people, was all in favour
of plundering private owners. Therefore I want to say that we are
very, very indebted to the owners of some of the pictures in this
collection who have generously made them available. In that
tribute of thanks, of course, I include myself. ( Laughter) I see
one of mine not far away from me. One of mine, I say, in terms of
ownership not in terms of croation.
Now the only other thing that I want to say to you
ladies and gentlemen, is that it has really been a colossally
difficult task to make a choice, because to select is to reject;
to offer a prfeorence to one painting of a great painter over
another is pOrihaps to engage yourself in controversy about
artistic judgment. Long ago in my sketchy studios of the Latin
tongue I learned, and learned thor-) ughly that " do gustibus non est
disputandun" so I'll provoke no arguments on these matters. All
I know is that anybody in London of the hundreds of thousands who
undoubtedly will come to see these pictures, anybody, looking at
them, w'ill look beyond them to the fact that these are not
definitive, they are a selection: they illustrate the kind of
work that has been dcJne, and that exists. So to the perceptive
eye behind every one of these masterly paintings will be a dozen
oth. ers, a hundred oth. ers. They will regard-this as givin, then a
sort of appetiser for a wider knowledge of the work that has gone
on in Australia. And I venture to say without any classification
at all as between one school of th-ught and another, that what ha
been done in depictive art in Australia in our time, in the last
years, in the time of this nation will si. ancd comp: -is,. n wit'
what has been done in any . th; her country in the world, 
People don't always realise that it takes a considerable
force of genius to establish some new technique, or now approach
in the world of art. I noticed in the programme that I was given
that Louis Buvelot was classified as an impressionist. I have
always thought of him as just a little bit before that time. But
his paintings had this lovely, mollow, quiet charm that we all
know. But when the other boys as I'll call them for this
purpose like Roberts, that groat master, not as yet fully
recognised, and Streeton and the others, came back full of the
ideas of the impressionists people were, within a few years being
made to understand that the great diaracteristic of the Australian
scone, the Australian landscape, is not darkness, or solidity, or
mass, but light, and the play of light, on whatever it falls.
This revolutionised the painting that was going on in Australia.
It is now of course permissible for people to say, "' Iell that's
rather old-fashioned". But it never will be old-fashioned. Ideas
will change, of course, but not to such a degree that these
magnificent contributors to a new vision of Australia will over be
regarded as so much folly. Of course not. They stand in their
historic period. That is the beauty of this dxhibition: it puts
everything into its historic period. So that yju may linger over
the ones that you like best, or you may, with the eye of history,
pass right around and see how something has developed in a new
and, in some ways, harsh and hard country, and what beauty has
been achieved in the process.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have a singular feeling of
privilege in declaring this Exhibition open. ( Applause) 



p NUCLEAR RE7SEARCH FOUNDATION DINNER
Seech b the Prime nister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. Chairman, Chancellor, Mr, Renshaw and gentlemen:
This is really an anti-climax. Here am I a simple soul,
dealing with the better part of œ 2,000m. a year and every time the
expenditure of the Government goes up our Lordships of the Press
say how disgraceful it is; and every time the Revenue goes up
they say how wicked this is; and I've been listening now to
Professor Messel who positively secures merit, not only in your
mind, but in the mind of one of the masters of the Press, by
being able to say that he has increased the expenditure 20 times.
( Laughter) Parkinson's Law becomes respectable tonight!
( Laughter) Even the Vice-Chancellor, my old friend, Stephen
Roberts, I thought played his cards very badly: he explained
that he was going to blackmail somebody, but he at once disclosed
the means by which ha was going to blackmail him which, if I may
say so to him, was a mistake. A competent blackmailer never puts
all the cards on the table. ( Laughter)
And here is Messel being positively applauded by you for
spending more money than he has. ( Laughter) And when he wants
you to make up the deficiency, does he do what poor wretched
creatures like Governments have to do, anrid say, " Well we must
raise your taxes a little"? Not at all. He just says to you,
" Now, make it a pleasure, make it a privilege, give mo another
œ 150,000 and I'll settle for it". All I can say is that when I
go back to Canberra on Monday I'm not only going to send for the
Treasurer, but I'm going to send for the Commissioner of
Taxation. ( Laughter) And I'm going to say, " We've missed
something." ( Laughter) " When the assessments go out, add a
little note in red ink, ' If you feel moved to give us another
000 don't hesitate"'. ( Laughter) And, of course, I don't
want to be too cynical but I don't think the re. sponse would be
all that magnificent. Still this is a very interesting experience for me,
because I have a simple job a sort of anti-climactic job. I
just propose the health of he University of Sydney. I think it
is a remarkable University because although I have a Degree from
my own University which I won't mention down there somewhere
for which I had to work and sweat, I have been given a Degree in
the University of Sydney unearned, and, so far as I remember,
unpaid for. ( Laughter) Therefore, as a graduate of the Sydney
University, causa honoris, it is my task to propose the toast of
the University which has attracted to its numnbers the greatest
collector of revenue, voluntary revenue, in the history of
Australia. ( Applause)
This, of course, all puzzles me very much, very much
indeed. I wouldn't wrant to talk about politics because a! you
know I'm now in a state of almost ineffable bliss at Canberra,
( Laughter) but this throws a new light on Sydney where up to now
I have always been in the habit of being told by my " friends"
that there is much to be said for me but the taxes ought to be
lower. And hero you are, you come along at vast expense to
yourselves and you listen to a man putting the hard word on you;
and all the evidence is that he has put the hard word not only on
you but on people all round the world and that you pay and like
it. Now I'm going back to Canberra to say to my Victorian
colleagues " Don't be faint-hearted. Make it a pleasure, and
they'll pay". Do you understand that? I think that's something. 
2.
However, my job tonight is not to marvel at what has
been done, but to say something about the University of Sydney,
the oldest University in Australia. This University, the first
in Australia, has seen its children, its nephews, its
derivatives in one wy or another, this or that side of the
blanket, spreading all round Australia. And I happen to be here
not simply because I an Prime Minister because that, as you
have reminded me of late, is a somewhat precarious post.
( Laughter) I am here as one who, if he's given time to look back
on his life whether that's a good thing or a bad thing I
wouldn't quite know they say that when a man is drowning the
whole of his past life comes before him there's no first hand
evidence of this ( Laughter) nor have I ever thought it a very
happy way to die-I don't want the whole of my past life to come
before me ( Laughter) as one who would like to think, when I am
ultimately relieved, with somewhat bogus expressions of
gratitude, of the tasks that I now pursue, that I could look back
and say " What is the thing in your public life that has given
you the most pleasure?" And my ansiwer would be clear and
unambiguous. I would like to remember that it has been my
singular fortune to be somebody who, with the complete backing of
his Government has done something to begin a new era for the
Universities of Australia. ( Applause)
This is one of those things that satisfies the mind and
will, I hope, satisfy the memory. If one speaks in that way, if
one thinks in that way, then it is, of course completely clear
that as one looks over the University field, the whole field, now
so rapidly expanding, now reaching out to cover hundreds of
thousands where it once covered thousands, one must always come
back to the University of Sydney, the first University.
This is a tremendous privilege for people to belong to
the first University, well over 100 years old. You look back on
the people who started it; you look back on the state of
Australia when they started it; you look back on the way in
which their friends no doubt said to them, " But how crazy can you
be? You want to start a University? le're a more colony. ; Je're
a handful of people". But they started it. They laid its
foundations. And if they could now come up from the tomb and
look at what has happened in the field of Universities in
Australia they would know that they built better than they knew;
they would feel a great pride in what has happened in their
country, then a new country, in some . ays a crude country, but a
country in which they were determined to sow seeds that would
grow and flourish and ultimately do something for a vast section
of the people of a future great nation. This I think, is a
tremendous privilege for the University of Sydney.
Of course there are other Universities. I have made a
modest and glancing reference to the University of Melbourne.
There are, I'm credibly informed by the Chairman of the
Universities Co:-ission, Universities in other places which have
their demands, which have their ambitions, which have their
function to perform. are now living in a period of time in
which we not only talk about what we can do for the old
Universities, but about what we can do to create new ones, about
what we can do to establish a varied, and perhaps complex system
of tertiary education in Australia which will all serve to make
this country the great country that we know, in our hearts, it
is and is bound to be.
But tonight rI' going back to the origin. There is an
old Latin r:. axim which, for the bonefit of those educated at the
Sydney Grammar School I will translate into English ( Laughter):
" It is bettor to seek the fountainhoads than to divide up the
little streams". It is a good thing that we should go back to
the fountainheads. 
.6 14.
But it was merely a graphic way of putting this: that
that was a tine, oven in my y-' ung manhood when the University was
something apart, a hone of privilege, dealing with matters not to
be understood by ordinary people; and that the rest of the world
might go on ignoring it with groat satisfaction, and, indeed, with
some advantage. Today, thanks to the fact that the Universities
have injected themselves into the public life of the country, into
the social life of the country, and thanks to the fact that scores
and hundreds, and perhaps for all I know, thousands of practical
men of affairs have made it their business to see what goes on in
a University, to help it, and to influence it, that old, false
dichotomy has disappeared. We no longer say, " Ah, yes,
University men and ordinary decent blokes different compartments.'
No. All that has gone, and it is a good thing that it has gone.
The fact that it has gone is not, if you will allow me to
say so, due to the unassisted genius of the business man; it is,
to a very formidable extent due to the new and practical and
enthusiastic approach of the people who are in, and of, the
Universities themselves.
This, I think, is a great period to live in. I would
like to live, and I won't for enough years to see some of the
fruits of this. But I believe that if one could, by a mere wave
of the hand, or ovei by an Order in Council, arrange that one
should live for another 40 years not in office, don't you worry
( Laughter) and just retain enough wit and enough memory and
enough historic imagination to appreciate the picture, one would
find in tnis wonderful country of ours by the turn of the century
a community which, because the Univursities and the public had
been married and had had issue, was making a contribution to life
and to living, a splendid example in the world, rivalling, in the
eyes of the classicist, tae contribution that was made by ancient
Greece. All this takes r. e back to . rhere I began because there is
a sort of " folie circulaire" about politicians for you nay not
have noticed we end where we began. If I may and where I began
I would like to say that this brings me back to the University of
Sydney, the father University of Australia, to use the modern
jargon, " the father imagoe" of the Universities of Australia. And
it is one of my pleasant satisfactions that when I have sat down,
as I'm about to in a minute and a half, you will hear in reply
to this toast a man who is the Chancellor, this great man,
Charles Bickerton Blackburn,( Applause) a man who, if I may say so,
is the greatest of Chancellors, the Chancellor of the oldest
University in Australia, and himself, technically, but only
technically, the oldest Chancellor in Australia. So when you
drink the health of the University have in mind this venerable
person who is at the s: ime time the youngest Chancellor in
Australia and, I sometimes think, the youngest man here.
( Applause) 



ATOMIC E!, TfRGY ESTABLISI-EiLNT, LUCAS HEIGHo
QRD MARH, 1 962
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Professor Baxter, and colleagues, and ladies and gentlemen:
Those of you who have suffered under me before in the
opening of something will knor that I have now developed the
almost perfect technique: I open the building, or the buildings,
first, and then talk afterwards, on the sound principle that if I
talk first I may well forget to open the building at the fihish.
Today I am opening two buildings. This building, the
Reactor Physics Building and the Radiation, Biology, Healthy
Physics Building a complex of names which, of course, are selfexplanatory
to laymen like me and perhaps to some of you.
Behind me is a low power reactor called " Moata". All I
know about this name is that it is an aboriginal name, stolen
from the indigenous inhabitants of' the country, which originally
meant " fire sticks". I am bound to say that if any of our
forefathers of the aboriginal races had been told fire sticks of
this kind would some day be put on the ancient hunting ground
there would have been tremendous incredulity and, perhaps, some
form of trouble. But here we are.
As we drove in here today I remembered, because I had
been told, that in 1955 this vas just scrub and sandstone
outcrops. What has been done in the course of something under 7
years is, I think, remarkable; and my colleagues of the Treasury
think that it is even more remarkable because its capital cost has
been œ llm. Its operating expenses I hesitate to refer to because
we haven't yet reached the Budget and the preparation of the
estimates. But I have gathered that it is fairly substantial.
And really what I am doing this afternoon is not only to occupy
your time for a few minutes, but to put in a bit of a plug with
the Treasury you will understand, ther. ifore, if I appear to be
a little expansive on the subject of Lucas Heights.
This place, taking it as a whole, one element of which,
the principal Hifar Reactor, I opened Ithink in 1958 and another,
the Engineering Building in 1960, and this one in 192, this
remarkable enterprise is, I believe, essentially a gathering
together not only of bricks and mortar, but of very high class
scientific manpower. And when I say manpower, of course, I rely
on the Acts Interpretation Act tuhich says that man includes woman,
the ridiculous proposition which only the Parliamentary draftsmen
could seriously believe.
Now, Sir, a great research establishrant like this has
very many aspects. First of all, research is being conducted here
into a variety of aspects of reactor systems avoiding duplication
I emphasise that and thus, by avoiding duplication, but by
doing first-class rork, adding to the sum total of scientific
knowledge in the wvorld. I said I emphasised avoiding
duplication because I know tat there are many people I hope a
diminishing number who look at an enterprise of this kind and
who say, " Well, what arc they doing here that can't be better done
elsewhere? Is this just a matter of prestige?" And the answer to
that is that it is not, in any rctal sense, a mere matter of
prestige. Iork is being done here which is not being done in
other places; and the people who are engaged here in this . Tork
involving such skill and knowledge that it is beyond the
comprehension of most of us, including mo, are adding to the total
sun of scientific knoeledge in this field in the world. Now I've
said that, and I've repeated it_, and I emphasise it, because,
after all, the people of Australia are the people who provide the
means for doing these things, and tne people of Australia are
ontitled to know that -, hat is being done Is of genuine and
cumulative significance. 
In the second place what is being done here involves the
training of Australian scientists and of course we haven't an
unlimited supply of scientists in Australia. I don't suppose any
country has an unlimited supply of scientists. But as the world
goes on pell mell, particularly in the last decade, or the last
years, it becomes increasingly important that we in Australia,
possessing great native talent in these fields should produce the
highest possible quality of scientific manpower, and do it to the
highest possible level, and do it to as great a numerical extent
as we can. This is one of the great tests of national progress,
and of the advance of world knowledge.
Now by training scientists here we do two things. I say
this to the lay people, if any, who are here today. First of all
it assists our own capacity to contribute to world knowledge. I
have mentioned that. I repeat it. It assists our capacity to
make a contribution which is significant and which will be, in
many ways, original. And in the second place, not being entirely
unselfish on this matter, it assists our capacity to take full
advantage of work done elsewhere in the world. Because what is
going on in other countries may mean very little to the
uninstructed; but it will mean a very great deal to people of
high scientific attainments in this field right here in
Australia. Therefore we have this both ways. We contribute and we
gain. And in order to contribute, and in order to gain, we must
set our marks high and achieve the highest possible standard of
efficiency, of understanding, of research, of application.
Then, Sir, of course, there is another aspect of this
matter. We want to attain in Australia standards of scientific
skill which will do two other things. First, to facilitate
exchanges with similar bodies overseas. This is an old problem
as to whether people should go from Australia to other countries,
as to whether people from other countries should come here.
There are people, I'm sure, still living who believe that
whatever we do we ought to huddle our garments about us, and keep
it to ourselves and show how clever we are. But of course there
can be no major advances in this field unless our people, trained
and working here are able to go to other countries with
intelligent and educated minds in this field, able to find the
best that is going on; and unless we can at the same time attract
to this place men of great consequence in these fields from other
countries. It is the fluidity of scientific knowledge in the
world which is at the very heart of developing the sum total of
scientific knowledge in the world.
Then, of course, I must say to those among you, if there
are such, who have what people are pleased to call hard,
practical minds, that every now and then there is what I would
call in an entirely unscientific way, a by-product of the work
that is being done here. Research, yes, above all; but, in the
course of this research I was just discussing it at lunch time
discoveries are made of immense utility, such as the discovery of
new techniques for welding stainless steel. I won't go into that
story but it is fascinating to me to discover that in the very
course of experimental work here problems crop up by the way in
the use of materials which require a solution. The solution
being found turns out to be of general application in many other
fields of industry.
I hesitate to commit ryself to the proposition that a
radio-active isotope is a by-product I don't suppose it is.
But I do know, as you know, increasingly, that the production of
radio-active isotopes here has opened up a new field in Australia
for agricultural research, for medical research. 
3.
Indeed it isn't long ago, before the election I assure you, that
I went to Newcastle and at that time I was received with every
outward sign of friendliness for all I know it still continues,
though a little muted, perhaps, by events and I was told there
and then by people actively concerned with the development of
Newcastle that the use of radio isotopes from here in the
investigation of the movements of silt in the lower reaches
particularly, of the Hunter River had turned out to be of enormous
practical advantage.
On top of that, let me once more say to those who think
we may be duplicating work, that I am credibly informed by the
technical members of the Commission and to them I make my bow
that there are types of radioactive isotopes which don't carry,
which have an early period of radioactive decay and therefore
can't usefully be imported. But if they are produced here then
they have a longer period of life, they have an immediate
application to the job in hand.
One matter that has been mentioned to me is that Cobalt
as I will, in my ignorance, call it, is being used at a great
city hospital in Sydney in the treatment of cancer. Now all these
things are not the main end result, but they are fascinating
incidental results in a great piece of research of this kind.
The only other thing that perhaps I ought to say to you
is this. There are many people, indeed there must be many
hundreds of millions of people in the world who, if you say
nuclear power think at once of nuclear weapons, of the great,
pressing, anguishing problems of nuclear military power in the
world and are therefore a little bit inclined to say about the
nuclear physicists " A curse on you. You have brought nothing to
the world except the threat of imminent disaster". That is
because, of course, what is best advertised tends to be more
popularly understood. Here today we have a magnificent
opportunity of being reminded that the work being done in this
field is not primarily work designed to destroy people, but is
work designed to uncover a new source of advantage for the human
race. We are all familiar with the phrase that was, I think,
used by President Eisenhower about " atoms for peace". But you
look at our own country. It is quite true that there are many
parts of Australia where vast supplies of coal make the problem of
power production technically simple, though it nay be,
occasionally, financially difficult; there are great enterprises
of hydro-electric power both on the mainland and in Tasmania.
But there will come a time as the population of this country
increases, as new resources are uncovered in remote parts of this
country, when nuclear power will become as much the servant of
peaceful enterprise as thermal power or hydro-electric power.
Indeed I am told by those who understand these matters that it may
well be that in parts of Australia remote from coal, or water, in
an appropriate position, nuclear power may become quite
competitive by the early years of the next decade, by the early
1970' s. It doesn't end there. The other day I was reading a book
which the President of the United States was good enough to send
to me containing a series of stateLionts made by him during the
first 12 months of his office. I was veiy interested to find that
one of them related to what had to be done, and no d-; ubt very
largely by the use of nuclear power, in experimental work on
taking the salt out of water. Think of what this could mean to
Australia; think of what this could mean to a continent whose
greatest problem is water, having regarc to its area and to the
distribution of its population. 
The other day my friend Dr. Raggatt, under the guise of
proposing a vote of thanks to somebody, made the principal speech
of the evening. I am familiar with this technique it happens to
me regularly at almost every political meeting I have. But he
did draw public attention to a matter with which some of you have
been familiar, or at least interested, for a long time, or for
some years now, the great problem of creating water storages, not
by the painful and expensive processes of earth m-ving as we've
known them in the past, but by the definitive use of nuclear
explosions in order to create a suitable crater and a suitable
holding means. Well, no doubt this is in its early days and
there will be many blind walls of ignorance to get through before
it is ultimately achieved. But I mention it to you merely to
indicate that we are only at the beginning of the peaceful
developmental application of a means which today is too commonly
regarded as merely an instrument of destruction.
The day will come when we will have nuclear powered
ships sailing into our harbours; the day may come, though
Heaven forfend, when we will need to be infinitely better
informed than we are now about protecting people against fall-out.
And one of the buildings that I am opening today has, as its
special function, or one of its special functions, to study this
matter. Then, of course, on top of all that, in an international
sense we will receive, or continue to receive, into this
enterprise students from South-East Asia, people who cone here
either under the Colombo Plan, or, as I believe increasingly,
under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
This is something tremendously exciting, I feel it myself; I
hope that everybody will feel it. This is not just like opening
a factory. This is not just like opening something which will
apply known means to achieve a prodeterminod result. This is one
of the great exploratory exer:' cises in the history of our country
into powers as yet a little known which will some day be
imr. oasurably better known. And the better known they are I
believe the better it will be for ordinary mankind.
So, Sir, these two buildings today, coming on top of
what has been done here before add up to a new adventure, an
exciting adventure, and, as I believe I may say, a highly
practical adventure. They will, I believe Sir, serve to correct
the widely held impression that nuclear power is an instrume. nt of
destruction. They will, as they go on, persuade more and more
people to realise that what we are dealing with today is an
instrument of human development ultimately to operate for great
huan happiness. Sir, I have a very great pleasure indeed in declaring
these two buildings open. ( Applause) 



62/ 042
PAKISTANI HONOUR FOR AUSTRALIAN
Statement by the Prin. e Minister, the Rt. Hon, h. G. Menzies
I have much pleasure in announcing that the
President of Pakistan ( Field Marshal Ayub Khan) has
graciously conferred on Mr. B. C. Quayle, Assistant Parliamentary
Draftsman, the high decoration of Sitara-I-Pakistan ( Star of
Pakistan), in recognition of his services as consulting
draftsman in the final revision of the new Constitution of the
Republic of Pakistan.
The Foreign Minister of Pakistan ( Mr. Manzur Qadir)
asked the Attorney-General, Sir Garfield Barwick, in Rawalpindi
a year ago for assistance of this kind, and Mr. Quayle recently
spent some weeks in Pakistan.
Mr. Qadir, who is understood to have been himself a
principal author of the new Constitution, said last week in a
public address that Mr. Quayle had " contributed a great deal in
chiselling and polishing the language of the draft".
The Attorney-General had been delighted to make
Mr. Quayle's services available, in token of the close, ties of
friendship and interest betvween Australia and Pakistan.
ISSUED: CANBERRA,
26th March, 1962. 



WEST : WGUINFA
SPEECH BY ThE PRIME MlSlfR, HE R5. ' ON. h,. Kl. T'S
IN -TH O b Z Nj-' DIT ' S
29TH MHaCH. 196
Mr. Speaker, I think I ought to begin by
congratulating my honourable friend the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr. Calwell) on his speech. After all, he has had great
difficulties on this matter and we have witnessed them from afar
how was he going to reconcile the very war-like utterances, so
dramatically described in the " Sydney Morning Herald" with the
well-kno nm views of some of those who sit, metaphorically,
behind him? And so we have been vaiting anxiously to see the
grand reconciliation. I do want to congratulate him on the way
in which he has escaped from his known difficulties, by diving
into a nimbus of words, because that is what he has done tonight.
But in my limited time I cannot deal with all the
points I would like to deal with. I hope I will be excused by
the House for a little recollection of my earlier, and what some
of you may think my more respectable, days at the Bar. We had a
broad rule, as cross-examinors, that if you could bowl a witness
out in a really good cold-blooded lie you ought not to worry
about him much longer thereafter. Bearing that little principle
in mind I just take one statement among the many made by the
honourable gentleman in the course of his speech. " Have we ever
insisted on the principle of self-determination" he said. " eo"~
( the Government) " Oh, no,"' bo says " the Prime Ministor has'
himself ami. tted that the Government has not", and he then
proceeds to quote from a speech of mine made in this House on
27th April, 1961, after the visit of General Nasution, and he
quotes two passages, torn out of their context; one of them
referring to sovereignty and the other of them referring to
domestic jurisdiction. And with a triumph of eloquence, or what
passes for eloquence, he says " Here you are. This is an admissim
by the Prime Minister that the principle of self-determination,
to which the Labour Party is now so devoted, has been abandoned
by him and is not worth a mention".
I sent out for my statement of 27th April. I invite all
members to read it, if they want to judge the truthfulness of the
Leader of the Opposition. Read it it is in " Hansard" at page
1247 and the following pages because in the course of this
statement I think it might be desirable to remind honourable
members of it; I will not quote .1l the passages, because there
were many passages on this matter I went on to explain this
is to General Nasution what we w. ere doing in our section of New
Guinea in pursuit of our long-held goal of improvement of living
standards, education and health to a point where the population
would freely determine its own future. Then later on I referred
to the fact that the Government of Australia, under my own
Prime Ministership, and the government of the Netherlands had
made an agreement in which they jointly declared that they are
therefore pursuing and will continue to pursue policies directed
towards the political, economic, social and educational
advancement of thopooples in their territories in a manner which
recognizes their affinity, I said further
" In so doing the two Governments are dutermined to prorote
an uninterrupted development of this process until such
timo as the inhabitants of the territories conc. rned will
be in a position to determine their own future".
Then again I will not read it all because I have not time; I
think I have only twenty minutes I wont on to add 
" In our own New Guinea Territories our policy is, by steady
dogroos and up to the limits of our financial and
Ldministrative capacity, to proote the advancement of the
people so that ultirctely they 1i; ill choose for thomselves
their own constitution and their future relationship with
us. ' Je will respect their choice whatover it may be.
This, for us, is not a new policy. 0e have pursued it for
years. It arises from our sense of responsibility, a
responsibility which ca-nnot be suddenly or prematurely
abandoned if our trusteeship is to be honourably performod'.'
Sir, those are three out of half a dozen references, in
my statement of that date, to this problem in this House. And yet
the bodovilled Leader of the Opposition, bomused by brawls in his
own party, has the nerve to stand up here and say that this
principle is something for which wo do not speak, something for
which we do not stand, and which apparently I am supposed to have
abandoned specifically in the throe statements from 7which I have
read excerpts to the Houseo. Sir, I recall the old principle of
cross-examination to which I referred and if he were the witness
I would say, " I leave it there",
Now, Sir, lot me go on a little. I will not leave it
there, for this purpose: The honourablo gentleman, so pressed by
his own domestic party anxioties, has thought fit as usual, to
deliver a torrent of personal abuse at me. I want to make it
clear that he almost invariably apologiss in private. But he
has done it. I made an awful fool of rysolf at Suez. Really, it
is about time that people understood that it is not an insult to
a Prine Minister of Australia for him to be invited by eighteen
nations in the world to present their views to the President of
Egypt. It is not an insult to the Prinm. Minister of Australia,
It is not a job that anybody would covet. If anything would make
one sick, it is this crawling, -pologotic attitude that you should
never take on any responsibility in the world, oven on behalf of
your most powerful friends, unless you have it underwritten for
success in adv. nco. I amn happy to say that I am not made that
way and neither are my colleagues.
This is the irony of it all: The honorable gentleman
loves to quote what somebody said about my appearance at the
United Nations in November, 1960. I want to tell lonourable
menbors that at that appearance I r. ade a speech which was as
strong as a speech could be about the principle of solfdeotermrination
and about what we wero doing in Papua . nd New
Guinea. In that speech I made an attack. on the villainous new
colonialism of the Soviet Union. The Leader of the Opposition
does not worry about that speech. It w:-s not in his official
newspapor; it was suppressed. But that was the speech I mado.
Yet he comas back to it and says, " The Prime Minister was never
fit to be Minister for itrnal Affairs. Instead of cultivating
the friendship of great countries likoe the United States of
Amrica and the United. Kingdor ho _ ught to be cultivating the
friendship of the governnonts and Peoples of Asia". That was the
theory that was put into his mouth at that tine. I do not want
to repeat what I said on an earlior occasion, but I remind
honourable mealbers that only a ooorn thtw o ago the honourable
gentleman, goadd on by his fri-nds in Sydney, mado a dramatic
statoeent the only signiicanco of which was to say that, instead
of cultivating the friendship of the Asian people all of whom
support the Indonosian clair, I sDhould have been prepared to
declare war on tho, not over the Australian torzitory of Papua
and lw Guinea, for which 11 of us will fight, but over West New
Guinea. What a it is to h: ve cl1. l this vulgar abuse about
the Prime Minister, a-c the tinome being also Minister for External
Affairs, not oakfirnige nds with Asi.. I vonture to say that no
nn has done more to embitter our relationship with the Asian
countris in the last six m: nths than the over-oxcited Loa.. of
the Opposition. 
There is really not i. luch occasion to alaboorate this
matter. But so I may .:. cko it quite clear that the second ooint
which I have been inaking is firmly based, I ronind honourable
mInrnibers once more that I and later my collen: ue, the Minister for
Zxternal Affairs ( Sir Garfield Biarwick), i: made statenoints in which
we indicated, not for the first time, our views on this matter.
. o stat d where we stood on such mattors as peace being the groat
principle adopted by the United Nations, no threats, no xacd
force, ond the assurances that had been given to us. We stated,
secondly, our belief that this matter jught to be discussed
peacefully and negotiated betwoen the Netherlands and Indonesia.
If the Oppsition disapprovos of that, it is new to no. I can
remomber the tiCe when Mr. Chifley, forimer Prime Minister whose
name honourable nonbors ' opposit invoke, and cnother frimor leader
in the porson of Dr. Evatt boastod clearly, and I thought proper: ly,
that this was a matter betwoon the Notherlands and Indonesia.
Apparently all that is gone. Those gentlemen must have turned out
to be wrong. We on this side of the House have stated our views. We
ha.' e stated that we desire a peaceful settlement, that we are not
a party principal and that we will respect an agreement made
freely and not under threat of war. But above all things, we
stand for the principle of self-determination of the future of the
Papuan people whether they are in -West New Guinea or East New
Guinea. These views have been stated by us here, in the Press
and in the United Nations. They have been debated all around the
world. Our vieis are quite well knoim. Does the Loader of the
Opposition quarrel with them?
Mr. Leslie I do not know.
Mr. Menzies Thank you. I do not know clearly. If he does not
quarrel with them, what is he quarrelling about? If these views
constitute the policy of the Labour Party, what is the uproar
about? If they are not part of the policy of the Labour Party,
let honourable members opposite rise and plainly and
unambiguously say so. Let them snap out of this compromising coma
into which they have Iallon, rise one by one even my friend the
Leader of the Opposition and say whro they stand on this
matter and what they would do that we have not done,
The only answer that comes up as repetitively as the
beat of a metronome in the spoech of the Leader of the Opposition
is " The United Nations, the United Nations, the United Nations".
Does he know that this matter has been before the United Nations?
Does not he know that if this matter were taken to the Security
Council a dozen times the Soviet jnlon would veto whatevor view
was taken. Does not he know that this matter has boon the subject
of resolution after resolution in the General Assembly? This idea
of transferring your burden to the United Nations is no policy at
all. It becomes worse than no policy at all if, as the honourable
gentioman did, one sets about joering at what he calls the oower
blocs and log-rolling campaigns by interested parties. Of course
honourable members will understand that that is a referonco to
our old-fashioned belief that when it comes to peace or war in
this part of tohe world Great BErhietraei n and the United Statcs
stand is of vital moment to this country. According to honourae
members opposite this is old-fashioned stuff. In theioir view we
should not be interested in Twhat a describes as power--blocs.
Thank God we have a powo:. bloc in the .! orld. It will be a poor
day for Australia if, in the name of somo thooroticel idea, about
the United N-_ tions, we abandon our lines of communication with,
to repeat my own phr:: s, our reat and powerful friends. No
country in the world more than ours : x-ds great and powerful
friends. I am all for them, I biave that the people of
Australia are for them, and I believe that any policy pursued by
us which would put at risk our friendship with those friends
would be rejocted by evry scnsible person in tho cuntry. 



62/ 044
P. M0 N02_ 32ZI921-
APPDOTNT, NT OF PCFZ3CKP D0Dj. Ltl v
TO CO1PITEOF 1-;" TIR TOfU PTY EDTJ CATION
Statement b-the Prime-inistetePt. Hon, R. G. Menzies
I have decided, on advice from the Australian
Universities Commission, to appoint Professor D. P. Deham,
M. BOE., Professor of furisprulenCe at Uthe Unri-versity of
~ Aebso uan e &amp; dltinalmeber to the Co-mmittee ofInir
P-le" ourne as Lan additional-mem! U~ eCc~~ ift~ e li~ r
into the future of Tertiary Education in Austr-lia.
The Commit-, tee on tertiary education has been
operating since last August and its tash: is sach that it is
not expected to complete its reporpt until some time next year.
March, 1962. 



62/ 045
P. M. No. 33/ 1962
COMMOCNAL TH SCHOLARSHIP S CEME
Statement by the Prime iMinister, the Rt. n. ReG. Menzies
The Prime Minister said today that the Commonwealth
Government had completed another of its periodic reviews of the
Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme and had decided to liberalise the
provisions governing the means test and the rates of living
allowance. Many benefits under the scheme are available to
Commonwealth Scholarship holders free of means test but living
allowances paid under the scheme do take into account the income
earned by students or their families.
The alterations to be made are these
Means Test:
The marginal adjusted family income, i. e. the adjusted
family income on which maximum living allowances are
payable is to be raised from œ 750 to œ 850 per annum and
the rate of abatement of the allowances is to be œ 2 in
up to an income of œ 1,700 ( instead of œ 1,400 at
present) and œ 3 in œ 10 thereafter. ( Adjusted family
income is ascertained by taking the full income of the
scholar's parents for the financial year immediately
preceding the year in which living allowance is desired
and deducting an amount, as below, for each dependent
child other than the scholar under 16 years of age)
This alteration therefore increases the amount of
allowance payable to all income groups at present
eligible and makes eligible certain income groups at
present above the ceiling,
In assessing the adjusted family income ( above), the
allowance for each dependent child other than the
scholar under 16 years shall be fœ 10, At present, only
the first such child is allowed for at œ 150 and
subsequent children at œ 75 each.
Living Allowances:
The maximum living allowances for scholarship holders
are to be raised by per week for students living at
home ( making the allowance 0 per week) and 7/ 6d.
per week for students living away from home ( making the
allowance 7. 6 per week.)
The permissiole income, i. e. the amount that a scholar
may earn during term time without affecting his living
allowance is to be raised from œ 2 to 10. O per week
in the case of ordinary scholars and from 0 to
œ 3 per week in the case of independent scholars.
In assessing the living allowance in the case where
there are two students of the one family in courses
approved under the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme and
one or both hold Commonwealth scholarships the living
allowance of one or both will be assessed by abating
the maximum allowances at half the normal rate; where
there are three such students the abatoment rate should
be 1/ 3rd the normal rate, and so on.
The Prime Minister said that all these changes would
operate from 1st April, 1962.
CAN3BERRA 1st April, 1962. 



TARIFF BOARD BILL
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G, HENZIES
IN THE HOUSE OIF REPRESENTATIVES
TH-APRIL, 1 2
Sir I think that this is a proper opportunity to say
something not I think, unduly contentious about the Tariff
Board Bill as it fits into the general pattern of overall policy,
because there may be some confusions here or there. It may
therefore be helpful to indicate how we understand this matter.
This is a bill which, if you put it in a short way, is designed to
facilitate the imposition of Q. R. quantitative restrictions on
imports in certain uncommon cases. These are special cases
demonstrated by special circumstances. This measure does not
represent a reversion to import licensing as we knew it. Import
licensing as we knew it, in the broad, inevitably meant what Ithink
most people would call a bureaucratic control, and it had
heavy implications of an unscientific second line of tariff
protection. That second line of tariff protection was quite
unscientific because it covered iabroad sweep so many hundreds of
items. I describe it as ar unscientific second line of tariff
protection because, although my colleague, the Minister for Trade
( Mr. McEwen) ad I time after time endeavoured to make it clear that
this was not regarded as a protective device, it perhaps
inevitably came to be regarded in that sense, as I think the
honourable member for Richmond ( Mr. Anthony) pointed out late this
afternoon. This broad sweep of import licensing was not to be
regarded as a protective device. It had two disabilities, to say
nothing of the others. One was, as I have said, that it was
unscientific, because it covered a wide field, not in a
discriminating way. In the s. econd place, it was something that
could be imposed by a governnent through a Minister without
reference to any outside authority or check. My colleague, the
Minister for Trade, who, I am sure, would have liked to be here
and who, I venture to say, is doing a magnificent job for us
overseas, liked this broad sweep no more than I did. In the
result, the Government gave thought to it. considered the
problems that are arising, some of them in the short run and some
of them, perhaps, in the longer run. J~ decided, as I announced
some time ago, that we would set up machinery involving a
reference to an independent adviser to enable import quota
restrictions to be imposed, not as a general rule, but in very
particular cases in very particular circumstances. In other wrords,
as one honourable member has said in this debate, this is a
holding measure introduced in order that we may prevent things
from getting worse in certain instances before they become better.
There is one other thing that perhaps ought to be said,
Sir, for these things cccasionally are overlooked. That is that
the restoration of general import licensing which has been
advocated here or there could not be justified internationally when
our overseas funds are as healthy as they are now, and at a time
when it is perhaps the fashion an undesirable fashion to
pretend that what was announced at the end of 1960 is now
abandoned. I remind the House that one of the many great
products of the policy then established is that today our overseas
funds are healthy and our current overseas balances of trade are
healthy. These are good things. They are not to be forgotten C
certainly not to bu cpologized for.
What this bill does is to provide for an independent
inquiry. I will not pursue the question of the identity of the
gentleman who has been appointed to conduct this inquiry, excep'
say that if there is one matter on which my friends opposite and
can agree entirely it is that Sir Frank Moore is a distinguished
honest civil servant of great cxperience and, I think, of great
objectivity, 4o wanted an independent inquiry, Sir. 
That is the first thing. The second thing that we wanted was tlat
there should be in the independent adviser a faculty to recommend
quota or quantitative restrictions only in special cases in
special circumstances. If I repeot that for the second time,
honourable members will realize why I do. ' o are literally dealing
with a very particular set of circumstances which may exist for a
yeor or for two years, but wrhich we hope will not necessarily exist
for ever. Thor. fore, the third essence of the proposal is that
quantitative re. strictions, if they are recommended and adopted,
should be temporary. Honourable members know from their perusal
of the bill what is involved in that.
It has been said I have no doubt in the best of good
faith, that the very presentation of this bill to the Parliament
exhibits some want of confidence in the Tariff Board. I want to
say on behalf of the Government that that is not true. We are not
challenging the Tariff Board. W hat we realize is that in spite of
the measures that we have taken in the past to increase the
personnel and the services of the board the pressure on that body
still remains enormous. I reject the idea, ; rhich has been given
some circulation, that the board has slowed down and is not dealing
with matters as quickly as it used to deal with them. If I had
time I could cite figures to demonstrate how untrue that idea is.
The Tariff Board is a very great authority, and we stand in great
debt to it. It has a reputation, not only in this country, but
around the world, for integrity and objectivity, and nothing that
we propose in this bill is designed to iwaken its authority or " o
give even the vaguest hint that we might want to be without it.
That idea is not true.
When you are dealing with temporary matters for which a
pressure comes suddenly a pressure that you hope will not
continue to exist indefinitely in the future there is an
unanswerable case for taking uncommon measures. If we had stood
still and said, " On, well, leave it to the Tariff Board; we willdo
nothing about it", we would properly bo accused of leaving some
industries or some sections of industry to be murdered by a sudden
spate of overseas competition. Perhaps one of the best
illustrations of this is that my friend, the honourable member for
Richmond, rwhen saying something at slight variance from what had
been said by my thoughtful and able friend, the honourablo member
for Wakofiold ( Mr. Kelly), said, "' ell, thure are cases in which
quantitative restrictions may be desirable". He instanced timba:
Well, I can understand that. Somebody else, somewhere else in the
House, might have instanced p per. The honourable member for
Braddon ( Mr. Davies) might very well be heard to say, " hat about
pap. r?' Somebody else might instance chemicals of certain kinds.
Somebody else might instance glass of certain types. The truth is
that not one of us can have within his own knowledge a complete
survey of all the industries. But when you get down to brass
tacks you will find that there are a few industries not too many;
this is not of universal application or sections of industries
in which the sudden impact of competition from overseas calls for
unusual measures, not in the long run but in the short run. That
is one of the reasons for this bill.
I wonder, Sir, whether I right pause at that point to
direct attention I an not the first tocb it to one espect of
the iuropean Common Market negotitiions which has, I think, beeocontinually
overlooked. It is quite true that at this time my
colleague, the Minister for Trade who, in spite of all the si.
tittle-tattle that I hoar, is a great defender of Australian
industry has immediatoly before him problems of our rural
industries and of our export industries, questions such as what
going happen to butter, w. hat is going to happen to Iat, driet
and canned fruits and r: any other co.. odities. But we can very
easily overlooked the fact that one of the great forces rm) ving
United Kingdom in the direction of the European Commnon Market
Mr. Cairns Is the United States. i 
Mr, Menzies No. I will make my own speeches, if you don't mind.
They usually turn out a little better that way. One of the great
forces moving the United Kingdom in the direction of the Common
Market we know this from what has been put to us is the fact
that inside the European Common Market there will be, for the great
industrial manufacturing countries, an extended home market.
Nobody can fail to understand the position of a British Minister,
sitting in Whitehall and saying, " We have a home market of
million people, but inside the European Common Market we will have
a home market, with internal free trade, of 250 million people".
As everybody knows, that was one of the main reasons why the six
European countries got together, beginning with the Schumann plan
for steel, and then developing a wider association. They saw at
once that if they could get this home market, something roughly
corresponding to the almost fabulous home market of the United
States of America, they might expect to produce more cheaply and
therefore sell more cheaply. What has been overlooked, to some
extent, is that British entry into the European Common Market, if
and when it comes, while presenting an obvious challenge to our
primary export industries, will also represent a powerful
challenge to Australian manufacturing industries. It will mean
that the producers of manufactured goods in European countries,
including, for this purpose, the United Kingdom, will be in a
powerful competitive position in our own market. So, not for the
first time, we have to boar in mind that we are all involved in
this matter. The manufacturer is at risk because of the Common
Market; the farmer is at risk because of the Common Market,
Therefore it is rather foolish-certainly unnecessary to revive
at this stage some of the old battles between protection and free
trade which were waged befo: re any of us thought of coming into
Parliament. All these considerations show clearly that we have
immense interests in common, and they show to me and to my
colleagues that we neglect any of those interests at our peril.
In other words, we must take steps to ensure the continuity and
growth of manufacturing. We will be imperilled if we fail to take
steps to avoid building up the costs of our export primary
industries to a point at which those industries will be priced out
of a market which is vital to our future.
So, Sir, this is not a conflict in the orthodox sense.
This is a great opportunity for showing a unity of approach to
those matters. v'hon I hear certain attempts being made to drive
a wedge between parties on this side of the H) uso, I say to
myself, " This is all nonsense. We are all on the same side in
this matter. We may have opinions which vary a little in degree,
but certainly not opinions which differ in deep principle".
Now, Sir, I do not want to involve myself having
already used a little more than half my allotted time in
detailed and technical arguments as to whether a quantitative
restriction, carefully selocted, oads costs in Australia or
reduces them. I have listened with groat respect to arguments
which suggest that a quantitative restriction will load costs
more than a high tariff. All I want to say at this stage is that
I am unable to subscribe to that view.
Mr. Pollard You are an innocent abroad.
Mr. Menzies I am not. I am an innocent at home. I wonder
whether my distinguished friend the honourable member for Lalor
( Mr. Pollard) means that he is quite satisfied that a quantitat
restriction will increase costs in Australia. If he docs, I ar
little puzzled as to why he is supporting the bill. Perhaps I
not so innocent as he thinks. But, Sir, I just offer my own vi
that there will be cases in which the imposition of a quantitat
restriction will reduce the risk of having costs and prices ri'
in Australia. 
Mr. Pollard That is right.
Mr. Menzies Now he says that is right! Previously he said I was
an innocent abroad. Anyhow, my friend agrees with me that i is
right. One of the beauties of this piece of legislation is that it
is a temporary proposal. It will be as I shall explain further
later, merged into longer-term legislation, and if my own view
happens to be wrong not for the first time
Mr. Pollard Oh!
Mr. Menzies You are thinking of matters different from those I a,
thinking of. Anyhow, if my view happens to be w rong, we will awe
ample opportunity to examine it when we cre discussing the longerterm
legislation. In short, if I may adopt the phrase used by one
honourable member, this is a holding measure.
The next thing I wiant to say is that we attach enormous
importance to stabilizing costs in Australia. If any item of
policy pursued by us loads the costs of production of the major
export industries of Australia, then it will deliver a crippling
blow at the Australian economy.
Mr. Pollard Everything you have done since 1949 has had exactly
that result.
Mr. Menzies I heard you; now you lister to me, dear boy. I
heard one of your heelers make that statement this afternoon. All
I am doing now is what I am allowed to do offering my own views,
on behalf of the Government on this matter. We believe that one
of the central principles of economic policy is that we must not
put the export industries at risk. The task is far from completed
as yet, because my distinguished colleague, the Minister for Trade,
is still abroad fighting our battles. We are preparing a further
Tariff Board measure. As I and others have made clear in public
statements, we propose to weave quota restrictions into the
general Tariff Board fabric for use in selected cases where a
tariff is not the appropriate remedy. I do not need to tell
honourable members that this is not simple. This is not something
you can run up overnight on a typewriter. This requires a great
deal of thought, and I am determined th,; t before we do anything
my colleague, the Minister for Trade, will have the fullest
opportunity to offer his views.
In the general armament of the Tariff Board we will
include the capacity to impose a quota restriction wrhere the board
is of opinion that no normal tariff procedure will be appropriate
to the case.
Mr. Pollard There is no provision in this bill to do that.
Mr. Menzies I am referring to the bill which, unless I am
bitterly disappointed, will be presented to the House in the
Budget session. All this means that we are uxamining the underlying
problems of the economy. The greatest problem of the economy is
to reconcile a few matters, each of which is ma; gnificently
important in its own fashion but each of which may have to be
modified a little in the interests of accommrodating the lot. Le'
me re-state shortly the problens that we have: First of all, wr
must build up our population by natural increase and by substant
migration. This, I think, isa national objective to which all
honourable members subscribe. Secondly, we must achieve and
maintain full enployr. ent for that increasing population.
Opposition Members Oh, no 
Mr. Menzies In stating these factors I cam unrmoved by the
professional unemployment non rs on the other side of the House,
They will all be absent on sick leave when we find that there are
no unemployed in Australia because, like Othollo, theiroccupation
will be gone indeed. Thirdly, we must support actively and
continuously the growth of manufacturing industry which I say
categorically is vital to the absorption and employment of our
increased population. That does not mean that I am ignoring the
tertiary or service industries. I know that they have just as big
a part to play as have primary and secondary industries, but the
truth is that if you look at employment and increasing population
in Australia you must look first, in modern circumstances, at what
is happening in the manufacturing field. Therefore, we are all
for it. Our clear policy is to support actively the growth of
manufacturing industry. Fourthly, we must develop the basic
resources of the nation. Government expenditure, sometimes rather
sneered at by people, is the vital foundation of industrial
development and of population increase.
We must try to do all these things while encouraging
the export industries which, in the most literal sense, are vital
to our international trade and solvency. At our national peril we
must not cost them out of their markets. This seems so clear that
I could hardly imagine any one would deny it. How are we to do
that? In our recent announcements we have indicated several ways.
The first is to keep down rural costs by measures designed to
increase the efficiency of rural industries. I have only to refer
to the work done in scientific research and in extension, in
which so many of my friends are so deeply interested, to make it
clear that from our point of view the first great thing to be
done for the primary industries is to help them to produce in a
quantity and at a cost level which will defend them against other
increases in the Australian economy.
The second way by which we hope to achieve our
objective I emphasize this point because occasionally it is
overlooked is by measures calculated to increase the efficiency
of local manufacturing and so enable the local manufacturer to
keep his costs and prices within proper limits. Whatever is
done, * hethetr by way of investment allowance or in any other way
to help the local manufacturer to keep his costs within bounds,
has a direct bearing upon the ultimate costs of the ru-' al
producer who cannot pass on his additional costs but has to bear
them. Concluding on this aspect, let me say that one vray in which
we can help the Australian manufacturer to keep his costs within
bounds, apart altogether from granting investment allowances, is
by making it possible for him to secure a share of the Australian
market which will enable him to spread his his overhead costs
over the largest possible number of units.
We might look occasionally at the rest of the wrorld to
see what has happened in modern industrial history. What does it
show in relation to America and modern Germany? It shows that
lower costs and greater export markets are the product of a large
sustained and assured home market. There is a lesson to be
learned from all this. Why should we deny co our own great
manufacturing industries I am not talking about casual fly-bynight
enterprises the very thing which has made their rivals in
the :-orld powerful and has enabled them to put such pressure on
our business as to require hearvy tariffs to provide protection?
These are all matters which have to be taken into account.
Perhaps I have gone a little . rider in my rumarks than one or tv
rulings that I have heard might have permitted.
Opposition members.-Hoar, hears 
6.
Mr. Menzies That is right; but still I have done it. I wanted
to put this matter in the picture. First, I wanted to make it
clear that -re have the liveliest interest in protecting the
production costs of the primary industries because vithout them
this country is finished. Scondly, ,. re have the liveliest
interest in maintaining a vast increase of population and
therefore a vast increase, among other thinz, z of manufacturing
enterprise on proper terms. Really, one of the great problems of
statesmanship in Australia today is not to engage in a lot of
slang-whanging in these matters but to see how you can reconcile
these matters to the greatest possible extent. It is for all
those reasons that this is a bill to set up a temporary machine
to deal aith a temporary problem, so that we will not have the
whole thing run away from us before we :, et to the point of
establishing permanent machinery and a permanent body to deal
with it. 



AUSTRALIAN _ UIThrR3rL IESCO1% tY1ISSI =, L
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER. ' THE RT. HON. R. G, MENZIES
IN THE HOUSE ' OF . PRESENTATIVE3
This, as honourable members will see, is a simple bill.
Up to now, the Australian Universities Commission has consisted
of five members. One of them, a very notable Australian
scientist, Sir Leslie Martin, is the full-time chairman. The
other four are part-time members. They are Professor N. S.
Bayliss of the University of Western Australia, Professor
A. D. Trendall of the Australian National University, Sir Kenneth
Wills of Adelaide and Dr. J. Vernon, a well known businessman of
Sydney. The commission has undoubtedly devoted a great deal of
time to its work and has, I think, served the country with very
great distinction. But the university problem is developing very
rapidly. New universities, such as Monash in Victoria, are
coming into existence and there is increasing pressure to have
medical schools established in those new universities. One can
understand that very well. It occurred to us that, under these
circumstances, it would be very desirable to add to the
strength of the commission a membjr who would be familiar with
the problems of medical schools and with their administration.
No current member of the commission has special qualities of that
kind. We believe that if we can get a first-class man,
authoritative in medical schools and their work, this will be of
tremendous assistance to the commission when examining and forming
judgment upon claims that are made. This means, of course, that
we will be adding to the strength of the commission one more
member who might be regarded, classifying them broadly, as an
academic member. Under these circumstances, the Government feels that it
is desirable in order to preserve the general balance in this
commission, to add one further member experienced in business and
financial matters. The commission will then number seven, six of
the members being part-time and one of them, the chairman, being
continually at work. I do not . want to occupy the time of the
House by reminding members that the Universities Coimmission, by
its recommendations, following upon inv.; stigations and
consultations, has already been able to do a great deal of good
for the university system in Australia. As we all want to see
. that work 6ontirv', e1, and as we. warnnt to see more opportunities
' for people to have the b. nofit of u. ivritcy iz., lhave,.. no.
doubt that honourale membors will agree with to proposd
increase ia the membership of the commission. 



WtEe P: nding!_ AmW. J7 92
COMM ' ONV-1A LTI Il OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Acting Minister for Trade, the Hon. Senato.-r-Denharmñ Henty
April 1.
4 6 No. 338A
No, 351
No. 364 TRADE PROMOTION DRIVE IN WEF3ST AFRICA
JAPANESE IMPORT BUDGET
AUSTRALIAN DISPLAYS AT INTERNATIONbrL EXHIITIONS
OPEN SUCCESSFULLY
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
April 4 Ho 350 MEDICAL COYCESSION FOR NORTTHERN TERRITORY
No6,0 RESIDENTS7
.36 WORLD HEALTH ) Y A 7
The Treasurer, the Rt, Hon. l-Iar iaot
April 5 No, 358 DEPUTATIN REPRESENTATIVE OF LORD MAYORS OP
STTE CAPITALS,
it 6 No. 361 REVIEW Al OF BILLS OF EXCHAYiGE ACT
The Minister for Nationa. Deve. locj. nt Senaor the Hen, W-H. poopnr
M nndd, the Tinist* er focr Territories, theHo. Paul Haslu -k.
April 1 No. 334PHOSPHAiTE DISCOVERY IN NtORTIll TERRITORY
The Minister fo' National Pave opment, Senator the Hon. WH. Soo eqp
April 1 No. 335 . EALTH LSSIS* PjNCE WITH RESOUJRCES MAPPING
IN QUEENSLAND. A
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley
April 2No. 336VISIT BY U. S. NAVAL SHIPS DURING CORAL SEAi
CEL LAIRTIONS
The1Minister for Civil Aviation. Senator Shane Paltrid&amp;, e
April 5No, 354 IPROVEIVLEFTS AT PORT LICOLN ABRODPOME
The Postmaster-General. The Hon. C. W. Davidson
April 1
it 5 No. 340
No. 356 BALL POIYT PENS FOR POST OFFICE CUSTOMERS
OFFI CIAT OPENING SYD1AAY-/' ELB VC-TQNE COAXIAL CABLE
The Minister for External liffairs, The Hon. Si. r C-arr eldBarwick
A prri l 2
11 3 No, 339
No. 344 VIENNA CONVENTION ON DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS
AUSTRALAN DELEGATION TO ECOSOC
The 7. in-ister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Aderrnann
April 3 No0 34i2 TI~ FISHERY SETING N-1" RECORDS
Tho Minister for Works,_ The Hon. Gordon Freeth
April 6No. 363SYD'TEY MIL EXCHA; NGE REDFERN
The Minister for the Nav. y, Sentor the Hon. J0G. Gorton
April 1 No. 33-W. R. A. N. S. CELEBrUITES 21st P1,3IVEM-RSARY
4 No. 346 U. N. R. L. N. EXCHAJ4NG, SUBMRINE~ LRFARE
EXPERT S
5 No, 353 MOST EFFICIENT COMBAT SHIP
6 No, 364jA L1' TE CULF MEORIAL SER'itCThe
Minister for on, _ Ls-lerih B u r,
April 2No. 337MOST EFP CIBUT SQUD1RN IN THE RPAA
The M-inister for S73uppl:,, The lion, Allen Fairhall
April 3 No. 345
to 5 No. 357 OVERSEA 03 AFRONA,*, UTI C AL SIET I TS MEET IN
MjEJ STR YTAIIA
ME LOURNE YOU~ h WL N&amp; INE1~ NAI ONALr, C OMPETI TT I~
c. o/ 2 
Ao~: L1 4
i 3No,,. 9'
D2 m1a : j of t~ he
Apr~. 1 5Woo, TMMIL. Z2A Yñ l
Cril j rJ : C
i 1~ 3NT X . L dl a~ w~' THEf prwt7,
No. 362 transferred ind~ No,, L dtad
' ic. i GovernacnZ P-abI ic 1,' tla timoun-O'j.,; up
Thp n"-
rT--T
LX to I YAA---NTTT4,-RL8 INDT. I T 



œ. PZ-ECH BY THE PBIME MvINISTZR9 THE H~ T, HON.
R G ' iT'L 3O. EI G O17 CO-AXIAL C., iBLE, 1
T'. I JtIH APTUL. .6
Postmaster-Geneial and vent lemon.
This is i-eally a very remarklrable day bac. Duse it
represents the culmination of a v. ary remiarkable piece of emok
And I am very glad to know, f~ ton my c&amp; Llaettthrar
represented her. e today people who can speak, think, for all-3
the various groups wh-o were responsiblo for thnis ach: levoment,
, le live i~ n such tuirbulent and hurried imes that we
occasionally forget tftat history is still being made even thoug~ h
It is made q 31Jittle more hastil; y thian it used to be mpade0 I
daresay that -if somebodyv were l~ iving today who could say, '" 4e11
my grandfathier had a hand in thie -laying of thie first trans-
At*-laPntac cable" tbis w,. ould be a mnatter of great family pride,
great family satk; isfaction. I hope thcat vo will have enough
imagination in future for those who have contributed to this
enterprise to be able to haand down to tiaeir grandchildren this
wcndcrf'ul constructive t-radition.
I'm very sorry Postia-ster-Gencral -that Sir -4% illiam
Oli. ver can't be hero0He is course, as you know, in Lngland0
And T thiink parliaps I ml . ght br. aJllowocI to depart for one moment
from the theme to tell you that i ha13d a letter from him the
other day. Those oi you whio L,. cw -Sir dilliam Olivor know that he
couldniit be anytair-g ( else but an Englishman: tall. straight,
almost thie Znglisix-man of fCiction, And he -urote_ in Ia lettor to me
that he had arrived in England, and when hae hailed a taxi the
tax-drivter said -to him ' Yhitorc do you coma from?" withL that
charming famili-ar view th-a t ' t. axi.-drivers take in London. He said
'" From A. ustralia". To Vhnicth t aXi-driver said I! Ah. T knew you
werenit an &amp; iglishmoenil To whiici Sir 1j) J. liamu Gliver repl-ieod
" Tao3 right",,
Melbourne to open zc; Dmettiing and 1~ looked at a sectluion of co-. axia.]
cab'le being imade and 1 gazed at it uithi awe, wJith wonder. .1.
di. dn~ t know wnat it was about,, This shows hew out-of.-date I am,,
i\ M* y fr. iends here crauld all explain what a Co-aoxial Cable is. I
can't,, All1 I kno w is that by somne mir-acle 1200 wretched people
can talk on it 4 at ttie 3sVnc t~ lne,, Twielve hiundred telephone
conversaticns! Just thk f it I can look back on CA time
when people raised fine T.) oillts about tapping telephione
convors.-tions. Now h-ow do you tap '. Ill 1 wont go
into it. ( Laughcr) All I know is that I h.-ave been told thiat
the re are 1200 and sometLi-ng pe-: opl)(-wiio will be able to talk
simultaneous! ' ir and by tib e wiza.-dry of the Post Office experts
each ., ril2. be spe_ aki_-ng to the epjpointed person and not to
somebody clso. Now I @ rm all for that as long as they don't all
ring me, up st the same: t-ime
-ur also told th -A-t u~ heres -there are noiw Q, million and
half calls per annum beoon Sydney and Mebourne,, v) hich shows
th attee tw ttsaeV~ tral getting togather, Jin
yer~ tirce there will bc k ml-lion ca. 1ls5 These, o~ f cour-se,
are fabu--lous fi., g-x'ers, B3it the-y all il] lustrate onei of the
ni. raclus of our lifetime,
When. I was a srialJ. klo~ y in the buIsh no-bodyr had ever seen
a motor ve_-hicle, nobody had evLer heard of a telephone; a ra. ilway
tan arr . ved soehtp: c'cai'iou.,., ly conce a wcelk i n no gr eat
harry, and i~ t departed lator on in the s,. men ( 1ayl commurinications
were scanty-, mail day ,. as a ;: i; r1-at e'et~ Sinco thc:. t tijme look
at the things that hanve hae:-rpe_ ne&gt;? -art. y., or mostly, in the,
field of c1ci mriai1_ cmu2ctdn os opro. 
Lockl. at tle enormous enanges thjat havo occurred irn flight, i~ n
intcrrnctiorlal travoli sota eoe-cae 1Vlterl; lh
hou yself T h-ve no doa . t that mly successor will be lea-wlrigc
Sychney at n certain ti.. mo ono day and arriving in San Fra:-ncisco1-
beofore he left Syd-ney. Ta 1. s is A-, emontary. All thecse thing,
have changed perosonal contact Croun thL or
Then we, hale coirui c " tion in other ways so that a
photograph * taken in London this after-;-nocn riley vory iweol1 be in a
newspaper in Australia iGomoirow , ffternloon: so 7we~ have the
mra rcle~ s of tejlox and the toepriritcr systems wh-ich translate,
somoJhat rouglyoly, !.. ihatu somebody ha's said hPere into w,. hat som~ ebody
reads Cat the other end,
Now ' LaVve this miracl-e of direct voice to voice
co . mun icc tion, I have been tol. Dnd no doubt
aUthoritatively, that; thie route of the co-xa. cable from
Sydne-y to-c Melbourne is approx imately the route that waCs tLakLen by
Flur. e and Hovsll so many years agThis is a fasci. niting
thought th. at in thosa days bravc men, skilful men had to set out
on journeys into an urknown countr-, y and arteor mon vrhs arrive at a
destL-inat1, ion and th.-at today they stiould be raermorialised by cair-ns
of. stones that "' Hurme and Ilovell pasSed. this wa" on a certain
date,, Today, -ArithL the almost incrodilble skil. l th.. t h-as baen
devlopd, he agnficntcc-operation that has xited f rom the
most ordinary man si. 4tting onl the ai of -a trornch digger to the
most skilled planzner and oeineer at the top., all th--is superb
teamworiz has produced. a rsu so that alrea-. dy, if the spirit
Moved ia I coul. d ring direct somebody in Sydney, and I am assured
b. 17 my coileaguoe thtboforo. wce are much oldar the re will be
direct subscribor to subscriber calling between Melbourne and
Oydney., And of courseo this is maerely thle be.-inning. This is Inot
the end. in duo cou2-se vil, in our countey, not over rich-in
people2 in nuribers., but Niery i. Jich in resource3s and spirit and
entorrise r1avo aSyrstem-. of (. omm--unication be~ tw. een thie _ oLeo
Ailstra]. ia which, 1 vonture, to say, r. ill be teenvy of m,: ost people
in thei~ rorld,, Thiis is not done just by sol-e. original decision,
Thnis is done by a co~ inat ioni of jolly hard ,., ork and ir.-nenso
sll. And today are witnessing. the fi'rst culrmina: tion of this
mag ificent col: binatiaL.
cir., it is a orotty di ffi cult vrorld. T isa4or fl
of rmisud,.; rst-andings. It is a-ror. L-d in iwh-ich one nation can
1--, ua: Lrrl so : eCsily, nd accasion.-ly so blindly, vrith. anoth,_ r,,
3ut I for one believe that -the moe e ot trDg,_ ther the happicr
we -,. ill ba, thla t t he m ore we c. ' n c-or. mun-icate diroct with othecr
p,: ople i~ n this Iwarld, the im. ore % we hoa r theiir oi) jcc~ s anrd
-sense t" heir feelin,-: th-e m-oroe di-1spose-d will webe to understand
thtte e2owo thc nton tht wo -ather~ disliked turns out
to be rather a bott:) r fe]. J1oW9 or a bettor nntion, ttan w. xe had
supc&amp; Ta e) liing in tlis ccntuary o f L i -racls the
greatest of all. tile E. i-acles h~ s beeln the de velopme: nt of
comunicati-on -in the-i : ilesa. 1 in thec voi ce, in the Oar, in the aye,
An hat, S'ir,~ is wny I riua delighted to be here today
: nd to do ;' ht~ rit " Is -DU WanG ne. to do in connection w. ith
thi. s rom-,-arka bic devolorvment imn An1s trali : s connTunietin
ast-o.-cy. ( A 



PY,. NQ, / 10162
EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN
Statement bythe Prime Minister,. Rt Hon. ReG. MenzLes)
The four Government women S; ators Senators RankinW( Q)
Robertson, Buttfield, and Nedgwood ( Vic.) today
made representations to me on matters affecting the conditions of
employment of women in the Commonwealth Public Service, Their
representations dealt more specifically with proposals which they
first raised last year and again a few weeks -go, and on which
Senator Buttfield already has a question on the Notice Paper of
the Senate, The proposals fell into three categories:
Equal pay for women for work of equal value
Equal opportunity for women
Elimination of the marriage bar in respect of women
who are parmanent officers in the Commonwealth
Public Service
The four Senators advanced strong arguments in respect
of the three matters and I have promised that the points raised
in our discussions will be brought before the Cabinet.
On the question of equal pay for women for work of
equal value I pointed out to the four Senators that the
discrimination which existed at the present time related only to
the base rates of payment and that where margins for skill were
involved there was no discrimination on the basis of sex.
I also pointed out that the Government had always been
most reluctant to interfere in the function of industrial
tribunals to determine tho question of base rates.
With respect to the continued employment of women after
they had married I pointed out that the High Council of Public
Service Organisations had expressed the view last year that
because of the employment situation and other considerations there
should not be any change in the present attitude of the Public
Service Board, I told the Senators that some of the suggestions they
had made warranted further examination and that I would seek
information from the Public Service Board to place before the
Cabinet for a thorough discussion of the issues.
CANBERRA April, 1962. 



SPE: E7CH BY TIT, PR1II41 MINISTER TUHE RT. HON. R&amp; G. MENZIES
AT TNSTALLATIOi' OF CANCI.-ILOiL CF A. Ntu0CANBERRA,
11_ DTH APRIL,_,
Chancellor, Your Excellency,
There is an old standing rule, Sir that when I wear one
of' these things ( doctor's cap) I am allowed L take it off' when I
speak. I introduce you to that rule at once, ( Laughter)
There is also a standing order in the Parliament, up the
street against tedious repetition. It is, of course, consistently
ignorea. ( Laughter) And I am going to ignore it this morning
because having heard His Excellency, the Governor-General, I
realised that there was really nothing more to do, in all honesty,
than to stand up and say " I concur and have nothing to add". But
having said that of' course I will break the rule myself and add a
little. I think that i~ t is a magnificent thing, a very
appropriate thing, that this University, which was not created as
something local, or limited, but was designed to achieve world
standards and perhaps world influence in many sphere, shou~ ld have
had as iLs previous Chancellor, one who I repeat what has been
sail is probably the outstanding Australian of our time, and now
should have one of the world-famous scientists of our time.
It may be that there will be some who think that for you
to come out here Mr. Chancellor from far away is something odd
you know we are all familiar with the slogan " What's wrong with
the local boys?". All I want to say, Sir, as one of the " local
boys", is that I was enthusiastic when I hoard that you were
willing to take this post and that is just because of the reason I
ventured to mention: that this University must, if it is to
justify our hopes, become a world famous centre of learning and,
particularly in its advanced studies make contributions to
knowledge which will run right round the world into the minds of
men and women of different races, and of different tongues.
Therefore, this, as we see it, is a University possessint
already and will moro and more do so of courso an international
quality, a quality which over-rides the mere boundaries of a State
or, for that matter, of the Commonwealth of Australia,
Ther.-, ore, we do ourselves great honour when we have, as
our Chancellor, a man whose name is known not only here, not only
in Great Britain, but known right'round the world of' science.
Just imagine what it will mean to many people in this
institution, engaged in scientific work of any kind, to be able,
periodically, to sit down with the present Chancellor and discuss
some of their problams. I don't think it is always realisod what
a tremendous thing it is in all branches of knowledge for younger
men to have the opportunity of associating in a personal fashion
with great scholars, with famous men. Some of the glory rubs off
on them. It is something that they remember. It is something
which serves as an inspiring force in their work, and in their lis
And so it is a splendid thing that we should have here,
once more, a famous man. He stepped into our minds and into our
hearts ready made, so to speak, because many of us have had the
pleasure of knowing him beforo. To those who haven't, his fame
has preceded him. He is here not only among scholars, not only
among experts in his own fieldA; he is here in a community that
alrody has a profound respect for him and will have even greater
gratitude as time goes on. ( Applause) 



' H1EKLY TNDFX TOX.
WEEK ENDING APRIL 1) 1962_
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Acting Minister for Trade, Senator Denham Hanty
April 8, 8
11 13 No. 366A
No. 369
No. 393
No. 400 APPOINTMENT OF TRADE CONSULTANT
NEW ASSISTANT TRADE COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED
SOUTH WEST ASIAN TRADE MISSION SUCCESS
STRONG INTEREST IN AUSTRALIAN GOODS AT
OSAKA FAIR
The Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
April 10No. 377ABOLITION OF TAXATION CLEARANCE SYSTEM
The Minister for Defencethe Hon. Athol Townley, M. P.
April 10 11 No. 375 H. M. A. S. SYDNEY TO ASSUME NEW ROLE
No. 386 AUSTRALIAN FORCES TO PARTICIPATE IN SEATO
MARITIME EXERCISE " SEA iEVEL".
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck, M. P.
No. 365
No. 383
No. 397 HIGHER EDUCATION IN PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
APPOINTMENT OF ADMINISTRATOR OF NAURU
TERRITORY OF PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA PROMOTION
OF A DEPARTMENTAL hEAD.
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
April 11No. 385 VICE CHAIRMAN RE-APPOINTED
The Postmaster-General, The Hon. C. W. Davidson
No, 371
No. 372
No, 387
No. 398 EXTENSION OF COMNONWEALTH CABLE TO SOUTH
EAST ASIA.
TELEVISION
RE-ERECTION OF SYDNEY G. P. O. CLOCK
TELEVISION
The Minister for Immigration, The Hon. A. R. Downer
April 14No. 404A THE WONG CASE
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon, C. F. Adermann
April 11No. 392SMALL FARMERS' PROFLEMS FOR C'WEALTH
GOVERNMENT
Th" Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
April 11 11 12 13
13 No. 381
No. 382
No. 394
No. 402
No, 4? 3 ARMY INSPECTION METHODS TO BE COMPARED
RECRUITING AND CADET STAFFS VISIT ARMY
ESTABLISHMENT
TOP C, M. F. AWAR
SENIOR ARMY OFFICERS TO ATTEND U. S. EXEROISE
ITALIAN HOWITZERS IN AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Customs and Excise, Senator the Hon. Denham Hgntir
No. 362THIRTY-FOUR FORMAL COMPLAINTS OF DUMPING
The Minister for the Interior, The Hon, Gordon Freeth
April 9 No. 370
10 Noo 373
10 No, 378
11No. 388 TOW-AWAYS AFTER ACCIDENTS: CHARGES AGAINST
A. C. T. POLICE.
APPOINTMENT OF DISTRIBUTION COMMISSIONERS
AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION IN MANNED SPACE
FLIGHTS FLOOD WARNING SERVICE ALLEVIATES DISTRESS
, P / 2
April 8
11 12
April 9 9
11 12
April 8 
2-
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. JG. Gorton
No, 367
No, 396
No. 399 NEW STRENGTH FOR R. A. N.
R. A. N. JETS OPERATE FROM THE PHILLIPINES
HUMANE SOCIETY AWARD FOR NAVAL OFFICER
The Minister for Health, Senator Harrie W. Wade
No. 368
No. 401 RESTRICTION OF IMPORTATION OF CATTLE HIDES
70 mm. MIRROR-CAMERA CHEST X-ray CARAVAN
UNIT for N. S. WV DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH
The Minister for Supply, the Hon. Allen Fairhall
April 10 No. 376
10 No, 380 W. R. E. SCIENTIST SHARES ROYAL AERONAUTICAL
SOCIETY GOLD MEDAL AWARD.
VISIT OF GENERAL DAVIS TO AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Air, The Hon, Leslie Bury
No. 366
No. 404 RAAF TO BUY QUADRADAR SYSTEM
CITIZENS AIR FORCE SQUADRONS TO BE
AFFILIATED.
The Minister for Repa. oriatiorn ThJ Hon., RW ,. Swartz
April 10
11 11 11 12 No. 379
No, 389
No, 390
No. 391
No. 395 REPATRIATION FILM ON T. V.
BOOST FOR OUR EXPORTS
SERVICE PENSION IN-PATIENTS
MINISTER TO VISIT PAPUA-NEW GUINEA
ARTIFICIAL LIMB MAKING IN AUSTRALIA
The Commonwealth Railways Commission.
April 11 No. 384 GIANT CATTLE VANS FOR COMMONWEALTH RAILWAYS
CANCELLED
April 8
12
I 13
April 9
13
April 8
13
No. 374 



621/ 050
P. M. No,, a/ I962
CHOIJILLA D14
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Premiers of Victoria and South Australia, and the
Deputy Premier and Minister for Development of New South Jales,
Mr. Renshaw, met today with the Treasurer, Mr. Holt, the
Minister for National Development, Senator Spooner and : yself
on the question of the Chowilla Dam project.
Officials of the States and the Commonwealth were also
present. Today's meeting was a preliminary one and favourable
progress was made. As a result of the meeting there will be
further investigation of the proposal and another meeting will
be held later.
CAi BERA,
16th April, 1962. 



S3PKKO 3! MIb AM, 4~ MIiJC-4 iiire &amp;, 41 H~ o i* C
MXf-Z aWg WMJ F JWK AT
C. KNAI1h* I 3OL, JOAs1 1 diL.
3Ky lord dishop, Reaib&amp; 3tnrg Mrs Robson and ladies and gentlement
I don't quite know in hAwt capacity I an hero* 1 know that
in a precmrious sense I am bore as Pimn inistur. ( Laughter) I
wou~ ld also have the boys unurstandp so that the Wa treat me with
proper respect, that purely in an honorary capacity I1 am a Doctor of
Selense of the Univrsity of New a; uth iiales. Qtaau degree
less dei~ rvod than that aoe aut still there Is a certain iatisfactim1
to be jot out of life In setting tbhiqyou don't deserve i) eoause In my
experience they are umore than balanced br gettin,, the abuse that you
don't deserve* ( Laughter)
Xov xi'. Robson, I would remind the boys wiho are he~ ro is
not only onected. 9 as be has described, ' With this kigiky
mainrAtIve 1' undq but be Is also himself one of the most a ebaed
headmastors in the history of ' ustralla* ( Applause) do he
understands both sides of the coins knows far mawe about schoolboys
than I do; and far more about the iorkluig of the fund than! I o,
though I appreciate oothe
I was particularly interested, to hear 11r. 1-obsonts
reminiscence about the time he % ras sitting for bAst was then called
; Onior Pulic because he and I ane more or less contemporaries and
he told you ; Lt a tiny fraction of those dho sat for othat you nov
call Leaving were taiting eieoee This Is a very emarkable and
interesting fact. And it is y jInterestin,; indeed* to find V at
In the Johoolsq taking them brosay tca4ay,, .3uh a vast Increase has
occurred in those wh~ o take some aspect or science.
3# At I dant to say this to you because it is vorth recording
it bears on this topic that in spite oft all t a things that have
'-ahpune In recent years In spite of the oznmas expansion in
University activity 4nd In the provision of funds for uriiersitiesp
there la, relatiwelj9 today a smaller poroontape of um4argradutto
ta wng Science -percentage of tie population than there jag 10 years
ago. Xow that in a very rehisrkable raut. 1 c4. L1 It a ramaricable fact
bectase I learnt it only -A ft.-4 days age from the Chairman of the
Universities Commision* Just let me state It quite p~ la inly, that for
say every so aay of the people in Austraiiu thousands ormilllhnasg a
smaller percentage is note ong&amp; aged In the stuij of science in the
Univrsities than we had some 1ears igo.
It is worth asking ourselves whiy this should be so. decoause
-Oen the enorims post-vafr impsat of scientific d, rolopment occurred*
tehon if I may put it quite shortly, science beawe rather the
fashionable, topic of the day# my own fear vus thtwt perhaps we might
Ooocee over-balanoed on ' hat side aAd that the great anrd ' vital studies
of the humanities = L~ ht K1l1 into disrepalr JAu t that was -irong.
This is not so. And when one asks wby thisa Is not so the 4 -sver iag
" OeU in ordinary professional courses ; here is$ under today's
Oirmstanee9 a prospect of Imediately earning a substantial
This in an econasmic sense$ is attractive to students; and attractive
, to treir parents. 4horeas seisnes Is a hard master in tMat sense.
To become, a notable scientist ono' aust be comple~ tely devoted to the
-, ok avo a sonse of mission In the work. AeJll or ejurse it is
' Peopho devotion, and people 41tb a sense or mission * ho keep this
World going. These are the people -who matte-r far more than the people
who own r-turn large Income tax returns.
If do are, to a.. nsider the matoi-ial " kvainomet of lustralia,
or indeed of any other countryg 40 laust ha ve in Min that in this time
In the acrld's history our material -Li1 4q ~ d~ q per4 fi~ rt and
foremost on aco. nce and tectu,. alog ! ng .&amp; ouVnaera
advanometg the -aising of econt" 1o standards. Im not taWIEUM a 0out
the doverlop-eont of other, land porhaps m-ore Important aspects of man* 
11at : in esonaaic trms a coutry that ffali oehind In sci _ zce 4nd in
the application of sciene thro,~ technology is goinlg to fall behind
in the race to maintain Its j) oilfftion anid its living standLards and
make headvayq eoonmalls~ y, in the doz'ldo
Now of surn., fortuhately for us tbsre Are man j. ople vho
understand this pez'fsctl' iello The am obo esta~ olished this "' ndg
some of wbis are very close personal riocnds of miae# non of
signifioan'-s in the busin~ ess world* in the ijwodixtive -iorld hami set
to all their oolloapuos in that bwancb of life an examjile of
Inzginutiws Indusa. w~ al statesmaflshipo ImxginatiYe 3e , as1e it
clearly through the : utuz'e years the ernormous Alpxificance of science
Leaching And science toaching In the schools from whience a11 the
universill studonts will ca and statesmanship acause they are
not taking the short viev, och most people dot but the long view
dh must be taken br same and by many If tbe cuumtry Is to go an
and krosper, Now ' 1 &amp; Ae other thi. ng* It Is quite cleat and this
also was iapiicit wu'hst Xr. Rabso had to say that to kroduce,
scientiflo: undrprada-tes, to produie post 6rat42te s : Iaatifio
studocts9 to produce roseareh in sciancelp to produce reople in science
upon wbam our economic fAure dehadst 4 must begin in the gailoolsp
particularly in the later stages 1W baving the best possible eaiiCMet9
the best possible lab*. equipxmto Modemn science CaS , iiWif
beyond ibat we used to rotprd as ft-cionce, thenu I was a boy, it now
Involves In Its higher baaohes partica~ rlyp enormously~ zstly
equipmenLtrau are out of da to, you are out of the race = nless you
can maintain the highest posihie sMa" Adr Of 4qUIjift and these
things oet inney I dare say Heamaster that if yoA had had to
4s end solely on your ovn resources in equping some of these new
U = e ywu do~ id have roand yourself in considt. rable difficulty* It
Is an Imaginative strokes and 1 ag1v* my compliments to the fund upon
It to realis, that you aan't start too soon in devtloping not only a
high level of achieveentg but such an noderstanding of the futnre of
ye~ study that you will produes mor. and note peo ho, will jo on
and not be satisfied to take a first degree9 but va't another onel
not be satisfied until they have made t-il contribution to that
scientifie research rhich the technologists All take up and Vly In
industry abtbher It is kr1nary or secon~ arj to the &amp; riot
&amp; dVaneoMent of AAaralao
So It tisiabig day in tehistory of this icool,
to-. haM AaAmeu that : 6 -as here to p a form a foundation Ston
laying anan earlier oomsion. I haveg for yea-s and years now,
oasionally had myself driven pastg or around this -ichoolo I have,
as any of youa must have sarvelled at the rapidity of Its &amp; ovth.
~ 4be I abrSt COWn to KanLrra in my more res. octable days when I was
ttoasne-General the populaition of anberwm was 6t000 odd anid yo a eou14
walk around the vtie place on Aurday afternoon * ithout mnd*
exhanstion. 10ow It is vottin~ near to 60,000 and the statisticians
tell us t Atit ill be00, O6ku'lf0 " ndItvwill be aquarter of
a million W the end of the century same of the ooys might make a
mental note of Wesu I vaont be bars, aut that is what do A" e told.
And. that is a mere matter of sine. -lot this city : is developing
character and It must develop character as a capital city if the
national Ovovh of ' Australia Is to achieve national tetes and a
conseiouess that do are a nation and not six indepenient o unties*
, so the arovth of Z nborr is her"; and it mrould be a poor arowth If
It erenotforthefact that ye are ombra~ ing in this city
Incrasiglya geatJiversityg great zaboolsq raji&amp; 1j achieving
great trd os n this Schbool may hold, i its be" d uon&amp; ~ Any of
theme ( Cpplauso) i 



P* fm. ITe0 3, ' 10 2
PRI I MINIS3::. E' CO. Tl., E-JN CE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the t. Hon. Menzie.
The Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, after
consulting all Commonwealth Prime Ministers, has convened a
meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London on
September to give further consideration to proposals which are
expected by that time to have been formulated concerning
Britain's application to join the Common Market.
This is clearly not an ideal date from the point of view
of Australia as the Budget Session will be in progress. But since
it suited a majority we felt that we could not maintain an
objection. I have no doubt that adequate Parliamentary
arrangements can be made for our effective representation. I
will discuss this with Mr. McEwen who has just completed a series
of important discussions in Britain and Europe and will, on his
return be reporting to the Gov-rnment on them.
The essential thing about the Prime Ministers'
Conference on the Common lMiarket is that it should not occur after
minds have been made up but should present the Prime Ministers
with an effective opportunity of influencing the ultimate
decision. We have, of course, been most accive in this matter and
will continue to be so in the period between now and September.
From the time the British entry into the Common Market was first
mooted, we have been seized with the need to secure an effective
voice for Australia in all the discussions involving our vital
trade interests. A special Committee of Cabinet has had
developments constantly under review and we have made rereatod
roprosentations to Britain and to the Six so that they might be
fully cognisant of the nature and extent of Australian interests,
and of our proposals for protecting those interests. At the
outset we asked Britain to seek rith the Six an opportunity for
us to state our case directly when matters of concern to us are
involved. Since the initial discussions were opened with Mr.
Duncan Sandys about a year ago this has been a main objective.
, Je have pursued it in our discussions with British Ministers,
through our Ambassadors in the countries concerned, in meetings
beteon officials, and in a whole series of formal exchanges
between Australia and the Governments of the Six and Britain.
Those efforts have been reinforced by the approaches which Mr.
McEwen has made during his rucent round of mootings in Europe.
One result of these continuous efforts, but l no means
the only one, is that an opportunity is to be afforded to
Australia on 26th April to present her case to the body of
senior officials of the Common Market countries and Britain in
Brussel. s the Deputies which has the responsibility, under
the Ministers, for detailed negotiations. As has boon announced,
the Australian case, covering all points of trade interest to us,
will be presented to this mooting by the Permanent Head of the
Commonwealth Department of Tradj, Dr. J. A. , Josterman. Dr.
. Jstorman will have available for consultation in London prior
to the Brussels moeting, advisers from a wide range of
Australian industries whose interests are most directly affect. d.
The work done at this mooting will be vigorously followed up. 
We are well aware of the difficulties in the way, of
securing safeguards for Australian trade int,. rests which we
would regard as acceptabloBut at least we can hope that, as
a result of the efforts we have made, Australia's particular
problems are now btter understood and the roat and grave
importance of these matters to Australia better appreciated, by
Britain and the Six. 1. e shall continue to press our claims, and
to make our views known with the utmrost energy. But it must be
roem. er. d that no conclusions on the terms and conditions of
British entry to the Common Market can be arrived at without the
agreement of the Six nations. Our task is th3erefore both heavy
and challenging, and will continue to require constant Australian
advocacy. CAN3ELRA, 19th April, 1962. 



' TDFY NO.,
WEE4X TYND-' NG A-tB'IT
CO 1 ifTY L~ ffl OF A'U:-: T. iRAL . t
index of Miistcrial StatementS TSOUed. in Canbaor-a
The Acting Minister for Trade,, Senator the Hone Denhrn Henty
April 18No. 414y,, CONSU-LTl'TIONS IN LONDON COMLMON 1, ARI( XFT
The Minister foc. r Labour and National -Service~ The H1, on0 W" il1 irm
M, ' M alon.
April 16
it 18
It 19 No. 405 REVIEW OF EIIALOYMENT SITUATION MARJCH ' 612
No. 414B EuPLJOYMENT OF YOUNG PEOPLE
No 417 W;, TE1RFjh* Z'kNT STOP PAGES
The Pcstmastrer-General. 10 The Ho-ne, CW. Daiidson
April 27No. 411FREOQE'CY CHA'NNELS FOR NEW TELEVISION
STA,' TIONS IN CA; ITAL CITIES1
The Minister for ExenlAff. irs. The : ion, Sir Girfield Barwick
April 19No, 419AU'STR,' LIAN A'ID TO CEYLON TO COMVBA T
FOLIOMYELITIS EPIDEMIC
The Minister -for Prirma-ry inldustry,_ the C. F, Adermann
April 16No,, 408AAUSRALAN UTTI2R SALE TO RHODESIA/
NYA SALANTP
The Miitrfrthe rwThe Hon,) J., Cramer
April 16No. 4o6CH. 1ANGES IN SENIOR ARIMY APPOINTIMENTS
The Mini ste r -for Works, The Hion. Gordon Freeth
Ar; pril 16No0L. O8
it 18 iio. 414 DIEV!. TIRAINING COLLEGE FOR NURSES
PORT MORESBY
REDUCTION IN INSUP. ANCE PREMIUTMS
The Minister for the N~ avy,._ Senator the Hon, Gorton
April 1-7
if 18
it 19 Nc. 409
No,, 412
No. 415 BIGGEST F. A. N. VISIT TO JALPAN
NAVYf COMMUNICA; TION L-PERT RETIRES
R. AON. FLEET-SPENDS EASTER INMAIA
The Mi1nister for lpTj, h1 f Ilon., ijlen Fairhall
April 16No. 408B
1 19 No,, 42 0 FIR ST HIGH-LEXTEL F T-LOIRATORY BALLOON
BURSTS AT 101; 000 FEET
7th MEETING OF C'WEALTH A-DVISORY.-
AERONA'UT ICAiL RESEARCH COUNCIL,
The Minister for ir he Hion. TeClip ir
April 1.9No,, 41eRAl'AF T. PZ'C FORCE FOR SEA TO XERCISE
The Minister for R. a riati oni The H~ on, R, Swart-
April 18No, 4 13REPA' 1TRIAT ION STUEhENTS GET INCREA1SE
The Department cof Extern-1 Affavtr
April 18No. 410
Nos, 407 and 426 4900. COLOMBO PLA N STUDE"' IT
CANCELLED
WVith the Compliymenrt0 cf
The Governmcmt Pu: blifc 11elations O'fj* cc,
ParliamientH JC
CTNFEnRPAQ T. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HONo R. G.
MENZiES, AT OPENING OF ADOLPH BASSER LIBRARY.
AD-MY OF CC CANBERRA 26TH I-A PRIL 1 C) 62
Mr, President, Dr, 3asser, ladies and gentlemen;
I want to tell you at once that a great weight has
fallen from my mind since I arrived here this afternoon. I was
here this morning as a sort of soi-disant Fellow of the Academy,
compassed about by the most formidable collection of scientists
that Australia has ever seen. So I felt muted and a little
depressed, But when I came in here this afternoon and saw so
many people just as unscientific as I am, this took a weight off
my shoulders. Sir, I want to say, before I make a few remarks that
may be relevant to the occasion, that I cannot tell you how I
admire the international organisation which has been directed to
this evento This afternoon I open formally whatever that meansthe
Library and I was told in advance very kindly by my old
friend Professor Cherry that this was to be directed to
scientific history, or the history of science. Today, when I
went into my office I opened up a coimmunication from Harvard of
which I am, as you might say, a species of graduate and it
contained a Newslette:. and, believe it or not, the subject of the
Newsletter was " Reflections on the History of Science as an
academic subject An ., Umerican viewro That gave me an enhanced
opinion of the skill with w1-hich these people organised their
business, Could I first of all say somethling about the man wIhose
name we are honouring this afternoon, Adolph Bassero So far as I
can make out I haven't pursued him impertinently he wasn't
born in Australia, but all I can say is that he has lived a long
time in Australia and ho has left his mark on Australia, He is
one of those men who, having decided no doubt that it was time
that he had a hobby, took up as a hobby giving money away. This
is an admirable hobby, nd give it away he does, in a magnificent
and spacious, but always well-directed fashion, I want him to
know that everybody here appreciates what he has done, and is
doing, very greatly indeed,
The other thing that I want to say to you concerns the
KLibrary itself. There are those and perhaps I have been among
them in my time who think threo is some rather deep cleavage
between what w. To call scientific study in the strict sense, and the
study of the humanities It is very fascinating to me to find how
the lines blur, and how, in the case of this Library you can
bring the great business of history into conjunction with the
groat business of science. The study of history has always
scomed to me to be one of the most important studies that a man
can direct his mind to because an ignorance of history can so
easily produce a stupid disaster; and to have it applied in the
case of science seems to me to be a splendid illustration of its
value not only to science, but in other fields,
A knowledge of history seems to me to be of great moment
for the conduct of public affairs; for the great conduct of
business affairs for that matter. I speak subject to correction
but wasn't it Henry Ford himself who, when on oath oddly enough,
in some litigation in America made that immortal remark that
" history is bunk", which satisfied my own mind that he understood
mass production better than he understood history. How can we
handle the reat affairs of notions unless we know something
about the past; unless we know what has happened; unless we
reject that single fallacy that ' happy is the country that has
no history'? I say unhappy is the country that has people
charged with Government the responsibility for it who are not
able to look back with history , nd to realise that there is not
much that is now, that thor:: are many demonstrations of error and
that the business of wis mni is to avoid errors that have been
committed and confine themselv. js to their own instead of
imitating other people's. 
In or 2.
In science it soams Ito me, as a layman, to be quite
clear that he -vho talkc-. 7 thc ed es of Gs'me pice of
scientific investigation, accepots it,, Puts it in-to operation, is
not a scinitin the fu'Ll s -% nsC-at The man who Tants to
conduct investiga2tion into sc-ientific principles can never, I
believe, separate himself fj--rom -that ,. rent be fore the last discovery.
He cannot confine himsai f to the discovcery itsclf. It is not
suffi cient to say 1-vhat did he do? l Js vory important to
di scover why ho did it9 and how he, did it,. Oo tuc have the great
stream of scientific kn owledge I a stream, incroasing at such a pac
in raod-ern times-,-th: at to unciorsuand it fully we must occasionally
go back along the streamrs and seck the fountainhead instead of just
dividing up the little stroams. Ther?-.: fore the study of the
nistory of science, facili7t ieS for that study, facilities for
quiet reading and rofJlction, s. cem to , e to be of the me'Ist
tr_-emendous iraportancce0
Thor--is just oncl other thing that I uould like to say
to you, A refolrence rmad,,, by Profe-ssor Cheorry to sound
rocordings0 I thinik vc haven't caught up very : mi-uch yet uith the
idea of using tapea record-ings anO. other nmeanis of recording people's
voices and ideas. ' Niobody) for ealecould properly understand
the history, purposo, fun' tiori of' thiis Academy unloss as I
didn~ t I had h.-Ad thie fortho[,. ugh-t-to -put on my table a tapere-
cording machine ivory tirie Mark Oliphaant corie along with some
im-probable story, Cve.-r time John Eccles came along with some
improbable story not nc: ssail the: sanie story or Leslie
Martin, or eve_-n 4ir John. Cickcroft the Chance-; llor. ' 11nat a
wonderful thing it ; vjsou1. d be to have on record the voice itself,
things that ha_ d bee~ n said uich Emigh tl in fact, in some sense,
influence the. future course of events. In thae samer,(, wVay I can
iraagine thnat if 12 ' ire a ran of scion.. tific bt: nt and were a student
at a University and 2, at at the fee t, if not of the prophet, at
le ast of some equal-ly e,. Ainant person, borrowing a little of~ hi.,
okwn liustre by hi-ving been near it Would be z: great inspatlion
tGo mae to be . Abl to listan thereafter, to his v:; co describing
soi-tot tdoiacs sn th .1uht provoking a few ideas. T ho refor e
I ve--nture oh-pta in this Library there; will be some space
reserved for such things as tape re cordings.
' Ja in A talaarc disposed to be a cy-nical, sceptical
people., You are rosi D. c-tabic -vhen youi are dea d. You may have a
fair chance of being faraous or forgotten if you have boen dead long
enough. BE-ta~ a s 1for the c u rrenIVta to cf :-1f f a iris, w0e l1 wha -t o f i-t.
Iventure to say taat iriis Academy there re men anL oe hs
voices, lite-rally whose voice. s, woulId be liste ned to with profound
inteorest by pcople hero in 50 years' timea, -or in ]. 00 years' tirae.
That really is why I llav only one doubt a-bout the Bassor Library
and th~ it is uwhether it will be big~ enou_ gh. Because. as time goes on
the material that it will-accumula te vill 3. argci, and larger and
indc, 3d ore and more sig.:. nificant0
But that we srlould be able to fLind established in this
p]. a-ce a Library devoted to scientific historN is, I think, a Late
for congratulations. I am ve ry we-ll aware of what Tom. Cherry says
about duplication of libraric-s and I am atll fo+. r rationalising these
matters. I say that as one who has ha~ d quite a few.. libr.-ries
pluciked out of him thie las-t few ycars,, But at tine s-) me time I
ari bound to say to you that 1 think one -of tho -many proofs of
growing civilisatiean in our-couantry is that wl. oeras to find a
Library in a University was, not so many years ., go9, rather a rarity,
we now have quite a few lar , ge, rgrowing, comraerhensive. In this
is the very heart of th-e ' Univer1sity structure,,
Thi-erefor-; Sir, Dr. 3asser, in thanking you for what you
have drone about th., is raatter 1 I ant toD say quite frank. ly that I thii
y our contribution, standing as it does -in the samo building as this
Hall which cormmoeoratos the r. ma; ni fi * cent : and imaginative generosity
of Sir Ellerton Bockor, that this Librar wilb oehngtt
you will alw,. ays be proud to rememiber that you brought into existencc
by ro-ur thougqt anid nerosity. The-. reor, ladies and iontlemen,
I forrmally declare tl~ o Libra~ x'y open0 



EMBARGO:-NOT TO BE CABLED? BROADCAST
OR PUBLITSHED BEFORE THE CONCLUSION OF
THE PRESS CONFERENCE IN CANBERRA ON
THURSDAY, APRIL 26TH.
BRITAIN AND THE COMMON MARKET
Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Trade, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
Mr. McEwen said today that the intensive discussions
on which he had been engaged abroad had fully confirmed his
earlier judgment that many Australian export industries could
be faced with immense problems if Britain joined the European
Common Market without special arrangements to protect our
interests. Mr. McEwen was speaking on his return from a seven weeks
visit to North America and Europe. in the course of his
overseas journey, Mr. McEwen visited Washington, Ottawa, London
and the capitals of the member states of the European Economic
Community. He said that he had talked with President Kennedy,
Mr. Macmillan, President de Gaulle, Mr. Diefenbaker and
senior Ministers in all the countries which he had visited.
In London he had several meetings with the group of senior
British Ministers handling the Common Market negotiations. In
Brussels Mr. McEwen also had discussions with Professor Hallstein,
President of the European Economic Commission and Mr. Mansb-olt,
Vice-President responsible for agricultural matters within the
Common Market.
" As I made clear before I left Australia", Mr. YcEwen
said, " I was not myself engaged in negotiations. Australia
is not a party to the Brussels negotiations. We are, however,
vitally concerned with many aspects of them. My task was to
ensure that at the highest possible political level the critical
issues at stake for Australia were fully understood by those
Government leaders whose views and policies would determine the
outcome of the negotiations". Mr. McEwen said 
, Mr. McEwen said that his discussions had been frank and
uninhibited. " I explained very clearly," he said, " that the
Australian Government greatly valued a unified, strong and
prosperous Europe. The Rome Treaty had this as an objective.
We believe that the accession of Britain to the Common Market
could contribute to this objective. As a staunch and unwavering
partner of the Western allies, Australia, no less than the
European countries themselves, welcomed any development which
strengthened the free world as a whole".
" But I made it equally clear", the Minister continued,
" that our Government's view was that the strength and unity of
the West, far from being strengthened, could be seriously impaired.
if the British Commonwealth were divided and its members
weakened by a failure to take into account and accommodate the
vital interests of Commonwealth countries in the maintenance of
their long standing trade and economic ties with Britain"
Mr. Mc~ wen said he had explained that Australia's rights
of unrestricted duty free entry into the British market for most
of our export products had been in existence for more than a
hundred years. The contractual arrangements under which reciprocal
tariff preferences are provided have extended over thirty years.
Many of our great primary industries had been developed as a
deliberate consequence of our contractual rights, and some of them
were crucially dependent upon their preferential access to the
British market for their survival as profitable industries. Some
secondary industries had succeeded in penetrating the British
market with the benefit of preferences.
If Britain should join the Common Market without special
arrangements being made to safeguard Australian interests, there
would be damage to Australian industries at present exporting to
Britain products valued at about œ 160 million a year. Many would
be seriously affected. Commodities affected include wheat and
other grains; butter, cheese and processed milk products; meats;
sugar; fresh, canned and dried fruits; wine; lead and zinc; some
/ manufactured 
-3-
manufactured goods and a whole range of agricultural products.-and
processed foodstuffs. Instead of these goods entering the
British market free of duty, as they do now in almost all cases,
they would have tariff duties and import levies charged against
them. They would lose the important tariff preferences nearly all
of them now enjoy against non-Commonwealth suppliers.
The Minister said he had emphasised in his talks that what
was at stake for Aus tralia was not just a matter of the possible
loss of export earnings although this in itself was a matter of
real importance since Australia's economic growth and development
was heavily dependent upon our ability to expand our export
receipts. The real issue at stake was the future livelihood of those
Australians farmers, miners and factory workers whose-products---
are largely exported to Britain. Indeed, even manufacturing
industry supplying the home market could be affected if our
capacity to earn foreign exchange becomes insufficient to provide
us with all the raw materials, components and plant which our
factories need to maintain their production. The future of whole
communities, such as the towns and cities of the sugar producing
areas, and the irrigation districts, and isolated mining centres,
were deeply involved. In the end result, few Australians would
not be affected one way or another.
Mr. McEwen said he had explained that these were the kind of
problems which the Brussels negotiations raised for-Australi-a. He
had pointed out that the opportunities and advantages we had
enjoyed for so long were not a one-sided affair. They were
balanced by the reciprocal tariff preferences which Britainen -oyPd
in the Australian market and which in total over forty years had
resulted in Australia, despite our small population, being the
biggest single market for British goods, consequently providing
more jobs in British factories than any other country. " Over the
decade of the 1950' s", Mr. McEwen said, " each Austra. Lian-. bought an
average of œ 34 worth of British goods a year. The people living
in the Common 
-4-
in the Common Market countries bought about œ 3 worth per head
a year from Britain and United States citizens bought less than
œ 2 worth". Mr. McEwen said that these were the facts and circumstances
which made Britain's application for membership of the Common
Market of such historic importance for Australia and Australians.
His task had been to ensure that Government leaders in Europe
and in the United States understood the stark realities of the
situation for us.
" Despite the unremitting efforts which the Government has
made since the possibility of Britain joining the Common Market
emerged for the first time in the middle of last year, I found
that many of the Government leaders to whom I talked did not fully
comprehend our position. I am confident that my discussions
succeeded in registering with them very clearly the strength of the
argument why the interests of Australia and other Commonwealth
countries in the British market should not be impaired. Without
exception, I found that as a result of my explanation of our
circumstances, there was a much better understanding of our case
and, I believe, a more sympathetic comprehension of our problems."
" Nevertheless", Mr. McEwen said, " lam bound to say that I
am far from satisfied that this genuine sympathy and understanding
will necessarily be translated into practical arrangements to
adequately safeguard our interests. From the outset of the
negotiations the British Govenment has said that it would not
feel able to enter the Common Market unless important Commonwealth
trading interests were protected. This, of course, is of tremendous
importance and only time will tell whether the special
arrangements necessary to give effect to this declaration can be
secured from the Common Market Governments"
Mr. McEwen said one of the most disturbing elements in this
very complex situation was the American attitude towards the
retention of the British preferential trading system which was so
vital to 
vital to Australia and to the continued unity and strength of the
Commonwealth. Despite the strong representations which he had
made in Washington, he was unable to say with any real confidence
that the pervasive influence of the United States in Europe would
not operate towards the disidantlement of the existing Commonwealth
preferential system in its own self-interest.
' lthough United States spokesmen had said that some
transitional period of adjustment was necessary, the United States
Government appeared to be clearly against what it vwould regard as
the continuation of the preferential system through special
arrangements made to meet Commonwealth trade problems if Britain
wore to join the Common Market.
Mr. McEwven said that A. ustralia would not be tranquilised
with transitional arrangements. These would be no concession
to Australia. The Europeans were arranging this as a matter
of course between themselves. He was concerned with permanent
arrangements that would safeguard Australia's vital trade
interests and allow the necessary economiic development to continue
without serious setback.
Moreover, he had put forward forcibly the view that the
which was the main instrument of the United States'
post-war trade policies and which stood for no new preferences,
recognised and accepted the existing preferential structure.
If it had not done so, Australia would never have joined the
G. A. T. T. Neither would any other Commonwealth country; and
the G. A. T. T. would probably not have come into being.
He had argued that Australia and countries similarly
placed already had a sense of frustration about the disparity
of trading opportunities between the highly industrialised
countries on the one hand and exporters of primary products on
the other. This must inevitably turn to a sense of real
grievance if the United States were to use the incident of
Britain's application to join the Common Market to seek to kill
our preferences and obtain profit in the process by benefitting at the 
-6-
at the expense of our trade in the United Kingdom, and British
trade in our market.
Tdr. McEwen said that his arrival in Europe had been timed
to enable him to press the Australian Government's desire to have
its own representative explain to the officials conducting the
negotiations in Brussels the facts of Australia's trade interests
in the British market, and the vital importance to Australia that
these interests should be preserved. This opportunity had been
secured and the case was in fact being put today in Brussels to
the negotiating Committee of the Common Market and Britain by
Dr. Westerman, Permanent Head of the Department of Trade.
Mric. McEwen said that the decision of the E. E. C. Ministers
to invite an Australian representative to present the Australian
position fully justified the stand which the Australian Government
had consistently taken that no-one could put the case for
Australia as well as Australia itself.
Mr. McEvien said that the Australian approach to the
negotia'tions--in--Bruss-elIs has always been positive and constructive.
He said that in his talks in Europe and elsewhere he had discussedthe
kind of arrangements which might not only protect Australia's
trade interests but should be acceptable to the Common Market
countries and to third countries such as the United States.
Possible arrangements had been discussed with representatives of
major Australian industries, which the Government had arranged to
go to London to provide practical assistance to Dr. Westerman in
the preparation of the Australian case. Mr. IdcEwen said he was
grateful for the co-operation of the industry advisers and the
assistance which their knowledge would bring to bear on the many
problems involved.
Mr. McEwen said that he would be making a full report on
his visit to his Cabinet colleagues early next week, after which
he expected to make a statement to Parliament. 53/ 62T.
Canberra, Thursday April 26th, 1962. 



6 2/ OW~
STMSGAT ( NVFIIS BILL, l962
SNDE C RP DNG PRE~; c BY rTHE 11011.~ R._ TTETTPTPS
This is a b-;_ 11 to make rrants to the States for
U-niversities purposes. This is not tohe first bill of its kind, of
course, nor do I supposeC that i~ t wil~ l fbe the last. It falls into
two pcrts. In one part it deals witbhe recurrent grants to the
uni'versities under rhat li-1 call the nolrmal pattern-, -in the
second part it directs itselIf to thae proo. er of teact-ing hospitals
at-tached to uaniversitie s0 Th'ose are -two different matters. One
is old, but is being adjusted. The other is new. S o far a s thle
old is concerned~, many honourable members will. recall that, under
the St(-ates Gñ ants ( Universities) Act of 19609 vhich is the
. princi~ pal ect ' for this purose.;. provision was wiar;-e in section 6
that thle rate of basic-prcfessori-al rem-nerationi that is
thie approved ratf. e for the purposes of finaric-lal assistance under
this part -is : 04~., 000 per annLu., being the rate that was on
October, 1960, th., e rate applicable in a majority of the universities
in Aust-raliLa. That was not a * grovision a~ qich fixed professorial
salaries at : 24, 000 pe,. r 3nmn. I t i. a a provision which treated
œ e4 2000 as the average figu. re on " hhec Coxmmonwealth. grant
shiould be based. I viar~ t to mnale that quite cleoar. ': Ie are not
prestufiing to doterm-ine wh. t 19 tate unive.-sities shall pay to tiheir
o; n academiJc stafTfs,, but ~, obvIously, for the pureeses of
caculating whiat oughit to btc grante-,: d -to tho States under our
broad scheme w~ e miust riave soroce, firure as a point of roforence in
i'&amp; i. ation to es~ ria T. e st tes bei-g presu-med to bo
in a certain ralationsliip to them Theefor-e, in te1960 actu-we
nam-ed œ C4_ 00O and then, be causo at hat t-;, Ime tile whole of tihe
salary s~ ructure was in a stato of flux and thecr_ wa re differenit
rules anpp1led in d-ifferent States, w~ e added a provision in section
6 sub-section whnich onablod Lthe Minister by an instrument
under his harid, to a: lter that filgure and thor ) fcre vary the grant,
On theP hole, ve thin! k -that sub-suctiOn is not a good
th-ing, I thirnk tlnat Tmnmrabjeer sv gonerally would agree th-at
if: 1 therve is to bea chonge in on~ e of the basic itams in the
CcuJ-la ion otf a Stato g-, ant t-he. Ho-Lso oughit to liave an opportunity
to look at 1it first., th. e re3fo-re I h-ave doci. ded that thnis subsection
oughit to goand that int fu-tlue if thera is any chiange in
the, poin-t of reforonce, as I hai" ve doscrmie it it ou,; ht to be
done by a measure bj.-ou,_ ht into this Hosone -; hIichi can be
discussed in this Houso,
So what wre are p-. toposing he~ re is to alter the provision
containcud i~ n s: ction 6o and to -Lepeal suction 6 so there
will not ba any adminis trati. ve doci. sion on thio matter, but a
statutory one. ThI'e alteatio i-' n section 6 hiaving regard to
wniat a special comi~ itzeo rocormec. ed to the AustEralian
Univers-ities Ccrrmi s. 5Lon aftur wide consultation, is to jincroaso
the point of refo3rence for -tte calculation of~ the rocurrent
grants from 42000 to œ, Z4., Y00 T'hat doe::-not me-,. an and I repoat
thi~ s that thlat is the salary for a univaisity prcfessor; but it
does mean thlat th-at is the isjr uron uh! c-Ich we calculate what we
are going to pay to tbno States In relation to their universities
for the current pericud.
M~ r. Cpean You do not look at eJ, -her a 7, ax. r. nun or a minimuzm.
MR. MENZIES No. I au C; Ia-d to be remntn'_ ed of th-is0 The
corfmrittee that rcorted on thu a matter thouglit that perhaps the
uniLversi-ties shiould adopt. a range of poXsorclsalarie's and
siuggsted, in fact. thiac i uhtt u ac-co. rn toc their
judmont and according to -the facu,. Ityr concernod, between ". 4,000
and 500. But * Uhat was merely a r~ omnainof the committee. 
Mr. Crean ' dithout having low--grade or high-grade professors?
M-. 0 MENZIES. Quite so. e are not putting ourselves in the
position of determining what the pay ought to be in the case of
the various universitics. They are not within our jurisdiction.
Howevor, we do fooeel, having regard to the goenral movement, that
it would be wise to make an adjustment at this stage and date it
back to the beginning of the iriennium because these things are
done on a three-years basis a. l. tring the point of reference for
salaries for this purpose from œ 4,000 to I think that that
is all I need to say about that. The schedule to the bill shows
what the provisions will be, having rugard to this adjustment in
regard to salaries.
The second thing that this bill does is to take up and
deal with, for the first time, the problem of the teaching
hospitals. This is a matter rhich has been put to me and to many
of us, no doubt on a number ox' occasions, There are universities
which have hospitals in wv. hich they provide clinical instruction
for their medical students in their senior year, and those
hospitals are staffed vary frequently by men of great distinction,
very many of them in honorary positions, who are giving instruction
which is vital for the complete education of med: ical students. It
has booeen said for many years, I think with a good deal of truth,
that if we are dealing with the universities problem we ought to
provide for instruction in the teaching hospitals, because this is
properly part of the work. of the universities. And in order to
get a pretty clear mind on this thing, if we could, I had
discussions with the Chairman of the Universities Commission and
we established a very powerful sub-committee to advise on the
problem of teaching hospitals, T1he sub--committee contained
outside p) eople, medical men of great distinction and academic
people of note. It made an examination and finally made to the
Universities Corissrwon a report -r'hich I have seeon and which I
may say this to the honourable membor for Melbourne Ports ( Mr.
Crean) I hope I wiill. be able to have printed in adequate time
beforc he has to resumzne the second-reading debate. The report is
not actually ready at the imoment. There are on or two difficulties
about it, Jhich I will mention.
The sub committeo, wrhen it got co work on this problem,
found, of course, that it had to divide the matter into two parts.
One was the capital oxpnditue that would be requirod if the
Commonwealth, making its œ 1 for œ 1 grant to the States, was going
to take on that proportion of the responsibility for capital
equi.-pment needed for this extended university function in a
teaching hospital. Honourable imembers will see particularized in the
schedule to bill the items that are involved under that heading.
We propose in this to adopt that portion of the sub-committee's
recommendations and to provide on a : U for œ 1 basis the money
required to carry out the capital programme that the members have
in mind a very substantial one, but a very important one,
Honourable members may ask thrmsulves, as indeed I did when I read
this report, how i. t comes about that so much capital expenditure
needs to be made at this stage to equip teaching hospitals for
their work The answer to that luary is that medical science
changes year by year. Noew methods are dovised and new fors of
equipment are needed.,
Incidentally, when a new univorsity is set un you can
get most acute probleos, To give an example, I take my own
State, which I know best. In Victoria in the past the University
of Melbeurne conducted its mdical school ope-rations in at least
two hospitals, the Ro yal M; elbourne H. sital and the Alfred
Hospital, In oach of thc elinical classes woer conducted and in
each of then the instructors did their werk, A new university
the Monash Univcrsity has boon established and it is to have a
meodical school 
If it is to have a medical school which is to be offective it must
have a hospital in which its senior moeical students can do their
clinical work and receive t hir clinical instruction.
The result will be that, whereas in the past the
University of Melbourne has had accoss to the teaching hospitals
within its own area, in the future, when Mionash is completely
establishod, these will have to be divided. The Royal Molbourne
Hospital, for example, will remain with the University of
Melbourne and the Alfrod Hospital will go to the Monash University.
I do not need to tell honourable members that when that
kind of thing happens you cannot throw up new hospitals overnight.
The fact is that to accormenodate in one of these hospitals more
students than it has over had to dcal with before, because of the
demands of other universities, you will need to establish new
buildings, new equipeont and new matters that are required for the
teaching of perhaps twice as many students in the hospital as were
taught befo:. o. If honourablo members will be good enough to run
their eyes over the schedule to the bill they will see the nature
of the things which are involved,
Mr. Crean I do not know whether your schedule is the same as mine
but rine has not pages 9 and 10. It goes straight from page 8 to
page 11.
vMENZIES Oh doarJ Do not bla Le me for that. I will look at
the one I have been working on. It is marked '" Confidential", so
perhaps I have been given something different, ;! hat pages are you
. acking?
Mr. Croan Pages 9 and
MR . MENZIES They are in my confidential draft. There has been
some discrimination Lhero in favour of fellows on the Governmont
side. I am sorry about that. TJe will see that you get a proper
copyo
Mr. Crean Thank you. I have now been given an adjusted copy.
MR. MENZIES That is a comfort. I would have hated to think
there was some discrimination against yeu.
Coning to the capital side, all I want to say is that
honourable members will agrco that the great movement in
assistance to university training would not have been complete
unless we had decided to take a nove for rard into this extra
provision for teaching hospitals run in association with the
univursities. On the other point, recurrent expenditure, a report
was made. It is frightfully difficult to determine, as members
will understand, hor to divide up the rocurrent expenditure in
hospitals between teaching and ordinary hospitalization. What
percentage of the, tiie of the nurses is to be reg: arded as
attributable to teaching and clinical instruction? How much would
be -ttributable to the normal conduct of the business of the
hospital and so on? I want to say quite frankly that we are at
the moment not entirely satisfied with that branch of the report
that was made, I have had a conference of a very friendly kind, I
hasten to say with the chairman of the Universities Commission
and with the very distinguished Prof ossor Sutherland, from
Melbourne, who was a rme~ ber of this conmittee, and the Treasury.
At this moment work is being done by the officials of the
Treasury, ~ ry officials and representatives of the Universities
Com~~ ission to se whethr such pints of difference as arise in
relation to rocurrent itoiLs can be worked out and accommodated, 
4.
That is not a matter of urgency, although we do not propose to
delay it. The urgent matter is the provision of the capital
equipment, and therefore I thought it would be wise to get on with
tne thing that was urgent and not to hold it up until the next
sittings of Parliament, when we wuld have the recurrent problem
worked out. I will, in the spring session, if I survive so long,
present a second measure dealing with recurrent expenditure
attributable to the medical schools. I was going to say that I
am full of hope on that matter, but perhaps that is an entirely
unnecessary remark to make. 



Weekly Index No. 17
May 5, 1962
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Weekly Index of Ministerial Statements
Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade,
The Rt. Hon. John McEw. Nn
April 30 No. 447 TPADE PUBLICITY MAN FOR SINGAPORE
May 1 No. 456A NEW MEMBERS FOR EXPORT DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
2 No. 461 MISSION SUCCESS IN VENEZUELA
4 No. 473 INTEREST IN AUSTRcALIA AT MILAN FAIR
The Treasurer, The Rt. Hon. Harold Holt.
April 29 No. 442 ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW NATIONAL MINT AT
CANBERRA
" t 30 No. 446 C'WEALTH CASH AND CONVERSION LOAN AND
NEW SERIES OF SPECIAL BONDS
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.
May 3 No, 466 OIL SEARCH PUBLICATION INNAMINCKA No. 1
WELL, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
3 No, 467 GECPHYSICAL MAPS KtILGOORLIE AREA, W. A.
3 No, 469 AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO SOUTH AMERICA
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley, M. P
April 29 No, 444 SEAT O SIXTEENTH MILITARY ADVISERS'
OONFERENCE AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION
May 2 No. 460 SHIP LAUNCHING AT MARYBOROUGH, Q'LAND.
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck
May 2 No. 458 HOUSING LOANS PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
May 2 No. 463 7. C. A. TO SPEND œ 337,000 ON " PROJECT JET
TALK".
The Postmaster-General, Tho Hon. C. W. Davidson
May 1 No. 45 A. B. C. MvEMBERSHIP OF INTERTEL
2 Nc, 464 DEPUTATION TO POSTMASTER GENERAL FOR
SATURDAY CLOSURE OF POST OFFICES.
2 No. 465 CONCESSION POSTAGE RATES
3 No. 468 INVESTIGATIONS IN POST OFFICE IN VICTORIA
The Minister for Immigration The Hon. A. R. Downer,
May 1 No. 453 RESULTS OF ] IMIGRATION PROGRAJME
The Minister for External Affairs. The Rt. Hon. Sir Gerfield
Barwick,
April 29 No. 444-A AUSTRALIAN DIPLOMATIC APPOI1NTMEN'TS
May 1 No. 448 CASE REVIEWED OF THREE PORTUGUESE NAVAL
RATINGS
4 No, 478A COLOMBO PLAN AID TO PAKISTAN
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
April 29 No. 444B WOOL MARKXTING COMMITTEE OF lQUIRY
REPORT AVAILA3LE FOR SALE.
May 2 No. 462 WOOL EiPORTS UP MORE THAN œ 39 m, in FIRST'
iJNE MONTrHS OF 1.961--62
4 No. 478 AIRCRAFT TO HELP SPOT TUNA FOR SURVEY
The Minister for the Army, the Hon. J. O. Cramer,
May 1 No. 447A NEW COMMANDING OFFICR APPOINT3D FOR NEW1
GUINEA C. GROUP. // 2 / 2 
2
The Minister for the Interior, The Hon Gordon Freeth
May 4. No, 474 AUCTIONS OF RESIDENTIAL LEASES
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
May 4 No0 477 NAVY HYDROGRAPHER FOR INTERNATIONAL CONFERL: CE
The Minister for Shipping and. Transport, Mr. Hubert Oppermann.
May 1 No. 449 RECORD BREAKING ROBERT GORDON MENZIES
3 No. 471 NEW SHIP HANDED OVER
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
Apr. 29 Noo 443 AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO W. H. O. ASSEMBLY
AT GENEVA
The Minister for Supply, the Hon, Allen Fairhall
May 1 No. 452 LOW LEVEL OF FALLOUT EXPECTED HERE FROM
U, S. TESTS.
2 No, 456 BLACK KNIGHT AND " HAD" FIRED AT WOOMERA
No, 457 WIRELESS INSTITUTE OF AUST. HONOURS SUPPLY
MINISTER FAIRHALL.
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
May 4 No. 475 50,000 MILES IN SEATO EXERCISES
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. Swartz,
May 2 No, 459 QUEENSLAND STUDENT WINS SCHOLARSHIP
3 No, 470 DUAL ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS
The Department of
May 3 No. 472
The Department of
April 30 No, 44.5
The Department of
April 30 No. 451 the Treasury
CONSOLIDATED REVENUE FUND AT APRIL 30,1962,.
External Affairs.
AUSTRALIANS MAN-HAUL SLEDGE IN ANTARCTICA
Primary Industry
EXPORT SUGAR REBATE
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
No. 454, 455 and 476 CANCELLED 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R..
MENZIES, AT OPENING OF T2 POi. ER STATION, ON
__ MTAHY 162
Sir, colleagues, Your Excellencies, and ladies and gentlemen:
It is only a few days ago that somebody was talking to
me about the great art of speech-making, and in my usual dogmatic
fashion I said to him " Of course the essence of it, old boy, is to
get as close to the audience as you can, so that you are on easy
and even intimate terms with them". And here I am today, feeling
remarkably elevated for the first time since last December.
( Laughter) There is one other thing that I ought to tell you,
. hen I have concluded my few remarks my instructions are to pull
a switch. I see that it has on the switch that it was used by
my wife in opening Tumut 1 and I am therefore very sorry that the
doctor has prohibited her from being with me this afternoon.,
But, I have been warned by Sir William Hudson, who, under the
direction of his wife, manages this enterprise, ( Laughter) that
when the switch is pulled there zrill be a co-tain amount of
mystery go on donm below, and then there will be the most
deafening noise, and I am instructed to warn you all to remain
quietly seated: there will be no occasion for panic because he
assures me that the whole thing has been tested and that it will
worko So that tremendous noise which will occur when I pull that
switch, will of course, be understood by you and will be
gratefully received by me as a substitute for applause.( Laughter)
Now, ladies and gentlemen, this is really, as I don't
need to tell you, a very remarkable enterprisco It has so many
aspects that one could speak for two hours and not deal with all
of them. But this is a very remarkable undertaking, with
various facets some of which are occasionally forgotten. This
enterprise, first of all, began as an imaginative conception, a
conception which was operated, which was put into existence, by
my predecessors; and I always acknowledge the imaginative effort
that they engaged in when they established the Snowy Mountains
Authority. It so happens, by the circumstances of politics,
which do change from time o time that my own Government has had
the opportunity of enabling the taxpayers to find the money to be
spent on it, and in large licks. Senator Spooner, as he admits,
has been the Minister for 11 years, the Minister in whose parish
this comes0 I tell you that his persistent attempts to get more
from the Treasury than he really expected to have excited my warm
admiration. And it is because I have very frequently come doiwr
on his side that he has this high opinion that he has been
expressing to you today. He has been an enthusiast.
But the whole point about this enterprise is that
everybody connected with it is an enthusiast. Sir ! Jilliam Hudson
is a quiet man. In Canberra he seems almost a shy man; it is
very hard to draw him out at all, a most retiring fellow. ho
has ever flogged an enterprise of this kind along in the fashion
in whic' he has done? The moment you meet him and step into a
car and find yourself driving into the domain of the Snowy
Mountains Hydro-lectric Authority he becomes a d7ynamo himself.
He convoys his enthusiasm to whoever may be with him; he conveys
his enthusiasm to a very remarkable team. And my one attempt,
which failed, with my colleague Senator Spooner, was that when he
said that he ywanted me to open this Power Station I said " Well I
look forward to the time when we will have Sir illiam Hudson
open a Power Station". Frankly I think he should have opened
this one. Therefore, as I have had this task put upon me I
esteem it my duty to say not for the first time, that Australia
will never adequately understand the debt that it owes to this
man, and to those who have worked with him. ( Applause) 
V* My colleague said something about wives, Wives are very
important: none of us would be here but for wrives. But Lady
Hudson is herself, again, the embodiment of the womn, the wives,
who have contributed to the success of this scheme a very
wonderful success, and a wonderful contribution.
Noj, Sir, there are other aspects of this Snowy
Mountains Scheme. , le think, perhaps, we who live mostly in
cities, think of it perhaps mostly in terms of power, electric
supply and of course it is quite true that it makes a tremendous
contribution to the supply of power in two States. But it is easy
to overlook the fact that in the course of creating power it
provides vast storages of water and facilitates the ultimate
irrigation of many hundreds of thousands of acres of land. ;. nd if
there is one thing that is clear in Australia it is that for the
purpose of diversifying the products of the soil, of attracting
population into rural areas developing export trade on the grand
scale, the spread of irrigation is an imense contribution. I
think I am right in saying, but I speak subject to the correction
of the experts whom I see here, that already in New South Wales
and Victoria something of the order of 3 million acres of land are
under irrigation. This is a tremendous contribution to
Australian peduction, to Australian population to the Australian
future. And this groat Scheme is going to replenish, and add to
those resources, and therefore bring that tremendous piece of
benefit to Australia.
You see the duality of this thing? Power, yes,
primarily for the cities, .? ater, yes, primarily for the ( mtry.
Here you have something that comes in aid of primary industry, of
secondary industry; indead, that comes in aid of the whole
economic development of Australiao
Then, and here I do no more than repeat sor. lthing that
has been well said by my colleague, this enterprise has itself
not only created things, the kind of thing we see today, the next
great step, but it ias also served as a remarkable nursery of
talent. Think of the young engineers, think of all the young
technical people, wuio been working on this enterprise; and
who, in due course, go : t from it and enrich the technical and
engineering life of Aus-alia with the product of the skill some
of which, a good deal of which perhaps, they acquired in and
around these mountains. And our contractors in Australia, some
of whom are now becoming extraordinarily competent and prominent,
have, I venture to say, learned more in a few years about largescale
contracting and engineering works learned more in a few
years by the example of world-famous enterprises, than they might
otherwise have learned in a quarter of a contury,
So that this great Scheme enriches Australia, not only
with power, not only with water, but also with skill and
exp-rienco; and in the doing of all these things it is opening
up a section of Australia which I believe is destined to be one of
the great tourist resorts of the , orld.
Now this means that one must say that it would be
difficult to imagine, and certainly difficult to find, any enterprise
which had so many facets to it as this one has. Therefore
today as I take the mechanical step of pulling a switch, as we
celebrate the establishnent of yet another Power Station in this
great enterprise, let us remember with pride as Australians that
this Scheme was conceived and brought forth, has been carried on,
has been brought step by step towards its a. oLjletion, by people of
this country, and the people of countries friendly to us, anxious
to participate with us, in the development of a great continent.
Sir I believe that this is in its own fashion an
historic event and I thtin that all o' us who are here today so
long as we live will be vuey happy to think that we were resent on
an occasion to mark achievements which do Sc'ri:,' h credit to the
country and so much honour to those who have been primarily
concerned in it. Now hav. ng said that, rememaber my warning, I Wl. l
null the switch. i declare this Stati5n opn, 



~-~ a~ l. MN~ id~ XiiMN1. j-HJ~ OURt 0? R, Hog* K. Jp
Your ft00lleni09s, Prime Hinist'ir, and gentlment
IL have a VerY Simple tusk tonight-I am to propose the toast
of 3omebody who Is heaiily concealed on the book of the 4ords as " our
Distinguished Ouest", ait I must bring him out from behind this
erncealmnent. The Prim Minister of Nowv Z! ealand is, af coara., j al-days
a distinguished 4vest, but he is aliso our aei~ tibour and our friend,
(-$' Pplaua) There have 0eern some amusing Incidents of late Tirime Xinister6
One or two, or, for all I ". ow three membersof the Federal Parliament
h. v suggested t at you ought to join the Coonwrealth of ', ustrisliao
-% nd I an credibly i.. forined that whom you were asked about this at a
? rasai interview you said, I thoght quite clearly, 04ell io're just
dis--hargod our trust to Jest ibAwa and they nov hale their
.16ndapendone. defre quite prepa* rol to conusir niothe,-taleovcr".
( Laughter) Is that right? The Prime Minister iamirds, me the lists
are open. It is a very curious thing, you kflov, about Auitradiih and
liov ., alandt a terrible thing, that -do should have to ,.-alk About each
other as if we . rere thousands rand thousands of m~ iles vway. I hIsv
occasionally pointed out to my Nov &amp;. aland friends that there Is
something quite irrational aiuout the fact -hat if . an Austrutlian Member
of Parliament wants to jo to Perth# or -ants to jo eien into the
remote vild. nessas of vjyndham., or * arits to o up 1Into 6-he north of
, ueensland he just oosj wnd Ministers io are ali~ ijs reluctant,
lik~ e mysl!' 1 LO travel win go to theso pucos. jut I ion't need to
be told that It is m~ uch fuarther from ; jdney~ or ', nberra to Perth than
it is from Sjd~ ney or Canberra to aekland. And yet th.: t is an
ov~ rsoas cnter prise, This is a very odd thing and I ast say* a
very ; tranje thi%,, t rho more you think uaout it l~ e more you .8alise,
that although we have _ vueu idea In Austridlia that New cZoaa is
our little brother, anid In Vowi Zealanid they h. ate a determined idea
hat je re a miserable lot of wvh atev,-r you oare to say in
Australia, the fact is that for aUl the iurposes in this iorld
, pirpostes of existenceg or economic survival* or econamic Srovtki ws
are the same people. '-rdi the proat problem, Prim Minister# is raally
to encourage every ody on both sides of this Tasman, this turbulent
sea, whiah lies east of Sydney, ir even east of eAst 3ydney ( Laughter)
to jet to know each other better and undrstad each other bett.. r,
I bad a talk with the Prime Ministe, 9 Awo is an old friend
of min*,, this afternoon and we agreed in principle ( you kcnow that is
a very good thing, * In pririeipleN this ' Ar I majy tell you Is EAwt I
alvays resist in labinets I say 01 won't haste these decisions in
principle* because once you baire made then y.-u are sunk, yju see but
on the Continent they do this thing r ther bottar they say " an
principles anid It's the ume thing) but he and I have Seedq in
principle that It is very Important that every ye. r some meaers of
Parliament from Australia should ; o to New zealand and dot to meet
their opposite mn~ ers; and that some aembers or Pa&amp; rliament from Now
/ Aealnnd should come, to nustralia and me. tCheir opposite nubers -not
based on some Party conception, but a bulance of people in Parliament.
I think this is of the greatest Importance and I am very hapy to say
that the P~ rime Minister agrees about this, in pr incigle# because vs
realj outt Lo kno moro about each other than we do.
Wihat do 4e e now about New Zealand? we 1Cnop CIvery
histralian knovsp going back to 4arst that the nov Zealanders and the
Australians have stood side by side and have k~ nown no diffarenoo in
the field of aourage. 
.4
4e also know in our Waesting fashion t at It is not somaqy yoara ap
that most of the Ministers in the Caibinet in Raw healand came from
kastralia ( Laughter) and# I relgret to say$ a nmoer of them from
iinyhow it doesn't matter. ( Laughter) There they iwere, there they vet..'
And In my own lifetime I have often met som distinguished beadmasterg
so famous pu'ofesaor# same ireat head of a cleg an I have said
Ineautiously, " his is a very pood mam and I have Lon answered Q
yes he cases tm 1ew Zealand". s3o it has been a two-way trafflo
Autrajian politicians to Now : ea1andj scholars and gentleman to
Alstralia. ( Laughtor)
I an reminded by my equestian friend the M~ iister for Trade9p
-4hio, as you well know is of course, a devotes of the race course9 that
eviery time w. have a Cabinet Siveep, a œ CL In -even -aul Hasluck
subscribing ( Laughter) all you have to do Is to run down the list
If you are a scholar oni these matters as I am and say " dhonea has
Safter It?" and you are pretty safe* ( Laughter) that Is what
they do to ua. That's right. Sven Captain Cook having gone to New
heaanddon't fbr.. tg cow to Australia Ast haste naver forget
that. tLaughter) -Mt dirt all these are intoresting aspects of the fact that
we a" r nei1hbours, ve are frinds, we are of the same bloodp und our
fu. ture Is inseparable. our fuiture as survivors in a vrord oonfliet
Detwoen. darkness and light, is topther* ziot one of us can survive
wiithouat the other, And In the great events that are being neptiated
at this time In the world we are toget Xou may havr this at risk
O irna ththeer mneogreo ttihaatino nuss , foanr dt hwee mSauyr opheaavne tChoamt ona tM rairskke t rbautht etrh maotr ew e tahraen you
tog~ itber in having things that are involved a. id, to that extent, are
at risk, nobody can doubt.
I think It In rather a dlmjadful thing that people like myself
who have been to New Zealand a number of times should havo been there
so little; and I was aho*. ed this afternoon when I can* back from
elbourne to find that this was the first time that you9 ai Minister
for nine years in New lealwa# d and a rime Miister for 18 months
and there is something to be said for 18 monthst you make a note of
that ( Laughter) ares visiting Canberra for the first time. Well nov
' Ir, that is to our discredit9p and to our disadvuntape.
Aiut all I runt to say to you Is thist that you ire here
among people who represent both sides of F rliament who represent all
the Comonwealth ountries, you are hore as a frienA and as a neigtibour*
I hope that you will always tol able to speak to us in forthright,
plain, homely terms as we speak to each other . because ' Lstralia
and New Zealand stand together 01r they f'all Lodether, This IB, of
cooirse, a great chaliertis But It is a treznendo-as honour. It produess
immense, pride in all our minds that when It comes to the point we are
together and we stand, or we fall. todathsr, When you stand and
sucoeed It is a very sreeable thing to hav* ocapany. I used to know
something about that, dhen you dont quite succeed, It Is till a
oomfort to know that you have omany isn't It?
I can say quite simply and plainlyr on behalf of the mebers
or the i~ ov-trnment side of this Parliament and for the oppositlon
members of this Parliament we are at one In lookin, Acroas the Taaan
and thinking of you as our brothers anid u~ s our rriends, Not on saw
tenuouis political zip ement, buit beca'use i . jit down in our lood we
are the same people. Flier. ore we are delighted to welo~ e you. It
unfortunately hasn't turned out to je posible for the Leader of the
Opposition, or for the Depuaty Leador, o Cbe hores they haye very
oopelling engagemonts, Sut I am happy to say that a 11stinzUished
member of the Opposition Liecoutiva, Mr. !, an "' raserv is bore and I am
sure Aill 3up, * rt me when I propose tho loast of your health.
( Applause) 



Weekly Index No-. 3,9
Week Ending 12 May, 1962
COMMONWFALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, the Rt. Hon,
John McEwen
May 6 No. 479A N1EW Ti-DE COMMISSIONER APPOINTED
9 No. 502DISCUSSIONS BETWEEN MR. RUSK AND MR. McEWEN
The Treasurer, The Ro, Hon. Harold Holt
May 9 No. 479LATEST ECONOMIC TRENDS
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
May 7 No. 481
7 Noo 482
7 No, 483
No. No, No, 487
496 514
The Minister for Spooner, M. M,
OIL SEARCH PLULICATIONS PURI No ol WELL AND
NORTH WINTON GRAVITY SURVEY
OIL PROSPECTS IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE GEOLOGY OF THE DAVENPORT MURCHISON
RANGES, NORTHERN TERRITORY.
SPEED-UP IN SURVEY AND MjAPPING WORK
FILM ON OIL SEARCH
GEOLOGICAL BULLETIN ON NORTH VTESTER~ QUEENSLND
Defence. the Hon. Athol Townley
May 8
10 11 No, No. No. 490 503 509
The Minister for UNITED STATES AIRCRAFT TO BE BASED IN AUSTRATø LI,
S. E. A. T. O, MILITARY PLANNING OFFICE, BANGKOKo
COMMALND OF C'"~, LTH BRIGADE GROUP IN MALAYA
Territories, the Hon., Paul Hasluck.
May 6 No. 480
9 No. 497
i" 11 No. 515
11 No, 510
The Minister for FIVE YFAR PROGPRAMME OF ACTION FOR FORRESTRY
PARUA AND NEW GUINEA
PHOSPHA TE DUST FOR USE IN NORTHERN TERRITORY
DE" 0LOPMENT
EXTENSIONS TO ESPJLNADE HOSTEL, DARWIN.
PAIUA AND NEW GUINEA TEAM FOR THE C' vEALTH GAl , ES
Labour and National Service, the Hon. W, McMa P
May 10 No. 504
The Minister for
May 8No, 495 LONG SERVICE LEAVE LEGISLATION
Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
TENVoDERS CALLED FOR PASSE GER FACILITIES AT
PERTH AIRPORT,
The Minister for Defence, The Hon, Athol Tovmley. M, P,
May 8 No. 494 RETIREMENT OF DAJOR-GENERAL WADE
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
May 9 No. 4.98AUSTRALIAN FLYIG 3CHOLRiRSHIPS
The Postmaster-GeneralI The Hon. C. W. Davidson
May 8 No. 488
8 No. 489 FREQUENCY CTHAN-NEL FOR NEW TELEVISION STATIONS
IN PMELBOURNE AND BRISBANE
APPLICATIONS FOR TELEVISION LICENCES COUN. RY
AREAS
The Minister for External Affairs. The Hone Sir Garfield Barwick
May 7 No. 484
7 No, 486
1-Nc. 513 NEW AUSTRJ IAIN PROGRAMME TO COUNTER_ COMMUNIST
PRESSURE IN SEATO AREA.
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO ANZUS COITFERENCE
AUSTRALIAN HIGH COMMISSION IN TANGOANYIKA
The Minister for Primary Industry, the Hon. C. F. Adernmann
May 8 No. 491
10 No. 506 œ 323,000 FOR FIRST BEEP RESEARCH PROGRAMME
A,-' PLE AND f: EAR EXI" OIRTS SET N'~ EW RECORDS / 2
I
I -, I 
-2-2
The Minister for Social Services, the Hon. Hugh S. Roberton, M. P
May 10, No.
The Minister 505 SHELTERED WORKSHOS
fof the Interior, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
May 9 No. 501 COBAR METEOROLOGICAL STATION
11 No, 512 NEW THEATRE FOR WOOMERA
S11 No. 516 ASSISTANCE TO PRIIATE SCHOOLS IN A. C. T.
The Minister foP the Navy, Senator the Hon, JGGorton
No, No, No. 499
493 511 512A R. A. N. SHIPS TO APAN THIS WEEK
R. A, N EXERCISES WITH U. S. MISSILE DESTROYT. 2
FLAGSHIP IN MERCY DASH
RESERVE SAILORS LEAVE FOR UK.
The Minister
May 8
10 10
it 7 No.
No. No. No. for Reratriation. The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz
492
507 508 485 REPATRIATION DOCTORS IN CONFERENCE
GERIATRICS AND REPATRIATION
REPATRIATION PAYMENTS IN N. S. W.
GOWRIE SCHOLARSHIP FOR ADELAIDE GIRL
The Department of Repatriation
May 9 No. 500'" CENTAUR" REMEMBERED
With-the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBERRA7 A. C. T,
May 9
it 8
11
10 -i 



62/ 053
DISARMAMENT AND NUCLEAR TESTS
SPEECH BY THE FPITI MJT. II. R TF RT. , ONO , ENZI
IN TH7 THROIUPSRESOESF ENTAES
1iTH MAY. 1 02
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell i
has read us, very carefully, a long statement and I must say tha'
throughout the first 90 per cent of it I wonered hether e ha
any uoint on which to criticise the statement that had been made
by the Minister for xcternal Affairs ( Sir Garfield Barwick).
However, in the last bit, if I may so describe it, he went throu.-
the motions of warming up, and this produced suitable applause
from his, until then, bemused followers. But one thing that he
said and I have had the advantage of reading this paper was
this " Yet there is no suggestion or offer of any contribution
comparable to that being spent on nuclear weapons by the
nations involved and their allies so that the causes of
these diseases and physical and social ills can be cured".
That is, of course, what might be described as a distributive
allegation. It is put forward as an allegation as much against
the United States of America and the United Kingdom, the i'estern
Pouwers, as against thc; Soviet Union,
I fear, Sir, that the honourable gentleman has
forgotten that if anybody cared to examine the contributions made
in the field of health, in the field of research, in the
production of the great antibiotics in the positive combatting o:'
disease, he would find that the Jostern world has an unchallengei
position in those fields. He would also find that there are
millions of people who can gaz,-from time to time on the sputni:
and other things that may be put into the sky by the Soviet Unio?'"
who would not be there to see then if it had not been for the
devoted, scientific and medical research of the free world.
Therefore, the honourable gentleman falls into error, if I may be
allowed to say so, in distributing these allegations as if they
applied with equal force to both sides in this groat and unhappy
conflicto I want to try to direct the attention of the House to
the real problems that we have to consider. The honourabld
gentleman has made, I am happy to say, several references to the
communioue of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers, issued at the
time of the last conference in March of last yearo I know
something about this, because I was one of those Prime Ministers.
I also know that no communique emerges from a Primo Ministrs'
Conference unless it refers to matters upon which unanimous
agreement has been reached. That is something that honourable
members should note nothing is included in such a communique
unless it has oeon unanimously , greed that it should be included.
Therefore, on the occasion in question all the Prime Ministers
agreed to the statement made with regard to atomic testso These
are the precise words of itz
" Every effort should be made to secure rapid agreement to
the permanent banning of nuclear weapons tests by all
nations, and to arrangements for verifying the observances
of the agroeemnt. Such an agreement is urgent, since
otherwise other countries may soon become nuclear powers,
which would increase the danger of war and further
complicate the problem of disarmament Moreover, an
agreement of nuclear tests, apart from its direct advantages
would provide a powerful psychological impetus to agroement
over the wider field of disarmament." 
I think those words are well worth quoting. WJe and I speak as
one of the parties heartily sapported that statement, and we
supported it for the simple sake of humanity. The profound cause
of humanity required, in our mind, that a statement of this kind
should be made. There were talks about disarmament. There were
conferences about it, They were abortive. You can go on talking
about disarmament, in the general, for a long time. But her., in
our view, was a specific matter on which we thought, or at any
rate hoped, that sensible people of all nations could agree. We
hoped that they could all agree to stop further testing of nuclear
weapons, and we said so, the Prime Minister of Great Britain
amongst us. And what happened? It was not more than a few months
thereafter when the Soviet Union, which had itself undertaken to
conduct no further tests pending agreement on their abolition,
and at the very time when the powers were meeting in Geneva to
discuss not only the general principle of abolishing tests, but
also the essential correlative of effecting inspection, so that
we might not be misled, simply broke up the discussions, walked
out and within 48 hours began a series of at least 30 nuclear
tests, preparations for which had obviously been made long before,
That is the kind of problem that the world is dealing
with. We need not live in a world of abstract phrases. wie are
living in a most terribly difficult world, -e are living in a
world of stark realities and unless we admit the existence of
these realities we will walk into danger.
That was the position,. and our distinguished visitor of
the other night I am not going to discuss any other matters in
connection with his visit because honourable members are quite
entitled to their views about everything that he said made this
statement: " Wlhile we were still negotiating, they"
The Soviet Union
" broke the moratorium on testing with a longand obviously
long prepared, series of tests, evertheless, we
The United States of America
" stood on our offer to conclude a test ban treaty, and with
an inspection arrangement that would have involved an
international inspection team looking at less than 1/ 2000th
of the territories of the Soviet Union in any given year.
Honourable members on both sides of the House will recall that one
of the pretences of the Soviet Union was that it could not have
inspection because this would involve espionage inside its
borders. The statement went on
" But, as the Soviets were still unwilling to agree, President
Kennedy felt obliged to resume our own testing for the
security of the free world. As you knovw, he reached that
decision most reluctantly. And we stand prepared to stop
testing at any moment that the Soviets ; gree to a test ban
treaty with essential international verification",
That is a pretty plain statement by the man who, as second to the
President of the United States, occupies one of the most
responsible and powerful positions in the world. 
He went on
" But the President of the United States will not acce. pt the
responsibility for allowring people who want their kind of
world order to move ahead of the free uorld in this nuclea.
field".
I wonder who disagrees with that? I wonder if thero is a. nybody :. n
this House I do not really believe there is who believes tha
after all this series of tests by the Soviet Union which will ad,:
enormously to the Soviet Union's knowledge and technology in thi.-
field, the U. S. A. should have said, " Jell, you can have it; we
will d) nothing about it. &gt; e are prepared to stabilize the
knowledge of the free world in this field while you go on year
after year, mnonth after month so that you will have the power to
impose on the world what is to us your rotten system of government'"ø
Really, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought it hardly admitted of
debate. Now, there are practical issues here and I think that
unless they are resolved by unanimity in this House they ought to
be analyzed frankly on both sides of the chamber. The first of
then is involved in what I have just said: Should the wostern
nuclear powers cease testing whatover the Soviet does? When I say
that, let me elaborate a little, I fool that there is a great
assumption in many minds that all thuse tests are tests of
weapons to be deposited on the enemy and to destroy or to blast
his cities. But we have got to a stage when a great deal of
testing in the world is of what are called the anti-missile missles,
These tests are devoted to discovering how to defend a country anc.
how to defend hundreds of thousands of innocent people against an
attack from the air. You cannot have one of these things done ard
forget about the other. You cannot have the Soviet Union
perfecting its means of attack and perhaps developing its means f
resistance by special exporiments in the nuclear field and say to
our own side and do not let us forget that, alive or dead it iour
side " You are not to do it. You stop where you are". All
these experimentations that go on have not only a relevance to
attack but also a relevance to defence. Therefore, I propound my
question and I would like to think that it reached the people of
Australiat Should the Jstern nuclear powers cease testing nuclear
devices w hatever the Soviet Uniujn does? The clear answer to thaL
in the name of humanity is: No.
The second issue is this: Can there be any effective
cessation of testing which could give to the world a feeling that
there was a calm in the storm or a hope for ordinary humanity,
unless we have inspection or verification whatever the word
might be? Are we so naive in the free world we are not really;
we have a long history of practical wisdom and experiment, but I
repeat: Are we so naive as to say to the prospective enemy the
country which is the groat and. only threat to the peace of the
world " We will take your word for it? ' ie do not want anybody to
go near your country to see whether you are conducting tests or
not", Can anybody imagine such a thing? The United States of
America, the great western nuclear power, and the other ; wstern
powers have gone to great lengths, as we ; wcre reminded the other
night, to reduce their d.-. eands for verific. tion to a more minimum,
Are they to abandon those demands? we sleep more
comfortably if they did? '/ ould the ban-the-bomb processionists
sleep more comfortably if they knew that on our side tests had
ceased and development had come to an end, and that we were rel;. ng
upon the punic faith of the authorities in the Kremlin? I do not
believe it. Ue say: No. I do not know ! that other people might
say, but we say: No. 
In the third place there is an issue that perhaps
scarcely emerged in what my honourable opponent had to say but it
is clearly implicit in certain things that have happened. It is
this: Should Australia, not a nuclear power herself remember that
in 1ll these mat-' ers permanently contract herself out of
permitting nuclear : reapons to be used in w ar or defence or in the
grave arbitrament of , war on her s: il? . ucause I did hear
suggestions that when the Minister for External Affairs ( Sir
Garfield Barwick) said we were not prepared to give a permanent
undertaking to that effect, he was under criticism. Under
criticism,' Have we reached the very ecstasy of suicide in
Australia? Are we prepared to say that come war, come peace,
come any circumstances nobody shall bring a nuclear -reapon on our
soil or discharge a weapon of that kind there? Are we bent on
self-destruction or are we prepared to sit up and wake up to the
fact that those nuclear powers which are on our side in the
contest of freedom, cannot protect us if we warn them off the
premises in perpetuity.
These are the three questions. All must have
considerable difficulty in understanding how there could be any
more than the one clear answer to any of them. There is certainly
nothing in what the honourable gentloman has said that in form
cuts across what I have boon saying in these matters; but if
there is a feeling in this Parliament anywhere that this attitude
is wrong, let us . for the sake of our own self respect, for the
sake of our standing in the world and for the sake of our
capacity to talk to the other countries of the world, learn it now-,
Let them stand up and be counted. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTERE THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
IN TIr HOUSE OF RPPJ SENTATIVES
16T 1MAY, 1_ 02
After close consideration of the immense importance of
the Common Market negotiations to Australian production and
trade, and to the political future of the British Commonwealth,
I have decided that, as the head of the Australian Government, I
should make a brief visit, during the Parliamentary recess, to
Great Britain and the United States.
Mr. Macmillan, has, in correspondence with me,
expressed the hope that I can do this. My colleague, Mr. McEwen,
whose recent efforts command our admiration and gratitude, is
himself convinced that, in this period when the negotiators are
beginning to get to grips with the practical issues, on-the-spot
discussions by myself are necessary. I hope to do what I can to
reinforce and, where appropriate, supplement his own advocacy.
Jhat is clear is that we cannot spare any efforts to see that
whatever decisions ultimately emerge, they will not be arrived at
without the fullest and clearest understanding of Australia's
case, a case which rises superior to any domestic political
differences. The political implications of an entry by Great Britain
into the European Economic Community must be very significant. I
would wish to discuss them in London at an early date under
circumstances not always easy to achieve during the course of a
comparatively brief Prime Ministers' Conference.
Other great problems confront us, such as the state of
affairs in South east Asia and in Now Guinea. These concern, not
only us, but our partners in SEATO and ANZUS; our friends
g. nerally. My Government feels that I should take the opportunity
of top-level talks not only with the Government of Great Britain,
but also with the President of the United States of Amcrica.
There will be a Prime Ministers' Conference in September, a
Conference of historic significance. My own participation in it
will, I have concluded, be rendored more effective by the
knowledge I hope to gain in my talks in Juno. The more these
great issues are clarified in our own minds, and those of others,
the better should it be for wise and fruitful ultimate
conclusions. Certainly, as Prime Minister, I must seek completely to
discharge my responsibilities, by all moans within my power, to
the Parliament and people of Australia,
I now pass to other, and important aspects of the
great matters to which I have been referring.
The first is that it would be a misfortune if, durinLg
the September Conference, Parliament should be sitting at
Canberra. I am not alluding to the problem of pairs, for I know
that the Opposition would appreciate the importance of
Australia being represented at the Conference. But thoso
representing Australia in London should not, if our case is to be'
presented with singleness of purpose, be distracted by political
events in Canberra. Ie have therefore proposed to the Leader of
the Opposition that, when the general Budget debate is disposed
of, at the end of August, tho House should adjourn, not for the
customary week, but for four weeks. Adjustments can be made
thereafter to ensure that the total poriod of the Budget Session
will not be abbreviatcd. 
a 2.
There is a second matter of some novelty and
importance. The Common Market problem concerns both sides of
this House, and all sections of the , ustralian community. When
the September Conference has concluded, and its results are
reported to this Parliament, it seems to us to be most
important, in a matter which transcends our domestic political
differences, that leaders on both sides should have had an
opportunity of informing their minds, overseas, on the views and
attitude of the negotiators and Governments concerned.
I have made it clear to the Leader and Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, who understand and accept what I have said,
that a Prime Ministers' Conference is priv: te, and that interim
statements cannot come out of it. But at the same time we
have invited the Opposition to send some of its leading Members
overseas, so that, by consultations of their own choosing, they
may acquaint themselves at first hand, with no commitments to rv
and with no restrictions by us on the contrary, with every
reasonable facility with the currents of opinion which have
such a bearing upon the future of Australia.
I have also informed the Leader of the Opposition that
should one or two of the pcrsons chosen by the Opposition desire
to make his or their journey during the coming Parliamentary
recess rather than in September, that will be acceptable to us. 



P. M. No. 7196,2
MINISTER FOR MGRATIONTO G. VERSEAS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mro Menzies, announced today that
the Minister for Immigration, Mr. Downer, would leave on Tuesday,
22nd May, for a quick visit to Britain and Europe.
Mr. Downer would study the problems of migration at
first hand and discuss future prospects and arrangements in a
number of countries with which Australia has migration
agreements, now due for revision.
En route, Mr. Downer would visit ' lashington briefly to
discuss general migration problems with United States authorities
preparatory to visiting the Geneva headquarters of the Inter-
Governmental Committee for European Migration and the United
Nations High Commission for Refugees.
His itinerary would include London, The Hague, Paris,
Cologne, Rome and Madrid. In Madrid, Mr. Downer would discuss
the operations of Australia's first migration mission in Spain
and investigate the likelihood of attracting a stream of suitable
Spanish migrants to this country in the coming years.
" Since Mr. Downer's last visit three years ago, there
have been considerable changes in the countries from which most
of our migrants come", Mr. Menzias said.
" These changes, which include the return of prosperity
to Europe and the development of the Common Market aims, are
altering the character of Australian immigration and demand
immediate attention in formulating our future plans.
" For, whatevertho changes ovcrs3as, Australia must
continue to maintain a steady flow of migrants at a satisfactory
level" Mr. Menzies said.
Mr. Downer would leave Sydney by Qantas at 7 p. m. on
Tuesday. The Ministo2 for Air, Mr. Bury, would act as Minis--, ei
for Immigration during Mr. Downorts absence.
~ CA3ER^ ti., t May, 1962. 



UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUTNICATIONS STATION AT NORTH WEST CAPE
STATEMENT Y TE PRTIME MTNISTERT TL RT, ' lONe R G MNZIEN,
" H-, THOEroTSE" Of RFe EITL 1V
As Honourable Members are aware, the United States
Naval Authorities have for some time been investigating possible
sites and studying the feasibility of establishing a Naval
Communications Station in Western Australia. Following these
investigations the United States Government has formally rcques'ed
permission to establish and operate such a station at North West
Cape. The Commonwealth Government has approved the request.
The Western Australian Government, which has been kept
informed, has already rendered considerable assistance in the
initial survey activities, It has expressed its desire to cooperate
to the fullest possible extent in the project an offe,
which is greatly appreciated by the Commonwealth Government.
The purpose of the Station, which will include a complex
antenna system high powered transmitting and receiving equipment,
and administrative and supporting facilities, is to provide radio
Scommunications for United States and allied ships over a wide
area of the Indian Ocean and the Western Pacific.
The power supply required for the Station will be
provided by conventional type diesel motors,
The total area of land affected by the project will be
about 28 square miles, Cf this area, all except about 4 square
miles will continue to be available for such activities as
grazing, subject for technical reasons to restrictions on certain
types of construction or installations,
The estimated capital cost of the Station itself will be
of the order of œ A33million. Substantial additional funds will be
required for such things as housing and family amenities. The
United States Government will meet in full the expenditure
Srequired for both the construction and operation of the Station,
which will be without cost to the Australian Government.
Construction is planned to commence as soon as possible
and will be at its peak from early 1963 to late 1965. During this
period employment on the project is expected to be between 800
and 1000 people. In the construction of the Station, the maximum
practicable use will be made of Australian contractors, labour anr:
materials. Detailed liaison will be established between the
United States Authorities and appropriate Australian Departments
and Authorities to achieve this.
Present plans provide for an eventual population in the
area, to operate and maintain the Station, of approximately 450,
including both United States and Australian oprsonnel and their
dependants. Married quarters and essential comuunity facilities
will be provided for these people. A detailed agrooeent is bein2
worked out with the United States Government to cover the status
of American personnel who will be in Australia in connection wi. h
the Station. 
2.
In addition to normal inter-service technical and
administrative liaison bet-een the United Stctes Authorities
responsible for the Station and co-operating Australian
Departments and Services, arrangements will be made for
consultation between the two Governments on matters relating to
the Station and its use. The facilities of the Station will be
available to the Australian Forces.
The matters to which I have referred will be embodied
in a formal agreement between the two Governments which is now
being prepared. This will be announced in due course.
The establishment of this Station in Australia will
mark an important step in the steadily increasing defence cooperation
between the two countries. It will make a highly
significant contribution to general allied military capability in
this area. It is within the spirit of co-operation envisaged
under the ANZUS Treaty, under which the parties agreed to
co-ordinate their efforts for collective defence for the
preservation of peace and security. 



AUSTRALIAN MEDIICA ASSOCIATION C ONR1SS
ADELAIDE. 19TH 1.7 l7 T
j. peech by he inster the Rt on, , Go enzie.
Sir, If there is one thing olitirian likes to be it is
safe. Those of you who are not politicians wouldn't understand
that. But what I mean is that this meeting has, so far as I can
make out tonight, been open for at least two or three days.
Therefore I run no risk of a Censure motion if I now declare it
open. ( Laughter) There is another thing that I would like to say to you
and that is that I compliment, if I may, Dr. Colville a r. I: L of
eminence from my electorate ( Laughter) on having been elected as
the first President of the Australian Medical Association; and I
am delighted to think that he should succeed, not technically but
substantially, Sir Henry, about whom all I want to say is this:
that I think my grandchildren will be inclined to boast that
' granpa knew him'. ( Applause)
Now having said that I want to tell you that I have a
slight grievance; and the grievance is that, as so many of you
may have found in your time, I find myself naked before the
medical profession, ( Laughter) I have stood in this lovely Hall
( Bonython) more than once indeed once I was counted out much to
my pleasure ( Laughter) wearing the garmats appropriate to the
unearned honours that I have acauired in my life. Tonight here I
am, you know, looking like a well-fed penguin ( Laughter) while all
the rest of them are here manifesting themselves in robes of
glory. And I don't think this is right, because I would have you
know, ladies and gentlemen, that I m. a, for some reason that
escapes me, a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of
Plysicians ( Laughter)( Applause) not that I have ever noticed
any fiscal results of such a position; and, what is more
remarkable is that I am, I'm happy to say, as I was astonished to
discover, a Fellow of the Royal College of Gynaecologists.
( Laughter)( Applause) Now you would think, wouldn't you, that a
man with these all-round qualifications ( Laughter) would have been
given a bit of coloured something or other ( Laughter) to wear
tonight? No, The medical profession, having been crossexamined
by the lawyers so successfully for so many years, is
jealous of us and so they said tonight ' Who is this follow?" " Well
he's the Prime Minister"* '" ihat was he in private lifo?"
Somebody generously said " A lawyer" and the result was that they
all said " Let him stand up undccorated:" Take your coat off,
Sir. WeTll I don't need to go beyond that point. So here I am,
But I stand here, not only as a species of lawyer, and
as a species of Prime Minister, but as one of the millions and
millions of people in the wcrld who say " Thank God for the
medical profession". It isn't so long ago that having we don't
have a 40 hour week in my job; nor do we have Saturday morning
off but it wasn't so long ago that having finished what I had
set myself to do on Saturday afternoon in my office, a time of
peace and quiet, the spirit moved me to have a look at the Year
Book. Have any of you ever read the Year Book? I'm astonished
at the illiteracy of people. How many people read the Year Book?
Only the people who want to confound me, in my expirience. But I
road the Year Book and then I wont back and I picked up one ; many
years ago I won't toll you how many years ago in ord.; r to find
out what the expectation of life of a male child was in the year
in which I was born. You may think that this exhibited a
melancholy state of mind, but it didn't really, because I found
out that in the course of this relatively brief span of years the
expectation of life had gone up by 16 years. And, may I say to
you, rather more in the ccse of womren. ( Laughter). Now whether
that is purely a psychological factor or not, I don't know. But
there it is 159 lo, 17 years. 
We take all. those tlaIngs forr grntd d t we? I f we
riappen to live longor 4Jhan g,, rnnpa-, pa,, we sa," c1 wyntV
rath-er attrbu bc it to ouYr own ; irtue,, u c yuta h
groat physical revolution in our timei has, '. eori what the medical
peo hIv don,[ hat thie bio-. ohernists have done, what all thec
people have done wh!, o have beoen preserving hium~ an life, and exendiing
it. This romarkabl-r-evolutionary fact is perhaps not very w, 31l
. known; and not vcery miuch appreciated. dhat we will some day coe
-to the medical profession is noi&amp; yet lanown-, but I think I knov
something of it myself.
So there you have medical science and the prolongation
of' the oxpectati. n of life, I have sometirnes tirought of it, Sir,
in these terms-, that in the last ton yoars it hans become a r-hor
mancabre fashi on to road, 6 and th-ink and talk about sputniks, aboub
the marvellous technological achiever. ecnts of the0 people who
develop piropollants and who send thinigs whiizzing around above the
atmospheore. Isnd no doubtu thope are marvellous things. But I
would evoiry h-uma-n being, -to r, oTembcr thrat of ail! the people who
have scen those flaming objcts -and m not using that in the
co~ lloquial sense passing across the low horizon at night, of' all
thle people who have see~ n that, probably a thircd Drould not ha-ve
been alive but for the immense in me-dicine and reskearch in o-ur
world. This is seothing: that -) tght to be realised -Jith c-L-' ity,
and remembered with rie, Therefore I rvaznt to say that I an
hore bocause. theo medi4cal profecssion h-as an irmmens-cl-aim on. my mind
and my gratitude on your mini and Your gratitude.
it doesn't 3lways got thnis recognition0I woulC~ rlt lk
to go back too far0 but in my oar. ieor dnys,, in my -mo* re respectable1
days at the ,30r, I not infreq i'uentl y a Lpcered as Counse': l for some,-
wretced doctor who was acc~ use-d of ncjgligerico Oh1 I couj1-d tel-l
you sto) ry after story ( haurater) about th_ is and mny he,: art ' las in
33cause, you knaew.., it* is ono of the ironies of life thia-. wha-r.
we feel ill, when i~ ro feel. 1 off, when something Lhappens to somebody
in the family, the flxst ma,. n turn to is the docotkor! he brings
with himi an aura of ski. Il and o-f knorlodge and for us,
oo0n f~ eneut I soothng oes wrong he is the first mn to be
ckod. LeA-t us ronree,, bcr that.-
1hiL1s proiession Ilivos in the middle of 1. i fe. it sees
huLman nature---at it-4 worst and9 thian i t s es human nature
at its best;.. It boconte3-familiuar ix. iti ' frights-it bacomos
fanailiar with courage. It bcmsfan-,. liar withK gratitude it
becorios fani'Liar with t'Lhanklessnoss. will-J never think of the
r~ edcal rofession as a prfssion in w.-hich men, hvnpasse..
u. rough a period of trLaining, Lave a liconce to ear., n agreeablC
incomes and that's t. bat. No-c at all. Any meodical mnan who thinks
of it in * that sense may be medi1cal but he is not a great citizen0
Buit this Alssociaition hias L1-ad in. it, year after year after
year-in my own tine, people of inmenseD distinctioDn, ., ithi an
immeianse se nse of rea * Ponsi bltlit-ly, whio have neve\ Tr tho-ught of their
profeDssion xce-pt in term-i~ s of thei co-untry in tJ'ich that profession
serves0 I havev rjfe red * toLn-oidn . t -to a most famnous mian in
thi city Si Hn-ry Neland, xrhlo deserves to be famous all, over
the world0 I look. L down and I sa c not fi.-r ahead of meo Siry Charles
3ickerton Blackburn, the CL'-r!, nc1lo-!, if' IUTihvee t oVSdy
a zr-an of immeinse distinction in the meldical. world who Las boon,
yea-r in and year out a m nL In and d votcd servant of th
people, zand of the natiu-n0 ' 1ase are, get tings0
DSir, spea-king ivith all the inbred feelings of a * lai. er)
. Tho l1ovcd the prac tice o-f t awT na d hoegraat regret is
that h.-o will 1n..-V* er roo.. t, T j:' s wan tn cv t, . ant t hereo are
someo asp,, ects of thie reeapofsontihat hina Y~ uatly co) ncorned
mo in recent years0Cue,(, T z. z-Ixn~ s~ yr~ pathotic fashion, 
HTOW can you today, 2 w th the vast accretions of
k-nowledge in new techniquas, aind ne--T b3iancils of appl.-Aed Science,
hu-v can you compress a period of medical trairnng uithin. an-y
reasonable period of time? This must be a tremendous problem,, T
can reomember whien I was an unde rgraduate it used to be said bY
peopl. e withi high brows that ' really it was nonsense to think athe
modical students werent educated!, -JeJll there Is something
to be said for that you know,, if you look at i~ t in thatfsin
LvJhy couldn't they do a year 6f Arts, or, as I would hiave though;.
mucht bettor, a year in Jurisprudence? No". medical jurisprud nce;
TI don't think: th-at would have done them any good0 ( Laughrter) But
anyhiow . Thv shouldn't they? se at th-at time there was a
disposition to think that within four years of technical teaching
a man might encompass a medical d.-gree. ' loll -4ti gone on,
hasnt i? It stretches out. Not to the crack of doom, but it
stretches out. I just don~ t kniow how you solve theo problem,
except by post-graduate instruction, of enabling a medical student
to be2come a norme2. ly qualifCied raedical practi4tioner when the
boundaries of the knowledge thnat ho must rcach to are extending so
tremendously overy year.-L I dcn~ t solve that problem: I merely
say-that I think tha t I roalise that it oxists,
I hve ad,, comparatively recently2 another problem,,
Th3re ore teaching hospitals in Aust. a, h'pAtl whc r
conducting cliniCal studies,~ in clinical teachLing work that is
properly considered the task of' the universitics0Pnd as many of
you know I hnave de voted a fairn~ m of m-. y declining years to
doing-something for thie Luniversitios of thi~ s country. ( Applause)
So Vrc establish a-special. corimittee, a very powe. rrful cmite
to oz cofatcerctei ghspitals. And I am happy to say
that -the last cormpieted ac-6 beforeo I lof~ k Parliar. me. nt : it thej end of
Thtco. sday night, theo last comrplcted act wa an Act * opod o
grants from the Co., rionweealtha in conjunction with thne 3tate
Governments who haoe behaved magnificently on these matters, to
encoura toaeh. ing h.-ospi1tals in their capital equipment, and. when
we resumeu 111 P.. rliaaent t1-heir recurreOnt ( jxperiditures, ( Applause)
The on) i0. y other thing., Sir that I want to say to you is
that I havori7t yet reached the poin of time at which I believe
that thle relations-hip between thec doctor and hL-is p:, tient is purely
obje ctive_, or sclontific., I don't believe it,. I don't believe -Lt.
The doct'ovs who are hero, 3; theoy t obe inteore. sted in this, but the
retof us. isn't i~ t a i~ iond.,_-, ful ting to have a man comec in to
see you whiom you -trust, whiose j-adgmant you respe_-ctL? This has a
thecrapy if its own. Y,) u ca,, n br~ ing alonlg saestranger, he1 m1ay
hcve all the gadgets in the world, he; r. ay do -, 11 these things andt
theacy are vastly important but I still reim-ain of the opinion that
theire are few things to equal theo therapeutic va-luea of the
confidence that the patient has in theo doctor. This means that
the persona-l rc2l-tien: ah,-* p betwee3n the doctor and the patient m.-ust
neve; r be destrod3 Aplme
My own Go-v.-rriaent hais tried to recognise this by this
rich voluntary element in what we do, But in particular I was
intere sted, I wias m,-ore, than interested the otheor day when Sir
Douglas arrived fron New Zee,, Lm_-d and had a i-. ord to say for the
general practitione r. ( Ap iauso) qTho an.-I tGo iaave a word to say
against the specialists' I balieve in theo spci-a]. ists. But the
esse-nce of medical practice4the wh-ole sub-strratum of meldical
pratic inourc~ utry ci n a~ ithr, is the en ral
practitioner who knovs the i'anily, and who is knovmr by them, who
is wise, whlo doesn't atter.-pt to go beyond his course because
there are some peo.-pl-wh haveo sp: ciaol] 1: noTw" ledge! rr in ?; his way or
th'at, but whc. has a wise, rich., informaed. 2xp,.: iencc. d juda~ ont
which enables him to say '" This thei p: asition. If I need some
. ore this is it. You r-aSf1-gE.) itl", vo wi-i faL inoVh
r-icst infinite clait. sif vical beom scientists, or things
t ha: it are expe. rim7ent. % d afbout0 
We must remain abovev all th,, ings humn boings. becauso hi-an bein~ gs,
Put all scionce on o. ne si. cI still remLain the most ir.-portant thing
an the iw. orld, don't tLhey'? This is it, hiaan. ' oings. -if ncdic-e, 1
1-th practice of moiiewore ever to become soe dctacliedl that'
it becamue a rmore ntter of test tubes instead Of an incidenta. l-
, ate of tes tue, than ,. Te wauld ro-ach a stage of life in which
much hope, rmuch expectation, would g-o out of hurian ~ ives; and a
great%-doal of anguish would come into th. eri.
So we thiLnk to) night of the miarvellous things thLat have
boon done by theo experts, the marvollous t'l. ings that will bo done9
the superb Awo: rk of the bio-chemiists. I an the last man not to
wish that in all these 7refined fields of research this country
should do evorything in its power to produce the rosult., And
having said all thiat I just want to end up by saying to you " Thank
God fa: r tho G. P. Thank God for the I.: 2-n who comas into the home
and 7 kio gives it cheer and com,. fort and a -Oipe skill," And on all
those grounds I am singularly honoured to declare this meeting
open, ( Applause) 



VW.. ekly ld., Nu,
COMMO(. 7N7V a, J, TlI OF AU STIPR" If,.
Index of Ministerial fr-ateipents, 1. ssued in Canbe. rr a
TP*, iiemDee)-1u4L nis.-r ndlliiscrfor Trnde, Th~ e Rt. Hone,
May 15, No 57COMMEN" IT OilTAEEN BY U. S. ' S3CRET. PI{ Y 0OF STA" T. E
if14 N~ o, 5214 AUSTRALIA TO' EXHIBIT AiT CANA, 12DIAN N~ ATIONAL
EXHI. BITION
MIay 18 No~, 547 STORE DIS? 3LAY SUCCESJS IN JAPANThe
Minister f or National Developmzent, Senator the Hon. W. H.,
S-oonerg M.,
May 13 ITO. 519 CONl\ TRlACYl 18EISMIC SURVEY FOOLE RANSGE,
lvE STERN AU STR. LT1A.
it 13 No,, 518 ATOMTC ENERGY ' EXHIBITIONT FOR. PERTH
The Minister for Defence, the Hion. A't' 1-lol Tovnley, M.,
May 16 No. 5-32 HIGHER I'T T'L l-POIlTNT'
The -inster for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck
May 13 No. 520 RECRUITMENT OF CA'DET PA'TROL OFFICERS IN THlE
PuB" LIC SERVICE OF PA'PUl, AND NEW GUINEA.
Thellini ster for Labu -ind ational Se-vae. The-D~ n ila
McMahon
May 14 No. 531 REPIVI OF EMPLTOYMntRlT STTUATIONT AT EliD APRIL,
I'-Phe Minister f or Trziiw-cotion The Hon. A. P. Dolm. ere
MNiay 17 No., 51j. 2 C W AL1T IT1 IMMIGRA(',*-TION PLANNIN COUNCIL TO DA.-fiT
IN Y-1L; TH IN%~~
The Minister f or E': ternal i'fe. irs The Hcn,, Sir G-rafijelc. Barvilo-k
May 1.6 No., 534 COK30) PER' TION IN THE TIACKING OF -RUSSIAN EAETH
1.1A TELLA TB S.
The Minister fcc r Pnvi-m~ ly Tndust The Hon. AiderIm-annT
May 17 No. 539 EGG PUIX, k0UPPlLIES T0 U. X. 1MAI1JKET TO BE
No, 525 AUTAINDAIRY PRODUCE BOARD ACTIVITY IN
The Mini ste for the iiy, the~ on. Cramer
May 17 N0540 NIEW BUILDING FOR OFF~ ICER CA.' DET SCHOOL
t 17 N -51P. U LiC WARNTED ON LETHAL-L SOUVENL\ IRS
The Ministor for Custcms and Excise2 Semnator the Hon. Denalun
May 1-7 No. 537 . PI OEFU) 2FNRC OA~ BELGIUM. 1
Thbe Minister f or the ln. ori -r hHon. Go; rdon Fmreeith
Mlay 14 No, 523 DUINOSL
K o, .527 7 F UIE NM l", D
16 ' No. 5-, 7 DWYTER O~ U
S16 Not, 53A. C. T HOSIN'. LOAN INCREA'T
6 N6536 r !, CHXICAL C; LL EGE OPENIN-1
." o-jrNa, HoleJ J? Go.,. ton
Me Not 55 Cl iZ iAPf T NACYV K zc' 00. 2 
The Minister f'or Sh~~ Ta~ r2TeHon. Hubert
No. 52? 2
No. 529 FIRST TENDERS FOR ILI WORKS SOON
REC" ORD TERM BY MR. OPPERMMT
The Minister forIie-alth, Senator the Hon. 1-Harrie W. Vacde
Apri). 29 No. 4.43AUSTRALLIAN DELEGA', TION TO WQH3 ALSSEMVBLY
kT GENEVA
The Minister-for M11r. The Hon, Leslie Bar a
No. 52).
No. 528
No. 538
No,. 546t PR. AAF WILL TA4" KE " CENSUS"
GAlLLE~ TRY AWA1RDS FOR VEIFN
RiA. F LOTS FOR Si1ECIAL HIELICO. 1TER TRAINING
ldAAF S NEW A'IRCRAFT TO TAK" E PA RT IN PROJECT
MEaCURY
The Minifster for Retriation, Tle Hon., R, W. C. Swartz.
May 15 No, 526 MINISTER TO VISIT TASMANTI
itj o, 51. MINISTER WILL BE GUEST SprAKER
The flepartmerit of Imm4L ration
May 16 N~ o, 530AUZTI Ac; LIA N MIGP2ATION MISSION FOR SPAIN,
With the Compliment c of'
The Goernn puliic Relations Office,
Parliamenit House CANBERIU\, A. C. T.
M-Ta y 1 b
tl 15
Macy 13 2.15
" 17
" 18 



MELBOURNE HIGH SCHOOL OLD BOYS' ASSOCIATION DINNER
IN HONOUR OF RETIRING HEADMASTER, I. M. WOODFULL
HELD IN MELBOURNE ON 21ST MAY -1962
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzies
Mr. Chairman, My Lord Bishop and gentlemen: ( Or perhaps I should
have said Lindsay Hassett and gentlemen) ( Laughter)
Look, if I don't speak up half your lucki ( Laughter)
Sir, with very great respect to you I don't think I
very much approve of being described in this honorific fashion
as a " Guest Speaker" because, really, this is not my night.
This is Bill Woodfull's night, Heaven be praised. ( Applause).
I don't mind telling you that the only reason I had an invitation
to come here to propose Bill's health was that they thought it
was very desirable that I should do it while I was Prime Minister.
( Laughter, applause). So, although I am setting out into what
you * ght call foreign parts in about three days' time, I said
" I must be there".
But my real job tonight is to say something about
Woodfull and if I stray a little, and to references to anybody
else, you will understand that these are mere decorations on the
true motive of my speech, which is William Maldon Woodfullo
Now you see at once I strike a note in your minds: Why
is he christened William Maldon Woodfull? The answer is quite
simple-Because he was born in Maldon, ( Laughter) And when I
was coming here tonight I thought how lucky that my parents
didn't christen me " Robert Jeparit Menzies'K. ( Laughter, applause)
Now your very distinguished guest tonight, William Maldon
Woodfull, has been a very versatile person. I am sure that quite
a lot of people seeing him only on the cricket ground, and then,
as a rule, for inordinate periods of time, little thought that
he was a teacher of mathematics, the most depressing occupation
I would have thought ( Laughter) that beset any man. And he
taught mathematics, either so well or so badly, one never knows
about these things, that they decided to make him a Headmaster,
( Laughter) And for a time he coruscated in my electorate.
I'm not going to embarrass him by suggesting that he voted for
me, or any of those rather eccentric things ( Laughter) but he
was there. Then he succeeded., in this vury famous School, two
very famous Hoadmastors, Ramsay, Langley, Woodfull This is a
wonderful trio to contemplate isn't it? ( Applausel And it is
worth contemplating them, because, though we never feel like
admitting it when we are at school, headmasters are tremendously
important. I'm surprised and perhaps some of you who are as
venerable as I am and who have got the years of wisdom may agree
I'm always astonished to find how a Headmaster I didn't like
very much became a legendary figure years after. ( Laughter)
You find yourself in the company of old boys and you look back
years, 40 years, or whatever it may be and you say, " By Jove
the old man was wonderful wasn't he?" At the time you didn't
say that. ( Laughter) B'It the truth is, of course, that a great
Headmaster will do more to make a great school that any other
single factor, He will do more than bricks or mortar, or a
benevolent department, or a kind and charitable Government.
( Laughter) When I looked around tonight and I saw the relatively
high percentage of dinner jackets I thought that this talk about
depression might have been over-estimated. ( Laughter) But
anyhow I hope you will agree with rae on this I'm sure you will
that a notable Headmaster helps to make, and indeed in some ways
makes, a notable school.. And in the case of this school you 
have had a remarkable succession of people of mnsequence, of
substance, of personal authority and of personal example. And
they have all helped to make you come along and sing that inspiring
song which you sang a little earlier, and feel proud of the school
through which you passed. Therefore, here's William Maldon
Woodfull, a Headmaster, and, I venture to say, a great Headmaster.
If I make a glancing reference to his immediate predecessor,
George Langley, I hope you will understand me because this
man, Langley, between you and me I wouldntt wish it to go any
further ( Laughter) served me a very ill turn once. He was
nominally in charge of a school at Jarrnambool ( Laughter) and he
had enough spare time to take a little interest in politics,
fortunately, as I thought at the time, on my side. I went down
to Warrnambool to make a speech it was in a State Election:
this was when I occupied a really dignified position and was a
State politician ( Laughter) and there was a big meeting at the
Warrnambool Town Hall. I was down there, allegedly, to support
the candidature of the late J. G. Fairbairn, serum et venerabile
nomen, and George Langley met me. He looked very busy. He
sounded very busy. And he said to me " A wonderful meeting
tonightl It will be packed and all the other side are going to
be here and you'll have a lively meeting." Well I've never had
any feeling of reluctance about a lively meeting ( Laughter) and so
I said, " Thank you very much, George. This sounds most promising,"
I went to the Warrnambool Town Hall. It was full,
there's no doubt about that, and I spoke, there's no doubt about
that ( Laughter) and there was an unbroken silence right through
the Hall. I thought " This is no goodø What about this fellow
Langley who promised me a bit of life in this meeting?" So I
then resorted to all I hope you won't use this against me
all the tricks of the trade to stir them up. I thought I must
get some hostility in this meeting. No. It was just like going
out and making a speech on a Thursday afternoon in the Kew Cemetery.
( Laughter). Well, of course, they had decided that that didn't
pay off, so they were silent. But I think that it set George
Langley back, in my mind, for a long time. But I recovered-as
I have now recovered long enough to realise that George Langley
is one of the great enthusiasts in education in Australia and
Victoria, and a great master of your own school. ( Applause).
p Now they tell me that Bi. 7L Woodfull is retiring by
effluxion of time the retiring age in August. You know there
is no retiring age to Prime Ministers. ( Laughter) In August
I will have been, man and boy at one time or another, Prime
Minister of Australia for fifteen years ( Applause) and this old
friend of mine will retire and sit under his own vine and fig tree
while I'm still being chased up and down the entire country. It
isn't right. ( Laughter) I wish some of you chaps who write those
silly letters to the newspapers would start a campaign for the
compulsory retirement of Prime Ministers at the age of ( Laughter)
with a provision for retrospective double pay ( Laughter) if
their retirement has to be dated back from 67 to 65 ( Laughter).
But Bill all this is good fun and games. I just want
to say to you an Im saying it not only for myself but for
everybody here tonight and, indeed, for hundreds of thousands of
people in Australia that you are being honoured at this dinner
tonight because of your character, clear marvellous character so
well known to everybody whoever has anything to do with you, your
immense skill your great wisdom and, above all, your warm, simple
humanity. ( Applause) * o 0. / 3 
Now, gentlemen, if I had as much sense as I had fifteen
years ago,, I would pause and stop at that point because that
is really what I wanted to say about Bill Woodfull. But my
attention was drawn to the fact that a certain number of his
contemporaries in the cricketing world have been dredged up
( Laughter) and placed here tonight Fieetwood-Smith has been
smoking the biggest bent-stem pipe I've ever seen in my life;,
Vic,, Richardson smoking one of my cigars. ( Laughter) Therefore,
perhaps, I ought just to say a word about that aspect of your
life. This is a little mixed up with politics. You young
fellows don't realise how far old fellows like myself go back
in the political scene. I can remember a time when, in the
Victorian Parliament, I was asked w~ iether I would go up and make
a powerful speech somewhere in the Goulburn Valley, And that
was at a time when there was a Test Mlatch on. (" Laughter) Oh,
not here, otherwise I wouldn't have been in the Goulburn Valley,
but in England somewhere. And my host on this occasion was a
keen cricket lover. We went down to the local hall, we had
all the local citizenry there, and in a little anteroom my friend,
the chairman who was a solicitor, had installed his clerk to
listen in to the broadcast and to send in progress reports.
Well, before we got a chanco of having one progress report, I
had only uttered the first four or five sentences when the
local firebell went. You know what happens in a little country
town when the fire bell rings:. everybody leaves at once hoping
that it's the neighbour's house that is being burnt down.
( Laughter) And the hall completely emptied. They just disappeared,
And I said to the Chairman " Do you think they will come back?"
And he said, " Oh yes, they'll come back; I've arranged to have
the cricket scores." ( Laughter) So they camne back. Well we
got going. At the end of about a quarter of an hour, I was just
warming up to point one you know, this powerful unanswarable
argument, this was it, 1his was to demolish the 6pposition.
( Ilve forgotten whether there was one ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Anyhow this was going to demolish the opposition. When in
ca~ me my chairman who ha-: d "' nicked out", as we say, held up a
hand like a traffic cop signal, you know, and said " Excuse
me," 1 I was half way through a sentence. This happened four
times% I almost applied for a job as a member of the Indeterminate
Sentences Board. ( Laughter) ( Applause) " Excuse me,"
he said, " laa~ ies and gentlemen-, Australia won the toss,
Australia batting, Woodfull 15 not out, Ponsford, naturally,
not out". ( Laughter) W4ell this cheered me up immensely,
because of course I knew that Bill must have had a couple of'
" no balls" delivered to him,, ( Laughter) Then we went on for
another fifteen minutes, and there was another interruption,
right in the middle of a sentence, and this time it was " Ponsford
27 not out, Woodfull 25 not out". This was a bit awkward.
Anyhow when we got along to a stage when this Bill was leading
that Bill by 1 the strain was too greats we declared the meeting
closed somebody carried a unanimous voie of' confidence in me
( Laughler) and we went back to my host's house,
In those days, you had to catch a very early train from
this place to get back to Melbourne and I said to this wretched
fellow, " Have you any teetotal drink that I might apply myself'
to?" ( Laughter) And with some difficulty he said " No" ( Laughter)
( Applause) So then I said " Well I must break my principles"
( Laughter) and he said " Yes". And we sat there for the rest
of' the night loosening the laces in our shoes and we heard the
whole thing through. I don't think, as a matter of fact, either
of them got out that night. I was only surprised next morning to
have sombody say to me " Extraordinary thing, you know, in
England, they play cricket in the dark",, ( Laughter) Anyhow
most of that story is quite true. ( Laughter) 
I wouldn't like to say too much about some of these
other characters who are here tonight, I wouldn't. Oh, yes,
I must say, yes. Would you forgive me? I am delighted to
find tonight my old friend Mr. Ironmonger, for some obscure
reason called " Dainty". o you know that when Larwood was
bowling at his fiercest on the Melbourne Cricket Ground, Ironmonger,
alrays under-rated as a batsman.. delivered a clout at
one ball which went to the boundary so fast that the eye could
hardly follow it. And it was only about eight years ago that
I looked over the Committee Box at the Melbourne Ground where
I go occasionally by courtesy of Ian Johnson ( Laughter) and down
below I saw Dainty Ironmonger I won't say in conversation with
Jack Ellis listening to Jack Ellis ( Laughter) so I went down
at once. I thought " This is a splendid gathering. I must
be in this". And I said to Bert Ironmonger " Ive always wanted
to ask you: you remember that superb four that you hit off
Larwood?" He said " I'll never forget it, neve? forget it".
" Tell me am I right in thinking that your eyes were shut at the
moment of impact?" ( Laughter) To which he made the classical
Australian reply " Too right". ( Applause) It is a wonderful
thing to see him here tonight, Somebody told me how old he was
and I don't believe it, All I know is that he was a great
cricketer' and the greatest bowler never to have a visit to
Great Britain. ( Applause)
Oh, I mustn't take up too much time. But, oh yes,
Hassett. Do you know about this fellow Hassett? I've been
pretty friendly with this fellow Hassett. He has been a guest
in my house in Canberra several times and by and large he has
behaved very well ( Laughter) His hours have not always been
of the most appropriate, but they have always been regular.
( Laughter) The other day he went up, keeping an eye on the
business, I suppose, to Canberra to the golf tournament and with
my usual courtesy and generosity I spoke to him on the telephone
in fact I think he rang me up ( Laughter) and I said, " Lindsay,
come round and have a drink before lunch." You know we always
keep a bit of Coca-Cola in the refrigerator. And he said
you dontt mind Lindsay if I quote this, it desorves to be
immortal he said ' Look Itm terribly sorry Sir' he always
calls me OSirl in public ( Laughter) ' but 11m woman-bound'.
I said? " Heaven help me, what does that mean?" ' Well'. he
said, 1' Ive got six women with met, Some of them turned out
to be children. So I said " Bring them all old boy" ( Laughter)
You know it's a wonderful thing, if you get even a modest
entertainment allowance, it's wonderful how generous you can
be. ( Laughter) So I said " bring them round". And he brought
themaround. There were eight of them if remember correctly.
It was very good. All I know is we had lunch three quarters of
an hour late that day. Ian Johnson7
Look, I could go through all these people. I see them.
Vic. Richardson, fielding at silly mid-on. Fabulousl These
men have given me the most tremendous pleasure in the world;
and they have given it to you too. ( Applause). The only
remarkable thing is that if you happen to be a fanatic about
cricket, as I am, you are occasionally a little put out by the
non-cricketing onlooker, with a serious mind, These people
oughtn't to be allowed to go to a cricket match. It ought
to be confined to the Houses of Parliament. ( Laughter) I
have a match each time there's a visiting team and Lindsay Hassett,
on the last occasion, when the M. C. C. were here was, having
received my hospitality and generosity, you know at the Lodge,
and all that kind of thing, he was fielding a little ahead of
square leg and fairly short and Colin Cowdrey was batting and
Colin had made enough runs Laughter) that's a remarkable
fact he had made enough runs and so he decided to go out so
he cocked one up about ten yards past Lindsay and Lindsay felt
S. 
that this was carrying friendship * boo far so he lot it fall on
to the ground and somebody else fielded it and then the next
time Colin, not to be outdone in generosity, hit it very high
and very short, Lindsay stepped across to the square leg umpire,
took his white hat off, caught the ball. in his white hat over
his shoulder, then appeared to tear the hat to pieces and throw
it on -the ground and walked off. And cne of these humourists
you encounter at a cricket match sitting next to me said, " But
Mr,, Prime Minister, that's not out, that's against the rules of
cricket." ( Laughter)
Well, of course, you could get me going forever on
this because I happen to be one of those fellows who have, believe
it or not, a lot of very heavy, serious and responsible matters
to attend to in my own life ana to me cricket, and the cricketers
have been the great joy of life.
And that brings me back to this great captain of
Australia, ( Applause) Most people in the course of their
lives manage to make some enemies, manage to have some knowledgeable
critics, manage one way or another to be involved in what
they are pleased to call I believe, " incidents". I venture
to say there is no captain of Australia, no captain of Australia
ever went out of the game leaving behind him a more untouched
reputation a greater affection, a greater respect than Wtilliami
Maldon Woos full. ( Applause)
Sir, having bored everybody stiff, may I now have
the privilege of proposing his toast. Bill Woodfull, Headmaster,
scholar, cricketer and friend. 



62/ 056
Statement by the Prime MIni. ister ( Rt. HIon, R. G. Menzies)
The Governor-General has been advised that, after
her recent operation, Lady De L'Isle should undergo highly
specialised treatmento In the opinion of her doctors it is
advisable that she should go to London to receive it.
The Prime Minister has agreed that the Governor-
General should accompany Lady De L'Isle to London and Her
Majesty The Queen has been graciously pleased to approve.
The Governor-General and Lady De L'Isle i'ill
therefore leave Sydney by air with their family on Monda. y,
4bh June. They will return to Australia at the end of
September. In Lord De L'Isle's absence, the Government of
the Commonealth of Australia '. ill be administered by His
Excellency General Sir Dallas Brooks.
CANBERRA, 23rd May, 1962. 



P. M. No. 39/ 1962
. MINISTER FOR DEFENCE TD. VISLT INDONESIA
-Statement by the prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that the Minister
for Defence, Mr. Townley, would be paying a short visit to
Indonesia. This would be a visit in return for the visit which
General Nasution and Mrs. Nasution paid to Australia last year.
The Prime Minister said it was regretted that,
because of the Election last year and the political situation
since, it had not boon possible for the courtesy visit to be
repaid before now.
Mr. Townley would leave for Djakarta in about ten
days' time and would be oway for approximately one w rdc.
CANBERRA, 23rd May, 1962. 



PRESS CONFER, NCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTEA1,
THE, iT, HON. h. G. 1M1ENZI. ES. IN CA3 CNA
23FIL MY. 1962 AT 4
PRIME MINIST-17-Th ere are one or two ma tters, perhr-aps, th~ at I should
mention to you -toc get them out of thie w~ ay. During my
absence, of courso, Mr. Mcm X'i! en rill be actinrg Prime
Minister, Mr. 3Bury will be acting for Downer. r
Freeth will be acting for the ' Attorney-General during his
absence and Mr. Mc*. wen uiill act as Minister for External
Affairs, assisted, of course, as at present by Senator
Gorton. The P,'-inister for Defence -aill be aThsent for a
short period something like a y-eek in June and when lie
is away Senator Paltridg-e will act for him.
Sir G-ar-field 3&amp;-rvick I think, Will be in a position
later today to make a sta-emnt about 2hailand and th~ e
provision of an A ustralian force, but T : 111l leave that to
him. He 1. s worlin-g on thtat.
Jo o~ ealso had undi_' r cons id= ration the matter of a
visit by the iling and Queen of Thailandl to Auistralia. The
Govornor-GUeno_, ral, on bohalf of the Govern: 1ent, extendad an
invitation and that has been accepted, in principle, Lis we
may say. The dat-ails of theo ) ro-remno are being worked out
and the e:, xact dates being orkad out bacause I am
anxi4ous that thoy should not conflict with the absence
from Pustralia in S._-ptum&amp; bor of s , nior jpe) opl, 1 in the
Governmont, it i3 e:' pocte-d that theoy . rfill make-the visit
to Australia, is a'lso tb. uhto each of the
St,, tcs, but t. A~ will be: ani-ouncod soon ras the details
havo boon cleared. with them.
: c do no., t ' know that therei-is anything part cuil" rly
to be sa id aboat my i--urney., but I will, porhiaps,
s= mmerise--a f points and if you hiva some,(, r: ucstion that
you wart -to risc then you can.. ask mo..
In tLha first place. I thi~ nk it is prop-r to sa y that
s p,-c ula: tioL cn Tft,. cli I have reoad in sorfe, English papers about
L4r. Macmillan be-ing ibLarrass, 2d by ivy visit could ha,. rdly
b' 0 mnora wrocng. iflr. Macmillan and I cond-uct corr-espondecnce
with oachi othe.. r and., 2 -r a-s you ca,-n on papor, discuss
some Of the10 COMT00omT. aith probe1_-ms, Ha has, for some time,
boon vory kaeen on mny raki: Jn2g In special . aisit at about this
tire so tlaat can discuss those thir1, s more fully -and
informall~ y in a pe-rsontal w--ay. Any ida tnat he is to be
e~ nb'rrasedcan be dismiss; d.
i~ er Nr. Mc~ 2rnfs vi* sit, 1 thought, was i. mmensely
vaL'~ ablo. Jo,-do not yot know, of course, * rhat results will
followil beca'useD thle orobloms are 3xtrcmelIy diffficult ones.
.3ut I do know this, and 1 have sa-, id it before, that I do
not kcnow of anny Tian in politics i~ n Alustr, -lia who has
quite theo same arasp of tho detn-Lils of our export
cormmodity problems. has had a gr!. ea deal to do with
th. em,. Ho has been blke to spooak o-v r3 a; s with great
authority nnd nothing that I say will be dosigned to
subtr-nct in any way fro~ iiahnwhatih. -as been putting. My
A~ kis to supplomcont it, and p, rhnps direct my own
c. ttontion to some rn:-rc, , on.: ral proble. ms tha. t wil have to
be. determi-ned.
I taink-it is us,.. Ul to rmnJ the history of this
Common Market Iohtanr it Jas originnlly
ustablislacd by the Jfran-ty of Gcme, 2ret i3rito-in chnose to
r oma_-in OUIt. L. Ta on., only in last tw o years,
discussionL; aros a s yh1-acr Cruc-t 3ritain icight
decide o to to-c n bat, until cc', r-mp-; 1o1' ivel-y recently,
tiais was : v'son th. 2 footing th-t ' gricultural products,
if T mray u&amp; se t! 7a-t omrhnivy rene: t to be in,
whidch meant tta r &amp; dUel-: of our :., xoorts wold, of
course, r.-main UantOuched. 
Lator en it b,.: came quito cleaor tha.-t they could not hoo
to co into tic, Coa~ on Mrket un] ass 2igricul tural products
i-, roro inl, h! avin-rgr to the iiwjoc'tanca) of ai,-ricultural
P~ tC inth sfix Europa. an 4-_ t Se. ' he ro by the time
Mr. -Sandys visiLad us it bec. amei clear? tvh. t there would
need to be a grcot deal of work done on the side of
-) rlcultruail products i~ f our . ntora-sts wore-to be
rasonably providud. for, Thorñ 1tor on, .2. s you know, the
3ritish, Govcrnme~ nt docided. to Apply to -go in; that was
the next thiing, we being to. Ld thiat tihe principle of
consult. a2tion i.; ould obser1-ved. -, wThion I wias in England
last year I sa cur d ' U-e _: doption of the proposition thnt
you could not urork ouit principles vory usefully until you
aed had -i ; ood close look, at the c ommoditic. s affocted and
th-at thare ought to be consul. tations.,
Now on that ma-tter th-e Astralian Govejrnme~ nt took the
view that we ou--ght ioa ena constructively, in detailed
talks on the cofamoditic s coneor-nod. 1-icn I say
" 1constructivel~ y" T man th-at insteaod of simply saying
" Loek avac-otin position cnd we will n~ ot discuss
anythiJn g else but its muraintenanco", we would be quite
willing to exploye those mnactars t11o see whethor good
reulssatisf-actor-Y re sults, might . eclcidu vbey sorme
alternative me,. thod at_-, riative to those now oxisting0
ThL4 i a's aihrogl constructive, 1way ofI7 goi. ngabu
thing s and--as yo-u knLrowi wa ' ifvc ii ad for 1-,. nt! s so: i-a : iery
top lino offici. als eDnga-ging in talntonyi no
on th-ioffca levelL but also in the_-continental
coun~ trie0s cKffctod-, all thiat culminating in Dr.
Jese ~ ans elabora to st-aeont in re lation to coimm-Odi ties
qui-. o, recently at . Drussols.
Noew-at th-1is st: go it seeme-Ld to rio to v, ry
dsrleth-at ' Mr. sho-uld go ove. rseas. It is quito
rue thai ta t del Df t'no discussion ha-d b-oo-n
occur: ng on the-a fici_-. 1,*, vol ' Utw.: British-Ministers led
by their chief noegotiator, 7ir. He-th, were in consulta tion
on rninistcril-i 1bidr in 2iaropo-. and I folt, and Mr.
iicvicn fclt,~ th-t thL is a, : ood ti-me, for h ir to go in
o rd er tD iJnn h1aes oa tion to a se~ ries of comr-, odities,
wha, our intcr osts whaMt the, dlangers woro that we
can, whe-1t the C. Oa uus i* rs of ce-rta-in pre fernces,
pferticul. arly hceefitn particular intorsts in
Austra liLa ndso S1, Laront and 7. s I haesaid he
s01 rhm had ei: etftmo with them-,,. HO put tile case
w,, ith the usual ri-ourt-f-rc~, and -) Dint.
But f2 av noew, rea,.-chod anoth_% r strigo, a furlth-or
S t-1i c This is L-c-) ntinuing process because during June
and July Ifee,: l quite) rt-_ n that -inds b-ith in London
and on the Contil. e: nt will binte_ crystall-ise. 1 o e
rmea-, n tirt thec wh. oJl picture ail. merge nc-ssarly. It
'&gt;; uld not at o nce. Eltut in relratio n to this. coir:;._ dity, or
tthat, there-will ten., d to be3 a cr, staJlis-21tion of ideas.
Once i; deas begin to crystallis.-in that fa-shiion, c; ritain
bro ad principles bcgin to emrg . as a re-sult. -C may find
it-mor difficlilt late.---r en to erC.-iSO thei influe nce whichl
is rotpu , crfl. J,. w-ho mi-nds noe not yet nodeo up. Ila h:-ve
always mcld" -fr et p: Lflt tthfa t. LeA as be c-. rnsulted
b-for2:,-: inds or oe p hat is whly i oj. n~ bocause
I thnink: thi-s is -; od tirno. July:;, of caursc., is not ait
all pr-ictic. al -yr mp . LJ. nt oi: L viao-r bec: nuso wer rill. bo
workin.:, n the, budg-t. June is thei .; otiruz prid
11--rA'f as a, tac-r of tin thSses be higbi-y 
Most -of n-. y tCaLks, i. f course, I will havo in London
with Mr. M-a:-LIn nd wiith thtogeio are porircipally
conc 9rned. li4ku Mr H -th and IrBt~ r Minis tor for
Agricultur., But) 1 an It bo ppo s in g to t-' ake ascries of
C--ZDd tics ann o trough thL:: i' as if I er gvin, an
i: e-itation of M-0. McEwmn. I hiope I wvill1 know : 1ll about
tLor,, but that r_; nt be businecss. My prime business
Will be -to discuss tE~ e broad Principles and there are
any broxad principles that iill ii-vc to be talked out,
The r a has boon a good dal of argument go) ing on about
prefronieltracde-peeeta trade which oporetes
bothn vays -in the,. British C,) mmnonuealh. Thrwil I
think, have to be good deal of talk a--bcut ono asp . ct of
thie n: attcr thiat hias not utr per ha ps, been oquately
ca. nsidored and thant is the political consequence of
Britain entering 4into thCoaon 1h. art kt will be the
political effe--ct in k2ur:, p.,' A : 41at will be the now
rela-Itionshiip bot-weeun Groat Britain a: ind the -L'ur:) pean
countrics? V14ll th., is that Gre: at Britain will
t'aere1-afte-r be a c~ nstituient stato in -Sarope? Will it be a
7uropoonn Fodora--tion' J it be a Confederati-on? Will it,
in efcaan that Jinstcad o-f' theo hist. ric balance of
poweor policy, withl. Grea: t 3ritain st:-nding outside Europa
and exeIrcising hoe be. 1ancing influance, it will be a new
state -of affairs in whaich '-eat Britain is a European
power or( 3 or less inte2 grated into a nau. 2uropean
structureu? These--! ro tro,,; nd-ously . Inport-. nt 2_. eattors for
us. They ar rmnosyipratfor Gree-t Britain,
of cours,_ and for 2n, de pp rob~ ably fa. r the~~.
western world.
Then in addititon to that'-, of courses1 there,-i. s the
consequentialI csr betou tiae off. 2, ct of this en GrCeat
3ritainl s relaItion to tft Cralnwalh Thae CononwOalth
has nowv becone, s so vrrdioerda di n its = natonmy,
thatI thnkfrDr ' he point of view of the Prir~ o Minister
o f this country I ~ J1 ' be-p rimar ily c ) n c arred _ nbout whiat
. ill be the o-f-*. Ict upon theo politicanl altosbetween
Groat BrI-tain a~ nd ustra'Lia-, how far tho present
nwa'Lth ,7, DIti-, nshAp th-lat wc e-njo,, y will be affected
010o way or tae othier, As ycou knowl so-ae senior British
Ministers consi1(. er tbnt C', rcQiL'-3ritain. s entry into th1e
Earopea-n Ccia-unity w.. ill stien then the Co: aIneat nd
the.: y hold tha1 t vi( . T very ' 3tron~ ly. Miy Own vie0w h-is always
b~ on tha t it will tend to ~ eknthe Corin: nwuyalth, But
t'hcre i s not -ucha Point in discussing thiat at long range.
Tha-t is why Imt). t to sit do3wn wihteeon the se: rnatters
in T. ondon. I do) not. knew yet whe ther I -ail I have
occasion to Zo, for exmlto Paris Dr to 3oflz2 A great
dea.. L will depend upon triu nature, of thetlks T will have,
in London. It doesn't taelong to get to theseo places
anyhow. 1 willc baclk vi-, tlioe United Stlatos of
nr i ca.. Ter is ntigto bo g-aineld by calling in nt
Canada o: ccaIusa thec [ LLinevnins araen e-lection. But
of co) uroe; eae-rtas nve been ead fo~ r to see
PreSident 1\', nnody aa.-d Mr. Yvask e-nd othe~ r senior illor~ bers of
the Adm-_ ini* st'r" : in in tvc. sh-; ngt~ n on the wa, ak
I -Aill be tak-in-Mr. 3unti. ng-te rit-ieod, o f n--y
-, eni.-r of fice,-r in Jendae: to be Qb. L to nJ -3p inmyt-rifirng
wbo--n a there. Dr7. is oigto WI~ cv'hn,-ton to
cond-uct corca di. 2cussions a_-nJ , r-Ll rrive in London a
few days bcfuoL'e 1 leave, Lea-Den. iJn r) idor to-. Put noT in the
pictar--: end p tL_ qUI~ p eC Ior Iv; Y discussions in
shin , tfn on imy wyh; a.-aaI~ -cm1ior Exte) rnal
Affa-i rs cffic -r in 1Lonu n so 6: not noeed to tak_! e
scxu ebzdy thlore, _ 9ut Trearsury of-ficejr is go: in, He
ran't ac-lAyeging, ,, ith bte will i-eet raeo in
Lond on-
I ight as -oe1l 1Confess to you that I oi-. g-oing to
give yel ee-n with my -daughiter and her family in
GeTneva to froshe-In my ind and rccup y spir-itg
QU E S ' IT0 1 Sir, you ho0P2, in your tv,: lks withi Prosident
Kennedy to soften the A-, arican attitude towards trade
PRIM1 MNIL ' Tell ono is alw. aYs h-ipef'ul. You knowr on this miatter
of preferencks: this is 2': most article of faith in the
United States; this is a doc-trine. No prefe rence s. And
although the Unitcd State , s pr._ rood the Havana Charter and
subsequently GATT the, best that could bc got at that time
w~ as that there, -rould be no new p-, ferncos but that
existing nes would be pr,.; scrved. The-y aiways ' nave boon
very opposed to this. ie, on the ce) ntro+ ry, have always
said, as we are well Dntitlod to., that if you have a
c: u,-unity of)' 180 ilinpeople em.-braced in a saries of
econom--ic acti vi tie. s in stats, and they enjoy complete
internal. free( trade, 9 they cmn hardly say thiat the re is
something e~ ssentially Ovi in anothe[ Ir ro~ up of comrmunities
who happen to be tho1 BritisL' C:) mo~ onwealth, iving
pre~ ferences cno t-OrlDtlar, -or, as I think it says in Holy
Jrit, " in brotherly love-proferr,. in.; ocie another". Same0
thing. Howo-\ fer:, I ha-ve hamd ta-Lk.-s abo ut thiis thiing, before
t,) d-ayq of course with my Anerican friends a-nd we bo-th
roniain quit3 intransigent on the n~ attor. But I don't wvant
to,-, e t bogged IdoAwn on w'ords, bc. usc you can ) cca. sioDnally
find yourself at c2Iplote arrs' leng; tl b,. causo the re is a
pharase, there is ex,-prussi o) n used, , te talk about
preifr(, ncos, vory properly, This is part of the pattern
of our econora~ ic life. Perh1aps I ni ght say " Lot us forget
z-. bo-ut the words and discuss in substance-. . what kind of
benefits Coanomelhcountries, in pr-rticular Australia,
enj ) y aiad w'-hat they give, end hoi: w theo Unitod States nighit
be able to soften the impact of change. If yo) u have some
alternative 1, hich you do nAt call prefe2rences but which
give us some c.). mp. Jnsatijng odvacntage then let us ha-ve it."
My exp--rienco has boon thiat if y: Du areafter a
ihi] W to put all those things on onen side a-nd sit djivm
roun~ d the tLebl. c so--y " Ihaoout this", ft.. ihat about
that", you occasi~ nally ca n geot soewc'e ach side
pre serving hi~ s principles, in theoDry, but modifying then a
little in Dractice. That, aftr -l-i1neo1t9gra
things aeu~ round table cmnforoncos, pa-rticularly botween
friends. '., Then I sa-, y that, do) n't be unde: r any
m is.-ppr oens ion: Mr. Mc~ w,-en has spon up manfully on this
question of pre-fere-nces and I not i-mo: dify a word ho ha-s
said. 3ut he know, and I 1cnw, that we must now. get to
the ne,: xt phase of se ~ gwhat pro: ctical, results wre can get.
QUETIO: Cldyoutel us Sr, r to what extnt you intend to
h.-v. e cnsultatiens e-n JTOst Now Guinea and S.-uth East Asia
and that kind of thling?
PRIivC MINISTEh_ UJll I have no set plan in y m-, ind, of co) urse but
yo,) u may take it f'~ r rfnted1 th'at wvhen I a-_ 1 there I % ill be
having discussi: ons a-bout theo position in 03Luth * 2ast Asia.
In point of fact the first week-ond Ia= in London I an
going to spend wxith tile Ford ign Soc--tary him-self -at his
because thole ar quite difficult que3stions there on
whaich vie ws -D not al',. ays coincide. I . I.. uld lieto see
wrhether I c; ulln't establish the) -re. atest possible coraI,' n
ba-sis .) ne GuIrea4 ' T'ai. 7, nd, and V~ iet Nain.
QUESTITON: Will the-is. e . iscussi~ ns iainto Britain's ruL-oured
Q1ortr frAS~~ hEs fs io. It boean rurmourod1 that
Bti i. pulling out of S-; uthi-oast Asia,~ 
PRIME MINISTE' 1k': I ha ve not hoeard theu, nor doj I think thera is any
substance in then-. 3ut if teois I w-iill find -) ut aond
lot know.
QUESTION: Do) y,. u regard the Indonosian :, tt;-. cks ) n Dutch New
Guinon. as C, bre-ach tne -, ssur--, nc~ s Yivcn by Dr. Soekarno
arnd Dr. Subandrio?
PRI*:, 1,4INISTEf,: I think so. If th-Jy do_ no) t ropresent the use of
force I do not Krl.) w ujbiat _, Lso they do, It is a r.. ost
unhiappy busi noss.
QUESTION: In thxe li-ht this bre. ach of fiaith how do yo) u foei
about thr~ ir assur-' nce that they will ii t lay claim. to
Eastern Nei.; Guinea?
PRIME MINIST7LR: I think that that is a que) stio) n I Y. light Leave -on one
side. I will trect it as a Kypothetical one.
QUE2JTION,': fr-Mr. lMcEwen r-turnod f om his Conmio: n MIarket talks
he said ho was neithur o. ptimistic pessimistic.
PRIME MIPTIST12L,: I think]-thiat is a pretty fa-ir st~ atoeh. ent. The
difficultics of this thing are eno. rmous. It them a
f~ eic rs t, th-h~ u the Trea_-ty o) f B-no. They have roade
a few protDcojls and n. o d . ubt they will imke som) ie roore. I
Lan not pessinistic. I have no reaso-n to think that we
cannot got sxoehero thiis n: atteL_ but ilhothor we will
get as far we an is a quo; stio--n on the knoes of the
Gods, or, if n-t onm the kneeks _ f the Gods, -on the knees
of people -other than urevswhen it can'Eis to the point.
our job is to treat thlis year as a yeir in which. there has
boen evory cffort, c c-tnn.' Ut look back at the e3nd of this
year, we cannot'c finishi this year, without being able to
say we hiave done all wo uld. WIe must keep up the
pressure,-of our casu until . o411 stageYs of this business are
conc. luced.
QUEZTION: PRIML, MINISTE
)' TITON Is '-ho general improssi.-n in favo) ur o-, f Britain
r-.-rsisting in hecr applic-ti-on to join the Coi--mon Market?
I-1 e nW. I ill kno) w roewhen I ye bean
t h. ere. That is 2 mat. t er on irhicn yo-, u do,. nAt WOnt to 1trve
soenc elssopini.; n, I k1now those people and uill get
a pretty fair idoc2-.
Will tne British Eima,_ rc! ycm note omnMre
talks?
PRIME MINISTER: That had nt occurred to meri. am a dyed in the
wool monarchist.
QUESTION: 11ill yo: u raise tho quost-in la roya-l tour of
Australia?
PRIME MINISTER: You never kno) w. If I answer " Yes" it will be-come so.
If I answer " Nco" it will not. Y) u h bet tor leave that
QUES T10N: There, have beer rupo) rts thnat the G ) ve-rni., ont will
cnmside r ostablisli(, ant o) f a bo--dy such ais the Fodiral
1". uiton C--issi n. i the Unlited States to-handle
allocation of frcoquerncics for roilio and tele2visi-on?
PRIME iMINIST2R2 I do, no) t bezo.-usc I do not kno) w anything about
t hi s I tugtit wea rutmour upon a, ruir:.-ur. N.) t hin g
was ever s: aid by ime, me, .: bo-ut it, 
4 0
QUESTION: Ar' 2 thoro likely to be any discussions on trae with
Cjrjr-unist China?
PRIME II STE:; M I I do not kcnow. YLu follw it is it ps. If they want
to raise some point on that no doubt they ; All and I ; ill
be very willing to discuss that.
QUESTION: There hls boun a ropoit that the United States xwishes
to establish tracking stations at Manus and Brika Islands.
Ara y. ou able to soy anything about this?
PRIME MINISTER: I have not heard about it. I have heard sug-estions
on this but n-t ask r.; e because I tn not the authority
on it. This niight be wTll off as far as I knox'. If it
was that kind of thaing no doubt Mr. Fa. irhall ., rill say
something about it.
QUEf-STION: Have you r. Jceivod a letter from Mr. Rylah c~ nplaining
about the tornis of rof, 2reoco fLr the Post Office Inquiry
in Victoria?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes I h--ao receiv: d lettcr. I h3iav passed it on
to) the Aerrny-Ganarai and the Postmaster-General to) have
a loo : k at it. I o not thiink they oiero va--ry formiidabl e
alteinatives.
QUESTION: Dos this r. ian t w~ ilrle b. alterations?
PRIME MINISTB,: I d not know. This is f--r the Attorney-Genoral.
Do not ask no.
QUESTION: iill Mlr. Holt be attending the Commo-i:) nwe-, alth Finance
HinistorsI Cnferuncc?
PRIME MiISTIL DD not ask!: t St b Thact is an awfully
long way off. All I knmw is tat perhaps the House will
be up has that not bDen -nn. unced?
With the compli,= nts of
Press Secretary to Prine Minister.
C. C1' X RA
23rd May, 1962. 


568FOR THE PRESSNot to be cabled, published. orbroadcast before 0300 a. m.,Australian Eastern Time,26th May, 1962. DEPARTMENT . OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRSCANBERRA PR 622VISIT TO SOUTH-EAST AND EAST ASIAStatement by the Minister for ExternalAffairs~*The Minister for External Affairs, Sir Garfeld Barwick,said today that he would leave Sydney next Monday, May 28, on anofficial visit of a little over five weeks to South-East and EastAsia. During his tour he would visit Singapore, Viet Nam,Hong Kong, Formosa, Japan, Korea, Cambodia, Thailand, Malaya andIndonesia. He also hoped to visit Burma.He was scheduled to return to Sydney on JulySirGdrfield's prvisinal t-ur itinernry is:-DATEJOURNEYFLIGHT DETAILSTIMEMay 28( Monday)May 29( Tuesday)June 1( Friday)June 4( Monday)June 6( Wednesday)June 7( Thursday)June 9( Saturday)June 15( Friday)June 17( Sunday)June 19( Tuesday)June 25( Monday)June 28( Thursday)June 28( Thursday) Sydney/ SingaporeSingapore/ SaigonSaigon/ Hong KongHong Kong/ TaipehTaipeh/ TokyoTokyo/ SeoulSeoul/ TokyoTokyo/ Hong KongHong Kong/ Phnom PenhPhnom Penh/ BangkokBangkok/ RangoonRangoon/ SingaporeSingapore/ Kuala Lumpur QF731 PA81 8PAO02 CT002 CT024 CT024 CT027 BA933AF/ TI 18VN484 TG301 BA716 ML172 1230-20401030-12401415-17251245-13001530-1900830-10301130-13101000-14351500-1 5150o45-12001610-17201325-17201800-1900
( Sunday)July4 ( W( ednesday) 2.Kuala Lumpur/ SingaporeSingapore/ DjakartaDjakarta/ Sydney ML1 71BA704 BA708 : 09000.1o0 1820-19501935-0710July I



TRI 3U,-E,_ TO SPACEMAN' S ACI EY " ME NT
Stateimeint by thie Ai~ i. PrLXL. UfistcrM. J i\,-Ewen
Thei Acting Primo Minister, Mvr. J. Mocwen, said today
that the three-orbit space flight by the Imrican astronaut
MalcolmLl Scott Carpentor was anotbiar dramatic achio~ emcnt in
space exploration. Ho extendod wiermost congra tulati.-ns on behalf of
Australiia to the United Sta-te-s Governiment, , stronaut Carpenter
and the Project Mercury Personnel,
' Astralians are delightad that this country wa able
to play a ml pr n theo success of the space flight through
our tracking fa-ciities.
" The flight's success is clear ovidunce of the
loac'lurship of thea United States in scientific achievenent in the
space age".
NBE FJ'
May, 1962. 



VlwE EKLY INDEX NO0,21
1WEEK ENDING MAY2 196
00OMMON'WY14LTH OF AUSTRiLr! A
Index of 1M1inisterial Statements Issued in-Canberra
TeDpi yri. me Minister and Minis-U'er for Trade. the Rt. Hion0
John McEwen
M1a y 2O0, No. 548 NEW = OT ACTION TMEA,' SURES SOON
23 No. 563A SURVEY OF TRAIDE WITH ISRAEL
No. 565 FIRST SHIPPING SERVICE TO VISTAFRICA
No. 567 AUTOMOTIVE~ ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT
The Treasurer, The Rt. Hon0Harold H1~ 2
May 21 No. 552 THE BAM( OF2 A, D F. LADE SAVINGS BA," NK LTD.
" 23 No. 5591 1 AUTHORITIES TO CARRY ON BAKNG BUSINESS
. The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. I . H.
Spooner, M. M.
May 2.3 No. 559 LA^ TEST APPROVALS OF OIL SEARCH SUBSIDY PA'YMENTS
The Minister for Defencie the Hone Athol Towr. 1ey
M-ay 21 No0 551 PROMOTION OF AIR COMMODORE C. T. HANNA-sH
" 24 No. .562 A USTRALIA'N MILITA'. RY INSTRUCTORS FOR SOUITH
Vi ETN1. M
The Minister for Turrite rio s., the Ho( n, Paul. Hasluck
May 22 No, 554APP, 1OINTM1, ENTT OF1Ai DMI1! 72T1LTOR OF NORFOLK ISLI'! TD
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator the lion. Shane Pg1trije
May 22 No. 555NDEWA EP ZVILC UN CdIDENiT ENQUIRY
The Pcotmaste'r-General. The Hon. C2.1 Davi,_ son
May 21 No. 550 POSTMA1' 1STER-GEN.\ ERAiL ILL
It 24 N o. 5 63 p~ OINTM ENTT OF COMM 155 lONER ENQUIRIES INTO
P. BOOKMAKERS,,
The M, 4inister-for Fxternal, Affa irs, The Hon.. Sir Garfield Barwzick
M41ay 235 1 0o. 56
No, No0 No, 557 566 5: 3 E. C. 1A. F. E. RA,* IL1WA' Y SUB-COMMITTEE CONFERENCE
TO 1E HELD IN MELBOURNE
AUSTRALIA-N CONT INGENT FO1" THA I LAUD
ASALIA* N FYPfj S SY IN A*' RGENT" INA
VISIT TO SOU1TH-EA: ST AN,"' D EA, ST ASIA
The 4Attorney-Genera., The lioi-% Si. Iarfield Barwick
Ma y 235
12 2-3 No., 558 Pr: TER hUSTRi-LL
No. 570 NEW COT&amp;~ dl~ oIS ORZDINA'NCE IN OPETRA'TION IN A. C. T.
ON JUL 1, 1962.
The inister for the Te Hon, j. Cramer
May 24 No. 560 H-Ei iij) MASTEI, S TO VISIT OYLMIAYCLEG
The Minister for the Nlvy Secnator thne lion. J. G. Gorton
May 24
" 1 2.5 No. 561. R. 1. N. GETS WA,_' RM T'ELCOME IN JLPAN
No0564 NEW CiAPTA'iN FOR FI2-G SlIt?
The Minister for Health. Senator the Hon:. Harrie W. Wade
May 20 No, 54811 USE OF O. PA! LVACN
" 21 N-o. 5L9MAL~ V~ CN N 51I T ALES
The M-nitrfocr luJk 3The Hom. A' Llenr Fairhall, M., IP,
My22 No. .55-3 ASTRONA! UT V2" ILL SEE WOOMERA'SROACNDE"
214 No, 571 FAST W--INDS CA^ RRY BA* LLjOON liAYLOA D FROM MTIL DURIA
TO JERV'I S BA Y
9 25 Y0 5_ 72 PAi. CLOiADi 75" OM RA'DIO,, TIVITY TE2STING BALLOON
S'. 21LL SSN 
The Minister fSoro_ R__ i ' n0 The Hon, RIW. Swartz
May 21 No. 5522L HOSPITIAI, VIIIlL DE RE" ADY SOON
22 No. 555 MINISTII TO VISIT : 7. YDNE* Y T-HIS YFEAR
The Minijstter-. in-Lreof CflR -Senat c trhe Hcn. , Gr
Gcrtor
Mta y 25 No, 56-3 C0MEI-UTI] M NETWOR FOP, THE CO4MONVW--Et*, ILTH,
Ko', 569CACIT, LE
With the Compliments of
The Government r-ublic Relations Cffice.
Parliament iiusc, C/ TB. SERIU,. 



TPANISCRJPT OF
FRESS AND T. V. INT* E1, V7E WIJTH THE PR. LME MIN-iSTER THE.
ROTN0. OG~ iZES AT L ONDON AIRPORT ON MA: Y 3,1
your rea ctions -to the aercement that w-, as reach~ ed. i* n
Brussels ycsterday on Coemmonaaith~ manufactured &amp; Dods?
PR7M MINISTER-That's rather a difficult quiestion to ' answer because
I ' ye read. about it in -the press flying over from Geneva,
but Ilve not heard any oficial acco-unt of ityet, and
thnerefore I speak with. some caution. B~ ut I -ima,; iJne that
an agreement of thLis kind can hardly be treatled as : 1final_
I don't know, because we're to have a Prime Minister's
conference in September and it's h-ard to believe that we
wlhave a series of arc, 1tsbefore thn. which will
render the conferonce unnecessary0 So I take it t, hat t.-his
has somie tentative quality. In so far as it appears to
recogn,. se a cut-off pointL,, or what's been called a
precipice, thor of course that's not quite our cup of tea0
W4o want -to have arrangements made thiatl are fairly permanent,
of steady quality, They may not be identical with the
old prefere,. nc-es thiat have caxis ted which-have gone on and
on and might hiave been expected to go on fLor a long time,
but(-in substance we? rn locking for arrangements that hiavke
some pormanent and protective quality, giving out an
opportunity of prescrv: Lng our trade patti. rns and of
growing as an economy, ThL-is is tGramondu-.: sy important
-to us, and 1' think iL-s very im:, portqnt1V for Great Britain,
perhaps more important than P. lot of people here think.
Because we're an enormous customer of Great Britain, and
therefore weo provide many thcusands of people in this
country with jobs,~ It's very imrortant to you, Jtis viery
important to us, very -Laortant frT the Cornionealth., and
so all 1 can say is-that this does represent a final
arrcangemaent of some kind., _ hnh ope it doesnt represent
what I mieght ocaLl a ZeCnerai pattern fLor-those agreements,
because if i~ t ( lid it wvould r-iutn counter -to the ideas th. a t
have boon pat p
Ubf'ich rather ibrings me to -that secorid questi. onn you
ha3ve in you., min, iy coL1eague MiIrr . icLia. Tn, has been
he ro with. my fulil acproval. and support 11e has put the
c as,,, e indotail, ' nor,: and in alrop,,_ with th-e iftll appro-val
of thec Governmeont and ra7slf, andt I thtind( i, with. great
abiliy. Ty here ri~~ e~ to bak up whatil ho s doing~, not
to water i~ t doi,.; n, not; ' Go qual-Ify iito back it up, and
perhaps discuss itin tbhose more gnedterms that ' Prime
Ministcrs arc su-, posed -to engage in whe-n theoy meat cacn
otheir, but no subtractions fromPj what Mr0McEwen has been
putt--'-ing)
Q. Would. you sayr th-1at the possikbility of this loosening
of Commonwalthi tiecs is a muchi more c-. ctio1nal matter in
Au7st ralia int is heora In D: rita-Ln?
P. M. 0 Well, I don't !, now what the oionis hero on t ; his
ma tte. of course., o, ti, a traditionally very St 0ongl1y
Cc~: mnw~ atI~ r cadod bul% I~ yer been an ol~ d Comm-nwca~ t
ha ras you mgtsay; for so I'eng now thiat I never
vundertake to say 1* jblat iny-d o) the conr thik a u it
So I don't know.
QUESTION NOT CLEAR 000 0 ( 3 
P. M. Dontt forget this, that we in Australia could h-ave simply
said 1Look,~ there'~ s nothling doing , e have : prre-ferentJa
arrangemients wit roi,,, they~ ve been zoin on for years,
Thaey arc! satisfaCtor*, r tC' u) S they are sati-sfac; ory to you,
yoen must choose between continuing that way and going int'Uo the
European Economic Coazmmnity." M'Tat would have been legitimate
, uould't it? But we h-aven't done i~ t ie hIave, in facu,
outstandingly said 11dell put our officials down with yours3",
we've -? one to all th people in the Faropean countries
concerned, Doctor Westerman made a long and careful
analysed statemen~ t on a series of commodities,, ' Je've done
all these things because we've said., in effect 11' iol we
wont stand on tI; ho letter of the if you can rnego~ iate
a series of conditions for us whiich enable uis in s'l. bstanco
to preserve our pattern of trade and -to grow economically
thein whether you call it A or B, we won~ t arrie about that;
we're looking for the subs) tance." 1 And so, oiitstandingl1y, the
Astraliunnegctiators have been constructive very persistent
IVve no doubt, and they need to be per. sistent, constructive,
not standing on a letter but locking to the Lubstance. And
that, I think, is a pretty good approach.
QUIESTION NOT CLEAR:
P M. I am not passing a judgr~ lont. I am not saying wihichi, in
theo end result, is to be preferred, but I cannot believe myself
thlat if Great Britain goes into Burcpo and becomes a member
of the polit~ ical orga-n~ sati-on, I can't believe that hor relations
wit.. 4h thle Comonealth countries will bce as t! ie: Xiblo or-let'Is
say, as independent as they have been in thoe past. That's
net to say -that I am saying you must11 not do it. Not that tl~: it
would cut much ice anyhow, but 1, not saying that. But
I am saying that I don't think that the, Co~ rnoiwcalth will be
theo sameo as it was bofore, As -the Commr-onwalth has been
ch-ianging very very oap'idl~ r for a long time nowr, I suppose
one ffurther change might be acceptable to a lot of pecple0
All T sa-y is, the~ ro wil L a change. Gruat Britain as part
of srpcas an -Into g-r-od partner in &amp; iropoan highl policy,
could hardly be as ndepondent a membe-r of thG Commonw_ ea lth
aS sho has been in thec. prst, thatts all. I Merely State itas
a fac.., I've got pest argui-ng about it
Q. You Jet ar obviously as a cha-nge, fox-tae worso?
P. M1 From the Comr=' oalth point of view. As long as you
under-tand that it eco a change for the better from tho
point of view of iworld security,, of a poucrorfui 1Europo-, a
powerful third g-roat Po;.-er in tewovld this may be'very
good, My observation is nolb to say that trtat's a bad tig
but that the Coimaonwoa1 th will no longor be th11e same thing
as it wa-s before. Well, I suppose th. at's clear enougA,
Q. Do you in fact, 101r, Pvrme Minisater, envisage Britaints
rol.. e in Europe. if it goes in, exclusively in te) rrs of its
bercorji*. ri g a memk-fbr of Q world po,, wer, or do you t17ir'-thiat
Britain has a choicee of staying out and of building l inks with
countries like yourself~' Do ycu think we have a real choiceo?
P 14, Well, look, 1 wouldni t like to answer that quaes-tion
because while the econoic iniplic. aGJions-of tha TrTetnty o-f Rome
arIthink, brcoadly cle1-, aK enougi-, the!., poliie. l implications
a-re as yet not clelnrly to be soeen. Be causce thiey ir: Ll, I
think, deve. lop0 It nay be tlnist the ir. tovio difi~ croncos
be: tween th Si~ x IEurcrpan countric-s will continueo to assert
themselv: Cs politically, Th-at? s very-much en the-L cards, and
if SO tho political -i. rn, L*-, rticn wilbe mach slower than the
a c u * 0 s 
P M.
( Contd) PQM, econoric integration, We can't tell at this stage what
fo.-m any political integration will taike wheth. eJ. it, ould
be some form of confederacy or whether i6 would be some
form of federation, there being a world of difference
between the two things, Whether it would lead to a
common foreign policy, common high policies on various
matters, is a matter of evolution and, therefore, I am
not proposing to be a prophet about it, But however
far the development goes, or however fast or slowly it
goes, my only point is I don't see the Commonwealth
relationship as remaining unaffected the Commonwealth
relationship, mark you, being a pretty hard thing to
define anyhowo
That being the case, Sir, is it possible to reach
a verdict in September when presumably only one half of
the deal is kno. wn the economic side. The political
implications aren't then fully apparento Is it possible
to reach a verdict?
Look, don't ask me to say what will be possible in
September. All I hoped about September was that by
this time the United Kingdom Government, as a result of
its negotiated work and as a result of all our consultations
and so on, would be able to come to the Prime Ministers
and say " Jell, it looks to us as if this kind of an
arrangement might be got, Now, as this affects all of
you, will you speak up and tell us what you think about
it. We want to get your judgment before we sign on the
dotted lino,:" iell, suppose we had a discussion in
September and, economically, everybody is satisfied,
Canada is satisfied with losing preferences on manufactured.
goods and we are satisfied about something else. You
know, we are all happy in September about the economic
problems. Then I would expect us to say so. And have
these arrangements madco But one thing I believe will
have to occur in September also and that is some consideration
as to the Commonwealth and what has become of it and
what is becoming of ito Because, you know, it is not all
related to the European Common Market, There are all
sorts of problems coming along. There are many now
countries about to come into the Co~ monwealth fieldo
Jhen I first attended the Prime Ministers? meetings, I
wasn't a Prime Ministero That sounds a bit Irish but
I wasn't, I was deputising for one and that was 7 years
ago, And there were five people there and now there are
nine or ten and within a year, probably fourtoen or
fifteeno A good deal of work has been done on this and
if you have a look at the number of former colonies moving
into independenco, this Commonwealth has become a pretty
numerous body. And, of course, when that happens,
obviously we will havo to do a lot of thinking about the
procedures to make it effctiv~ e Unless we are just
going to have a meeting once a year That is a difficult
problem not soluble at this cmment. But I have no doubt
that in September it will come into the picture when we
are discussing th Common Market,, The Comnmon Market
will be the occasion, I think2, for some of those discussions,
Sir, is it your ~ imrpr-esion that the British Government
is jumping the gun on Soptember?
P. M. No, no. 
4,
Qo Is that not implied in this agreement reached
last night?
P, M. Now you are asking me to make a comment on an
agreement that I haven't seen but have read about in
a newspaper or two, on which I have no reactions from
my technical people or those who have been conducting
negotiations. Now if I were a newcomer to this business
I would make a lot of inferences in the light of it.
I am not. I have no reason to suppose whatever that
the Government of the United Kingdom won't pay the
greatest attention to what we have to say to them.
If I thought anything else I wouldn't be here.
Qo Does the importance of this meeting in September
make you feel that voting procedures at the Prime
Ministers' conferences might not, after all, be rather
useful?
P. M. What sort of procedures?
Qo Voting procedures, etc.
P. M. Oh, don't try to sell that to meo Look, there's
one thing that is an article of faith with me. It is
that the Commonwealth is not a committee of the United
Nations. And that it doesn't have votes. When it
becomes a committee of the United Nations and has votes
I hope and believe that I will no longer be Prime
Minister and no longer have to submit to such atrocities,
Not a bad word, atrocities, for that either. Move a
resolution, go round the corner, see if somebody will
support an amendment; argue about sub-clause get
a motion carried, What does the minority do in the
Commonwealth? Suppose Australia is outvoted in the
Commonwealth voto? ' That do we do? Go and bow three
times, and say, " Certainly, we will alter our policy
to please youo" Not on your life, That's not the way
the Commonwealth has worked.
Qo But is unanimity possible on such an issue as this?
P. M, But we've never had unanimity. That's why woeve
never taken votes, perhaps. It's rather a perverse
way of putting it, but the only thing that's unanimous
out of a Prime Ministers' conference is the communique
not a word in which can appear unless everybody agrees.
And that's why these communiques are such frightful
collections of platitudes they're the one thing or
two things or three things that everybody can agree about.
Qo Mr. Prime Minister, the problem for Australia is,
of course, rather agricultural than manufactured goods
and we have been hearing it suggested that Australia
might find alternative markets for her agricultural
goods in South Fast Asia. W'ould you envisage this
as being so?
P. M. I think we have boen doing our best to develop them
for a long tine, But you nustnit assume that you can
get an alternative market for the whole sweep of our
agricultural products, because scme of then have been
developed with particular reference to the markets here
in Great Britain. Dried fruits, canned fruits are
perfect examples. But I would just like to :. ake one
slight correcticn, You say our great intorost is not
in manufactured g o If you ean by that that we
C901: 000920615 
PMo
( Contdo) Q. P. M.
Q. P. M. don't have the same volume of exports of manufactures
however that may be defined, as, say, Canada, the fact
is that we are a very great manufacturing country and
people seem to assume that the whole problem presented
by the Common Market is the export problem. That's
not the only problem. If in fact the result of the
Common Market and Great Britain going into it is that
there is a tremendous exporting capacity, additional
exporting capacity in manufactures developed in the
European community, with reduced costs and all that
kind of thing, the Australian manufacturer is going
to have an interest in this, because he will be submitted
to the most enormous additional competition and may have
to come more and more frequently to the government and
the authorities to ask for some protection. I mention
that to show that, after all, trade is two ways. We
know thato We sometimes forget it. This Common
Market argument does operate both ways. As exporters,
of course, we are primarily in the primary industry
fiold, the agricultural, pastoral field.
May I ask you, Sir, if you resent the American
pressures on the British Covernment on entry into the
Common Market?
Well, I would prefer to discover for myself what
these pressures are before commenting on them. I will
be seeing the President of the United States and so on
when I have finished here. Well, I think it's time
I went to the hotel. I'm seeing your Prime Minister
tonight. If some of you will give me a paper of what
I have said I will be able to give it to him.
Before you go, Sir, is your arrival here today
significantly connected with the forthcoming Test Match
or is that pure coincidence?
Noe I don't even know whoro the Test Match is.
And if it's any comfort to you, I wontt be there,
There is a type of newspapjr man who lives on the
assumption that in the sunmr-. I never do anything else
but go to test natches,, it's a newspaper logend.
I go to as many as I can. I see, on the average, two
and a half days in the course of the season, 



F OR PRESS: I have received the following Pres ttmn rmi~
Australian Hi gh Co con in f~ lindon. e. sSamntfo ! a
J. O'Suiiivan
The Prim,-e Minister of fustialia, Mr. Menzies, anid thLe
Deputy Prime Minister of N-. eW Zealand, Mr. Marshall, wh-o are at
present in London, today Lad discussions in ; rhicli they reviewed
at some length-At-. e d. evelopmentsin negotiations concerning
Brtii application to join the Commion 1' iarket.
Official advisers from both-countries were present.
Mr. IMearzies and Pr. M:_ rshial1 said that they had taken
thLis opportunity to discuss th-Ie trend of the neg otiati -ons in
iñ elation to th1e great tracding interests of bc'th countries in the
3British 1-arket, Thne int~ eres,-ts of Clustralia and New Zecaland in the
neiaIrisnssDae ay similar. The economnics of each
coluntry depend critically on exports to the Britisha M1arket in
whthicyhh v on C-no unrestricted and praferential duty
fr. . oentry for al: most all1 their E~ accsh country is also a
major m-arket for Britishi expcc-ts. The proferential trading
relatlions which. 1-avo existed etee Britain on the one hand and
Austral! i-a and Now Zca2. pnd on the, othier for the gre--ater part of
this century have wor-ked to theo mutual advantage of each of -te
three couintries. Fur,. ther, bothl kiustra1 ia and Ne1, w Zoaland have had firm
expectations thaat thoea special trade rolaions woulid continuo,
Theose they wore weol. crt1tod to heave, This is qbovo question,,
This continuity of Co-io.: , ltl t--sde has been the basi s of a
great dcal of special duvcT~ rnent' in both countrias in thle sense
Ghat particular prouct ~ s anjj e and parti cular coimmuniti. es
hava developed on tihe I of' an assurance of markets in Britain,
3oth ust-rale L and KNew Zealand fLace drastic consequcnCeE
if Britain wueto rnter thGor.' fion Marku: t cn te rms which do not
afford acduq-uato sa. guard-s to t~ evital tradtng interests of
Austra: lia and INew. Z. D.. and ini theo British. Market-,
Mr. I.-Inzies rind said thtit was
r congnistled thrat1 Britis! h, cttry to tiio Comricon NMarkect was not solely
a tr&amp; edo or cecorom could hava far roacnhing political
inplicc-. tion extending far beyond oe
Brit i Sh c n should. not be onl terms which resultod in
critizeal dmage o hcir ' o~ lJs and the ipimn fCmow~
ealth lielati ons kr, Munzices and Mr. Mdarshall recal~ led thaat the
Bn ti sli Government hnad roitd~ give n assurancos that it would
not fe el able to join unless Comnelhinterecsts were safebguardr,:
d. Th-oso rssur. ancos wo-re-of vibalq.-. importance in the
curront~ negrotiat-ions,
Nevrthj~ es nithr Astralia nor New Zeala. nd could be
indi f fe rent+ to somrr . c nt d; evoloweeonts in tne negotiati-ons0
Alth'o _ El nco doubt tho(-ofic a't his woceek's1. sission on
industriJal -,-_ oducts wc. Ie c: rnc -L. ndcr xsriaonat the Commonwe
alth Prim Ministe rs 3Confren it. nonre the. lass represe nte d
ditrbn VO. pee4o-~ ot 4full shoicrt o f p ro vJ. d i g
adeqi-uato Se feguaire. s for Cme.* athrd in theo rprodLCU'ts
corncerned, E\ 7ton rn'oirorfent. of course,; I it must not under any
circiris tanco s be-tf-.. 11 as a -. ia Lrcnrn f'or ta o" settblenent
. hic an mi -D. t bo rched-on. o.&gt; e Product-, of even groate r concern
t o Au s tr-, a. i. a a nd w Zeala
2nd Juno, i962, 



WEEKLY INDEX No. 22
WEEK ENDING JUNE 2, 1962
COMMONWEALTH OF LUSTRALI.'
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
No, No. No, No. 573 579 581 597 John McEwen
TRADE MISSION FOR CARIBBEAN AREA
TEMPORLRY DUTIES
MISSION SUCCESS IF SOUTH AMERICA
PREFERENCES ON C'WEALTH MANUFACTURED GOODS
IF BRITAIN JOINS THE COMMON MARKET
The Treasurer, the Rt, Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
No, No. No. 590 598 60h PAY--ROLE TAX REBATES
COMMONW\ EALTH LOAN
NEW YORK CASH LOAN
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.,
May 30 No. 594
31 No. 599 EXPORT OF WEST AUSTRALIAN IRON ORE
GEOLOGICAL HISTORY OF THE CAIRNS-TOWNSVILLE
HINTERLAND
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley, MP.
May 28 No, 583AUSTRALIAN FORCES FOR THAILIJND
The Minister for Labour and National Service, The Hon. Wmo McMahon
May 31 No. 600APPOINTMENT OF A COMMISSIONER AND A CONCILLATOR
UNDER THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT.
The Postmaster-General, The Hon. CoW. Davidson
May 28 No. 577 AUTOMATIC MAIL HANDLING EQUIPMENT FOR SYDNEY
MAIL EXCHANGE
The Acting Minister for Immigration, The Hon, Leslie Bury, M. P
May 28 No, 585 NEW MIGRATION AGREEMENT SIGNED WITH BRITAIN
The Minister for External Affairs, the Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
My 28 No. 575 APPOINTMENT OF MR. F. R. GULLICK
28 No. 576 AUSTRALIA'S RFLTIONS WITH ASIA
28 No, 582 AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO THE UNITED NATIONS
TRUSTEESHIP COUNCIL
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
June 1 No, 603AUSTRALIAN BUTTER PRICE RISE IN LONDON
The Minister for the Army, The Hon, J. O. Cromer
May 29 Noo 587
30 No. 591
June 1 No. 602 NEW SYSTEM OF MEAUSREMENT FOR THE AUSTRALIAN
ARTILLERY
TROOPING FOR THE QUJEEN
TOP SOLDIERS TO STUDY TACTICS
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
573A 592 593 596 NAVY PILOT TRAINING RESUMES
2000 AUSTRALIAN SAILORS HEAD FOR HOME
U. S. N, ESCORTS REFLOATED SHIP TO AUSTRALIA
HIGH HEELS FOR RANS
May 27 28 28
31
May 29 31
June 1
May tt ft
it No, No. NNooc, So o/ 2 
2
-The Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert ODpprman
May 28 No. 584 FIRST OF THREE LIGHTHOUSE VESSELS LAUNCHED
June 1 No. 605 NEW ACTING CHAIRMAN OF AUSTRALIAN ROAD
SAFETY COUNCIL
The Minister for Supply, The Hon, Allen Fairhall
May 30 No, 595 LONG TOM ROCKET CARRIES 5 CAMERAS 80 MILES
ABOVE WOOMERA.
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
May 27 Nob 580 RAAF AND AIRFIEID RECONSTRUCTION
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz
May 29 No, 588 CHLIPMlN RE-APPOINTED
29 No 589 REPATRIATION MINISTER TO VISIT S. AUSTRALIA
30 No: 595A MORE WOMEN PATIENTS IN REPATRIATION HOSPITAL.
Department of Repatriation
June 1 No, 605A REPATRIATION WTLL COVER WHIOLE STATE
The Department of Primary Industry
May 31 No. 601. EXPORT SUGAR REBATE
The C. S. IR. O, Minister-in-Charge, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
May 29 No. 586 AMIERICAN ROCKETS AND SATELLITES TO ASSTST
AUSTRALIAN RESEARCH
Pepartment of the Arm-.
May 28 No. 578 DOUBLE SALUTE FOR QUEEN
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBERRJ A. C. T.
No. 574 CANCELLEDO 



TEXT OF TELEVISION INTERVIEW GITLN BY THE
PRIME MINISITR, RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, ON
B. B. C. on 4TH JUNE 162
Mr. Robin Day: Mr. Menzies, we've read about your strong reaction on
Saturday to the agreement which was reached in Brussels,
whereby Britain would gradually do away with the
Commonwealth preferences on manufactured goods from
Australia and other Commonwealth countries. Now why were
you so disturbed about an agreement which affects only
about 2 per cent. of Australian exports to the United
Kingdom?
Prime Minister: Well of course the effect of it depends entirely on
how many more agreements there are to come. Because it
will be the cumulative effect of these things which will
be important, in the long run. Now this first one, as
you rightly say bore on a relatively small amount of
trade from Australia, much more of course from Canada.
But when it was announced as an agreement, this at once
provoked in our minds the question that ' Is this the end
of it? t Is this a provisional arrangement? Or are we
being told now that thiat is the agreement?
Mr. Day: Well, the British Government line has been that this
can only be judged, and ought not to be judged except as
a part of a package deal which is not yet complited.
Prime Minister: Well, I've been emphasising to them in my talks since,
that that needs to be made clearer than it was at the
time this particular agreement was announced.
Mr. Day: May I put to you what one Conservative newspaper said
about your statement? It said ' It is a great pity that
Mr. Menzies should make such an outcry over the settlement
on manufactured goods. His Government knows that
its main export interest will be well cared for.' And it
goes on to make this point: The main commodity in
Australian exports is wool, and it is already certain
that there will continue to be free entry of wool into
Britain and Europe.
Prime Minister: Well the writer of that is like a lot of people he
thinks that wool is our only export commodity.
Mr. Day: It didn't say that.
PFinru Minister: No, but he rather implies it, Wool is looked after
wool is safe yes. But we have many many scores of
millions of pounds worth of other co. mmodities, which are
at risk.
Mr. Day: May I ask you about one point in your statement on
Saturday in which you said that this agreement must not
under any circumstances be taken as a pattern for the
type of settlement which might be reached on other
products. Now isn't that rather strong language for one
independent Government to use to another independent
Government?
Prime Minister: Well, I thought it wasn't very strong myself. You
have to remember that these are our exports that are
being dealt with ours these are our preferences that
are being negotiated. Not your preferences into Australia
our pref,; rnces into Great Britain. These are the
ones that are on the counter. JWe have a perfect right
to express our vie-. s.
Mr. Day: Oh, certainly, yes. Jhat was the reaction of the
British Ministers at the weekend to your observations?
Prime Minister: I think they understood rry point of view. 
D; bre they angry with you?
Prime Minister: No, oh, no. 7We know oach other very well. We don't
get into that state of mind.
Mr. Day: What safeguards Mr. Menzies
Prime Minister: I may tell you that I M,. y I interrupt you?
Mr. Day: Please go on.
Prime Minister: -We in fact have been, as they know, most co-operative.
We might have said at the very beginning ' Look, we
won't have anything to do with this matter'. But we
didn't do that. le have, through officials and other
channels, put forward constructively, proposals without
which Mr. Heath, as the chief negotiator, wouldn't have
been as far forward as he is now. Of all countries we
have been reasonable on this matter.
Mr. Day: Now what safeguards, Mr. Menzies, are you in fact
demanding for Australia's interests?
Prime Minister: Well, you can't answer that except by answering in
terms of about a hundred different commodities. But
there is one point that we have emphasised though, and
that is that we do not like this transitional period
idea what has been called the precipice by some
people. That was involved, that was included in the
hard manufactures arrangement that has been tentatively
made, as we have by now learnt. But if you were to
reproduce that in respect of dried fruits, canned
fruits, wheat, butter, meat, so that all these
preferential arrangements or their substitutes, went out
by 1970, this would be in the highest degree
unsatisfactory to Australia because we would have a
decline in our production of these things, and our
marketing of them going on steadily over a period of
years. And that is why we sr. id, both Marshall and I,
that rwe didn't want to see this method reproduced down
the line.
Mr. Day: Now may I ask you about some of the alternatives in
this problem, Mr. Menzies? If we join the Common Market,
the United Kin dom stands to get free access to the
Smarkets of Europe; now if we don't, as an alternative
are you prepared to offer us free access to the
Australian market, to take away your tariffs on our goods?
Prime Hinister: But aren't you rather overlooking the fact that we
have been giving you tariff preferences in Australia
since Australia began practically?
Mr. Day: They have been reduced in recent yoers, haven't they?
Prime Minister: But their effectiveness, let me remind you, has been
such that we have over the period of the last twenty
years been. Great Br. tain's biggest customer. In the
last 30 or 40 years we have taken more goods from Great
Britain though we have a population running from five
million at the beginning to ten and a half now, we've
taken more than the United States of America, with 180
million people. And this is, I think, very largely the
result of the preferential tariff position enjoyed by
British goods passing into Australia.
Mr. Day: But if we dont go into the Co_ . maon Market there must
be some alternative trading arrangenoent fur us to gain
benefit from, and this is what critics of your attitude
maintain.
Mr, Day: 
Prime Minister: Now look, I want to make it quite clear that whether
Great Britain goes into the Cormon Market or not is a
matter for Great Britain to decide. She knows far more
about her business and her interests on those matters
than I do; or than we do. That's not our point. We
have said: Very well, if you want to go in, that's
your decision, and you will cast up the pluses and the
minuses, fairly enough. We know what the pluses and the
minuses are in the impact on our own trade and we want to
come out of this with as little injury as possible.
Don't imagine for one moment that we expect to come out
of this as a profit, we won't. We will lose something.
But we want our losses to be within reason.
Mr. Day: Many people, Mr. Menzies, see this whole issue as a
choice between the Commonwealth and Uho Common Market.
Do you see it in that simple way?
Prime Minister: Jell, I think that is over-simplifying the problem;
I think the two things overlap; I wouldn't at all be
disposed to be dogmatic on that matter. But just to take
a simple example: if Great Britain goes into the Common
Market, the Cormon Market has an internal free trade, no
internal Customs barriers. Then certain products on
which we now enjoy a preference, will be the subject of
a preference to the European competitor, and we will have
to encounter a tariff barrier. So that our preferences
will be reversed into a preference for one of the
European suppliers. ' cll, this may be the price of
Adniralty, this may be one of those things that must
happen, if you are going into a species of Customs Union.
And we feel the merits of that kind of thing. But we
being of the same race as you are, are always prepared to
have a good look at our own interests on these matters
and protect them.
Mr. Day: Mro Menzies, there has been some criticism in the
press that you have doubtless read about your motives in
making your strong statement the other day. One was that
you had deliberately overstated your case for tactical
reasons in order to with an eye on the harder
bargaining which is to come on wheat and butter and all
these other things
Prime Minister: Well, I'm sorry to be disappointing on this matter,
but you say it was a very strong statement and a
provocative statement
Mr. Day: I didn't call it provocative
PriJae Minister: Before it went out
Mr. Day: I'm not objecting to it
Prime Minister: My only doubt was whether it was too wishy-washy.
Mr. Day: ell would you like to strengthen it now?
Prime Minister: I've never seen anything so built up and so
dramatised it's a perfectly simple statement. We don't
want the rule that's been applied to manufactures, to
hard manufactures to be applied down the line. That's
quite true. They know that. There is nothing in our
statement that hasn't been said a dozen times to the
people conducting the noeotiati-ns.
Mr. Day: There is another criticism made of you which you have
pro) bably also roed, that you made this protest, whether
strong or not, to strengthen your somewhat shaky
political position at home:, where I believe you have a
majority of only one in the lower House of Commons. 
Prime Minister:
Mr. Dcy
Prime Minister:
Mr. Day
Prirme Minister
Mr. Day:
Pri~ ic Minister
Mr. Day:
Prime Ministeor
r. Day:. many say -tInJt i ha~ ve never felt So comfo_-rtable in
Parliament as I Cid durn 4uh cn itigwt
Lmaj Drity o f Orice.
Can I go onicpe
t1i4nkr I cry-ing roysoif tosleep wjvry night
worrying a-bout ti-n-t thoy-20 quite wrong.
Ym) said before) yo. u lef't Australia tha-t you wre
coming to-1D into tho politic-al iJmpli cations of this
Eur oan quo-stion. Now ono of the th-ings you ineintioned,
whther Brita-in wo,: uld become,, a State, pa-rt of the
Europkean Fe: dcra-tion, what have you f-Jund out about this?
Aro yo. u any clea,? rer?
No, VI' not, but I expect I siaall be before I leave.
I've : lroady ha-d -, no or two discuss.-rL-ns with m: y old
friend, TMr. ir-cillan cmn talk to each other, wvrer
old friends and I'm se_-eing, him agarin next wuekend.
And _ L hope to:_ furnish my -mind a little more fully.
You have sugested that Britain as part of Europe c
ha,, rdly be an independent meombe! r of tVecoonath
those w. 3r your words -, heiin you arrived here. ( Yes)
. vhat effe ct dD yo) u thin!: that is going to hlive on the
wrhole constitutional st1-ructure of the CoiL: ionwoalth and
the Cro in, the q ueen of c:) urse-, being C,: uoen o f
Australia 7. s :, oll as Quee, n of the United K" ingdom? a n
I th-ink-it will teond to i* myself lo-. osen the
structure o) f theo~ nn~ lh but thqe Cojym. onwedLth
structuru, of c". urso, has been fairly well loosened in
rucont years: it's be-come a little less structural and
perhaps a little Drc casinally functional, And when
you discuss it f ccurse, yo-u just -mentioned the ueon,
we are the -, ueonls ] i n and women in Australia, we're
-n. oncirchists; and thore's a c -, rtain quality about the
rei31rti.; nbship bctWuen the imnrchiical countries which
can't be -2, reproducod by a fL. rn of words with other memberS
Do Y,; u thiink, tha12t would be affe~ kcted if the United
Kinf,! rn ro n~ uyp-rt of aEu rop can FedeOration?
Dirminish the sizmifi canco f thec on.
Prime Minister: The longcr thiis, wW1, A tha__ t's true but the-long-er
I live, the less disposed am I t-o -yen-ralizo -, bout the
futuro of the Co: nwat0be cause I don't know, quite
frnnkly. But I do) kn-w this, that t'o the great
Comrenwelthquestion is the re-lations between Graat
Britain and Australia. This is it. I know theiy ( arc
rolo., tio) ns withi othei r vn rsof the Coiunorwalth t. o) o
I dn' udeesir11-ato them~ but when it comes down -to
brass tackEs, to ioe the co) ntiin. uance of theo Commonwalth
is vitally acitdwith thei avoidance of nisunderstanding-
betaeen Great Britain and Australia, and their
workin.,-to gather, Oconom. i cally and p oliti cally.
Mr. Day: Mr Dy: Thyoa. n, uk Mr,. Mnzies. 



' lie eky End. irw t~ ne 96
COWM~ lUZEl-ALTH OFAUTLI
Tndex of Ministerial Stoat-ments Issued in Canfberr'a
Actingz Prime Minister and Ministe-for Trade,~ The Rtv, Hcn0
John Vr. wexi
June No. 613U. A TRADE MISSION ARRIVING
Tlie Comonwath TTsueasrelTbRtHonH, tl
Jun 7 No. 621 TLX DEDUCTION F'OR TECHNICAL BOOKS AND
EQUIPMENT
No,. 622
No. 626 TRADING BAiNK FACILITIES A ND ARRANGEMENTS
REPLY BY THE RT. H01,. HYAROLD) HOLT, M. P. TO
MR. C1IIVELL' S COMMENT ON ECONOMIC SUR'VEY
The Minister for Nntional Devel opment. Sena tor the Hon. W. H.
f-p-o2o-n eL-L -m-MJun-
e 8 No,, 6 24~
The Minister fol. OIL SEA7RC'. H PUBLICA" TION DELHI FROMESAiNTOS
BETOOTA No,' 2.&gt;
Defence. The Hon. ! Atho. Tovinle. y0r M. P.
June 3 No. 60C6, ATPOINTMENT OF CHiEF OF THE~ GKNERAL STAFF
The Minister for Ter,. ritori-es. ' bhe Hon. Pa~ ul Hasluc-k, Me" e
June 6 No. 617
gl. iise for
June 5 No, 614
1; 8 No, 627 CATTLE IMLPORTA TIONl SUBSTDY IN PA-PUA AND)
NEW GxU! iNEA,,
Civil Aviation,. Senator the Hon. Shone Paltri. eg
MEMBER 0' TL., 1, A, BOARD
1, 1NG IU\ NC+ TE RA-DAR FOR BUSY A. IRPORTS
TheA ctiig Linister for,, E-ternal. Affairr-Tmh-R-t,_ Hon. John.
c6Ew en
j'kLrne 5 No,. 609
ti Ir o a
Thec iiTVnister fop
J: 1. fle 6
1? 8 ~'~ 61.5
No. 623 OPENING OF AUSTPJ. LINl% LEMBASSY IN THE REPUBLIC
OF KQREA.
I. LT. 0 Iq~ Ufj, COWFERElI'IOE
theh rmthe ;-lon, J., O. Crne
REC-U" l.. R AI-MY APPOINTMENT CHA,, L" NGES
A M MNISTEP TO ViSIjb" T DAl'RVITT AND ADElAI) E
The Minister fo ~ tm dEcz~ Senator the Hon,, Denhamn
onme 6 No 6 08Lj'ERA* L--' E l--' NORHTPT
Thle Minister for th'Ie TLnterior. The Hon. Gord. on Freeth
No. 63.0 61a9o
N o. 6240 TID03ER SUPLY REVIEW
DEFENCE WARN INGS OF NUCLEAR TEST1S
I) US' 2-EL* L GRM[&amp; C PRZ" E
The linis-ter-for ' the Navy, Senato-.? the H0r, n0J, 1o. v on.
June 5No0612AU8TRAJLIAN~ l NAVAL OF~ I'CER TO COMMAND RCOYAL
MLAJYAN N; AV'lY
Tib~ ne istr forShipp-h agn d Trtarns1or The3 Hon. Hbr
fr Mniser ub , rma
vune 6 No061-6 MINISTER C!* lLSES E CA. F. E. ! ULW'AY ' C0NFERENCE
If 8 No, 6 25 AUTAINTRANSPORT ADVI'SORI. Y COUIN-CIL TO
MEET IN DA?' ATL'N ooo/ 2
Jvfle .5
ff 7
It 7 VruEKLY TNDEX No., 23 
e--
The Minister for kIr, The Bon, Leslie ' Bury
June 4 No, 607 VISIT OF I-ON, JULI. 4A N 2XIERY, MP,
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. R. W. Swartz,.
June 5 No, 6141, NO T. B. WARDS ; T CPRINGBANK
6 No, 618A NEW PSYCHIA TRIC WAJD READY THIS YELR
7 No0 621A -vETERAINS MAKE TOY8 FOP CfILDR11
TheDe artment of the Treasury
June 6 No. 618 CONSOLIDA. TED REVEYiJE FUND AT MAY 31, 1962.
i 7 No. 621 TRADING BANK UNCLAIMED MONEYS
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBEPPYAQ, . C. T. 



OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR AUSTRALIA IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Australian News and Information Bureau, Australia House,
Strand, London, W. C. 2 Telephone: TEMple Bar 2435
AUSTRALIA CLUB DINNER
SPEECH BY THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, PRIME MINISTER OF.
AUSTRALIA, AT THE SAVOY HOTEL, LONDON,-12TH JUNE 1962
" Sir, Mr. Prime Minister, your Grace and Gentlemen, I
never hear my name announced in London, and I want to tell you
I have heard it many times now, without recalling that on one
occasion the Master of Ceremonies having heard me referred
to as Menzies and, being a decent Scot himself, came across to
me just before, and said: ' Excuse me, sir'-in a Scots burr,
which he used when making the announcement ' excuse me, sir,
am I to announce you as Menzies or by your proper name? i
" So in whatever capacity it may be., here I am. I am
really in a state of considerable embarrassment because the
chairman tonight is a former Governor-General of Australia of
whom I live in fear and trcmbling for years and who, whenever
he made a good speech in Australia, which was usually, was able
to say ' Thank you very much,! yes9 and when he said something
that wasn't approved of, said: ' vy constitutional advisers, of
course'.' Nowadays I am delighted. I have him cold. He just
has to talk for himself now. And then I have, of course, by
misfortune, here tonight the current Governor-General of
Australia, Lord DO L'Isle hare because his wife has been ill,
and they have had to come back here for a timc; and every member
here tonight, every person, would wish us all to send to her
through him our warm good wishes.
" And then, of course, I have here my old friend the Prime
Minister of Great Britain who has spoken so gencrouoly. tonight.
Harold Macmillan and I have known each other for many years and,
through many escapades, wei have been and remain, great friends.
And he and I have lived long enough to learn that the right way
to maintain our friendship, one with the other, is to disbelieve
everything that we read. This is the pinnacle of' wisdom on
which he sits for the moment. For a year, or two years, he
seems to have an unrivalled command of the timetable quite
comfortably and I sit precariously0 If I may coin a phrase
' here today and gone tomorrow'
" But anyhow I have been over here on a matter of great
moment0 Not under any impression that problems were going to
be solved, but because a great number of these problems are
not to be solved so easily as the onlooker supposes, But here,
to -be able to go back home, as I shall in a couple of days time,
with the certain knowledge that between us all, we have got to
understand our problems much better; and this is tremcndously
important because really, at this time, putting on one side
the enormous events of war, we are dealing between ourselves
with problems which are the greatest problems that you have
dealt with, Prime Minister, or that I have dealt with in time
of peace in our lifetime. And it is therefore very important
to begin by understanding that the man who is dogmatic in
these matters runs a fair chance of being wrong because these
are enormously complex matters0 / 2. 
" The Prime Minister of Great Britain has made a most
eloquent speech tonight about the significance of Great Britain
in Europe, as distinguished from Great Britain out of Europe,
but exercising somc balance of power in Europe. This is an eloquent
speech and a powerful one. I don't know what the answer
is to this. I well understand how strong the feelings are of
people who feel that at this time in history Great Britain
ought to take its place in the European comity of nations; how
at this time with Europe so significant in a heavily divided
world, Great Britain should put her weight, her wisdom, her
experience, into the scales.
" I would have you understand that I think I understand
that very clearly. But when we get to that point we enter a
complete medley of considerations, He is more familiar than I
am, or perhaps any of us are, with what we mean by ' going into
Europe ' 0 Are we talking about a federal Europe, a confederacy
of European nations? Are we talking about something perhaps
more practical, a little more elementary, the pragmatic
approach to the association of great European Powers in a
practising way from time to time through Prime Ministers and_
through Foreign Secretaries? N" obody can answer these questions.
There arc some people in the world who think of joint actions
always in terms of mechanics and there are others who think of
them in terms of functions, of friendship and of associations.
And so I am not going away from here with any ideas in my mind
that there is some strict form that will be observed, that there
is some structure emerging in Europe, because I don't know what
it is and I don't suppose that there is anyone else at present who
knows what it is. All I know is that the decision to go into
Europe if I may use that compendious phrase is a decision for
the Government of this ancient monarchy to make and it"' is *: ndt-f or
me or anybody else to say ' yes' or ' no'.
" This is one of the most remarkable decisions that will
have to be made and it will be made by the Government and
Parliament of the country which has more wisdom and more experience
and more to lose than any other country in the world.
And so I want to say, at the very outset, anybody who supposes
that I have come here as a newcomer in some brash fashion to
say, ' This is what you are to dot, will be disappointed. I am
not here to say what somebody else ought to, do on this great
matter0 I happen to be here as the Prime Minister of a country
which is British to the boot heels, which is a monarchist
country; which with you, Prime Minister, is within the
allegiance to the Crown no ambhiguities, no formulae needed
about our position.
" We in Australia are of Her Majesty's subjects and
whatever politicians -whether they are you or somebody else, or
myself or somebody else -may do nothing . will separate the
people of Australia from the allegiance to the Crown. The one
great danger at this time, and I see it from time to time, is
that people, particularly some commentators, see everything in
black and white0 Now perhaps this is an occupational disease
for when they write it, it appears in black and white, and
there it is0 But these are not problems of black and white,
these are not matters on which you can afford to be dogmatic.
They are in reality, to the pride and joy of ourselves as
Commonwealth people, matters on which before the ultimate decision
is taken we may sit down together and talk about ass'friends-
13. 
-3-
and if necessary disagree, on detail, as friends. But in the
long run the judgment that will have to be taken will be one
that is neither brilliant white nor dark black but maybe some
form of iridescent grey,
" But this is the way of the world. Wie ought to remember
these things. We see a certain colour in the sky. Vie think
we identify it. It may be thGe dawn, it may be the twilight, but
it largely depends on what direction we are facing, as to whether
we think it is the dawn or the twilight. These are tremendous
matters and I am the last person either to surrender the views
of my own country to somebody elsc or to try to persuade some
other person that his views are wrong because they don't happen
to coincide with mine.
" This is one of the crucial periods in our history and
it must not be confused by prejudice, by overplaying the hand,
by stirring up hostilities. This is to be dealt with by
remembering a few things. I don't want to say too much to you
because I know from long experience that you become uneasy, and
so do I-in a * long speech but these are to be dealt with by
remenmeting a few things. One of them, for example, is that as
betweon Great Britain and Australia the structure is clear.
The interests, properly considered, are, I believe, in commnon.
I can't suppose for one moment that Great Britain is any more
unaware than I am, or than you are, of the tremendous significance
in the world of the last 30 years 40 years of this
family preferential system which has built up a great pattern
of trade in the British world and therefore and don't forget
it a grcat pattern of production in our respective countries.
" It doesn't occur to me to believe that the Government
of the United Kingdom forgets that any more than I do, These
are essential things. I have read a few exercises in newspapers
and a few letters in newspapers which appear to suggest that
Australia is being very selfish over all this matter; that
we want everything and we give nothing. Now really.' This seems
to me to be a little bit hot if I may use that homely
expression, a little bit hot, All my adult life my country
has lived in a pattern of preferential trade, ' in honour
preferring one another' which is good biblical authority as
well as anything else ' in honour preferring one another'. And
in the result we have built up a trade structure, an economic
structure, which is very hard to equal in modern history.
" And to think that all this happens one way is quite
childish. We give preferences to Great Britain; Great Britain
gives preferences tD us. You give preferences, sir, to New
Zealand, whose distinguished High Commissioner is here. She
gives preferences to you. It runs round the world, this
Commonweallth preferential structure. And in result we in
Australia have contributed to the well-being economically of
this country in the most dramatic fashion, just as you, by
your preferences to our goods in this country, have rendered our
expansion, or a great deal of it possible. Well, here we are;
we are on comimn ground aren't we? Yes, a plague upon these
people who want me to believe this is all one way. / 4, 
" I was questioned the other night by a gentleman on
the television well you notice I am using the terms of
courtesy; I didn't have the figures with me, but it is one
of thd rare privileges of Prime Ministers that they leave all
the knowledge to their subordinates and dwell themselves in a
lofty zone of their own. But may I just say this to you, it
is for the better part of 50 years now that we have had this
pattern of British Empire trade, Commonwealth trade whatever
it may have been called. My old friend the Prime Minister of
Great Britain, this most distinguished servant of his people;
he and I have before today, on many occasions, stood on
platforms together and spoken for this very pattern of trade,
and he would do it tomorrow himself and so would I. This is
a great story. But in 1960-61 I admit that's the final
financial year before I almost lost the Election and I don't
say that one is related to the other not at all; who am I
to say this? But in the financial year 1960-61, 1 obtained the
figures. We imported we., Australia from Britain, goods to
the tune f. o. b. of œ 272M. And in order to improve the strength
of sterling, I am quoting my figures in sterling œ 272M.
sterling. And Great Britain imported from us, and I am not
complaining about this, œ, 166M. sterling. In other words I
am talking now to those who don't have the supreme privilege
of being Australians you had a favourable trade balance with
us of 9106M. " Don't think for one moment that this to me is an object
of complaint; it isn't. I have great pride in the fact that
under this preferred system my country has been, over a period
of years, with a few exceptions now and then, with its handful
of people, the greatest customer that Groat Britain has had,
In fact I don't want to create any Trans-A1" tlantic difficulties
because I am going there on Thursday. I must gird my loins
for the arguments that Itll enc. Duntcr in Wlashington. But really,
it is worth while some of these gentlemen who write their
comments for your improvement, to remind them or to tell them,
that they didn't know that my country, over this eriod, has
had a population ranging from ' 4 million, 1 to lO-million and
that over this period of ' 40 years, Australia little Australia
which is supposed to be selfish at this time, has bought from
Groat Britain, very properly, and has in the buying produced
employment in this country, very p~ roperly, L8501, more than
the United States has over the corresponding period of time,
" Now Sir, I think I may say those things0 These things
are very familar to my friend, and to the British Government and
they wouldn't quarrel with them0 You mustn't think for one
moment, as between the United Kingdom Government and the
Australian Go-vernment, that there is some deep-rooted disagreement
abo-ut the fact. There isn't. These things are all well
understood; and warmly understood; and heartily approved.
The one thing that did occur just a-fter I arrived here was that
when my distinguished friend from New Zealand, Mr. Marshall,
and I being presented with what turned out to be a purely
tentative arrangement on hard manufactures, said, I thought
very modestly, if you can associate modesty with me: ' We hope
this is not your reply to foodstuffs,.' And you know, we were
quite right. You can apply to something, nc doubt, a phasing
out by 1970, but you do that to the foodstuffs that are exported
from the Commonwealth countries, so that at the end of 1970 
it's all gone, and the noises that will come from the Commonwealth
countries will be such as to exhaust even the vocabulary of the
' Daily Express'.
" Because, you see, you cannot say to countries which have
lived within the covenant for so long, and that have conducted
this mutually advantageous economy for so long; you can't say
to them ' Well, look, we wouldn't kill you straight out, but in
1970 it is all over'. And I don't believe for one moment that
the Government of the United Kingdom is going to subscribe to
such an idea. Not for one moment. We have in fact as
Australians difficult as we are supposed to be worked through
our offices, constructively, with the great assistance of the
representatives of the United Kingdom, with Mr. Heath opening
door after door for them, with meetings of members of Council;
we have been presenting constructive ideas. We have not, as
the Prime Minister knows we have not, said, ' Well, let's stick
to the old form', We have realised that that might be very
difficult for the Six to accept, and we have therefore worked
out alternatives, whether there could not be comparable outlets,
whether perhaps the preferred entry of goods into this country
might be distributed over the countries of the Common Market,
This is, to a point representing our normal traffic, with a
little edge for growth and Ihope. no busines. man
is going tc object to that because you are all devoted to the
principle of growth you wouldn't run your business unless you
thought you had a little margin for growth. Our business is
the business of Australia the business of a country whose
population is increasing as rapidly as that of Japan, a country
which, if it is to play its part in the world as a member
of the Comionwalth, must 3o on, grow, expand, have more people,
more production, more trade, more power. Of course this is
right. We are not a static community, put away in a remote
corner of the world. We are not prepared to be a static
community and neither does anybody in this country want us to
be a static community. And therefore we have, with the full
approval our colleagues in Great Britain, been working on
ways and means of developing alternative methods of preserving
a proper volume of trade for Great Britain, in Great Britain,
in the Six for Australia, for New Zealand, for Canada, for
whatever it may be. Now this is not a point of difference. We
have in company with aur colleagues in Great Britain been
working on these things. All I want to say to you is that if
the Six took up the attitude that they are not looking at any
alternatives, that the existing preferences preferences
behind which thousands of people in communities in Australia
live and without which they would die if they took up the
attitude ' Nothing doing, the preferences must disappear in
1970', then I am perfectly certain that my country would not
say ' Yes'. And, though I speak with no authority, I am
perfectly convinced that the Government, the Parliament and
the people of this country would not say ' Yesf.
" One matter arose when Mr. Marshall and I made our rather
anodyne statement and woke to find ourselves famous. And that
was that we were afraid that these interim arrangements were
in a sense final; they were announced in certain organs of
/ 6. 
-6-
the press as agreements. Now I am happy to say that one of
the things, as my colleague will agree, that has emerged from
our discussions is that it is perfectly clear, that although you
must mlke tentative arrangements if you are ever to bring
negotiations to an end, they are all tentative. They do not
bind us. They do not bind anybody. They are tentative
arrangements and when finally the ground has been covered, there
will be a ' package' of such arrangements andi that, I believe
I am right in saying, is what the Prime Ministers will be in
a position to discuss without prejudice, without commitment, when
they meet here in September. Now I don't complain about that.
I know how negotiations must go on and I am happy tc say that
this understanding that we have is now completely common ground.
" Now perhaps there is just one other thing that I ought
to say to you. I want to make another p6int to you, and I make
this in no sense of hostility, to either the European countries
or to the United States of America, our great friends our
generous friends. But I do want to put this to you. Those
in Europe, or those in America, who press too hard what I
believe to be the doctrinaire view that preferences must disappear
without substitute in 1970, accept a great responsibility
before history. The European Powers have not engaged or begun
the lengthy negotiations with Great Britain because they don't
want Great Britain in Europe. If they didn't want Great
Britain in Europe it would have been a simple thing to say ' No'.
Wouldn't it? But the negotiations go on. One must assume
that, not necessarily unanimously but in a number of fields in
Europe, there is a feeling that the association of Great
Britain with Europe this revolutionary change in the eye of
history is a good thing, a good thing for the world, a good
thing for peace, a good thing for resistance to tyranny. And
the United States of America which is not a party, but which
has offered positive views on these matters, must be taken to
believe that it would be a good thing for the free world for
a Europe to have Great Britain in it.
" I don't. need to elaborate these things. I just assume
them; in my naivetLo I assume them. They will accept a very
great responsibility if between them, jointly or severally,
they assume an attitude that the old preferential relations
between the countries of the British Commonwealth are to be
destroyed by 1970 as part of the price of union. This will be
a great responsibility because they will in effect, if they are
right, if they succeed, if all this happens, be presenting the
Government of this country with a dilemma the like of which
was never seen before in peaceful history, the dilemma of
choosing between Europe on those terms and the Commrnwealth.
" I don't believe for one moment that you are going to
choose against the Commonwealth. I don't believe for one
moment that anybody in this country is bound to accept every
jot and every tittle of the things that we put up though we
think they are pretty good. But I do believe that if and it
is a big if it turns out that the attitude in Europe is that
Great Britain must determine the whole of her preferential
arrangements with her Commonwealth in 1970 as the price of going
/ 7. 
-7-
into Europe, then they are offerin. this country a choice which
is well, I fail to find words to describe it, a terrible choice,
an historic choice, a disastrous choice. Because, you know,
tbetter the devil you know than the devil you don't know'. We
have lived long together. When I look back over it and, I am
an old hand in Commonwealth business and so is my friend Harold
Macmillan, thc reason why we always meet as friends is that we
know the story behind it all. It is the story of a Commonwealth
in which he and I both happen to be servants of our Sovereign
Lady the Queen, in which Great Britain and Australia, to say
nothing of all the other Commonwealth countries, have lived
together a Commonwealth whose roots have been nurtured in the
soil of co-operation and affection, and loyalty. These are
wonderful things. Not to be lightly disregarded, not lightly
to be put aside. It is because my approach to this matter is
exactly the same as yours, Harold, that I know that we must not
cry ' disaster' too quickly, that we must not be dogmatic too
soon, that we must understand, that believing the same things,
loving the same things, remembering the same things, we are going
to do the best to help each other and at the same time help the
continent of Europe, help the whole free world. I can see all
these things. I can understand them perfectly. How wonderful
a thing it would be for the free world to have a concerted
Europe, to have a group of Powers who were not ambiguous, who
knew where they stood, And so when he says this is of great
value I don't resist that, I don't resist that. I merely say
to myself, ' Yes, but don't forget', and I don't need to say it
to him, though there are some people to whom it needs to be said,
' Don't forget that we haven't come to our present state in the
world, we haven't c. mO to our present power and significance in
the world without having these things connecting us, wonderful
things bringing us together, a great record of achievement and,
I believe, properly considered, a marvellous vison of hope and
Sain and strength for the future'." 



PM I41/ 962
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT OF NORTH : EST ' USTRALIA
Staemnt bAcn Prime initr Rt. Hon. John McEwen M. P.
I conferred today in company with the Treasurer, Mr.
Holt, and the Minister for National Development, Senator Spooner
with the Premier of Western Australia, Mr. Brand and the Minister
for the North West, Mr. Court. They put before us various
proposals related to the farther development of the north of
Jestern Australia. It will be recalled that in the speech delivered by the
Governor-General on the occasion of the Opening of Parliament in
February of this year, it was stated on behalf of the Commonwealth
Government that we believe in the development of the north of
Australia, a development which we regard as cssential. We
reaffirmed our determination to continue our efforts in that
field, pointed to assistance already given to basic public
works in the north of Australia. Those include, in the case of
Jestern Australia, the Ord River Scheme and the programme of beef
roads. 4e referred also to the important research work being
conducted through the Bureau of Miineral Resources, the Commonwealth
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization and the Bureau of
Agricultural Economics. said at that time that we would
continue economic and scientific research and survey work with a
view to the production of developmental plans. We recognized that
in these matters the co-operation of the State Governments would
be essential and this would be sought. The present talks are in
accordance with this general statomont of policy.
The proposals put before us by the Premier and Mr. Court
offer, in their judgment, good economic prospects and would
contribute to the strength of the Australian economy either by way
of increased export income earnings or by the replacement of
certain current imports, do have agreed to study these matters
closely with appropriate Commonwealth officers and will arrange,
where that appears desirable, for consultation to take place
between officers of the Cormmonialth Government and the . Jestern
Australian Govrnment. Some of the matters would involve
budgetary provision by the Commonwealth Government and these will
be given appropriate Cabinet consideration.
CANBERRA,
13th June, 1962. 



WEEKLY INDEX NO, 24
Week Ending June 16, 1962
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hono
June 19 John McEwen
No, 641 OLIVE OIL
The Treasurer, The Rt. Hon. Harold Holt.
June 13No, 635 INCOME TAX INSTALMENT DEDUCTIONS FROM WAGES
AND SALARIES
The Minister for Defence, the Hone Athol Townly. M. P.
June 12 No. 634 APPOINTMENT OF STAFF OFFICER TO THE HEAD OF
THE AUSTRALIAN JOINT SERVICES STAFF,
WASHINGTON.
14 No, 637 AUSTRALIAN/ NEW ZEALAND JOINT ANTI-SUBMARINE
COURSE
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
June 13No. 636 Mr. NORMAN WATT RETIRES FROM QANTAS BOARD
The Minister for External Affairs, The Rt. HonJohn McEwen
June 13
1" 14 Noo 636A LAOS AGREEMENT ON A COALITION GOVERNMENT
No. 639 NIGERIAN MINISTER OF TRANSPORT AND AVIATION TO
VISIT AUSTRALIA
The Minister for Primary Irdustry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
June 12No. 634A AUSTRALIA ARRANGES INTERNATIONAL DRIED FRUIT
CONFERENCE.
The Minister for Works, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
June 14 No, 638 WOOMERA THEATRE CONTRACT
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. JoG. Gorton
June 12 11 15 No. 631 NAVY DIVERS TRACK ASH ON OCEAN BED
No. 630 EUROPEAN MIGRANT BECOMES FRIGATE OFFICER
No. 643 CHANGE OF COMMAND IN FLAGSHIP TOMORROW
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
June 12 No, 633 INCREASED SUBSIDY FOR ROYAL FLYING DOCTOR
SERVICE
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
June 10Noo 627 SUPPLY MINISTER FAIRHALL TO INSPECT ELDO
PREPARATIONS AT WOOMERA.
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie Bury
June 10No, 629 TWENTY-FIRST BIRTHDAY OF AIR TRAIINING CORPS,
RAi; F o
The Minister for Repatriation. The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz
June 12 15 No, 632 MINISTER PAYS A TRIBUTE
No, 642 SIR GEORGE HOLLAND
With the Compliments of the
Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBERRA, A. C, T.
II I m 



TEXT OF PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME
MINISTER RT. HON. R. G AiENZIES, AT THE
AUSTRALIAN EM3ASSY, UASHII'GTON, DoC.. U. SoA,
ON 20H JUNE, 1932,
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER:
Qe P. iM. What can you tell. us, Prime Minister, of
your visit to the President?
Well, there's a communique out, isn't there?
That says what we both find ourselves able to say,
Personally, I thought the discussions were very,
very helpful. They were conducted in a very
helpful spirit. There has been a belief, I think,
perhaps in some parts of my own country, that there
is some very powerful opposition between the position
of the United States in relation to the Common
Market and the position of Australia, I think you
could sum it all up, after the discussions I've had,
by saying that the central feature was that if
Great Britain goes into the Common Market, and that
would be for Groat Britain to determine, both
Australia and the United States, or in order of
magnitude, the United States and Australia, will
be outside the Common Market and will therefore
have some interests in common, very considerable
ones; because each of us would Isire to maintain
our competitive status as a non-member of the
Common Market of the European Economic Community,
and that became common ground between us in the
course of these talks. In order to give effect to
some practical considerations you may have noticed
in the communique that we said that the problems
arising out of Britain's proposed entry should be
approached not on any basis of theory or the use of
particular word-s, but on a practical basis, examining
commodities one by one, and in order to enable that
examination to proceed in a practical fashion I
have arranged for the Head of the Australian Trade
Department, Dr. Westerman, now in London, to come
across and have further discussions with'the experts
ac this endø I think that fact will demonstrate to
you that we are not just up against a closed door,
but there is a feeling that if we can get to a
discussion of commodities one by one then it ought
to be possible to evolve proposals in regard to
commodities which would be acceptable to the United
States and acceptable to us, and much more importantly,
of course, acceptable to the Six, So that the
position is to be regarded as a flexible one, Dr.
Westermann, might explain, is our expert who put
a full presentation of our case to the delegates at
Brussels quite recently and he is, on the official
side, our principal expert in thee negotiations.
I haven't been negotiating, of course; I don't
regard myself as qualified to be negotiating about
a whole series of commodities, He's our expert when
it gets down to the retail business; I have merely
directed my mind to a few wholesale considerations.
Can you tell us, Sir, what the main commodities
involved are?
Oh, well, there are a great number of commodities
that fall into this fr-om our point of viewr There
are certain base metals, particularly lead, sugar,
wheat, meat of various -inds, fruit in various o./ 2 
PoM. forms and so on, There are probably scores and scores
( Contd.) of items, but these are among the major ones that are
under consideration. So far as some of them are
concerned of course, we w-ould like to see world arrangements,
and there is a glancing reference to that in the
communique. We would like very much to see a resumption
of discussions for a world whea-agreement because the
wheat problem wcn! t be easily solved in the absence of a
world arrangemento Similarly with metals. We think
that international commodity arrangements on a world basis
are very important.
Qo Sir, would you put a wheat arrangement ahead of
British membership or can it wait?
P. M. I think the negotiations ought to go on right
away, but if those negotiations succeeded, and you've
got a world wheat agreement, it would take that topic
out of the Common Market discussions, brt knowing something
about the long distance durability of negotiations about
wheat, I would think that the negotiations with the Six
will have finished before the negotiations about wheat,
go They don't seem to be very happy to talk about
wheat while they're negotiating.
P. M. That's a matter for their own judgment,
Qo In that connection, Sir, there's a paragraph in
the communique which says the Prime Minister offered
the view that it would be a grave misunderstanding if,
after the negotiations it turned out that the conditions
laid down for Britain's entry were unacceptable to
Commonwealth count-' ies.
P, M, " Grave misfortune". That's an error, There's
a misprint here. You've directed my attention to it
" The Prime Minister offered the view that it would be
a grave misfortune". " Misfortune" was the word
" misunderstanding" doesn't make any sense
" grave misfortune, if after the negotiations it turned
out that the conditions laid down for Britain's entry
were unacceptable to Commonwealth countries." Do you
want me to explain that?
Q, Did the President agree with that?
P M. This is a statement of the view that I was
putting. The President is not to be treated as offering
a view on that matter. Very naturally, because though
he has an interest in the Commonwealth, he wouldn't want
to buy into a discussion of that kind, I am sureo But
the point that I've been putting here is this: Let's
illustrate it. Suppose as a result of the negotiations
between Great Britain and the Six the best that could be
obtained was that by 1970 all our present trade advantages
should disappear, Suppose that happened. Great Britain
would then have to choose whether to go in on those terms,
terms which would involve bringing to an end the special
Commonwealth pattern of trade or to stay out, Now, that's
a pretty grave dilema because to stay out would be to
forego, what I believe is regarded in Great Britain and
here, as the matorial advantage of Great Britain being in
the European Economic Community and yet to go in, to
get those advantages on terms , which involves the termination
of what I ve called the Com. monwealth pattorn by 1970 would,
I am perfectly certaLin, be unaccoptable to the Commronwealth
countries, And therefore this classical choice that's
0 6 * 0@ S o/ 3 
PCM.
( Contd0 been talked about a good deal Europe or the Commonwealth
would present itself in a singularly naked formr That,
I think, must be avoided, and one of my objects has been
to emphasise here, in Washington, the nature of that
choice and I must say that I've been quite pleased with
the understanding of that point that I've encountered
and a willingness to sit down ar. d discuss, commodity
by commodity, ways and means which might be put forward
for preserving the competitive status of Australia, for
example, and, at the same time, the competitive status
of the United States much larger interests in some
things but as I said earlier, both of us outside the
Common Market and both of us anxious that the Common
Market should not be established in such a fashion as
to inflict damage on us or to prevent us either the
United States Or Australia from proper economic growth.
These are wide, general words, of course0 They have
to be, but the thing I attach great importance to is
the co-operative spirit behind them,
Is ome year other than 1970 acceptable to you?
What do you mean later? Well, that can't be answered
simply yes or no. There are some commodities on which
we would hope to have a world agreement made and under
those circumstances, special a: rangements made at this
stage would need to be permanent. They would be merged
into a world agreement when it was arrived at. There
are other cases in which, where we now have tariff
preferences in our favour, these preferences would
become negotiable as they say, in GATT, because that
is the machinery that is provided for negotiating about
these matters. You give up a right in order to obtain
one, You do a bit of horse trading. But the machinery
of C! ATT has always beon available for that purpose and
if negotiations of that kind occur, then the existing
state of affairs would terminate. But you can't put
a date to either of those things, they merely exhibit
two possible avenues by which one procedure will be
taken up and merged in another.
In paragraph 2, on page 2, you said it was
agreed that the problems should be approached not on
any basis of theory or the use of particular words
does this refer to 2Astralia's insistence on comparable
outlets. There have been, I think, two words or phrases
that have had a good deal of currency. One is the
great word " preference" on which almost theological
arguments have been going on, to my knowledge, for
thirty years, and w. e agree to disagree, but on this
occasion, I said, " Well, let's forget about the words,"
because words don't matter very much; and, similarly,
we have boon putting forward alternative proposals to
the Six and through Great Britain, for what's been
called ' comparcble outlets", Well if that is a
phrase that excites opposition, lots forget about the
phrase, In other words, it may be that we can evolve
some comparable outlets, without calling them such, and
maintain some of the benefits that we have had in the
past without putting a particular label on them. This
is a purely pragmatic approach, and I t. hink we both
agree that we ought to move away from the world of dogma
and become pragmatic on those matters, And that's the
drill. O tcaone/
P. M.
P. M. 
Q. P
S P. 140
0o P .21 Mr. Prime Minister, Soviet Premier Khrushchev
offered a proposal for a world-wide trade organization,
would you have any comment on that? And there was
another related question What is Australiats position
on trade with the Communist countries? Do you favour
more restrictions or less restrictions on that trade?
A world-wide trade organization, did you
say? I wouldn't have thought that was practical
politics, so stated. You can deal with a commodity,
or commodities, on a world basis, There are one or
two now which are the subject of world arrangement, but
when you say, " Let's have a world wide trade organization''
well, frankly, I don't know what it means. It will
become so general in its description as to be ineffective.
As far as we are concerned, we trade with Communist
countries, yes. We export substantial quantities of
wool and wheat. Recently, the Australian wheat farmers
have sold quite large parcels of wheat to Communist
China and the volume of trade is not big, but in the
case of wheat it has recently been fairly substantial
because of the shortages of foodstuffs in Communist
China. We have certain rules that we apply about
strategic materials. If the External Affairs Department
regards any particular material as of strategic
significance, then we won't export it to Communist
Chinr, but that's a limited list. Again, I think you
could take it that our attitude is not a doctrinaire
one. If Jones won't buy our wheat, then somebody
will have to stop growing wheat unless Brown buys it
instead. This is purely a practical approach to the
matter, It is generally assumed that Australia is very
interested in a peaceful settlement of the West New
Guinea dispute. Did you soo some kind of role, either
direct or indirect, on the part of Australia in trying
to get this peaceful settlement through the Bunker
proposals? I would have thought the first condition for
a peaceful settlement of the West New Guinea problem
was for Indonesia to stop making war. I mean, that's
very simple. Then there would be an atmosphere of
peace and I think, myself, there'd be great hope of
getting a peaceful settlement, The two parties don't
appear to be all that distance apart over the Bunker
proposals, There are differences of emphasis and
differences of timetable but, really, in principle, I
would have thought it was negotiable. But the atmosphere
is clouded because of this quite extraordinary maintenance
of armod hostilities by one of the parties while the
talks are about to be resumed. I don't profess to
understand it, I, myself, have twice received
categorical assurances that arms would not be resorted
to in support of the clains once by President Sookarno
himself; on the other occasion by Dr. Subandrio, the
Foreign Ministero It is a very unhappy affair, but
I am sure that if a peaceful settlenont is desired it
would be mnuch quicker if the hostilities so initiated
were dropped, Mr. Prime Minister, do you favour the French
idea of a high price for wheat and a limited market?
Don't ask no to go into the details of the
matter because, first of all, they are very complex
and, secondly, it's not my business on this visit to
discuss thoem CPojo 
Qo Mr, Prime Minister, from what Mr. Heath has
said in London, it looks as if " he draft agreerent for
Britain's entry into the Common Market will be ready
by July. Have you any comment on that?
PM. Well, Mr. Heath is in the best position to know,
I grant you. We are having a conference of Prime
Ministers in September. In August, as you know,
official London is not a hive of activity, and therefore,
if the comprehensive series of proposals are to be put
to the Commonwealth Prime Ministers, they will need to
have been formulated by the end of July. As a mtter
of pure reason, that's right. But when I left London,
some of the senior people were somewhat doubtful as to
whether there would be such a comprehensive list by
that time, brt what they did hope was that some of the
major matters might have been negotiated so that the
Prime Ministers could see, in the broau, the shape of
things to come. Indeed they must get to that point
because they meet on September 10th and it's no use
going over there just to speculate about what might
happen. It's much better to argue abcut what will
Shappen, or what will probably happen or what can happen.
Qo Sir, would the enactment of the Trade Bill in
Congress here be a workable alternative to the accommodation
you are seeking with the
PoM. In itself, I wouldn't think so. No, It will
facilitate negotiations, yes,
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, would you comment on the
situation in South East Asia, and more particularly
on the role of SEATO? Do you think it's finished, or
is it a going concern?
P. M. I don't think that SEATO is by any means finished.
So far as Laos is concerned, well, we are all looking
forward now hoping, and I think not unreasonably, that
the now government arrangements that have been made will
work and that Laos will be able to take her position as
a free and independent and neutral country. If that
happens, the position of Thailand becomes more stable, less
threatened. Of course the actively troubling spot at
the moment is South Vietnam, but I think there is reason
to believe that the position there is improving and I,
myself, am pretty optimistic about it; in the absence,
of course, of interventions by people not at present
engaged. By and large, I think SEiTO, although its
means are not v'ry extensive, has been a very useful
instrument and it has maintained.. and attracted, the
support of its members United States, Great Britain,
ourselves, for example, have all come to the party, both
economically and otherwise. I think that as a result
of all these things, there is a strungthening of morale
in South East Asia, and a growing disposition to resist
being overrun by other people. And anything that can
be done to strengthen that patriotic, sensible view,
ought to be done, I know that it's rather popular
from time to time to say that SEATO doesn't matter,
I think it does. 



F'OR THII7PRESS* NEWV M. 3MBERS OF AUSTRAZTAN UTITVTRSTTTES
COMMISSION.
Statement by-the Acting Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. John McEwon, M. P
The Acting Prime Minister, the Right Honourable John McEwen,
announced today the appointment of Professor SUNDERLAND, C. MoGø,
and Mr. KENNETH MYqR, as part-time members of the
Australian Universities Commission. Professor Sunderland is Dean
of the Faculty of Medicine in the University of Melbourne, and
Professor of Experimental Neurology. Mr. Myer is Joint Managing
Director of Myer Emporium Ltdo.
Mr. McEwen referred to the establishment in 1959 of the
Australian Universities Commission to advise the Commonwealth
Government on grants for Universitins and to co-ordinate the
balanced development of all Australian Universities., He said also
that Commonwealth Parliament in its recent session had passed
legislation to increase the number of part-time commissioners from
four to sixe
Mr. McEwen said that the Commission at present comprised the
following members under the Chairmanship of SIR LESLIE MARTIN,
CB. E., F. R. S.
Professor N. S. BAYLISS, C. B. E.,
Professor of Physical Chemistry,
University of Western Australia.
Professor A. D TRENDALL, C, M. G,
Master of University House and Deputy Vice Chancellor,
Australian National University.,
Dr. J. VERNON, C. B. E&gt;,
General Manager, Colonial Sugar Refining
Company of Sydney,
SIR KENNETH WILLS, K. B. E, MM C E. D.,
Chairman. Go R, Wills Company Ltd., Adelaide.
Since its establishment three years ago the Commission has
been faced with an increasingly complex task. At the present time
the Commission is beginning triennial visits to all Australian
Universities preparing for the 1964/ 66 triennium. At the same
time the Commission's Committee on tertiary education is examining
the whole pattern of future development of higher education in
Aus tralia, Among the more complex problems recently examined by the
Commission was a conideration of the teaching costs of medical
hospitals, Mr. McEwen said that the needs of teaching hospitals
would be considered by the Commission each triennium. Further,
the establishment of new Medical Schools at the University of New
South Wales and at Monash University poses special problems for the
Commission. Therefore the Commonwealth Government has decided to
appoint Professor Sunderland, and so to make his specialised
knowledge and experience available to the Commission.
For its second new appointee the Government had decided to
seek a person of eminence in the business and financial community.
The original Commission had been chosen to provide not only a
balance of academic and non-academic interests but as wide a
oo3. oo. .2. 
2-
experiment had been more than justified* Mro Kenneth Myer, in
addition to his outstanding knowledge of the business and
financial world, had shown himself to have a rare interest and
capacity in th3 organisation of many community activities of a
cultural nature and had likewise been chosen a member of the
first Council of the National Library of Australiaø
Mr. Mc-wen said that the Government appreciated the
co-operation of the part-time members of the Commission wno
gladly gave up their time to help solve the onerous problem of
higher education facing the nation, He expressed the
Government's gratitude to Professor Sunderland and Mr. Myer for
accepting the appointment.
CANBERRA. Jima. i962~ P~ M4
June. 19) 62,, P. M. 



656
FOR THE PRESS DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS
CANBERRA
RELEASED ONLY IN CANBERRA. PR 2 ,8 .2
AUSTRALIANS PLAN ANTARCTIC JOURNEY
Statement by the Department of External Affairs
The Antarctic Division of the Department of External Affaira has
drawn up plans for a major antarctic journey next summer.
The object will be to carry out seismic ice depth measurements for
Sdistance of 850 miles inland from Wilkes Station to link up the work of
t-Australians in 1961 with other seismic work carried out by the Russians
at Vostok station.
SThe expedition will be led by Robert Thompson, of New Zealand,
officer-in-Charge at Wilkes Station, who will be accompanied by Alastair
Batty, glaciologist of Chatswood, N. S. W; Donad Walker, geophisica. t, of
Mosman Park, Daniel Foster, weather technician, of Londonville, Ohio,
Neville Collins, senior diesel mechanic, of Inala, Queensland and
D mond Evans, driver-mechanic, of Yallourn, Victoria. 



TEXT OF VHITE HOUSE RELEASE 3Y
THE RIGHT HOiOURIJALE-. K: 7mTZI rEi IhISTITER OF AUSTRALIA
A-i3 + PSIDENT KENNEDY
The White House today made public the following joint
communique after meetings between the President and the Right
Honourable Robert Gordon Menzies, Prime Minister of Australia.
The President and the Prime Minister expressed
gratification at the opportunity presented by the Prime
Minister's visit for furthering their personal as well as
official friendship symbolizing the cordiality of relations
between the American and Australian people.
The President and the Prime Minister discussed the
question of peace in South East Asia. The President noted with
satisfaction Australia's active interest in supporting -the
struggle of the Government of Vietnam against subversion and
aggression organized and directed from abroad. Both leaders
looked forward to the effective realization of the Geneva
Accords assuring the independence and neutrality of Laos.
The President and the Prime Minister agreed that a
peaceful solution of the West New Guinea dispute would be in
the best interests of all concerned, and they recognized that
the efforts of the Acting Secretary-General of the United
Nltions,, U Thant, and his representative, Ambassador Ellsworth
Bunker, had provided the atmosphere for the achievement of a
significant contribution to the cause of peaceful settlement
of international disputes.
Both the Pr~ sil* ent and the Prime Ministor agreed on the
desirability of maintaining the excellent record of Australian-
American security consultation and co-ordination through the
A. N. Z. U. S. and S. E. A. T. O. treaties.
President Kennedy expressed his strong belief in the
importance of the Commonwealth as a source of stability and 
strength for the free world. At the same time both leaders
recognized that European unity could contribute substantially
to the strength of the free world.
They reviewed therefore the implications for the trade
of their two nations of the cossible accession of the United
Kingdom to the European Economic Community.
It was agreed that, in this event, the United States and
Australia would, as great suppliers to Eritain and Europe, face
problems in endeavouring to maintain and expand access for their
goods. The Prime Minister offered the view that it would be a
grave misfortune if, after the negotiations, it turned out that
the conditions laid down for Britain's entry were unacceptable
to Commonwealth countries on the ground that they damaged
Commonwealth trade and expansion.
The President and Prime Minister took note of the fact
that with respect to certain articles and commodities
Australia's historic terms of access are different from those
of the United States. They recognized, however, that Australia
competed with the United States in the United Kingdom market
with respect to only a relatively small number of these items,
though the items themselves are by no means small in importance.
They agreed that, with respect to these items, technical
discussions would be held between the two Governments in an
effort to reconcile the trading interests of both nations.
With respect to the great bulk of articles and commodities
they noted that, as non-mombers of the European Economic Community,
their countries faced essentially the same problems, and they
jcined in hoping that the community would pursue liberal trading
pclicies. President Kennedy pointed out that under the trade
expansion legislation now pending before the Congress the
/ 0A 
United States Government should strive, through reciprocal
agreements, to bring about a general reduction of trade
barriers for the benefit of all. Moreover, both leaders
agreed that, with respect to a number of key primary products,
the problems raised by the expansion of the Common Market
might best be solved through international arrangements.
During the course of their interviews the President
expressed his warm interest in Australia and his understanding
of Australiats needs in terms of development and growth,
recognizing the problems of particular regions as well as
industries Both he and the Prime Minister were agreed that the
problems for the United States and Australia arising out of
Britain's proposed entry should be approached not on any
basis of theory or the use of particular words but upon a
practical basis, examining, commodities one by one, having
in mind the protection of the interests of both countries.
As a result of their discussions the President and
the Prime Minister were encouraged to believe that satisfactory
solutions will be found to those problems faced by their two
countries, Canberra. 3.30 a. m. Juno 21. 1962. 



P. M. No 942/ 1962
VISIT OF HER iMAJESTY QUEEiT ELIZABETH II AND
TI-7. DUKE-c OFL EDINBURGH
The following statement is issued simultaneously
in London, Canberra and Wellington at 3 p. m. tonight.
In London, by Buckingham Palace; in Australia, by the Acting
Prime Minister; and in New Zealand, by the Prime Minister
" The Queen and The Duke of Edinburgh, at the
invitation of the Governments of Australia and New
Zealand, will visit New Zealand and Australia in
February-March of 1963. They will spend about a
fortnight in New Zealand, before proceeding to
Australia for about four weeks, where they will pay
a necessarily brief visit to each State. They will
be in Canberra during the celebrations in connection
with the 50th Anniversary Year of the Capital."
The Acting Prime Minister, M1r. McEwen, adds the
following statement
" This news will be received . with the greatest
of pleasure by all Australians. Every one of Her
Majesty's subjects in Australia will be delighted
to know that Our Queen and His Royal Highness have
been pleased to accept the invitation, extended on
behalf of the Government by Mr. LIenzies during his
recent visit to. London, to spend some time with us
early next year. Her Majesty and Prince Philip
will receive the very warmest welcome. Whilst the
prime purpose of the visit will be to celebrate
Canberra's Jubilee fear, I am sure that all
Australians will be pleased to know that The Queen
and The Duke will visit each State, even though
these visits will be short.
Canberra,. 21st June, 1962. 
AK'( GROUND STATE M~ NT
The precise date of The Queen's arrival in
Australia and the point of arrival are not yet know-n.
It is expected, however, that Her Majesty will arrive
in Canberra about the middle of February and will visit
the States before returning to Canberra for the Jubilee
Celebrations on 12th March, 1963.
" Canberra" was named by Lady Denman, wife of
the then Governor-General, on 12th March, 1913. This
-was nart of an historic ceremony held on Capital Hill
iimr. eicately behind the opresent Parliament House building.
On that day the Governor-Goneral, Lord Denman, the Prime
Ilinister, Andrew Fisher and the iMinister for Home Affairs,
King,-O'Illley each laid a Foundation Stone of a
C crL' e nc ement Colurn.
Her Majesty will travel by air.
Canberra, 21st June, 1962. 



Tn Pori* or the Ylat Is to be abotrt~
then the lat tua flsu MJ" sIW MrA" PhiLup
so to Autr'~ aa Met, hmv* is 6.. iwmba.
tot it sbml op halt* -W 516.* 6004410"
Or bswtaus ar will, I anmus v spmat
satisfttion to us all.
I kw t~ t the Quem is PIORMA with
the iota" of the visit am uowed
am 71% scts
22d UD 196a P ' 10 fO4-' m ,4440-40 



WAEEKLY INDEX No,,
' T'IEEK aTDING JU17JNE 25 1962.
COMMOP V EA', LT1H OF AU PTR. 1% L IA
Index of Ministerial Statements IssuErI in Canoberra
Tfhe AIcting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Hon0
John NMeEwen
June 19 No. 651 AUSTRALIAiN TRA. DE MTSSION CONCLUDES GUTH
AMER ICA'N TOUJR
i21 No. 657 JhR-COOLED INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES
The Treasure, the Rt. Hon., Harold Holt.-M. P.
June 20No. 652NE'! YORK LOAN\
The Ml~ inister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H. S9pooner
June 21N ~ o 3655 LATEST-" 1 APPROVLLS O. A" OIL i:-' E,' RCiH S13. SIDY
PAIYMENY T S
I~ Defence, the T -cn ! Ath' tT'r-' r1eyr -L
Ju ne 17 No, 6414 EFF2CTS OF HIGH EXLO" IVE IN TROPICA4' L TERRAIN
" 18 No. 6418 APPOIFTMENT OF GEYERAL OFFICER COMMANDING
NORTHERN COMAN." ID
" 22 No. 660 ROAO F. VALiAI' 1TS TO VISIT AUSTRjLIA' 1
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck, M. P.
June 19No. 650 ENQUTIRY INTO THE EUILDIG ANDM COYLSTIUCTION
INDUETRY TERRIT PfY OF Pi* LPUA AND NEW GUIN'EA
The Postmastelr-Genera l_ The Hon. C. W. Davidson
Ju,, e 18No. 64i7 APPLICA TIONS FOR TELEVISION LICENCES SYDNTEY
ANiD MEB-BOURNE
The Minister for Prmr nutThe Hon. C. F. Adermann
J-Line 22No. 660, A ) j* LE OF TRY1vJ4E7-" SOUTi-ERN EY-DEAVOUR".
The MAinister for te ArmyE the Hon. J. 0. Cramer
June 1I9N\ o361.9 SENIOR ARYOFFICERS' AP, 3POINTED
2he 1: inistcr for tho Interior, the lion, Gordon Freeth
June 22No. 658 CIVIL DEFENCE
The Ministei for the NavTy, Senator tho flon. J. G. ( GTorton
June 17
it 18
it 18 No. RL,, A FLEET RETU. RLNS HOME
No. 6415 ARTIFIC-EQS FOR R. JAON,
No.. 6L46 NEW'V NA'ME FOR R. fA. N. T-ANRER
The Minister for Supply, the Hone llen Fairhall
June 20No. 654 tOOMEIRA TRALCKS TIROR, V W EATHER SATELLITE
The Minister for ReoatriatI~ on The lon0RW. O. Swartz
June 20No. 653 FRIEND OF EX-SERVIGEMETT TO RETIRE
' The Department of External A." ffairs
Juno 21 No. 656 AUSTRALl NS RLA-N ANTARCTIC JOURNEY
The Australian ! gri cultLural Council
June 21 No0659 AUSTRALIA1: N AGRICULTU1RA'L COUNTCIL TO lZET Ilq
PERTH
With the Compliments of
The Government Fablic Relations Office,
Parliament Houso-)
CANBFIR' tLL-C. T 



PRESS, R DO AMND TELEVISION COiNFERENCE GIVE BY THE PRIIE MINISTER,
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES IN CANBERRA
ON SUNDAY, 2. TH1 JUNE, 1962, AT 3 P. M.
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: Mr, Menzies, what do you consider were the positive gains
of yeur mission as far as the Comrmon Market negotiations
were concerned?
Separately? The United Kingdom and the United States?
The great advantage in the United Kingdom was, I think,
th have discussions with the Prime Minister and the
other Senior Ministers, and to learn as far as I could
the strength of feeling that might exist; on what lines
it went, and, of course, to remind them quite vigorously
of our own interest in the matter, and the things that we
regarded as important. I was following on on a visit by
Mr. Mc Ewer, in which he had, with great command of all the
details, discussed various commodities very closely and
it wasn't rry business to endeavour to repeat that, because,
quite frankly, I couldn't do it as well. He had been in
the United States for similar reasons. vihat I wanted to
do was to get into the broad a little if I may use that
expression to try to form some political impressions
and some political judgments. I think my broad
impression in the United Kingdom was that it would be a
mistake to think that there is a unanimous mind. There
isn't. Various Ministers have various degrees of emphasis
in their own minds, but I think there is, broadly, a
considerable belief not by any means universally held
that there is political merit in Great Britain going into
Europe political merit from the point of view of
strengthening Europe, of helping to keep Europe outwardlooking
on the problems of the world and that, therefore,
Great Britain inside ur. ope can exercise a degree of
influence in the free world which she could not perhaps
exercise outside Europe. That, broadly, is a view I
think which is pretty broadly held in Great Britain on,
both sides of Parliament. There are large minority
groups, of course, on both sides on that matter. On the
economic aspects of the thing, opinions are quite divided.
There are those who think that economically it is vital
for Great Britain to go into a European free trade area.
I am using that, not in the old sense of the rather
abortive attempt to forn; one earlier, but into the uropear
Economic Community. There are others who think tc
argument there is no better than 50/ 50, and there are
some who believe that Great Britain will encounter some
risks by exposing herself to the custom-free entry of
commodities from Europe. It is not for me to say what
the majority view may be. I thought when I was there a
pretty broad view was fairly expressed by Mr. Gaitskell,
when he said, in an excellent debate in the House of
( bmmons, that he was not prepared to form a judgment of
the value of the propcsed move until he knew what the
price was arid that he himself would suspend his judgment
until these negotiations, which have been gi. ing on with
the Six, clarify themselves to a point where the price
can be reasonably assessed. And that, I would have
thought, represented a not uncommon view in London.
It is an entirely practical approach to the matter.
Against that hsi. tancy of judgment, I think that it is
fair to say th , t there is a considerable volume of opinion
which is impress. d by the political advantages that
I have just referred to. In the case of the United 
2.
States, I really. wan-ted. Jo_. find-out, in my own fashion, whether the
United States was, first of all, strongly persuaded, and when I say
the United States I mean the A-dministration whether it was strongly
persuaded of the political value of Great Britain being in Europe,
and, secondly, whether it had a sort of dogma. in its mind against
the Commonwealth special relationship and that it would be disposed
to use pressure to give it fillip and it could to produce a
bargaining result which was unfavourable to us. Now that is what
I wanted to find out. I came to this conclusion after talks with
the President and with all the senior 1d;: iinistrative people concerned
that the approach of the United States is broader than that. I don't
doubt for one moment that the Administration would like to see Great
Britain in Europe. I think that what the President said in a
communique which we issued, and in which he expressed his strong
belief in the importance of the Commonwealth as a source of stability
and strength to the free world, is quite right. was very greatly
impressed by his lively and friendly interest in tne Commnonwealth,
and, indeed, by his knovledge f it, what it stood for. I was also
impressed by this, that he and his I was going to say " Ministers",
I'll use che Australian term he and his Ministers, do not want to
see the price fo-the Commonwealth too high. They recognise that we
have interests. They recognise that, like themselves, we want to
grow, want to develoo our business and want to have the best possible
access to the expanded European Common Market. Indeed, one of the
things that was said to me quite frequently in the course of
discussions was, ' Well., look, after all, if Great Britain goes into
the Common Market, you and w will be outside of it. iTe will both
want to have access to that Market to the best possible extent. We
will both want to have the European Common 1Market trading policies
so as to enable us and you to expand our business. And, therefore,
we have much in common. And, far from being dogmatic about the
matter, they exhibited complete willingness to discuss with us,
commodity by commodity with our experts, ways and means of achieving
that broad result. I thought that was very helpful, and, in
consequence, we arranged that I. Vesterman, who is in London, to go
over and continue, in the light of my own talks, some of these
discussions. Well, in both of those respects, or in all of those
respects, in both of those countries, I thought some usefulness was
achieved by the visit. Don't take me as overplaying this business,
because nobody can tell until the end result comes out.
Q. Before you went to London in this room at a Press Conference you
made reference to the political aspect of the Common Market. I am
just wondering whether or not the Queen's visit to Australia may be
related in some way to that.
P. M. Well, I have been reading, only today since I got up, some highlyengaging
theories about the FDyal Visit being associated with the
Common Market. Well, it's picturesque, and I don't want to deny
people the pleasure of their own ideas, but it's quite untrue.
As a aatter of fact, I duscussed with Her Majesty over a year ago the
possibility of a Royal Visit. At that time I had in mind this
year, 1962. At that time, the Common Market discussion hadn't in
any way reached the headlines as it has since. Her Majesty told me
that there were great difficulties about 1962, but she had hopes of
doing it in 1965. But we allowed it to rest there, because I knew
I wo" ld have further opportunities of discussing the details. As a
Inatter of fact, my first discussion with the Queen on the question of
a R! oyal Visit preceded this time any of my discussions on the Common
Market. In my very first t. alk witi her we discussed it. To see in
this some Machiavellian technique by which the Crown is going to
soften the blow for us is, I t. ink, quite unreal. The Queen was -rury
keen on coming here when I discussed it over a year ago. She is
still very keen. Indeed, the one mistake I appear to have made abou' 
the matter was that, instead of reserving the announcement of the
Royal Visit until I got home, which I suppose would have been good
politics, I said to the PCalze, " Will, just lot it go when you are
ready," And, of course, I have only realised todo. y that I almost
killed my own 2tory about the colmmiMi uo with Mr. Kennedy. But it
shows how stupid you can boe or I can be, anyway. But, don't think
of this visit by Her Majesty as some rmonouuvre by which she tempers the
wind to the prospectively shorn lamb. Trine two things are not related.
The Queen likes this country and she is looking forward to coning here.
Q. In your discussions with the Queen, was it made clear by you that this
tour should be a very inforlmal. one?
P. M. We agreed about that as I say, it was well over a year ago. My
view on that, and Her ! Majesty shares it, is that if each Royal Visit
becomes a full dress journey State by State, locality by locality,
then it will beco1me pretty tedious and will becomne, inevitably, pretty
rare. You can't go in for that kind of thing very frequently. le
have been trying for soie time now to try to achiive the result of a
special visi'U for a special purpose. Prince Philip has been here
already once for the Olympic ( Imes, a special visit, Princess
, lexandra was here; she didn't go to all the States, the Queen
Mother was here; Prince Philip comes out towards the end of this
Syear to open the Coironwealth Games he'll come to C:. nberra, no
doubt, bit it won't be a Continent-wide tour. On this occasion,
the Queen, I think, would like to visit each State, but not just as a
sort of State visit in which people are arguing about, i4hy don't you
come to our town, because you went tu a-. nothr town last time?"
But perhaps some particular occurrence in a State will attract a
Royal 11sit, ie arc going into that this wee-k to see what can be
worked out. But a visit which is directed to occasions, and not
simply to localities, is the type of visit that I had in mind, and
I know that that is what she would like. And if we can do that, then
I think we may hnvu more visits by numbers of the Royal Family on a
simpler, shortor basis, than we would have if they were all on an
elaborate basis. I think the people of Australia will appreciate
that and ricsponci to it,
Q. It has been suggested that one of the ieribers of the Royal Faiily may
comne out with the Royal couple. Can you corLu-ent on that?
P. I. Nao, I can't. ve don't know about that yet.
Q. Con you give us some idea of the date of the arrival in Canberra of
the menibers of the Royal Tour. It has been suggested as February
P. M. iell, the intes that I was discussing when I wrs in London have been
altered since, because I think that they decided that they would like
to make it a little earlier, so I no a. uthority on the date. But
the Canberra date the fifty years Canbcrra date is what, March 12th.
Yes. w1ell I would think thAt that would probably be about it. I l
reminded. that the Australian dates will proably be abcut imid-February
to mid-March and that would cover the period of this Canberra event.
Q. Do you know which order the tour will take? Khich order of States?
P. M. On no.
Q. You hLav no idea of those things?
P. MI. Those are the things that now have to be worked out.
Q. iill Her Majesty take part in n opening of Parlianment?
P.! v. Don't ask me any of that. These things have all to be worked on,
vqhether you can have : n ounirg of Parlilament between the middle of
February and the middle ofk i.. arch depunds on many circumstances.
Q. 4ill you announce the a ppointrient of Minister in charge of the Haal
Tcur soon? 
PoM., Yes fairly soon If I decide to have one. I mean the method
of running this tour has y:, t to be worked cut, I have had some
rjrelimi-nary discussions btit T wouldn't take i for granted tha
the old technique will Accessarily apply.
Qo In saying that, do you mean that is because the tour will
be more informal than on previous occasions?
P. M Well, no. For other reasons, But I : ill deal with those
when we are in a position to announce what the arrangements
are,
Q. In other words, we should not take for granted that there
will be a Minister in charge?
P. M. No, not for granted. I don't say there won't be, but don't
take it for granted, and don't embarrass the prospective
Ministers by offering them knighthoods in advance.
Qo Will you be in a position soon to announce the name of the
Director of the Royal Visit? Have you anyone in mind at
this stage?
P. M. I have nobody in mind at present, but I have a specification
in mind, that's all. Naturally, we will announce all these
things just as soon as we can, Whether it is in a week's
time or a fortnight, I just don't know.
QO Has any planning at all been undertaken at this stage?
P. Mo Only in a very general way as the result of cables. But
it can't be undertaken in detail till I have a chance of
discussing with my own people here the kind of talks that
I had with the Queen and with the Prince.
Qa How long do you think it will be before you are in a
position to announce at alcast a preliminary itinerary?
PoM, Oh, I would hope oh, an itinerary I don't know. Look,
as soon as I am in a position to announce % what m. rhinury
there is, the general idea, I will do so-Ttihre will be
no ttco: i . Lbuer mysterious abo-n but the order of
events well, that may t-ir-a few weeks to work out.
I don't know.
Qo Coming back to the Common Market, do you now regard it as
inevitaole that Britain will enter the European Common
Market?
PM, No, I don't think that could be regarded as a certainty.
Q. Any particular roeson for that?
P. Mo Well, I think I have, Just after I arrived in London, I
had a talk with Mr. Marshall of New Zealand, and we made
a statement which I thought was fairly commonplace, but
we woke up the next day to find ourselves famous. But
the gist of what we were saying was this There had just
been announced on the very day that I flew in to England,
a tentative agreement between the United Kingdom and the
Six on hard manufactures, as they are classified. And
this agreement amounted to this, that the existing
preferences enjoyed by the Commonwcalth countries into
Great Britain would be phased out by 1970, 1970 being the
date on which the Common Market becomes, under the terms
of the treaty, completely established. They would be
phased out by two stops a'-nd then disappear in 1970. This
has been called " The Procipice Solution" in various quarters,
and that's not a bad description. We felt very strongly
that if that principle was applied down the line to matters
of greater importance to us, such as temperat, foodstuffs,
through all these cormmodities, so that it became the
established practice that the conditions of Great Britain
going into the Coron-Market were that by 1970 all our 
( c( ontcL0
P. M.
P. M.
P. oi. preferences, right down the line, disappeared. We felt that
if that happened that would be disastrous and that would give
rise to most violent protests or. the part of the Commonwealth
countries:, An. I am sure i. t would.' If Great Britain, in
the negotiations, can do no better than that. as the
negotiations proc-ad, so that in September, the position is
that the best you c?, n get is the 1970 termination, then,
I for one, think there is great doubt as to whether the
United Kingdom Government would go, or whether the House
of Commons would approve going in. Very great doubt.
Decause, you see, that would present the problem, the
dilemma in its most acute form. You now choose, as from
1970, your special relations with the Commonwealth or your
new relations with Europe. And this is a pretty stark
choice. And I don't know it is anybody's guess but
I would doubt, myself, very strongly, whether under those
circumstances Great Britain would go in. And, indeed, you
have probably seen the communiou's. It refers to the fact
that I said to the President that it would be a grave
misfortune if, after the negotiations, it turned out that
the conditions laid down for Eritain's entry were unacceptable
to Commonwealth countries on the grounds that they damaged
Commonwealth trade and expansion. This, in reality, is
one of the key things I wanted to put to the Amnecan
Administration " If you w. ant to have Groat Britain in
Europe, then don't allow your influence to make the price
an unpayable one" o
But sir, isn't it almost cert-in thtthe Six and America
will seek to make the price reasonable?
I come back, fooling that they probably will. I don't
assume that the Six are goin to play this game too hard.
I happen to believe that what was put to thom first of all
by my colleague, Mr. Mcewen. and then by Dr. Westerman, at
the Brussels conforence has had some effect on their minds.
It certainly has affected some of them. You can't lump
them altogether) because the French view is not necessarily
the some as the Italian view.
Following that up, do you got the impression that America
is willing to lower her tariffs so that we could perhaps sell
more on the Anmerican market, and, on the other side, the
Six and America will agree to some kind of international
agreement on bulk commodities?
The President of the United States has, as you know,
promulgated a law giving him a discretionary power in
relation to tariffs within certain limits in the course of
making trade treaties. He undoubtedly attaches great
importance to this and thinks that, arrmd with the new
powers, it nay be possible to make agreements and arrangements
with the Six then the Seven perhaps which would
tend to encourage trade from outside to inside the Cornrion
Market area, which, of course, would help us. But how
that will work out I don't know. All I know is that the
American Administration attaches importance to it and it
looks as if the Congress will accept it.
Do you think that the terns will be clear by the tine The
Prime Ministers meet in Sept,.-mbr?
I think they'll be clear and unclear, Let me put it this
way. When I went over, one of the reasons I went was that
I was afraid that Juno and July might be the months of
decision and it was better to be there when ninds were being
formed. than to b, there \ whjn minds had been formed.
I'mr not sure now, At that tine, thought that by the
n aa 9 
P. M. end of Ju&amp; ly, thie package ,-,-ould be fairly tied up. Flut
( orLtdj now I [ have doubts. Pr3a thr think the negot-iatis nr
be complete Jlhen we mect in Sept. ember
Q. Does that mean
PQWI4eC~ lw~~ i oet et-me sey, what I want to say. I
rather think that the negotiations -4ill not be complete.
I may be wrong, but there w. ill have been a s-tfficient number
of negotiations, on a sufficient number of comm-jodities, to
give us the broad shnape of what is going on. It may be
that tthe September conference will thecrefore de~ al withi
something which is nct complete but wh-ich is suiCficiently
formed to enable us to offer useful opir:. ions.
So you see no need -to postpone the SeDptemter conference?
P. M. I don't think so, no.
Q. ~ Has ' the Eritishi Government given any undertaking to bring
thlese mnatters to tht-e Septemirber conformee for discussion
and decision rather than as a corilete pack.-age?
P. M. 0 h, yes, that is somothing that is completely established.
i wentt o sonme pains to hnave it establishei-d. Alth. oughi
we read about cort,: in matters as agroei-onts9 like the one
on manufactures2 the_ fCact is th-at they are not agreements.
Theyaretenatie a amcnts put i* nto suspo-. nse so to
speak, designed to b-e brough; In toge ther in a package,
nobody being comrmitted and thui Commonwealth countries being
completely uninhibited in wlzat view they m.-ay offer.
Q. ~ American officials h-e,. c durlng, vour absene have sa:; d the
basis of an agreemient has bc-e n put to our g overnment about
thne U. S, attitude on thlis in-) thl-ree part11s firstly that
the U. S. woulid not withdraw its oppositLionl to a transitional
arag~ letonly for-. pjrjfornce s; secondly, tha t if tChe
Tralde pansion Act is -Lassod, theo U. S. Geovor-. 1-rit would
takk.. o euefreampslCtepO, the wool -tariff, and,
thirdly, th. at thec Govornment would use, its best offices
to pro_-, oto -voild col: 1iModity stabilisation agreemeants,
Has tha-Lt been-
P. M, W! eJT. l i havcon't seeln thi! s cj-_. munication, so I makre no comnment
on it. Onc. or two as'eo-, c Gs of it would surprisu mal.
041, Did you aslx for anly specific quid pro quo from the Amricans
for giving up special ri hts in Britain?
P. M0 I enaged in no detailed argumeint about any coillodity.
That wasn't mry business.
Q. ',; ill Dr. Wst.-rn-an try to negcotiate--any # id pro quo?
I don1 L kew Look, there is nothing more dangerous than
to talk like that, really. I would not talk like that.
When you sit down to negotiate witr-people you don't go
along and say " I qCui1il ntp ro quo, you want this".
Heo will sit down aithi th: m and discuss com~ modity by
comm. odity what is thuij-be; st kind of result we think we
can achiove( satisfactory to t'nem, satisfactory tc) us. If
I eeto sit heore talking aboit any individual coimiiodity,
I ~. o~ dbe destroying thev pros-cts of' suaccess. Arid I
am not going -to. I w'Y intoircsted in Australia.
1Mr. ivinzias, Mr. Macmill1an ; z-. as reportod yesterday to have
told a Conser-vative axo rally thiat L41itnin was dotermiinor
' to join the Common Manrketl dcsriitc_ criticisn, but that the
Govcrnimon~ t recorgni s -i its oblig; ations and ailmeid -to makQ 0 a 
arrangements for the Co. mmonwealth' s temporary and
ContcL.) permanent needs. He went on to say that
P. M. Look: What are you reading this TO me for? I did not
hear it. You knowr my attitude on these matters. Years
and years ago when I was a boy I was prepared to comment
on what some man was supposed to have said. I grew out
of that years ago.
Qo Sir, in your discussions with Mr. Macmillan, did the
question of Britain's preferences in the Australian
market arise at all?
P. M. No, not specifically,
Q. The impression seems to be growing that yjur efforts on
behalf of Australia could put you in the position where you
could be used up as a champion by those who are opposed to
Britain entering the Common Market. Could you comment on
the dangers of that?
P. M. I would not agree with that comment at all. I merely
happen to have put as clearly as I could our own views on
these matters, I thought very mildly and, I hope, clearly.
Q. Would you say, sir, that you have the support of any other
Commonwealth countries apart from New Zealand in the general
line of thinking about the strength of the Commonwealth
and so on?
P. Mo I would have thought the views I have been uttering on
this matter would have general acceptance in the Commonwealth.
In fact, I would be surprised to know they
were violently opposed by any British Minister.
Q. While you were away, Mr. Townley has been in Indonesia
and a certain controversy has arisen because he either
wore an Indonesian uniform or somenthing close to it.
Have you any comment to make?
P. M. No comment, No comment at all,
Qo Do you intend to ask him for an explanation?
P. M. No comment.
Qt Did you discuss with the Canadians while in London any
combined Commonwealth attitude?
P. M. I had some valuable discussions with Mr. George Drew, the
Canadian High Commissioner, but it wasn't possible to
have discussions on the political level because of the
Canadian election,
Q. You have no intention, have you, sir, of trying to got
a cohesive Commonwealth attitude to the Common Market?
PM., Wll, if you nean by that, do I intend to set out on some
campaign with other people, no. I am a great believer
in speaking for my own self, and the Government here.
Q. Australia, then, is looking after its own interests?
P. M. We identify our own interests with the interests of the
Commonwealth. I dcline to believe that they are
difer ent. 0 0 / 8s 
Qr Vie announcement of ' D Royal. Vi sit scems to have knocked
sugrgesti4-ons th-at 1-he Governor-Gen; e-ral will not be returning3
14. The Governor-General has every intenticrn of returning.
Certai . nly, and I have every intention that, Le should.
Q, You have spolken about the(, danlgers you see in a " precipice" t
soluti on. If you were facod with sucri c: solution, have
-iou considlered what our policy would be?
P. M. I think that's a mnatter on whiichi you engage in concrete
thin-king when you see the time coming.
9. Sir, would you carae to commnent on Mr. Killen' s proposed
visit London?
P. M, I have no comrment.
Q. ~ Is it quite clear thiat you will be going to the September
confer en ce?
PbMt Well, no, I think it is full of doubts. We might be
kicked out i~ n August, and that would rather put me out of
the running. I ihtstep under a bus. But subject to
those accidents, politic. al arid physical. yes, I intend
to bc there.
Q. Wil ' Mr. McEwen also go?
P. M, i iope so. Thiatls my present intention.
9. Can you give us any lcte,, r information about the ',, lst New
Guinea situation following yorur discussions abroad?
P. M. 1No5 the impression of U Thant, wbvom I saw--in !, ow York, is
that thec parties -11J. 1 resumce their conferenco, under the
chaicmeanShiu of Ambssador Kionkor and if tliat is so,
wol" J. we hcopce so,,, oo d will result.
9. Did yNou discorn anly hardenillog in British or Ame,. rican
attituides to t-uc west New Guinea sit-uation as the result
of paratroope being dropped by Indonesia?
P. M I think1 there'Is breCIi gr, 3atc -esentmnitn both places-against
thei continuedI -se of force, and I have no doubt that that
has boen conve yod by botha adLniri stra Lions.
9. Did you see Lord Giadwyn whe n you weac in London?
P. M. 1NT .
Q On South East Asia in viewTv of the new agreoment with
t'ne new Gov-r-imnt in Laos do you consider that AustraliaTs
coritnitment in Thailand will need to continue?
PIM. I think that would be&amp; rusing it a good deal. It is quite
true t'nat an arrangement has boon made in Laos, but it
remains to be s(. en that -i-t sottlos down in-to some-" thing that
is durable, We all hope, it uill; but theo essence of it
is that the. re should a neutral anrd independent, Laos not
interfered wish by poopl( c from-z cutside. A-nd, as it has
lackled any stability of groveirnment fo.-r some timne for a
long time, I thinkE thant we r all h-, oping that t~ iu now
arrang: cmAc nt will work., If it does , Jork1, and Laos in fact
becomels a proet-ty sce. ttle-d community, thcrn it may be tkiat theL
pot nti-al throat -to Tiha-iland as a SEATO country will
diminishi and th-at, o1 cokirs wl be taken into account,
a. 0 Q 2 00 LU/ i 
Oo Coming back to Indonesia, Sir Garfield Ba. rwick will be
there is a few days, I think. Will he indicate quite
plainly to the Indonesians that we also resent their
activities in Dutch New Guinea?
P. M. Well, I've no doubt that he will. He can speak for himself.
I spoke for myself in answer to a question on this matter
in Washington.
Q. One more question on South East Asia, This row between
the Philippines, or what looks like becoming a row, and
Britain, over the future of British North Borneo, which
is more or less pledged to the Federation of Malaysia.
What is going to be the future of SEATO if SEATO partners
are warring among themselves? Have you any comment on
this?
P. M. No. You must work that out for yourself.
Qo Will you be making a statement early in the Budget Session
on your trip abroad?
P. M. Yes.
Qo For a debate?
P. M. Yes.
Q. Mr. Menzies, while you were away, Mr. McEwen asked the
Americans to " get out of our hair" on the issue of
preferendes. After your visit to America, do you think
that they are likely to take a more conciliatory or
constructive attitude towards getting out of our hair?
P. M. Look, I'm not here to be using phrases. One of the
things I was discussing in the United States, and I hope
it will be allowed to remain there, is that we are not
going to argue about words or about dongas or these ideas.
We agree to disagree about those things. What we want to
do is to have some constructive, co-operative discussions
with each other to see what result we can got. And all
that I Lave to say on that matter is, with the authority
of the President, said in the communique. The greatest
disservice that you could do to Australia on this matter
is to take this, which is a useful document, and try to
tear it up by harking back to other arguments, I'm not
going to. 



TP~ 1~ I{ PTOF T~ IBWiNLhTTB I1 GIVEN BY TME
E'WL~ 1 Y'T,, H:' IbZITS CON T" T. C0' vUK) N K?. L I2f
MT CHAEL CHIL LTGT14 FOjI LLC 0i4 A3. SI'ATI-ONS
IC TFJiG -IOUT " J.. 1-ALI
PR3GRi, 2, Flv F I T-M-HD O'N STJI-DAY~, 22ñ T-H jU. NTE 9 62 ATD
DR 0 -T" CAST 01N JUNA'" Tumi -C
MIh. HARTO'N: First of all, Prime Minist( Lr? welcome back,,
PRLIME 1iIITER-. Thank you,
You l-eft this country expressing concern lor its
future,) and that you wanted tI-o be in places in1
many diff'erent parts of tiia3 world, to play an
active part in s~ eeing T;' h at you could do about that0
" low do you etr a* re you. mc-re or less. concerned
for its future?
P. M. 0 OhI i'm concerned, but L t-ein.., n the wh-. ole, more
optimi1stic th. ri I was and I sa y thaabl because,
politicallyqv. I am a Li-ttle better acquainted Wi. th
what th~ ey are after politically in connection with
Great1 3ritain 0inLfto Europe, and economically,
yes, I aninore opti1mistic., bacause 1 .6hI. 1 that in
botli countricJS our-case is botter uunderst Ocd"
QO ~ Now, ve have bcen to'ld on many, occasions that this
country stands to lose a great deal i. Lf sufficicnt
guarantees are not provi-dcd OCionwei: alii countries
if ritin oes c-n cr ih Coir.--aon iZa'et but-!-do w
-tand to vai r any thinng, do yuthj~ rk by 23ri Lish1
entry?
P I' 1 Oh, I don~ t put i. a' 1l. oe iq'ay. I thiink that2 on~
the faco ) f it.. we stand to leoseg For example, if'
G,--rat ? ritai', n we(. nt in and w: e lost citl-ir imm'odiat Aly,
or afte-:, a timo,. our pecrnC3oci certeain things
dried fruitI can-ned fruit2I mat-ters on w~ hich thec
United Kingdc. om mar-. ket is7 reall" y vi tal to us yes,
weO ioul I have thiings to lose., But one oan't deny
tr~ at trearc-, on -Lhe other hand t ho possi11bilities3
o f -aijnf tneCo, Mar: kc~ t develops as it is
hkoped JAt i-47 Rr-. r-itain goes i-' n arid Groat
Br . Ltain-r becomes 0Ccn2: oni: calIy srne se eut
aS Groat Britain hocpes to be, hnteeisi hoy
at any rate, an increasing oppor tI-urnity for us to do
blasinoss with. an incrocasing marLkotc"
Q. I th-in]-it is trueo to say t!-at one sees evidence
incroasing cplinion that you haeve perhaps overcstina Led
tho losses and bavontt emphaised enuhtheo -pos--. ble
gains ta this country, Do yocu t~ iirik~ thatis truc?
P. M4. I thU-Iiin. k that, in a. scnase, is a fair cc~ iunt3Bot
that's IarLJp-bcauseo we hnave bcc, p1. a-nl con,-ce. rned
to 01' 0CIAcSS the possibj. o. los-ses in or r o avuijl. d,
' incurring L'icri3vll not. b(: iJng-, in tooc m-ach of a
hUrrY to SI. Y tLt therfoe ' C3t gains,, And. let it
be rtmernbred tha so i', al. theagg, thexo hus be an
an occnctz: ic stu. Lngt in Europe wJIth. th---
existing Six, wehavrcn~ gained -In ooefr msa rkcet0
It~ s be.~ n rathnev dita,) pciutl. irg in 6h. at. VenVsu!
stll~ yc. ij corl troeat. ra as ic,: anvTIrg flg tat tihca:. e
mbaey ~ g~ a o swll s o gain moe corzco
oftepossi -1. e ~~ scr utCo~ c
Cul "* CCe 0 6 
Now,, con3ae-rnlmcg Commonwealth ie of Whieh you spo -0
much. in B.: Ltai), bJuid you agree that -hcy7 v increased
what; Could almaost b~ called a ' Is-tandI-. offC" non~ m
iBriLtaints part t'vdsthe ttiaxt; you have gopt a
gVeatly increased voice of tfte Labor O0ppositiLon in the
Britisha Parliament, for one thing.
P IM., I don? t kinow that-I wouLd nco-_ ssarily ac. ee with that, Las
Iunder-stand it. T he Labor Op,) ositlon in the British
T'r~ iarent ha~ s propoun~ ded the Comrnnwealth J. ea and has
made it clear thiat i~ t docsn? t w-jant Commonweal intez-ests
to suffer. kid I havie no doubt thik thVi nt
genuine stat-ement, but at tho sampe time, Hugh Uzaitskell,,
who has expressed the 6ppositLon v ew, and who has been
accuced of sitrtig on the f;? nce-hasinr. ty merely
lbeen saying " Dor~ t aisk me to dEccidc, whetthec ive ought to
go in or not until T 1Yinow what the jprice Is, And the
pric that concerns me includes the price that tlie Contmon~-
wea1. thi may have to pay
11r0 Ppre Minister, T~ wonder if the irony of this appeals
-to you, the fact that your tr! ongest support is coming
perhaps in Britain fromn the LraboPat and that you, at
least on. some occasions, are arguing against somcthing for
whl-ich you personally must stand.,
P0M0 WellsT don't regard tnis ae,_ a par-ty matte". ort vr
strong support for My vievs on thlo Conservativexc side in
the House of CoiT-rinns, and T don' t want to have it thought
that lvinisters fC-, rm Mr(, MacrniLlan dowrn are Ios tile to oUl.
point of View. 01 thle co ,-arv, 7te r ey ~ SO. U
ofit, In. e sori Sp( erhaps oneo thing that isOt
adequiately . realised,~ T didcL.? t ral it mysulf until I
went this te and'that is t-hatb 1-Loer is no cloar-cull,
unanimous view on thi. iiattero in Lo) ndorn., T I eoreo a .1-very
strong fec-Iing, ix, the G -, oonmint thiat tera ara groat
pol~ tic J ntai' gong into ~ uoe Ith~ irk there
ares ton vi c s on t ie O-ppositi. en side to ex-actly thc
same effect. WheLon you cc. jme to the economic aspects of the
matter, balanc-ing thk.-irmmedlato againc; t the romote. or the
p-obDablo aga4ri-1t theo possible, then ycu can get a htind.-rea.
Q. Welln, Sir, 1 wun-dor if yucan talk about hat appcar
to be t1ii~ S fascina,'-ti,, g politi'cal ba!; tle whlichi is going on.
There av boon suggost-ions thAat the,-fecolings in 1Pa r i an
in Bo'nn. Dr., Adonauor and thc. Preside, 1-nt of F. r. ancQ Genoral
de Gaul log cro becomling harder -toxard. 3 British. orttry. that
therue is a. fooling th~ Cthau. they feel th-at th! ey can go;
alonie in. Europe,, FlrL Ud anything like this tiieroc:
POMWellI that's very inte-esting and it's ve-ry diffi cul. t for
oe 3At Je. tati; ' utid0. e o foma j . LT_ 01t aboCUt it_ L.
woul. d hLave thiouglt that' i f yo t ke th LAteBecL~
countries as thuy a-re cle teLow,. Cocunt&gt;-' LS, WOUld bo
stroonaly pcjiti. Cal.: Ly in faVCu: Of I" rat. Brtain going in,
rr1a tL i. th.&gt; tha , tl i-te ra r thlinlk t'ha t
. oir12, iany7 is., Tbub~ vcry hard 1to -toll, because Do,
Adanauozr and G.-ano. re. 1 C1_ au] Jo are pro Lty close ogter
Q, You wcu ~ i a-it--tha: roii1icis of tiso that the-re isn it a
tiossi: iiity thaLt Bonn and Pii r--ay say rVill 1 go it
alono", 0 1 0 0 / 3 
3.
P. M, Well, they might. but I think that the rucial point will
be Paris and on'that I don't think there's any doubt that
General de Gaulle didn't look with any great favour on the
British coming in, He has his own ideas about the
position of France in Europe, particularly so long as he
has close association with Adenauer. My impression this
time was that although nobody could say that de Gaulle was
in favour of Great Britain going in, I don't think he is
so utterly hostile to it as he was perhaps a year ago,
In oti-er wo'e 1' Ihe'b a. fy , ben j
it's a movement in favour of them receiving Great Britain,
Qo Well, now, if that is one strong force at the bargaining
table, the American attitude is another one. How precisely
would you measure the American feeling about Britain going
into the European Common Market. I have seen only recently
a report which quoted the " highest authority" that the
Americans would regard it as catastrophic if Britain didn't
go in.
P. M. Well, I don't want to engage in superlatives, but I came out
of Jashington, after very close discussions with the
President and a variety of the members of the Administration,
quite satisfied that they were very, very keen on Great
Britain going in. Indeed, I rather used this myself in
my discussions with them because I said " Nw, if they're
keen on Great Britain going in, they are not without
influence in Europe itself; if the British difficulty
about going in and appuaring to desert the Commonwealth
economic interests becomes manifest, then my card of
entry with the Americans is to say, " Look, don't make it
too hard. Don't make it so hard for Great Britain to
go in that she has to make this horrible choice between
Europe and the Commonwealth, because this would be, in
itself, a catastrophe. I think they understand that very
well and, therefore, I would describe their attitude, as
I found it, and after the discussions that we had, as being
one of great keenness for Great Britain to go in, of
knowledge that there's a limit to the price that she can
pay of an understanding that the Commonwealth does matter
to Great Britain and to the world and that, therefore, the
American approach must be one, not of dogma, but of
practical accommodation. Indeed, both the President
and the people in his Administration repeatedly said to
me " Our approach to this is quite pragmatic, it is not
do g-atic."
Qo Did you get the fooeeling that the Aerican attitude was so
strong that it would carry the day inevitably in Europe
for British entry?
P. M. ' Jell, I wouldn't be prepared to put it as high as that,
but I do believe that the American influence in Europe on
this matter will be considerable, and that, of course,
particularly has relation to France
Q. Sir, there seem to be two developing attitudes about the
nature of the European Common Market should it come to
pass. One is that it is an exclusive community which
looks inward upon itself and that the Common Market
countries the United States of Europe are selfsufficient,
or that it should be an expanding community
with interests donm as far as this part of the world,
Which do you think is uppurrnost? cc a a o 
P. M. Well, I wish I knew the anser to that. The great
danger about the European Economic Community is that the
countries in it may become inward-looking, They may
become full of ideas of economic self-sufficiency.
They may say, " Well, now, the day will be a happy day
w. hen the new European Community, including Great Britain,
doesn't import wheat, but gets it all from within."
The French are, today, wheat exporters. Then they may
say, " Well, why should we be dependent on the rest of the
world for canned fruits, for dried fruits we can produce
them all ourselves for butter 0. Run right down
through the listo That is, theoretically, a danger,
And it may be, that for a while, that will be their
tendency, their temptation, but in the long run I think
that we have to remember that one of their great ends is
so to increase their industrial power tLeir capacity to
make and to sell to other people, thai they are not so
foolish as not to realise that they can't sell without
buying. And, therefore, in the long run, if they avoid
ultra-nationalistic self-sufficient economic policies,
we may hope that their activity with the rest of the world
will correspond to an activity on the part of the rest of
the world with them,
Q. I wonder can I press you a little bit. You said you
weren't quite sure which idea was uppermost in Europe at
the moment. Have you, as a last word, any real feelings
about which idea is the prevalent one at the moment?
P. M, Well, I would think, myself, that they were at present
rather on the self-sufficiency line,
Qd Which is not good for us?
P. M. Uhich is not good for us. and what we have to do is to
break that dowm, to make them more and more conscious of
the fact that if the rest of the world doesn't have a
market in their countries, then they cant have a market
in the long run in the rest of the world.
Qo Is it this to which you devoted the greater part of your
energies when you were in London?
PM, And a great deal of time in the United States itselfe
Very interesting on that mattier The Americans, they're
very big and we are relatively small, but one thing that
I kept coming back to or that they kept coming back to,
in my talks with them was " Look if Great Britain goes
into the Common Market, you, Aus ralia, and, we, America,
are both outside of it, and we therefore have a tromondous
common interest in getting the best possible access to that
Market for our own goods. If they become illiberal in
their economic policies, that's bal for both of us, Then
the joint coummuniqueo with President Kennedy here it
was WJe both indicated that we had this in common. We
hope they will have liberal policies, and we hope that
there will be increasing access for our goods into that
Market, That, I thought, was a good start.
Q, Now, Sir, the bargaining on behalf of the Commnonwalth has
been done at the moment by Bri. tain for the Commonwealth
countries in Europeo Mro Macmillan's position is somewhat
loss secure, one would have thought, losing by-elections
as he is, fairly frequently. Do you feel that this may
have, or did it have any offect on his powers to bargain
adequately at Brussels? C 0 0 C 0 0 0 Cl'
L 
P. M, I don't think so. It is in the nature of things that
governments lose by-elections without necessarily losing
a seat, but it is a very rare event when a government will
increase a majority at a by-election, because at by-elections
people are able to chide the government without throwing
it out. We are very familiar with that. INow, I think
he will go ahead. He has a large majority. He is the
master of the timetable. He's not due to have an election,
if he doesn't want one, before the second half of 1964.
No, I think he'll go ahead and negotiate.
Q. With a freshening opposition in Britain to British entry
and negotiations for comparable outlets on behalf of the
Commonwealth taking place now not making as much progress
as I understand would have helped you, wouldn't you agree
that this may be a factor that the people in Brussels'
attitude might harden because of the British Prime
Minister's position at home?
P. M. I don't think so, myself, because I don't think that
anybody could answer dogmatically as to what the Prime
Minister's opponents would do. I don't moan his critics in
the Conservative Party but his political opponents, the
Labor Party. I don't think anybody in Europe could say,
" Jell, we could do a better deal with them, than we can
with Macmillan," because I don't think they can take an
easy position, either of them,
Qo Mr, Prime Minister, Sir, I wonder if I can put this to
you now, Supposing it comes to the worst, supposing
this country gets nothing but transitional agreements,
suppose comparable outlets cannot be negotiated, what do
we do?
PoMo eall, it divides itself into two parts. First of all, if
that turned out to be the position and we had, in September,
the Prime Minister's Conferjnce, I think this would be
very badly received by the Commonwealth Prime Ministers,
I don't see how it could be avoided. ' Je have our problems,
but you take Now Zealand New Zealand's problems, depending
so enormously on the products of farms, would be almost
intolorable, and I am perfectly certain that there would
be tremendous opposition on the part of the Commonwealth
countries. And if it turned out that the Commonwealth
countries all being confronted by an end of the present
pattern of Commonwealth trade by 1970, said, " We don't
approve, we disagree. Te disagree violently." Then, I
for one doubt very much whether a government of any party
in Great Britain would go in. But if a government of
whatever party in Great Britain went in, then I think there
would be a heavy blow dealt to the Commonwealth association,
and I think that so far as we are concerned, and other
Comnonwealth countries are concerned, we should have to
engage then in salvage operations. We, ourselves, would
have to devote our time, between now and 1970, to determining
what we can do to develop unexpected i. arkets for certain
commodities, what financial arrangenants we could make to
support the variety of interests. We are not going to
wander away from these industries. No industry like
dried fruit or canned fruit need suppose for one moment
that we are just going to dump it under those circumstances,
but the problne of how to support it will be, of course, a
very acute one. Je don't want to get to that problem if
we can help it.
Q. I was just wondering0 Obviously, I imagine, you have
second lines of defence to fal l back cn, You must have
given some thought to this to a policy should this come
to pass? o o0 3 o/ 6 
P. M. That's right. But it's not orthodox practice to publish
your second lines of defence.
Q. There's been a lot of speculation that Japan might, in
such an instance, become almost a second Britain to this
country, and that you are busy now developing, on behalf
of this country, greatly increased trade relations.
PoM. We have been developing our trade relations with Japan,
After all, Japan, last year, was our biggest wool-buyer,
and Japan increasingly takes commodities from us, and
we from Japan. But there's no doubt about it that if
the old channels of trade begin to dry up, as they will
under this 1970 idea, then we must more and more not
hesitate to open up new channels of trade. If this means
that we'll do more business with countries with which we
now may have some reluctance to do business, well it will
mean that, because after all, the first duty of the
government of Australia is to the people of Australia and
to the industries of Australia.
Qo What would you say to those who perhaps see something
like realism in this: that when it comes to the fortunes
of 50 or 60 million people in Britain and perhaps the
fortunes of the whole of Europe, the fortunes of 10 million
Australians and 2 or 3 million Now Zcalanders are not
going to count for very much real. y?
P. M. Well, in a sense, that's intelligible, but don't forget
this: that the fortunes of the 50 million people in
Great Britain have boon very largely tied up with the
fortunes of a relative handful of people in Australia or
Now Zealand because, until the last couple of years, for
example, we in Australia, 10 millions as we may be, have
been the biggest customer of British goods in the world,
You could literally say that there are scores and scores
and scores of thousands of people working in factories
in Great Britain whowouldn't be working there but for
what Australia buys. These are very important factors.
Indeed, I pointed out when I was in London that the
Ai; erican market which happens at the moment to be the
biggest; all that's very satisfactory but if you
compared that market in actual terms, not per thousand of
people, but in actual terms, with the British market in
Australia, over the last thirty or forty years when we've
had this special preferential structure, Australia has
bought from Great Britain, in actual terms, œ 800M more
of goods than the Tnited States of Amnricao
QO But the pattern of trade with Britain has changed, and is
changing constantly, isn't it?
P. M. Yes, but not all that materially. We still remain the
second greatest customer. She remains our largest
customer, overall. There is a mutuality about these
things the preferences given to British trade passing
into Australia and our preferences in the British market,
and I don't think the people of Great Britain will ignore
this. They don't want to ignore it. There are still
many, many thousands or millions of people in Great
Britain who are conscious of the Commonwealth.
QO On the other hand, again, there are those who would say that
the realities of this are bargaining powers. Much as
you talk, you still come down to bargaining. How big a
bargaining power are British preferences which this country
has in its possession nolw? 0 0 a 0 7 
PM! o Well, they are a bargaining point. How big they are
depends entirely This is rather a psychological problem.
If the negotiators in Great Britain feel that their advantages
in going into Europe economically are so great that
they will outweigh any losses that they might incur elsewhere,
then they will go in, and when you come to discuss
these economic problems, I find the greatest difficulty
in getting any two people to agree. I spoke to one or
two of the most prominent men in Great Britain, actively
engaged whose attitude was, "' Jell, the economic argument
is .0/ 56" and that's why I believe first, that the British
negotiators, Mr. Heath, in particular, who is a very able
man I had known all the others over many years, but
hadn't known him, really, before and I think he's doing
his best on this matter. He will want to achieve a result,
but I don't think that he will want to report to his Prime
Minister that the best deal that can be presented to the
Prime Ministers in September is one under which the existing
Commonwealth pattern of trade disappears in 1970.
Qo Now, have you given any thought, sir, to this whole idea
of customs unions which seem to be fashionable now and,
again, people are talking about a customs union, a much
closer association between Australia and New Zealand.
Have you any comment on that?
P. M. e0ll, I quite agree with you that customs unions are
fashionable. It's occasionally overlooked that the
United States itself is a customs union, and so are we,
in the Commonealth( of Australia) as we have complete
internal free trade and a common external tariff, The
problem of developing some such thing with Now Zealand
will become really quite an interesting one if it turns
out that our present positions in the British market fade
out by 1970, which assumes that that's the best term that
can be got and that the British Government agrees with it.
Then it would become a practical probljm. But, really,
I would hope to be delivered of having to solve it. You
seo, in the ultimate, we say, " Jell, let's have a common
external tariff. We will form a customs union." That
connotes internal free trade. And that moans Now Zealand
butter passing without duty into Australia Well, I think
the dairying industry in Australia might have something
to say about that. And so on.
qo This raises many other things. The pressures that are
bound to fall upon this country must get greater, I imagine
you would agree with that. Do you envisage a more planned
economy, a more directed economy for this country over the
next few years?
P. M, The word " planning", of course, is a rude word. You know
wh-at mean. There are those who dogmatically are for it,
as such, and against as such, but if the word " planning"
meant that we must increasingly, and particularly with
those possible economic difficulties that we must
increasingly try to determine in Australia what our rate
of population growth ought to be, what degree of expansion of
secondary industry so vital to population growth ought to be,
what the uosition of the primary industries ought to be, in
terms of production and nmrket, what the tertiary industries
ought to be. not laying it down in some'theoretical ' dog r,
but trying to work out, in terms of expansion and growth,
what the best. rate of expansion and growth would -be'-in each
of these sectcrs and then sit down to say " iJhat ought . re.
to do to bring t-ot about?" if you'mean that by planning,
then you can put me down as a planner. 0. 0/ 8 
One final word, sir, and I think we will have to be quick.
Some of your comments in 3ritain that this country was
British to the bootheels, that we ate the Queen's men in
Australia have drawn a lot of comment. The " Observer" in
London said that you were a brilliant and eloquent advocate
of something which was dead and gone forever. I wonder if
you wouldn't agree that perhaps now Australians are
particularly feeling their isolation, geographical and
otherwise. What would you say to reassure them, those who
feel like this, that they are not right?
P. M. Well, I didn't have the advantage of reading any of these
comments, but you see, like you, I happen to be a subject,
and a very happy one, of the Queen. I am a royalist, I
am a monarchist, we all are in Australia.
Q. Do you think that some of our post-war migrants are?
P. M. Well, if they're not, I am sure their sons will be and
their daughters will be. Thatts what i mean by being
British. W e are within the allegiance, we are British,
in my case and yours, to the bootheels, and in the case
of some people perhaps, as you suggest, to their children's
bootheels. This is, to me, a tremendously important
thing. It means that we will not get into a state of
economic strife a3 hastily as wo otherwise would. It
means that we have our instincts, our allegiance and
deepest feelings in common, and if that's a dead cause,
in the eyes of the London " Observer", then i am happy to
say that the " Observer" doesn't represent my opinion or
the opinion of most people in Australia. 



FOR THE PRESS WEST NEW .3UINEA
Statement by the Prime Minister-, Rig. ht Honorable R. G. Menzies
Cabinet has given consideration to recent developments in West
New Guinea. We have in particular been concerned at the latest news of
the dropping of Indonesian troops in and around Merauke.
With every natural desire to live on terms of friendliness
with Indonesia, we find it necessary to point out two things.
Oi ne is that this warlike action is quite inconsistent with the
Otatements publicly and repeatedly made to us, that Indonesia would not
pursue its territorial claim to West New Guinea by force-of arms.
SThe other is that the negotiations recently begun in the
presence of Mr. Bunker after initiating action by the acting Secretary-
General of the United Nations, have yet to be resumed and concluded. We
find it impossible to understand why the processes of peaceful negotiation
should be interrupted and impaired by military aggression...
Wo would like to say, ince more, that we df. siro and will respect
peaceful sftttlement arising fr-' m such negotiation; that active
hostilities can achieve nothing but unnecessary bitterness; and that
peace in this part of the w-rld is important, not only to the nations
mmediately concerned but to the whole future of South East Asia and the
outh West Pacific.
It is also important for the future authority of the United
Nations that international territorial differences should be settled
without either the threat or the use of armed force.. 



67-107(
J'QO, fJ iR l -) SS_ ul AUSTRALIAN LOAN COUNCIL
Statement by the Chairman ( Rt. Hon. Harold Holt IM. P.)
The Australian Loan Council decided at its meeting
today that the borrowing programme for States' works and
housing for 1962-63 should be œ 250,000,000.
A borrowing programme of œ 106,750,000 was approved for
Commonwealth and State semi-government and local authorities which
borrow more than œ 100,000 during the year.
In addition, the Loan Council decided that no
overall limit should be placed on borrowings by authorities
for which the State Governments approve programmes of not more
than œ 100,000 in 1962-63.
In making these decisions, the Loan Council took into
consideration the Commonwealth offer of a special non-repayable
interest-free grant of œ 12-million to be expended by the States
at their discretion for employment-giving activities.
The allocation of these amounts is as follows:
State
Torks
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania œ' 000
65,102 51,645 26,200
25,529 20,522
15,102
204,100 Governmental
Commonwealth-Stat" ousn Total
Agreement œ' 000
15,000 12,600 3,800
9,000 3,000 2,500
45,900 000
80,102 64,245 30,000 34,529 23,522
17,602
250,000 Special Non-repayable
Grant
œ' 000
3,044 2,442 3,640 1,312 894
1,168
12,500 
Serni-Covernme-rt and Local Author-ities
Borroviing ; Z100,000 or More,
C omfo nw ealt h
New South Wales
Victoria -Quee ns land
South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania T otI-al Z1000 1,595
31,000 39,800 21,7287 5, 820
3,666 3,582
106,750
28th June, 1962 



/ 62/ 080 For Press. 691.
FINANCE FOR STATES 1962/ 61
STATEMENT BY THE TREASURER RT. HON. HAROLD HOLT
The massive programme of works, housing and special
development projects agreed upon between the Commonwealth and
State Governments undertaken in association with the improvement
already appearing in production and employment should help to
ensure a high level of economic activity throughout 1962/ 63.
The amount of funds being provided for State Governments is œ 14
million greater than the high total to which provision for these
functions w. s lifted by the measures of last February.
The ordinary State borrowing programmes for works and
housing next year will be œ 250 million against the œ 247.5 million
agreed in February for 1961/ 62, the non-repayable interest-free
grant of œ 12.5 million which we will make to the States next year
compares with a special œ 10 million grant made in February. We
have already notified approval for expenditure of approximately
œ 16 million on projects like the Mount Isa Railway, the Western
Australian Standard Gauge Railway, coal handling Port facilities
in New South Wales and Queensland and beef roads, on which
expenditure this year was under œ 7 million. Total provision
for these categories in 1962/ 63 is estimated to be œ 278 million as
as against œ 264 million in the current financial year.
But this is far from being the whole story. The
provision by the Commonwealth Government for roads is likely
to rise this year œ 4 million to œ 54 million. The approved
borrowing programme for semi-governmental authorities those
seeking to borrow œ 100,0O or more has been fixed at œ 105.15
:: illion. This is higher than the exceptionally high figure of
œ 104 million to which these programmes were raised, in three
successive steps during 1961/ 62. It is 20% greater than the
borrowing programmes of th-se authorities in 1960/ 61. 
got the bonefit of 3ubstantial incrcoses in Commnn e1, t h
contributions to develo-onrnta! irojccts like the Munt Isa
Railwayo, beef roads and the Port of Gladstone. This is being
done for two rood reasons. One is the recognition that jicensland
offers very considerable potential for export devcelopm. nt. The
second is th!. at we bolieve that ther. is -encral public acceDptancce
on
of the neod to pushi/ rapidly with vworth-while development in ttke. a
northern pnrts of Australia. Takon with what the Coilmonw~ alth is
doing on those lines in the Northern Territory, nd in conjua. ction
with the State Goveorlnent in the Ylorth-w,-est of \ hst Austr;. ll if the
total programme is now assurring substn-tial di 2eusio4
Canberra 29th June, 1962. 



PoM. NO. 4J'/ 062
CONFER JITH INDUTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister t Rt.. heH on. R. G. Menzies
In announcing on February 6, 1962, a series
of measures affecting the national economy, I stated that
it was the intention of the Government to engage in periodical
consultation with those engaged in practical production and
business. Accordingly, on two days next week, a committee
of senior Ministers of the Cabinet will meet in Canberra with
representatives of primary and secondary industries to hear
their views on the current state of the economy.
The first conference at 10.30 a. m. on Monday,
2nd July, will be with the following organisations
Australian Woolgrowers' Graziers Council Mr. T. L. Bull
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Bankers' Association
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
National Farmers' Union
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of
Australia
Australian Council of Retailers
Associated Chambers of Commerce of
Australia
Australian Wool and Meat iroducors' Federation Mr. IT. Serjean'
Mr. C. R. Darvall
Mr. W. J. Bryant
Mr. Havard
Mr. B. L. Burton
Mr. J. W. Walker
Mr. T. A. Pettigrc
Mr. J. C. Willic. a
Mr. LH,. Keaslip
The second conference at 10.30 aom. on Tuesday
will be with the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council,
represented by Messrs. R. J. JWebster, RoA. Irish, J. Burnett,
G. More, Dr. J. Vernon and Sir James Kirby.
The third conference at 11.30 a. m. on Tuesday
will be with Sir John Allison and his colleagues on the Export
Development Council The which was invited to send a representative
to the meeting on Monday, was unable to accept, but will
forward a written submission.
CANBERRA, 29th Juno, 1962. 



WEEKLY INDEX No, 26
WEEK E jNDINJ U 1-962G
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Peputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trarde The Rt. Hon.
TFohn McEwen
June 25 25 No, 663
No. 690 WEEDICIDES AND INSECTICIDES
EXPORTS OF SCRAP IRON AND STEEL
The Treasurer, the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, M. P.
June 29No, 691FINANCE FOR STATES 1962/ 63
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon. W. H.
Spooner, M. M.
June 25 No. 666
26 No, 671 RADIOACTIVE COBALT FOR MELBOURNE
OIL SEi, RCH PUBLICATIONS SEISMIC SURVEYS AT
ARCADIA ANTICLINE AND SOUTH ROMA, QUEENSLAND.
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley, M. P.
June 27No. 677IMPERIAL DEFENCE COLLEGE 1963 COURSE
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck
June 28No. 684REPORT OF THE UNITED NATIONS VISITING MISSION
TO NEW GUINEA
The Minister for Civil Aviation, Senator Shane Paltridge
June 27No. 680DIVIDEND TARGET FOR T. oA. A.
The Postmaster-General. The Hone C. W. Davidson
June 26 No. 675A ISSUE DATE FOR POSTAGE STAvMP TO COMMEMORATE
WORLD CONFERENCE, ASSOCIATED COUNTRY WOMEN
OF THE WORLD.
29 No. 690A MR. A. G. LOWNDES AND MR. J. T. REID REAPPOINTED
AS MEMBERS OF AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING
COMMISSION FOR FURTHER THREE YEARSo
The Acting Minister for External Affairs, the Rt. Hon. John
McEwen
June 25 Noo 669A INTERNATIONLL CONTROL COMMISSION REPORT ON
VIET NAM
28 Noo 683 AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO UNITED NATIONS
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COUNCIL
The Linister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermannm
June 26 No. 670 EXPORT BOUNTY OF PROCESSED MILK PRODUCTS
26 No. 672 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE EXPORT SUGAR
AND FRUIT INDUSTRY F. UGAR CONCSSSION
COMMITTEES.
28 No. 685 LAMB EXPORTS TO THE UNITED KINGDOM
28 No. 685A APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE AUSTRALIAN
WOOL BUREAU
29 No. 689 œ 218,000 FOR WHEAT RESEARCH
The Minister for the Army, The Hon, J. O. Cramer
June 25 28 No. 669 ARMY MEDICAL OFFICERS TO STUDY ATOMIC SIDEEFFECTS.
No. 682 BIG TANK MOVEMENT oo.. / 2 
2-
The-i Minister for the Nnvy, Senator the Hoym JOCr, Gorton
June 25 No. 665 RECORD P OPPICTN'IOVNSY TRAINfl1G SCHOOLS
27 No. 679 NA VY FOR THE GAMES
27 Noo 681 OFFICERS FOR THE NUCLE! AR AGE
29 No( 686 SUB1URINT] ' VERSUS SUBMARINE
No. 667 NAVTAL I-ONOURS AT CNTBERRA FUNER. AL
The Minister for Shipping and Transport. The Hon. Hubert 01DPrmar.
June 25 No. 664 NEW ROAD SAFETY CiADPi, IGN STARTS TODAY
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
June 27No. 678 CHA LK EJECTED FROM " HAD" ROCKFT CAUSED
300 MILE GLOW
The Minister for ! tr, The Hon, Leslie Bury
JuneNc, 661
No. 675
No. 676
No. 687 RAA1' F SQU, DFON rT TH11, IL1AND NAMED
USAF OFFIO. ER TO VISIT AUSTRAIU-Z
RA-. A OFFICERS TO STUDY AVIATION FUEL
MAIL ADDRESS FOR IN THA , ILANiD
The Minister for Repatriatirn, The Hon, R. W. C._ Swartz
June 24 No. 662 NEWj'i RDPhTRI4' TION COMMISSIONER APPOINTD
25 No, 668 GCVZRNMENT WIlL HELP Pj-. P, PIEG-IC GAM'E S
26 No. 673 NEW TFESTPMENT FOR HEIDELBERG PATIENTS AND
NURSES
26 No. 674 TWO NEWi REPi TrIATION , PPOINTMENTS
The Rt. Hon, Harold. DHolt P. Chairman of the Loan Council
June 28No. 688 AUSTRAL1IAJ1N LOA'N COUNCIL
The Department of Primary Indcust, y
June 29No, 688A EXPORT SUGAR REBATE
With the Compliments of
The Goverl-wlent Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CA1NBEFRRA, A. C. T. I 



P. M. No. 45/ 1
CONFERENCE ITH INDUSTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hn. GoMenzies
This afternoon, the Prime Minister and several
of his senior Cabinet colleagues met leading representatives
of Australian business and industry to hear their views
on trends in the domestic economy and on prospects for the
coming months. The industry representatives present today
were Mr. J. No
Mr. J. C. Walker, President, Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia
Williams, Acting President, Associated Chambers
of Commerce of Australia
Mr. AF. Havard, President, National Farmers' Union
Mr. T. L.
Mr. T. A. Bull, President, Australian Woolgrowers'
Graziers' Council
Pettigrew, President, Australian Council of
Retailers
Mr. C. R. Darvall, Chairman, Australian Bankers' Association
Mr. L. H.
Mr. WoJ.
Mr. I. T
ir. B. Lo Heaslip, Immediate Past President, Australian
Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Bryant, President, Master Builders' Federation
of Australia
Serjcant, Vice-President, Australian Primary
Producers' Union
Burton, President, Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries.
After the meeting, the Prime Minister, Mr.
Menzies, said that the first-hand accounts of the progress
made since the introduction last February of measures aimed
at stimulating the economy and the views expressed by the
visiting representatives on the possible future trends in
activity were very helpful indeed, and would be carefully
considered by himself and his Cabinet colleagues.
CANBERRA, 2nd July, 1962. 



P.. Mo No U7/ 1962
DEATH OF MR. R. JAMES M. P.
Statement by_ the _ Prme Minister the Rt,_ H onL R. Menzies
Rowley James was one of the most colourful
Members of the Federal Parliament in my time.
He was a great battler for coal and the
coalminer. He lived among his people and spoke for
them at all times with great vigour. It must have
been a source of great satisfaction to him that his son
now represents hi-old seat. Though he was a hard
fighter, he enjoyed popularity on both sides of Parliamont,
I extend warm sympathy to his family,
CANBERRA,
4th July, 1962. 



M. N-io. 46/ 1962
VISIT OF KING AND . jUEEN OF THAIILAND
Statement by the Prime Ministe the Rt HJon R. G, Menzies
Mr. J. H. Scholtens, the Chief Ceremonial Officer
of the Prime Minister's Department, has been appointed to
be the Commonwealth officer in charge of the visit to
Australia in August/ September of Their Majesties the King
and Queen of Thailand. Mr. Scholtens will le ave Australia
on Thursday 5th July, for Bangkok to discuss with representatives
of the Government of Thailand and of the Palace a
draft programme for the visit. The draft has been drawn up
in consultation with the State Governments.
After Mr. Scholtons' return to Australia in
about ten days, the State Governments will be informed of
Their Majesties' wishes and the detailed planning will
begin. The tentative itinerary provides for Their Majesties
to begin their Australian tour in Canberra on Sunday, 26th
August, and to leave later in the week for visits to all
State capital cities,
CANBERRA,
)+ th July, 1962. 



P. M. No. )+ 8/ 1962
FOR RELEASE 6.-3o P. M. JULY
ROYAL TOUR
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rton Menzies
The Commonwealth Government has appointed Vice-
Admiral Sir Roy Dowling, C. 3.7 to take
charge of the planning of the visit to Australia next
year of Her Majesty the Queen and His Royal Highness
the Duke of Edinburgh.
Sir Roy Dowling will be Her Majesty's Australian
Secretary for the occasion and will be a member of the
Royal Household throughout the visit.
Arrangements have been made for him to visit
London in about two weeks' time to confer with the Queen
and Prince Philip. His discussions at Buckingham
Palace will take place over a period of about three weeks.
He will be accompanied to London by Lady Dowling.
Before leaving for England, Sir Roy Dowling
will, in accordance with arrangements made between the
Prime Minister and Premiers last week in Canberra, meet
State Directors, and will thus be able to take with him programme
suggestions for discussion with Her Majesty.
The States have been asked to indicate what
events of special significance will be taking place during
the period of Her Majesty's visit and the final arrangement
of the itinerary will depend, in some measure, on the
proposals forthcoming.
CANBERRA, July, 1962. 


FOP. PRESS: P. M. NO 41962,
0. AND WOOMERA JOINT PROJECT DISCUSSIONS
Joint Statement by the Prime Minister, The RtoHon. RoG. Menzies
and The Rt. Hon. Mr, Peter Thorneycroft, British
Minister of Aviation,
The discussions between the Right Honourable Peter
Thorneycroft, British Minister of Aviation, and the Australian
Government, which began in Canberra on Wednesday, have been
concluded satisfactorily.
The main purpose of the discussions was to review the
working of the Anglo-Australian arrangements for the Woomera joint
project, and to consider the use of the Woomera Range by the
European Launcher Development Organisation ( EoL. DoO.) o
Australia and Britain are partners in E. LoD. Oo with five
European countries Belgium, France, Germany, Italy and the
Netherlands who are combining in a programne of work for the
development of a space vehicle launcher.
The initial programme provides for the firing of a complete
three stage EoL. D. O. launcher from Woomera. The first stage of
the launcher will consist of the British Blue Streak rocket, the
second stage of a French rocket and the third stage of a rocket
to be developed under the leadership of the Federal German
Republic. The first series of satellite test vehicles . re-to". be
developed under Italian leadershipø Long range telemetric links
are to be developed under the leadership of the Netherlands; and
equipment for the down range guidance stations is to be developed
under the leadership of Belgium,
Australian membership of EoL. ODO. requires no financial
contribution at least for the programme now planned and EoLoDoO.
will meet the cost of completing the facilities at Woomera
required for the EoL. DO. programme.
Australia's contribution to the Woomera joint project will
be on the basis of an annual contribution of œ 8.7 million for
five years, Australia will also set aside funds for the
development of Australian projects, previously included in the
joint amount0
A party of technical experts from member countries of
EL. D. O. will be visiting Australia next month.
CANBERRIA. 6th July, _ 962, 



YOUJNG LIBERALS3 L'LY , IA-THOT11 TONHALL,
Sp~~ P~ in~ iLee, e.~ c h~ by~ e Hon. R. G-Menzies
Mr, Chairman., Mr,, Seanl.-;% n and I. adies and Clentlemen
This is a v, rv interestin--evening for me, beas
1 began my political, my parliamentary ife, 7 if you may so
describe it, in this hal. it wasn~ t as gr.-and in those days,
but Hawthorn was the centre of the old seat of East Yarra,
which I b elieve still continues, and which I had the honour
of representing in Parli~ ament ini the Upper House many, many
years ago, Mr. S2canil'!-n has also recalled to mly mind that sQm3
trifle of 33 or 34j years ago we established a rathier radical
moverment called -the Young Fationalists, * r^ d lik-. e -to tell you
that all this ha ' ppened in tbi. study of my lhouse in Kew, where
1Billy Kent Hughes and Mr,, Grceenwood who was tiaen Member for
Nunawading, and I sat down and we agreed about one thing,
unanimously, the sort of thing that you have in mind very
frequently of late-, " Time tha old boys were shaken up a bit"
( Lauglhter, 9 Applause). Ind so we dec: ided to shake them up a
bit. Perhaps we did,
All I can say for myself is that in those Jaays and
for at least ten years thereafter, I found myself referred to
quite habitually, as a promising young mani and nowr, of
cours'e, people dontt say it to my face I know from around
the corner, that they are beginning to say sijhe old boy has
had a good run". ( Laughter, Applause),
However, Sir, I am not unduly disturbed about that,-
because I just want to remaind you that I really couldn't leave
at the present time, btx-cause I am--the Government'ls majority
( Laughter Applause). I see my distinguished collea gue
Harold Hoit * here, whom I still. rofer to as " young HaroldI~
( Laughter) and hie's registering a protest,, He thinks hers
the Clvrnin' majority.,,-( Laughter) And so lie is. All1
I know is that we have a majority of one, and it is a case of
all hands to th. e pump, until the&amp; next elcction, a-' ter which
we'll have a majority of much beer thnoo Har, hoar)
( Applause) I want particularly I_, orighti to address mayself to
the, what I'll call compendiousl~ y, Youn~ g Liberals, because
they have somthng to contribute to th-e affairs of tha naotion.
The drive, the dyrnamism of the noxt ten-twenty, thirty years
is in your hands., And T th~ ei-fore iv., a1. t to taTlk to you in
that sense. What is the business of govc-rnnient? The business
of government in the Coimionwealth of Aist'. al-ia is to produ~ ce,
to expound, to advocalte ,,, eat objectivoe:: of uational poli-* C-y,
We exre not here just to win an elcotion. Ncx are you here
just to hclp to Win arn e. LCoticn., I-1 are here ; O-o win something,
to do something for oair coutntry. Arid there fare we must at
all times, try to behave according to t! 1e standa~ e. Ths of stlatesmanship
and not just acccrdinL to-the,, standards of vote-getting,
I am the last person to dony thLat unless you haNve votes, you
have singularly little o'pportu-i-ity of tV-he statosmanship,
( Laughter) But getting votcos ii2 PWe be-anll and -the enJ-all.
We must have sorn pictur-o J. n cour mindsc of wshot wo want -to do,
This perhaps is maoreo tai o.-n ic -the yocung than it is
-for me. Though it i isuprl imaprtant for me because I have
the major respon-sibi11ty in rgovcrnment, But it is vastly
important for you), 
Whiat are -tho, object ive:, s of na-tona1 polifcy?
Iwould v\ ienture to sa-" y to you. i'n a -few conciso fentencas
i. hat lj a/ c in mind, is of 01.19 owc-objective irust~ ba,
-Go buil. d a balanced, stroig, proEgrCes,_ vo( and civilised notion
in which. advances a:, e shared all secticns of tiao people0
Noxu that mnay sound. to you a'lmost a platitude,, it isn't such
a platitude. Wha~ t did 1 say " a bzalanced nation". A ny
cheapjack can como al~ ong wiLtha somec rati,. or rmsretricious poliCy,
some catchpenny policy, and get votes and disturb thae balance
ofC the naition but it is balonnoc that counts,~ if a Ination is
to build on its f~ oundations0 Wo want a-strong natilon., thnat's
el~ ementary. We want a progrossive one" IP11 say something
botthis later on, b-cus thre e those whlo were to be
heard last year who appeared to be -under the impression that
the Federal Government alidntt believe in progrc-s9 but believed
ñ Ln some vjrotched form of stagnation,, And we -at'Iler lost that
propaganda battl. e. So I repeat:, , e want a pr-ogressive nation.,
There is nothiLng for thto youang in this country
that can attract thenj or us, unlo._: s it is tlie vision of
progress for the:, future, bua above all1 things, twe t-iant a
civilised nation,, Not a nation in wichn every, p lI I
issue is determined in terms of pounds shil' ings and ponce..
Nota~ teiaistc aton but a nation that tunes itself to
high endeavouro and to great ide-alsi a civilised na-tio~ n, 0
In the course of Dy thl-irty-odd years in Parliaraentq
one way or anothoiuI'eher a good. deal about the alleged
class struggle in 1Australia0There are alwais pecople to be
fol. m~ d who ir. ant to set class against,, class, !-nat class I
be* Lcng -to, Ivve neverr quito di" scovered9 but I do believe that
there is only one groat and, hionouraibie class distinction in
Australia and that's th.-[ e distiln-ction between the industrIous
and the idle. W4hcinevor hecar , m7y Co-, m, nmi st . Iwas going
to say 11frio. ndrs" theyore nt,( Laughter) Whenever I
hear the Communssrte arCriunists talki ng about the
class struggle so muohc~ be-Love( d of Marx, I remind myself that
in this cotuntry of naina. anci. yours, all thaot Class s-tuff is
out of date, Yo'alre a wokror you're notv, and whenever
they say inr. the Jor6s of tte old u] ltimaitum the MLanifestCo
QWr" krs of the iiorl-d unite" l I foo lih ang " Hoar-, 9
, e a r' t ao fvro c'D h zro s of'L stralia iuniting
becauso, , be Leve me t I e future ofL the~ o country depends upon
the-porcentr-o of pople afhoc iwTUroors and theo pw,, C entage
of thIe people Wbno are not" Thiis is tlie 7, ne class distinction
thLat I recoganise0 So T. paS on from that, Wihnat is the second
great objective of natIi-onal pol1icy? It is the objective o f
building, our young rnation iLn'ko a strong and splendid he-ritage
and this can' t be achieved by a. people who acquire hoabits of
do D-ondency0 It centb acOL~ cl. by peopl e who ha -e been
reared up -to Say the3 curymnt s. Logan 1+ Why doosn2t th. o Governmeont
do something abo--u t it? Tt alw1, ays soe1-, 1. to meto be
theo mest ele-montary thin. g ~ n tho th-at if you iwant an
inepndn ntini rmjtbe built' up if indopendent people.
Tf yo--wnt -a nation th-. at is -tn a prsltion to
be pushed over by,, othur nat-o. ns o f error if you like. ' Ou-t of
gi. cateGr devot+ ion and ntuoLaa,-Lhn You ; qji]. J f-ind i in EL
nation which_ has leanrn O. Lto-soyj Lalv it to thnu Government,
doñ!-t leave it to mc.; Th1-is is a ticme,, ndous t. ing, I beg
ovfe y oug an and evelrry ,/, ung w; oma-n heetonighLt to
recall i~ t an irtdopoen nP; r ' ti-on. necdn epe
people of ccu: a~ e~ a~ iha spir.-t' of . adventure
with a desire to , and n a~ Kya dosiare to receive
3 0 0 S 0 
from that mystic body known as th-government a rising . evel
of civic unselfishness. I hope that nobody will suppose that I'm being,
as you might say, parscnical about this. I'm afraid as a
working politician I've been in the midst of the fray for
many, many years, and my greatest disappointments in politics
have been at the persistence of selfish judgments, of selfish
standards, a loss of the old spirit of independence which.
after all, has made Australia what it is today. This is a
great banner for you to carry, You will be told by older
people who will pretend that they are wiser people, " But all
that's airy, fairy stuff that doesn't matter." I tell you,
as one of the oldest, if not the wisest among them, that this
is the only thing that does count. That we, in our time,
should make an unselfish contribution to a great country which
will be greater and greater as time goes on, but which must
not be allowed to become merely greater in economic terms at
the sacrifice of civilised standards of life, and of thought,
and of character, Now, Sir, having said that, may I just say something
about what we're pleased to call nowadays, the economic
policy for Australia; the national objectives, because I find,
rather to my surprise, that some of these objectives, particularly
in our own Party are not all that well understood.
So I will try to illustrate a few of them.
We must build up, in Australia, if we are to be
a great country and an independent country, a groat and growing
population. That doesn't necessarily mean only at home, but
by immigration from abroad. It's been, I think, one of the
glories of the post-war period in Australia. This has been
no party matter. One of the glories, that our population
has been increasing in Australia at least as rapidly per cent
as the population of Japan This is a very interesting
rellection. A few millions a year ago, a little more a little
time later. When in 1949 you sent me and my colleagues back
into power in Australia, the population seemod to some people to
have reached almost an optimum level, But today, there are
between two and three million people more than there wore then,
many of them coming from distant countries, many of them coming
here with now traditions and new histories and new cultures
and finding their place in the Australian community to our
immense enrichment. And as we look forward to the future, we know now
that the pessimists of the twenties who thought that we would
never have a population of more than six or seven millions are
completely out of date, But today we have ten and a half
and the day will come before long when we will have twenty or
thirty and become, in terms of population, a very, very
considerable nation, And that's tremendously important.
This is a big country. ItJs no mere figure of speech to say
that I nyer go into the United States of America without
reminding myself that that country is roughly the same size
geographically, as Australia and that it has 180 or 190 million
people. And, if there's one thing that helps the people in
the United States to understand something of the problems of
Australia, it is their superb, optimistic belief, looking back
on their own history, that the day will cone when Australia
will have as many people as they have today. They look back
on their own history they look back on their own great
migration waves and they look at us as if we were a sort of
younger brother, going through the experiences of growth which
they had themsclves. Ani this is a great tasko We must not
falter in it. We must build up our population, e / o4 
Dut J. i we are to b' Ld op ce11" co -t i orni e mt
not build uo an armay O'f: pole who1 1" vC r-0o TO toC' do xid
tbe~ s . qere mry second objecti-ve ione. s Je v eq
in l-, ustraiia, thue f,: ullest enmloyment' of manpower and of
available resources,, You w Lbtod vrnwadth
uitia relference to current fi.--urias tnia tftere is sofae
registered un-employmont today,,
Ladies and gen.-tlcmen., Ihnlo1o kl hack: ove(-r the
last twleyearsD, T musL say tfaat th-e record of ful-l employinent
i. n A1ustralia has bee) n so r; emarkcable. -that nobody before
thie wrar -, ould h~ ave believed it Possible,. I weant to say
to You, the younger people " Don't take those things for
granted." Whan i first w-n-t into the Fedoral Parliament
aIs Member for Kocyong, wheon I i-ias an itornpy-Gc,.-eral under
the -late IMr, Lyons we; had, in -ustrzalIJa, a Lvlof
unemployment w. hstrigfrom the-pa of tryDoi-cern.,
in th( 3 great dy f JT laibad fallen ' L. o fifteeon, totwelve;,
tcn, and theose a cthievom., i. ntIs wore ro-i. rdod as so
remarkabloe in 1Ius-, tLaJ~ ia tt L the Lyons Gover. nme--nt w as r--
elected time afte r tin0 tl today, a" ltar theio war, 7w ith
all. the circums'an,-icz th'at ! have cxi etd, we take certain
ttiings for gvantcd, The faict arnd I dont 6 doy It, I
assort i-t-ta one o-f our g-reatest objecti-ves of nzational
poliy mr~ atn verto etun to state 0 o ffairs, but
to liave a full employmnt!* in u o,. m country ofmen, of
manpower, and of physical rG-sourcos,,
Blut, Sir, v mentionevd two th1-ings whl'ich oroduce
thneir -prob-lorms Moro anid more~ peoplo, ancthaer qu-iraror of a0
million peoplc a y~ aer th.-probleom of ' ull onlotc and,
t te same time, weo -I-ust-rest-r-in inflat-Ion, No,, v, don't
homisled by some of tiU allgedwsare h. il akt
you and say that all t 1Lalk of Infl-ation is nsne
Infliation of t currcoy-a ! rclcting -ice level the,
sucking---ip of r. eal va 7CIIII t MmiI o ny the L ' oi r, 7ceiVe-3
is a -trcman'lous socia p* Yoblem -nd i~ f itis allo-J'ed to
Continuea, is a trxwnerdous social cri. Influction imust
be rostrain~ j'r. And , ven1h ea ve spoke,-n in the pas a bout
Stab. li1ty, ani tv-c. Lira thtv ' av rdcd tbljy
a lt~ ofpepl hvetakc, n thei op-.-ortunity of saying. " Oh,
ye! s. but stbJi. mero t~ eio% Ad sn you got thte
bflrloigwtw ii -a11 f, 7--3w~ thn9 but the? governr"
c--. nt is al1l-for ot--i t; Dn"~ je rionsomn-' e this is, J 4t
a, pity th-at anybody,-, proJe. -sing b a smp-portor of the
government sh-oul. d be bogieu. 3d tby Sua nonse--Snse00. f cour se,
stability is lprai
For thIast o. Lhtcon m.-onths. as a re-sult of
p-olicie(-s of theo FPrlOvaimn, olicie) s for whicha ray
colleag ue the Titeasurcr h.-s been L;-ost (': ickedily blamed as if
hwe er soo. y and singl~ y rcsm~ oefo31 then--L) nrder tho se
policie-s we havo fo) r the-J. ast cig~ en, month'-s had coirpleiAe
b l-, jlity in C3. rLSLIMir LrI. OeS 4n Australia, Eighteen i. onths
howould have th.-ought it -ossJ ble" oe t; ie? Arid that
ha s -tuant Lht. h vailue o f 1.-one; ha s bcoo-n pre Se+ rvodc, The
3plw t4.-C thoir n the sav-nogs bark haenotIj zceen
taom,;:-fiter awa y+ Thuc pe-)-lo wln hkave inve stjA JIn gover-nment
stocks im vc-seolee of1hhir ivm mrsmn-b filtor
awa pep-jOJv n&gt; xdicmshv bThne able to
s-y wvJLi er~~ tv-~ I " esnIb. II~ Ic n-r whLat tha-t -Inc-jae is
WDrth" 21-. 1 h o t beae~ e~~ in tecou-ntry the
beenr achieved0 e a 0 a a/ 
Now, I said to you just now that there are people who
believe t-hat. when we talk of stability, we Liberals, wevre
talking in negative terms, we're professing something that's
the opposite number of growtho In fact, you'll hear the
question put, won't you " Are you for growth, or are you for
stability?" Je happen to be for both, and in order to remind
you how important stability is for growth I just want to tell
you that over this period of eighteen months when this hardearned
stability has been achieved, we have, at the same time,
carried out or heavily contributed to, one of the greatest
development programmes in the history of Australia the Snowy
Mountains Scheme, Some of you have been there, Some of
you have seen it.
If, at one stage in our life, preferably just before
an election, I had been able to say, " All right, We are
going to spend œ 400M on hydro-electric schemes and irrigation
headworks on the Snowy," people would have said, " Ah, there's
a progressive man, That's a fine chap. Yes, he's for growth,
Hets the man for our money," But this is exactly what we've
been doing. Year after year I hesitate to mention the figures
in the presence of Harold Holt, who has to flinch under them
year by year, poor chap, But year by year, we're finding out
of the Budget round about œ 20M for the Snowy and by the time it
is finished, it will have cost œ 400M-odd and it will be then
acknowledged to be what many people now acknowledge it to be
one of the wonders of the world, one of the great developmental
projects in this country or in this hemisphere.
At the same time, over this pericd think of the other
matters uniform gauge, I came down in the now train from
Sydney to Melbourne the " Aurora" 0 We had a great deal to do
with this, It is perhaps forgotten. A great deal to do with
it, Seventy percnt, of it in the long run. And this great
piece of development Sydney to Melbourne on a uniform gauge
has already, I am happy to say, although it was finished only
a month or two ago has already made a powerful contribution
to freight returns and to passenger returns on that line, In
other words, this has been a rumarkable contribution to the
stability of the railways system in Australia,
Up in Queensland, where they were beguiled into thinking
the opposite, ( Laughter) c. What have we done over this
period? I am talking now about a period of eighteen months
of stability on the price level the Mt, Isa venture this
tremendous railway conversion, which will enable Mt, Isa mine to
become the greatest copper mine in the world, and a tremendous
source of export wealth for this country beef roads, coal
ports in Queensland and in New South Wales to enable an export
trade in coal to go on and to grow, Al aiese things have
been happening at a time when we were told that stability in our
mouths meant stagnation, Did you ever hear such nnsense?
I think, you know, that our political opponents frequently
rely on their implicit belief that no Liberal has a good memory.
I wanyou younger ones about this, You must cultivate a good
memory. You must keep on, You don't want to be like the Lourbons
and learn nothing and forget nothingr., but at any rate start by
forgetting nothing, because they want you to forget th.: t when at
the end of ' 1949 you sent us back into powc. r, one of the great
problems in Australia was coal. Do you remember it? Some of
you older ones will, Coal. , Jo were importing coal in Australia
from South Africa and from other places0 There was a tremcndous
shortage of coal, Po. wer was rationed because the power stations
were short of coal. People forgt thse ths tings For the first
two or three years of this po) r, stagnant, decadent governncnt of
0 * f000 .16 
yours, wev er devoting our attention to getting coal from
anywhere that it cculd. be got from. And today, nrt only does
Australia have all the coal that it needs, but it is developing
very large export markets for coal to the other countries of
the world. We never have a deputation today to say we're
short of coal, but we do have deputations to say, " Ie're short
of the ways and means of exporting our coalo Give us a better
port, give us better handling facilities. Do something for
us that will enable us to use our surplus of coal for the
advantage of Australia,"
You heard something about beef roads. We don't have
too many beef roads in Hawthorn, ( Laughter) The only one I
can remember offhand is the run down towards the Richmond
Abattoirs. The beef roads in Queensland, in ! est Australia,
in the Northern Territory, in parts of New South Wales and
South Australia these are tremendously important, because
we have entered into the export phase of our lives as a nation,
and we want to provide the ways and means for getting cattle
to market, and getting stock to market in good condition with
proper speed, so that our exports of these matters to the world
may grow and flourish, No Government in the history of the
Commonwealth has done so much in this field or is doing so
much as your own Government and all this has been going on
at a time when anti-inflationary measures were regarded as the
very definition of stagnation by our own opponents,
Now, Sir, I don't want to go on and make a catalogue
of these matters; I've quoted a few examples to demonstrate
to you that that great objective of policy to restr?' n
inflation is the very condition of encouraging growth and
development. If my colleague, the Treasurer were speaking
to you tonight, he would Le able to tell you that as a result
of this stability, as a result of the philosophies and actions
of our Government our credit around the world has never been
as high. We must borrow money, because no country of
million can generate all the capital it needs for the development
of a continents But our credit rating abroad is
phenomenal. If I had the time to talk to you about the
terms on which Australia, as at present governed, can raise
money overseas, you would be staggered. And why? Why does
this happen? Why dons it happen that, year by year, over this
period, particularly the periods of stability, hundreds of
millions have been invested in Australia from outside Australia
invested by hard-headed peoples by people who, like most
investors, look at what they call the growth factor, when they're
making an investment. And here we've had, over this term of
years, hundreds and hundreds of millions coming into Australia
from other countries, coming into Australia from private
investors, because they believe that on the basis of honest
stability in the currency and vast developmental projects,
Australia is the best place in which to invest their money,
And, indeed, if that didn't happen, how do you suppose that
we would receive all those migrants? How do you suppose we
could build up our population, unless we had, year by year,
at the same time, the capital behind them to enable them to
make their own powerful contribution to the ffture of Australiao
And our next national objective is that we must have,
in Australia, a growing manufacturing industry0 Now, when
I was a small boy, witi long ears listening, in the country,
in a little village, in a rather political household, ( because
you will be surprised to know, some of you, that this is an
hereditary defect in me) ( Laughte:) t. he g-eat arguments were
.0 o .0 oo / 7 
protection and free trade, within the country, and mc. t of
the people were in favour of free trade and a few hardy souls
were in favour of protection. But this really determined
whether you were a good man or a bad man, It was like cowboys
and Indians on the films, All that, I believe, is dying
away. The fact is that nobody with a balanced mind today
denies that you can't increase the population by a quarter of
a million a year without having a steadily growing manufacturing
industry, Because, on the land, where the increase in
productivity has been admirable, over these years, there's not
much scope for employing more people. The more farming is
mechanised, the more science is applied to the processes of
agriculture and of the pastoral industry the more likely
is it to be that you won't have any grea% increase in the
employed population. That is quite true, Everybody concedes
it. And therefore, if you want to have a quarter of a million
more people every year, there's just no escape from it and
I don't mind, I'm all in favour of it thoro's no escape
from the proposition that you'll have growing manufacturing
industries and growing service and tertiary industries in
Australia on a scale which will accommodate this population
and give it employment.
Now, Sir, I said a while ago that all these things
produce their own problems, So they do, An increased
population, the struggle to restrain inflation which may
persuade people that policies are negative at the same time,
the vital importance of building up manufacturing industries
the vital importance of developing basic resources in Australia
and all. of these things, except the restraining of inflation,
tend to create it, And this is something we must watch,
This produces some of that cution that you've been told about
from time to time.
Because, you see, ladies and gentlemen, we could
build up our manufacturing industries almost extravagantly.
We could build up our population. We could devote ourselves
to the principles of full employment, but if the results were
that the farm industries of Australia found their costs rising
and rising against them, this country would be brought to ruin,
because let's have no mistake about it; the great export
industries of Australia, to wit, the primary export industries,
are responsible in the true sense for the prosperity of
Australia, directly and indireccly, For a start, they
produce most of our overseas income, and they are able to sell
abroad and to extend their production and to sell more abroad,
because their costs have not yet got out of hand. But if the
day comes when, because of inflationary processes at home,
their costs rise against them, they can be tossed out of their
world markets. What would happen then?
I beg of you, think about these matters. Don't
be bemused by the people who say, " Well, that's all right.
We can always handle the currency internally, We can always
have monetary mechanisms which wi. ll make up for that, My
friends of all the hundreds of millions that are earned by
the Australian wool and wheat and meat and dairying industry
and so on, down the lino, the m: tal industry, seventy percent.,
a safe estimate, pays for imports into Australia of items
needed by Australian manufacturorso
This idea that everything that is imported into
Australia is a chiffon of some kind what the economists are
pleased to call " consumer goods" this is all nonsense,
The groat bulk of the imports into Australia, paid for by
wool and wheat and moat and so on are materials to be used
and plant and equipment to be use.. in Australian manufacturing oo0ooo o/ 8 
Ind'ustry. ~ Id it is in that sense that the nvrnufocturer
himself, whose supporter I am as I bave indicated, must always
remember that he must not, 9 arid we must not, price the primary
producer out of that vital market in the rest of the world,,
And, therefore, thatts another of our great objectives to
preserve the cost level of the exportu industries to preserve
it not only by allowing the costs against it in ihat positive
sense but also ( this goes for manufacturing also) to concentrate
our attention on getting their costs of production down by
improving their efficiency,, I just want to illustrate that
to you, without being too tedicus.
You take manufacturing. You may have not.-ced that
last February and thereafter in Parliament, we introduced
provisions for an investment allowance on new plant in manufacturing.
The whole purpose of this was to encourage manufacturers
to improve their plant and therefore to improve their
efficiency, and therefore to reduce their costs of production
and therefore to render less necessary the rate of tariff
protection which might otherwise have been required, This
is a practical, sensible,~ reasoned approach to the matter.
Anid, in the case of t~ ie man on the land, we have, in Australia,
superb scientific organisations the C. S. I. R. 0 is one of the
great things in the world in that field. Much research is
done but the results of it must be brought to the man on
the larm if we are going to have Pall advantage and, therefore,
we have devoted a lot of attention to extension services and
matters of that kind and have a lot more to do before we are
finished. Now, Sir, I have spoken to you about national
objectives, These are some of them. These mostly rolate
to what goes on inside Australia. Their achievcement seems to
me to represent a magnificent challenge a challenge not to
complacency, but to the spirit of adventure, and, therefore
above all things, a challenge to young men and women who will
be responsible for these matters when I am a mere dusty
memory, Thasaa:. oa marvellous challenge. Thore is nothing
negative about them, they are positive and they're compelling,
and these are the problems of the dreary science, the problems
of the economy. They are not the only problems that we have.
I wonder if we realise always that we are so few in a land so
great that we can't expect the rest of the world just to be
kind t us, to look after us, for some inscrutable reason.
What we have to do in the world, and we do it through our
Government primarily, is to establish with other countries in
the world a position of respect, a posi~ tion in which they
will encourage us, a position in which they will be delighted
to give us such help as they can, The business of foreign
policy, so complicated by some of the commentators, is at
base a very simple one. The business of foreign policy is to
make friends and keep them. Not to go into a war72 if a war
is not unavoidable, but if you go into one, to go into it with
strong and resolute friends. This is the simplified statement
of foreign policy, and those who represent you in Australia in
the Government and who go around the world and speak for you
in the councils of the world, must speak for you to the Prime
Minister and Cabinet of Great Britain, the President of France
and the Chancellor of Germany and the President of the United
States of America and so on, right round all the spots of the
world. I think you'll agree with me that it's very desirable
that whoever speaks for you in that sense should speak for a
country that knows its own mind, that Iunov. s where it's going,
that is determined to make sacrifices to get there, which is
honest a country whose word cali be takon, a country which will
00 0 : 00/ 9 
be regarded as a fPriendly country in all1 the countries of the
worLd0 Thi~ s is tromean2ously important0
I don~ t propose at this time to try to make a speech
to you on the Common Market, because I have said somethi-ng
about that since I came back home, but I'll just say this to
you: This is a great problem,, It is a great problem for
Australian primary industry; it is a great problem for
Australian secondary industry; it is a great problem for the
Commonwealth. There are powerful political arguments for
Great Britain going into Europe, and she alone will decide
whether they are valid or not, There ara~ economic arguiments
for Great Britain going into Europe, and she alone will decide
whether they are valid or not. You have the six nations of
Western Europe all concerned because they are already within
the Treaty of Rome. You have Great Britain you Lave the
United States of America, in which this problem is lively and
produces activity in the minds and actions of the President
and the Administration., These are tremendous problems.
I can see all the advantages of Western Europe
having some form of association which may drub out of her ccr~ aiaceani
consciousness the old feuds between the French and the Germans
and perhaps offers some prospect of peace. I can see all that.
I can see all the advantages of Great Britain being inside the
councils of Europe in order to give what no other country can
give in such full measure, wiso counsel and sensible and
experienced guidance. I can understand that. I can understand
why the United States of America would like this to happen.
I can understand the arguments that are put by some people at
any rate, in Great Britain about the economic advantages 01
being inside a customs union which would give to Great Britain
a home market of 250 million people, instead of 50. These are
all quite intelligible things,
Our great problem, a delicate problem, a difficult
problem, a problem not to be solved by violent statements at
all, or by violent action, our great problem has been to keep
on reminding those concerned that9 up to now, the great pattern
of trade for us and for Great Britain, has been the Commonwealth
pattern of trade, and that this is something with its roots well
down now in history, which will not be thrown away l~ ightly or
casually. I don'tthirik it will be thrown away lightly or
casually, I have no doubts whatever after my visits to both
countries that the most stronuous efforts are being made by
the British negotiators to preserve, if not in form but, at any
rate, in substance, the pattern of Commonwealth trade which
means so much to us, and which as I reminded them, has meant
so much to Great Britain herself in our lifetime,
But this is not the time to be conducting longrange
debates en the matter. All that I can tell you is that
I have no doubt whatever that the negotiators, the Ministers of
Great Britain, understand our case completely, I am happy to
say that I think that the Administration of the United States,
from the President down, understand our case in substance very
well. And as they are both our traditional friends, I have
not yet reached a state of mind in which I want to abandon
myself to despair. Indeed let me warn you against this,
Don't let us get into a state of undue exercise over these
matters, Don't let us become too much the doubters on -these
matters, because all we will do will be to damage our own
economic activity at home. ' tie will create fears and uncertainty.
I will be going over there unless, as I concede, we are tossed
out in Auf'-' st 1.1-blc,: Pudrget Sessi. on6But subject to that risk,
00/ i0 
Ipropose to be there with one or two of my colleagues in
September, and will then be in a much better position to form
judgments and to offer arguments.
All I want to say to you is that the Common Market
argument is not just an argument about a market or markets,
This is an argument about the most remarkable development in
international affairs of this century, All those of you who
have read history will remember that the balance of power
policy of Great Britain has been a cardinal point for a long
time. If, as a result of the present negotiations, the
United Kingdom goes into Europe with mutual obligations, with
the inhibitions arising from that on her powers; if that
happens, that will be a most remarkable development in British
foreign policy, We are not to permit ourselves the luxury
of saying, " You ought not to do that", instead we must say,
" This is for you to say": but we are of the family, we have
lived together and traded together and that pattern is not
lightly to be put aside.
1 come back to where I began, Perhaps for people
of my generation, the retrospective attitude begins to cloud
the mind. But in the next twenty, thirty, forty, years, it
will be the spirit of adventure that will be paramount and
that spirit will have to come from you young Liberals or
where is it to come from? 



P. M. NO. 42192
ROYAL TOUR
Statement by t ~ rime Minister the Rt. Hon RG Menzies
I am now in a position to announce certain tentative
arrangements for the forthcoming visit to Australia of Her
Majesty the Queen and His Royal Highness, the Duke of
Edinburgh. It is expected that the Royal couple will arrive
in Canberra by air from New Zealand on Monday. February 18.
Thereafter, they will engage in a tour which will take them
into all six States and the Northern Territory.
The precise amount of time to be spent in each
State has yet to be determined though it is unlikely in any
instance to exceed three days,
Her Majesty has made known her wish that her visits
to the States should be associated, if possible, with some
event of special significance. As a result, the exact
itinerary cannot be announced until the States have themselves
made their proposals and these have been communicated to the
Queen. However, it seems likely that the general order
of the visits after Canberra will be South Australia, Victoria,
Tasmania, New South Wales, Queensland, return to Canberra,
then visit the Northern Territory and Western Australia,
Her Majesty has also made known her desire to use
the Royal Yacht " Britannia" at various stages of her tour.
Rcalising that this will reduce the periods in which she will
be in direct contact with her Australian people, she has
herself volunteered to extend the length of the visit beyond
the month originally contemplated and her departure from Perth
by air for the United Kingdom will now take place on 27th
March. It is expected that the use of the " Britannia"
will produce a number of agreeable results. It will allow
Her Majesty to enter some of the Australian cities from the
seaward. Further she will be able to achieve rest while
moving from point to point and the Royal Yacht will be
available for such entertaining as Her Majesty may choose
to do.
CANBERRA, 6th July, 1962, 



Pr-OPENING OF NEWq SCIENCE LABORATORIES AT 4ESLEY
COLLEGE, MELBOURNE
ON 7TH JULY, 1962.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. President, Headnaastex Mr. Robson and ladies and Gentlemen:
I always like to begin even the feeblest of speeches
with a couple of preliminary observations, and the first one
that I want to make to you is that the President of the Council
is a man possessed of low cunning. ( Laughter) I have found,
after many years in office, that if people write and say to
me, "' vie would like you to do so and so on 15th of August, or
whatever it may be and I am engaged on the 1 5th of August, I
can honestly say how deeply sorry I am that I can't be there.
( Laughter) But with great, low cunning, as he has practically
admitted to you he said to me, in effect, " Now, do come and
do this job Iand name your own date." ( Laughter) Well, you
know, I don t want anybody to be encouraged by this example,
but there's nothing more difficult than that. The only
possible hope you have is to get out of the country. ( Laughter)
And, believe it or not, I can't be out of the country all the
time. ( Laughter) He also made a glancing reference to my
majority. Well, as I said to an audience last night, I'm " 1it" i.
( Laughter) ( Applause)
But, Sir, one develops a certain amount of philosophy
about these things. I've had the most remarkable experience;
no doubt bred into me by this school. I've run a minority
Government. I had a majority Government once which was sustained
in office by one and a half Independents, ( Laughter) and each
time I went back to the Lodge at the end of the week for dinner,
I would say to my wife, " M1y dear, nothing but death can put me
out of office before Tuesday." ( Laughter).
Which reminds me Sir, that my wife is tremendously
sorry not to be here. She? s not only been under doctor's orders,
but doing frightfully well under them, I am happy to say. She
is also becoming impatient of them, and therefore I have to say
every now and then, " No. You shall not go." I don't think she
can be all that well, because it is the first time she has ever
taken my advice, ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, I'm the least scientific of mortals. All
I know about science is that a few misguided fellows in my time
did chemistry, and they had a distinguished teacher who was
known irreverently as " Bunse" l and some of them studied physics
and some of them branched off into a mysterious thing called
mechanics. All I know is that the only record you will find
of me in the scholastic history of the school is in things like
History, English, French and Latin. As for the mathematical
and scientific subjects, having an indecently good memory, I
was a master of the bookwork and didn't know what it was all
about. ( Laughter) So I could get 50, and that, after all,
oddly enough, was more than some people got. ( Laughter)
Yes, Sir, I associate myself a great deal with the
humanities, with those studies of humane letters which the
world needs so much and which, perhaps, it tends to neglect
not a little. But more and more in recent times, I've had
borne in on me tha this world is changing almost at an
explosive rate. The population of the world we used to
think we knew about it will probably more or less double
between now and the turn of the century. This presents the
most colossal problem. More thousands of millions of people, ** e/ 2 
and in a world in which the pressure of population on the
resources of the world comes greater and greater; where
the mirrored problem of sustenance becomes more and more
acute as years go on. And if all these problems are to be
solved if they are to be solved on the principle of justice
which cloesn't breed hatred between those who have not and
those who have, then we, ourselves, must make a contribution
in the field of science which will harness the resources of
the world to produce more to feed more people, to give more
hope, more skill, more productivity to other nations in the
world. This business of scientific training it is not
just a matter for ourselves, though we need it. It is something
which will represent some measure of what we are contributing
to the world. That is not to say that everybody is to
become a scientist. I had a faint and friendly quarrel with
a very distinguished scientist one of the most distinguished
in our history, when he suggested one day that every Cabinet
Minister ought to be required to have a scientific degree.
And I thought, " Oh dear." ( Laughter) It would afford me a
much-needed relief from office. I had no complaint about
that but the idea of twenty experts sitting in a Cabinet
really frightened me, rather ( Laughter) I wondered what
would become of the real experts when they were being overruled
by the political exports.
But, Sir, it is true, profoundly true that this
world, not only as we see it now, but as we look at it over
the next twenty, thirty, forty years, with the eye of imagination
in my case, this world is going to ru quire such added
stores of pure science, such added stores of applied science,
of technology, if it is going to sustain itself and raise the
average level of wellbeing and of happiness. In other words,
Sir, to come back to the point about the humanities, I think
it is tremendously important that people should pursue humane
studies, but they won't be able to in the future unless the
scientists and the technologists have done their part to raise
the standards of the world and to give us the means of justifying
our own independent existence in Australia. Science, I
see as the developer and the protector.
Well, now Sir, you may be a classical scholar or a
student of history or of literature and want nothing more than
a library. I don't mean one of those great things, containing
all those well-bound books that every gentlemen's library ought
to include, I mean a library the books that you know, that
you read, that you look at, that you turn to. This is all the
reflective scholar in those fields will need an adequate
library and there you are. But in science I was so
interested today to hear Mr. Robson talking about the difference
between his time and today. Of course there is a difference.
When I look back, even looking through the door at
these mysteries, at the rather sketchy equipment, the rather
sketchy apparatus, I just marvel when I go into a well-furnished
lab, today and see what is needed for these purposes; how far
the boundaries of scicantific knowledge have been pushed. So
far indeed that what was advanced in my time is elementary
today. And this is as it should be. The more advanced the
study, the more complex will become the apparatus needed, the
mathods to be employed.
E~ very time I speak with the Universities Commission,
which is something that gives me satisfaction as I look back
on it, I am reminded that in a new university, in the development
of a university, the cost on the scientific side far 
3.
excels anything on the other side of university life. If a
university is going to be a great university in the scientific
field, then it must expect to spend hundreds of thousands or
millions more on scientific equipment than it would on the
side of humane letters in the old-fashioned nineteenth century
way. Well, I acknowledge this.
It has been my great honour and Mr. Robson has
referred to it, to have been the promoter of a lot of new
things in the university field and of vast expenditures in
the university field in Australia. So vast that I don't even
talk about them now until the last moment in case the Treasury
overhears me. ( Laughter) But on the scientific side, no
longer can things be done on the cheap. This is why this
industrial fund seems to me to be such an imaginative affair,
Quite frankly, Mr. Robson, Mr. Booth and Mr. Trigg, I had no
idea that big businessmen were so imaginative. ( Laughter)
But those limitations on their imagination which makes them
fail to understand my Budget ( Laughter) have not prevented
them from this tremendous conception.
Think of it. School after school helped in a massive
wdy to produce first-class scientific training&amp; And don't
let us think of any training at school as ending when the boys
leave school because thatis not true. The best of those who
use these facilities will be in the universities6 The best
of those who go to the universities will find themselves
irresistibly drawn into post-graduate work, into research work
and will provide the scientific leaders of the future. Right
down through the line, we must aim at the very best that we
can get and we can't get the best in the field of science,
whatever the genius of the teacher, whatever the incipient
genius of the student, unless you have the scientific apparatus
that can be used. People like myself can achi. e: ve a certain
amount of half-merited success scholastically by having good
memories, by being able to read and learning how to read and
learning how to remember and learning, I hope, how to think.
But you can't teach science in the modern world unless you can
also put into the hands of the student the things that are
needed to illustrate to him, to give him the feel of the
developments that have occurred in physics and chemistry and
in a score of other subsequent and perhaps mere refined studies.
So it is for those reasons that I am delighted to be
here and I am particularly delighted to be here in my old
school. I notice a few changes well hI don't mean individually,
I noticed today with some astonishmcnt hat my contemporaries
who are here today seem to me to look rather elderly. I don't
understand it. lU putting that on one side, the one thing
that I notice with regret is that in my day there were forms
with backs and if somebody of a wicked disposition got in
early at assembly and pushed the first one back, the whole
of them went right back to the back wall of the hall ( Laughter)
and this was received with magnificent applause. ( Laughter)
It was regarded as the most instructive physics lesson for the
day. ( Laughter) But now, I'm afraid Sir, with prosperity you've
become respectable. You have chairs, but you can't prevent
me from turning my
m1 ' ind back to the fact that when I used to
sit down in that corner, it was my pride and joy to look at
L. A. Adamson and be frightened of him. ( Laughter) To look at
Harold Stewart and be more frightened of him, with his gimlet eye
and a most unfailing perception of the gaps in my knowledge of
Latin. ( Laughter) But all came well on a Friday morning when he
would stand up and sing, in a fine true voice much to our enjoyment,
" W'hen I was a now boy, and an addle-hea ed cub".( Laughter)
So my mind goes back to that, Sir new boy no longer, addleheaded
cub only in the views of my more biased adversaries.,
Sir, I have the very greatest pleasure in declaring the
new rL 1ro 



WEKLY INDEX
No 9 2
Week ndin
July 7, 126
COMMONVrEALTH OF AUST LIA
Index of Ministeria. Statements Issued in Canberra
The Minister for Trade and DeputyPrime Minister, The Rt. Hon,
John Mcawen
July 2 No. 6-6
5 No. 709 DEATH OF SIR JOHN TEASDALE
SYNTHETIC RUBBER
The Treasurer, the RtA Hon, Harold Hlt, M. P,
July 2 No. 595 APP0INTMFUTT OF DEPUTY PHAIRMAN CF C'VfPA. LTH
BA? TI-G WCR P0P-RTION BOARD
3 No. 700 INCOME TAX REFUNDS
3 No-702 COMMONIT -EALTH BUDGET RESULT 1361-62
The Minister for National. DeoelopmentSennator the Hon. W, II,
p oon e M. M,,
July 1 No. 692
3 No., 697
3 No. 699 AUSTRA--LIA BENEFITS FROM BIG GEOPHYSCAL
' PROJECT
OIL AT MOONIE No, 4 WELL
RESEA RCH CO-NTRCTS
The Mrister -ecr Territories. the Hon. Paul Hasluck, M. P0
J3uly 4 No0, 707
The Minister for MORE TRINED TEACHERS WA, 1, NLTED FOR PAPUA
ATTD GUINTEA
C. Lvi AviatirL Senator ' hSanePaltrid
July 6 No, 711 Mi,' OR DEVELOPMIvENIT OF LAUN'CESTOT DIRPORT
The Postinaster-GeneraL tho -Hon, CW Davidson
July 3 No, 6.03POSTAGE STAMP FOR 150th AiNNIVERSARY OF
FIRST CROSSING OF BLUE MOUNTAINS
The Mni for External f airs. TheRt. Hon, John
-McEwen
July 2 No. 694 AUSTPA LIAN G. i. FT OF TENTS FOR ALGERI, N
MOSLEM 1? EUGEE S
The M~ njstcr or the Ar th JXO. Cra-mer
July 4 No, 704MORE EITTRANTS FOR OFFICER CADET SCHOOL
it 6 No. 712 LNDING SH~ P TO 11011P30RT NORTERN\ SUJRVEY
OahTIOn. S
The Minieteo? rS ociall Sevioe the Hon, Hugh S. Roberton
July 6 No., 710RECORD = J1ENDITURE ON AGED PERSONS HOMES
The Minister for the I* T~ j~ y Senntor the Hon. Gorton
July 4ir
I. 5 No. 705
No, 708 NA'VYr PROMOTlONS
1TNA^ VY A-ND C. S. I. 0. BEGIN INTENSIVE SEA
1, ES~ i. ICT'
The Minister for He2al1thF -ojactor the Hon. Horrie W, Wade
J-11y 1 N E 93WOrLD,-T ñ TTH Y20E'M3LY
he De-par-1, rien of "'. xtments,-,
July 1 No0 693, A IN. iP. NDENC OF RVV NDj'L iD BURUNIJI
4 No, 701 A L( 4ERF1JAN INDE'I-ENDENCXE9 MESSAGE FROM
M9, 9ME1ZIES TO TIE FRih-SIDE\ T OF THE
PRCISTNA EY( 2TI~ l~ OF A'LOY2IA1'. 6 Ol / 2 
-2-
The 2eartment of External j9f ftiirs
July 5 No. 705 VISIT TO A,, UkTRl-LIL BY E) TCITIVE DIRECTOR
OF WORLD FOOD ROGPRIME
The Minister for Repatriation, the Hon. Swarz, M. P
July L No, 706 NEW FORM TO BE TRIED IN QTEENSL'\ ND
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Farliamen House,
CANBERkR, T. 



OPENING OF THE AUSR A IAN-NEV ZEALP. IA
ECTION C' 1N A L" FIC
C'LE AT SYDN TJULY1 2
Speech by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Ho nzi
Sir, Parliamentary colleagues, Your Excellencies and Gentlemen:
You may have been tempted to wonder that my
colleague, being a politician, sat down on the tick of the
clock. This is not a common disease among us. The explanation
is that in front of me, as in front of him, as in front
of somebody else here, there's a flashing light that begins to
operate when you have fifteen seconds to go, and so if I finish
up in the middle of a sentence, you won't put it down to mental
decrepitude ( Laughter) with advancing years, you'll just understand
that the clock has struck and that's all you can do about
it. Sir, every time I hear the Postmaster-General
talk about something being Phase 2 and that Phase 3 is coming
along, I've learnt from long experience that Phase 4 is just
around the corner and Phase 5 The Treasury, particularly,
is always interested in those later developments, But I an
bound to say that when I attended this Conference in 1959 it
doesn't seem as long ago as that I little thought that the
practical work of getting on with this job would have proceeded
with such speed and such obvious skill, because this is a very
remarkable occurrence. There's a good deal of rhetoric spoken about
Australia and New Zealand getting closer together. I've heard
one or two people say that we ought to take New Zealand over,
I heard the Prime Minister of New Zealand say very witt. ly that
if the takeover business was in the air, he was quite prepared
to make an offer. ( Laughter) But, here we have something which,
in actual physical terrns joins Australia to New Zealand this
submarine cable, There s some dramatic significance about it,
And, of course, its great significance is in the field of communications.
Like some of you here today, I was born in the
nineteenth century. Some of my political opponents, one of
whom is here today, think that I was born in the seventeenth
century ( Laughter). Anyhow, it was the nineteenth century, and
the nineteenth century was a century in which communications were
slow and difficult. People wrote letters a great art which
has perhaps now passed into docay-c They travelled by stagecoaches
for a great part of the century. Steam began and the first steam
vessels began to emerge to take people from one country to another,
But if you were to look back on the nineteenth and make a sort
of comprehensive, sweeping statement, you would say that it was
the century of slow comUunications.
And if you look at our century the twentieth,
I: n sure you will agree with me that the groa revolution in
this century has been in the speed and variety of co. iM. unication.
Voice to voice around the world. Because of jet aircraft and
the like person to person around the world0 Because of the
miracle of cable and other services writing to writing around
the world. This is a tromendous revolution.
If you leave Sydney in a jet aircraft, as I have
repeatedly discovered you arrive in Honolulu before you leave
Sydny. You got to San Fr: ncisc3 an hour or two later,
Theres something about the Interoinational D&amp; to Line which
explains this miracle, but I dcrnt understand the International
03# 000 / 2 
Date Line and therefore I insist on saying that you arrive before
you leave. And if the jolly things get any faster, you'll arrive
anywhere in the world travelling in that direction before you
leave. But it is the most remarkable thing that, actually in
physical contact, this century should have put us in a position
where we are no more than a few hours away from many of the
people we would like to discuss things with.
And, of course, the miracle of the international
telephone, radio telephone, cable telephone, has I think been
simply incredible. Now, this is a wonderful thing. I is a
wonderful thing if we take advantage of it. I've never been one
of those who believed that if we all spoke the same language right
round the world we would be better friends. I don't think it
follows, because it's very difficult to quarrel with a man in a
language you don't understand. But it's very easy to quarrel
with him in a language that you do. And, therefore, that's not
the complete answer. But I believe, myself, that underneath it
all, this speed of communications, this growing knowledge that
people have of the other man's country and of other people, the
growing means they have of direct conversation all these
things -properly used, as I hope they will be, are going to
revolutionise the face of the world and, I think, have a profound
effect on international politics,
It was one thing some few years back, to say,
" Well, I'd like to find out what the Primo Minister of New
Zealand is thinking about this matter. Or the External Affairs
Minister might say, " I'd like to know what the External Affairs
Minister ( who is the same person) is thinking aoout it in New
Zealand. But with this, today, I think we've reached the
absolute ultimate with no interruption. If I want to talk to
the Prime Minister of New Zealand as I expect to in a few
minutes' time, you pick up the telephone, you rely on the Post
Office or whoever it may be, to give you a quick " through" and
there you are. You have a discussion about things which, if
they had to be put into other terms and sent in cespatches and
what not, would mean a delay of quite a long time.
So that I believe that we are, today, witnessing
or taking part in a quite historic event and, of course, when
the other phases are complete, when it's not only to New
Zealand, but to Honolulu to Vancouver, across Canada to Great
Britain, you'll have a ring through British Commonwealth
countries and, in particular, through those Commonwealth
countries which are within the direct allegiance to the throne
Great Britain, Canada, New Zealand, Australia You know,
together, we're not insignificant in this world. There are new
fashions, there are new organizations, there are new ideas, but
in the long run, it is on the cohesion of countries like those
I've mentioned that a good deal of the sanity of the world will
depend. And his will bring us closer together.
I frequently say that it is one of the oddities
of life -it is, too, that if one of my Ministers wants to go
to Perth, well, he goes to Perthe He goes aboard a plano and
goes there. It's not my business it's his. But if he wants
to go a much shorter distance, to Auckland, that . s an overseas
journey. That is written down in the book .( Laughter) It is
the subject of questions in the House. Now, of course, this is
all too silly. New Zealand is just as close to the great centres
of population in Australia as is the West Coast of Austrañ ia
itself. And this significant fact, this fact which ought to
have made us much closer than we are, is being underlined by
what happens today, Because this cable brings us, through this
mediui, closer and clearer to the Dominion of New Zealand. / 3 
Ar. n' thiix is wiy a Prime Minister of Australia and
a Prime linister of New Zoaland can feel tremendously pleased
at the event that is being celebrated.
I said, Sir, that there were many ways and means
that had boon uvolvod in the twont: ioth cen tury for improving
communications. I'd just like to repeat before I conclude
that these are the mechanics of international relations,
They still leave the substance of international relations as
a matter of profound, human responsibility, The scientists,
the technologists, have given us to our hands and to our ears,
all the mechanical aids that we need and, of course, others
are still undreamed of. All the mechanical aids that we need
today to be in touch with people, to hear what they have to
say, to tell them what we have to say. And I believe that as
the scientists and the technologists have done this so it will
be the task of statesmanship around the world to see that these
things are applied in the highest possible fashion to produce
the greatest possible areas of understanding and of peace,
Now, Sir, in a couple of minutes' time I've been
given my instructions something happens and I pick up the
telephone and I have a conversation with Mr. Holyoake, You
will all listen in to it. I remember when I was at Canberra,
helping to open the coaxial cable, the Lord Mayor of Sydney
had a talk with the Lord Mayor of Melbourne and I thought he
beat him right off the track ( Laughter) and before we came down
here, I said to my colleagues up above, " You know, it's just
a gamble as to who gets in first, Mr. Holyoake or myself;
because whoever gets in first is likely to drive the other
man off the course ( Laughter). So, if you find that I have
too little to say, you will please credit that fact partly to
the superiority and attainments of my opposite number in New
Zealand and partly to my innate and well-known modesty,
( Laughter) Now, Sir that hasntt rung for me yet. They said
to me " Pick up the phone with your right hand" and I said,
" How do you know that I'm not a bit deaf in the right ear"
( Laughter). That's what they take for granted. I have misread
the clock, (' Phone rings)
Voice: Mr, Menzies, Mr, Holyoake is on the line.
Mr. Holyoake Hello, Bob.
Mr. Menzies: Hello, Keith, how are you?
Mr, Holyoake I'n just one hundred percent.
Mr. Monzios Where are you? In the Auckland Town Hall?
Mro Holyoake I'm in the Auckland Town Hall and obviously
you're here too, Bob, by the sound of your voice.
Mr. Menzies It; s pretty good servico, isn't it?
Mr, Holyoake Yes it's tcrrifi3
Mr, Menzies We must advertise it ( Laughter)
Mr. Holyoake It's cetting a pretty good kickoff today.
a 0a0 a00 S / 4 
Mr. Menzies t
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Mr. Menzies Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr. Mr, Mr. Mr. Menzies Holyoake Menzies Holyoake
Menzies Holyoake:
Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr, Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr.
Mr. Mr. Holyoake Menzies Holyoake
Mr. Menzies Yes, Well I'm in the head offi. ce here, with
a couple o' hundred tired businessmen locking
on and listening in. Have you got the same
kind of thing?
I think just a little more than a couple of
hundred. I must always just top Australia,
musn't I?
That's quite right.
Little more than two hundred. A very, very
representative gathering.
Well it's quality rather than quantity that
counts. ( Laughter) How's Jack Marshall, is he
in good form?
Jack's very well, and highly appreciative of your
assistance, of course, over in London.
Are you taking him with you in September?
Most likely. I would think almost certainly.
I think he's frightfully good.
John McZoen going with you?
Yes.
We will look forward to forgathering with you.
That's right. Will you be going just at the
last moment, or a few days earlier?
It will depend on my House a bit. Will yours
be meeting at that time?
4oll, by a brilliant arrangement, heartily
concurred in on both sides, my House is not
sitting in Septomber, so that whoever is Prime
Minister at the end of August, will continue to
be Prime Minister until the end of September.
( Laughter)
I'm just a little more fortunate, Bob. I haven't
got quite the anxiety from the House that you have.
That's quite right. ( Laughter) And you even
improved your position at a by-election.
Well, we didn't win the seat, but it was
improved, yes.
Well I hope that there's an easterly wind blowing
and the habit comes over the Tasman ( Laughter)
I couldn't wish you more than that, of course.
Wo .11 do our best anyhow.,
I say, it's an extraordinary thing being hitched
up like this,
Tt's wonderful. It's a most historic affair, this
We've j. ust ben talking a out it here, 0 0 Ot@ 
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake t
Mr. Monzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoako t
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake Another close link,
You know what this means instead of sending
letters to you in future, i' 1 ring you up,
My goodness. Don't forget New Zealand is
ahead of Australia again, Bob,
I know that. Two hours ahead, in point of
time. Oh yes9 we've always conceded that.
Just another thought. This links us so much
more closely together, You remember when was
in Canberra five or six weeks ago, I made our
position quite cluar, didn't I, on the question
of the seventh State of the Commonwealth?
That's right. I was telling the audience here
about it, Vhat you said was, that if there was
any takeover talk in the air, you were prepared
to make a bid. Does that still stand?
Yes, that still stands.
i'll discuss the details with you when we meet
next, When you think, too, not of just Australia but a
link up through Canada and Britain. We are
going to talk just in this fashion. Perhaps we
won't have any more Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
Conferences,
Well, that's well on the cards. How does that
strike you?
W0ll1 I think that had better go on the Order
Paper. ( Laughter)
Yes, I think so.
Toc many people listening in.
Look, Keith, I think all the gentlemen who are
hero today would like me to ask you to convey
to your audience in the Auckland Town Hall the
warm good wishes that Australia. entertains
for your country. Would you do that?
Thank you very much, Bob. They've all heard
it over the loudsoeaker system, and can I on
behalf of everybody here, everybody assoclated
with this venture and, indeed, everybody in
New Zealand warmly reciprocate your good wishes
in that respect.
Thank you very much.
1 think, Bob, it's a tremendous experience for
us both, for me at least, it's a tremendous
experience to share this unique occasion with
youo a o@ e ** 04u3 ./ 6 
Mr. Menz ie-
Mr. Holyoake
Mr. Menzies
Mr. Holyoake Thank you very much and I have exactly the
same feeling. As a matter of fact, I don't
need to tell you, we and your New Zealanders
like to have a chip at each other, You know,
it's rather the vogue, but down underneata it
all, there are those things between us, aren't
there, that can't be destroycd.
The closest and the deepest ties.
That's it, Perhaps, at this stage, I should
say the appropriate word, and you'll do yours
at your end, will you? I have the great honour
of declaring, on behalf of Australia, and at the
Australianmend, this cable open.
And I join with you, and on behalf of all the
people of New Zealand at this end, I join warmly
in declaring the cable officially open from the
New Zealand end. 



P. M No_-/ 16 2
FOR PRESS RBOYAL TOUR
Statemen b _ t _ he P Miiei . njsterhtRt. oG. Menzies
The Australian Secretary to The Queen for the
Royal Visit, Sir Roy Dowling, D. S. 0o, will meet
in Canberra on Monday, 16th July, with State representatives
to consider proposals for the Royal Visit next year.
State representatives will be asked to put forward
ideas for the programme within each State. These will include
events of special significance which might form the basis of
visit plans, Admiral Dowling will leave for London on Wednesday,
18th July, where he will discuss with Her Majesty and Prince
Philip, proposals put forward by the Commonwealth and States.
It is expected that Admiral Dowling will be in London for about
three weeks. State repr( sentatives who will attend are
New South Wales Mr. G. M. Gray, Victoria Mr.
J. C. Macgibbon, Queensland: Mro RoB. McAllister;
South Australia: Mr. L. King, Western Australia
Mr. R. Doig, C. V. U0Tasmania: Mr. F J. Carter, C. B. E.
The Secretary, Prime Minister's Department, Mr.
E. J. Bunting, will open the meetingo Also attending
will be the Administrator of the Northern Territory, the
Honourable Roger Bo Nott, the Secretary of the Department of
the Interior, Mr. WNA. NcLaren, C, B. E. and Mr. J. H. Scholtens,
Chief Ceremonial Officer of the Prime Minister's Department
who will be in charge of arrangements for the Royal Visit to
the Australian Capital Territory.
CANBERRA, 12th July, 1? 62. 
BACKG! OUND NOTE
The meeting will commence at 10 aom. in
the office of the Secretary, Prime Minister's Department
and is expected to last all day. It will not be possible
to issue any statement about the work of the meeting at
its conclusion because any proposals or broad outline
agreed at this meeting are tontative until discussed with
Her Majesty the Queen in London by Admiral Dowling.
It is expected that a statement will be issued
some time after Admiral Dowling's return about the precise
timing of the ao-al Visit in each State. Any announcements
then about arrangements in each State will be made by the
appropriate State authorities,
CANBERRA,
12th July, 1962, 



I, w~ wrII WI D1 A~ VMftrf ILT. E.. I
WA III 7W 1 WW
P t Ib0 I7ma"
QUESTION MR. MUZINS Q0 A* t Mr. Prim Minister, I merstand this afteroom
y haVe bad the rAwpioS m of
t: great indus t gilrowth I&amp; the d of
3IpsoniVg* Vould you be so kind Sir as to
give as your impressions of bowtls ass in
with your Oovumnt's peloy of growtk and
prespority?
S Veil IW've seem a little set as os as I
al&amp; have like to have sem. I are of
sourse, been here betf ht the
mm her*-: I think is PheasaRm l, imt eary I&amp;
irm sax steel and OWLq and of ' se with the
œ eWlejvopmnt of the eawi pet, the expot
ofi but aLA@ of m s 7@ U? Qiit tIuInYrmV
In" utres dam on this sernst. Ifi ps i ncf.
And what I libe about It is that at a tiwbefn
peat stability ha been avUvved at so cheap
In the eonsoe prios Iaiz for eighteeemn th,
a sonsLdersbl degree of mmetary stabiity In
Australla the produetion and export of seal
and of irsa and steel don here have rises
alInt fabdIOUle&amp; a. This 4amestrates somethiag
that I as aftrquetly eig that stability is
the 6endition of v t and not the onew of
povth. In other wts a that stablity is
not eta patisa but S is the sendition an whisb
trimr pevth depadq, and bre you have i ome
distriot, with Its matiplislty of sotivitios,
the most perfect example of this that I could
think of*
Nw, Siz, am faist of our area Is the 4*' ing
in&amp; 1$ tz7 frthu d" SkOo MU fvQM~ lC
Thi brinstyio the * ea Gf emo riar t
&amp; vjvwvwwD s ut7 IntQ th eiPi~ r Commm maximt e
WOU yoa asr to sy ~ Fieors t thi sabjeet,
Wellgs, fQubit. r iefly,, becaue I is't need
to ymrit vould take aa h to explain the
variosaspests, of the Cemma xrket. jat I
do't tb Pee3e UNd to be or-eroxitd about
this matt'. w T'dairyiag imdustry is a m7r
iportant am In aradli me Gmrmrnat
Would I of allIg it to be hatally afr~ d
kwvi amwi we Iare of oe battlin her
tkz kth vited RiaM vernment
ofe tir entvr Into the Csin NZRt
vhio will give sa stabili and piespeat to
the 46137U industRY. I an t desp" al of that*
I think te rm ot of tUs Vaited LIXaUMA is
workiag W4rd on it wo itimly re veeking
hax4 it has a ed adea or am tmn..
We ar determinde m Pt best ao that am
be put ad nobdy kkb entbslw. t the SIx
eanMeamtries will aesept 6d0itiens that
M bio Great Writala to p in without
dargig the dairYing instrY In lAmstrala or
* e00000.1/ 2
v 71 li iip-r~~ Um~ g fn 
the . n laIndustry in Smt Zealand vhiebt of
SOON, it~~ z1 1a" stat to thet . uWAtry.
But I an nt UM~ the ssimIsts a this mttes.
d4oa uit believe treat Britain voulA V ina on
toru mtj a* vut'bo. ns MA I a pesftstl
cor~ a,= ta mT-Autiinl1* 3 Gsvpeaiot v@ 4A beZ-Ym"
M# 7y to 4. fthd Its am-m lftus tries mine
swtaiul will be am " T I as tar as ~ she
eZ marhets, in ownse llasow" market $ be
Wrest rit" ai am ame9.
Qq sm.# Sir, y"' ve just meatime * thw marbats.
The 4001 a~ tw isam whisk atroots us v~
Ueatlin this W mcgmatlSUrM Sr
tima this arml SWr
A* I do amess m seset Zm k,~ l I
sa 14k ba* to atun Js beiu bakat
Offt ve in emA fW a yewar two tboeaft#
vhs. t Seal fents he" was so low that vswe e
lapettimg = 7a. it## " I&amp; r I* bellow= vwset
impstig sal tfan South Aftles end Inia am
v~ m lakrates a It basins. there Vag
inth sewa tret and*
toftr, ve are expig Jarl; emyPr4. i
all we vast ft ou anyapoos, beteetlg
Do has, tkhoe is this sm at sl. 2a
apatas " tts being W1t teaistamom
Gladstone I&amp; QN6essam4, we amc really &amp; Fewl~ p
wsmzkable el for expert of 040l toth w
last* And this of ovam zet el use" a gnat
deal fb the s0u Ifa n In~ st bat It memos a
seasidtaMe thiag fmt ow belamm atf
It wAIles o-Ii# pass a ll fer1ma
a great fwture fw St.
Q. en aml S3iWr , ei the ai2.4isp~ taaPt Prim
Daito In 1= Septomber,
ou Siaw us a * liot out] UuI of whet yw
0omai will be In the next spLe of vedcs?
A. V. 11, I merwer appear to be vItaut ame essapatiem.
You know whom I got bask ftsm a WeottT OtS
Seri" s .1 4s alsownea whe a forU'taik
ap I ftm mlsolf pivaged Into camt meetlags
and ito the Lems Caeni amd the prmies'
Cariee ana ims them, I hewo beeo tyngt
onak vp a fem arrowrs of work ad meIt msa
mering th ( biuet mets to Lisaste s,
the pet PRO&amp; lM ef the ma~ t fler 12/ 3a
I oqotto be heavily laws" Ina that forat
least three das tbonafter, As a matter of that*
botbwe thoubb es som e of the papers A" eben
seaut to ms Wbe I m using temiohta
I will be &amp; I ag a P" e doal of Weft on the ft
you sma say bre" do% Ohat et taskt ins July
is to w~ e" a smapt and, ofr., . VWybe
who im ss t hae to peaethe Umutato
do It am eml the peo who kev~ do it a" e
tfIamlw with the faeftS This is mi&amp; to be a
puetJ dfftl t am* AWisyhow, w it. Them
c liim mieets, as fto~* a Augat 7t fr
the ftipt Seetie m A then, at the and of Aufast 
baVi ma lit with the Oppositica, the Nov" s will
&amp; QeMI ? w a menth and awe o~ f us~ will lp offtthe
Ptie Mniser 00f~ eceIn Septesber on the C sM
Kaikets, We vo't so Just as if ve m wzwoit or the
egsuhell you kw becuse durin Augst wewl " ev
a ret alof Ud.;.. ts.. fro ee Witain MWi
ftie. ftepe about the leak of Its whiat soniditions night
be agreed Upn what tentative ilpwsat mbet
made what Is going to happen todre frI Caned
X1 and batter and meat and womat and sugor and so
final fW* bet Inn : 06slsfru W illb
able to disouss It Ad deide what attitude ve a" e
ping to adopt on these mtters when the PntUw Ministers
inevt. NMI tha mest anSeptsbe 1t in LGG01
I an perhops releasy' asaing, tkat I Will be there.,
I don't kw beSaUSO It there's time in vbich a
T" ent with a majrty of me ean be kidiad out,
It Is Ixt the Bapt SeoIs and therefae I may be
aae " 4 "-pttmist. I sm talking about what I am.
vftg doam what I en ping to says Ato anybowt
ot~ thin being equal, witha&amp; l ittle bit of ludkas
~ they said in the somie ope I'll be tbeanor
that tieW , my Miisters, ; atlisaawly Hz&amp;. ) IjicTh
finister ) wT~ usbde axA 316. hlt, the Treasurer will
hew* been able to diamass what Wesaen and whed our
Attitue ought to be* go the" will be no lack or
aillVel find ow~ time for " creation between these
De you knw that you are about to betvay xy Wiltky
semet? IFor a long time th JZsag pe autbarities
I* Sydney'ksV been trying, to et maose
Leagn matebe I'm a UmIbman follow -you kne
Ausral ln SLthis Vas what I played who&amp; I e
and And nv, theyve, gt ms Ila
* oein to be preent on Satoday aftemmoos at the
inMte reTsetsdt Mbeaetmohu seaqn dsa ltohfo usto urIs e., ptIh'elrl tbhe attr sAnduusltralia
lost the first t" o Test Mai lov'e been mob pleased
to dissav wm b e" e that you've beaten the finglisb
teen. Everybd has bees talking about it. I read
about It in tepapers. I thisk it Is magpiftenat,
And If this bus a stimulating effet a golvanisiag
efteet, em the AuxtrmlIan teem on ada7i. 7I'l ame
a J* 1, y good matebe eve tbousk I an bomA to admit to
you the a" e noWs aspoelts of It that I won't = WkrstaM.
Q. Sows timelly Sir sould we have a ftw words tes you an
the frnthamlng joyal Towr next year?
A* Vell, ve are all looking fomrwid to it. I discussed
this first with the vases a year ago -awe than a
year a .1 I am assure you shels von#, ve7 b
on out aid sIs ftinse Philip One point to
be remebered,, Is that we ean't cmaslh tim the
QNeen a1teo hae a sort or pqphiml towr -yo
knew what I seen -evriag a arg arem of amuntvy
in ssh States, with em town saying., OWelly she didn't
sume har~ e lA&amp; time, she ought to e6here this time.,
The whole advantage that I en trying to got, ad that
the Qmeen would lile, would be for bar to v1i sState
004,0404100 
kV State, to attend oe partim~ laa matter Mtato
of ñ mpwlanoo; maybe in M States so e nt
ei~ tht vould lend itself to Royal at moae
and In anothor sawe other * vet. It Is not to t
thought that tAL Queen is just 4ping en the big
trek &amp; road oaok -tate, bsuse this 1.5137 doe"
be~ em vey tiring ad as I wat to have quite a
few Royal. Visits$ I would like them to be related
to partiougar evonts so that ve, may have no" e
shoter vIsits6 Do you amthe point I sat 9?
go Yeas, Biro
A. And fee long visits, and therohwe am People, will
need to be very umdestaning about that., ht I
ea assuret you that the Quesa is tmozdously keen.
on this visit*
Q* So, Sir, we amy assme that in the fortheoming Royal
Tour the aoect will be, to a not marked dopes an
infomality?
A* Oh. yes. Partle3awa a ets out out a good doel of
the fbrmality, cat out a good deal of what I * all
the bnoirtic hbsiness of wreeiving addresses and
answering thanto We are, locki for a visIt. that
will. leave the quen, with apweeble umeories of
sa* vivid event am Plaose or thins that she saw.
This Is the advanta go. I woud likce to think that
I&amp; two or throe, yea" s" time, she would look back an
the visit and say* Oh, yes I remember what I sam
In sook and seek a StULt. It was splenid. I
rmember vhat happoned. Isted of tryins to remomber
a Series of 26GatM vIsit4. I Me fte You Will
understand that and I = e tkat the people of
Anstnaha will undestand. if we are ping to
beoms elosorr t or nen14 derstand her betteut
as I think do Awsal, thnwe must understand
that sh. is a wars a being of groat intellffaee
fins memown who likes to se things that she,
remmbe : 2take away the away of the peepA1 of
hew own allegiamme vw she has soew In Australia
and vhs have regeived twa' with approval and varmth.
Q&amp; airv ve thank yea vwry muck for Youm omento this
evening azA In Wating aqwe tiust that you enJcW
yourself very mobk over theeoked In Sydney.
A* Thank you*
Goodnight Sir. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G.
INZIES. TO THE GrATR I OT. O GONG CHAMBR OF
COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
12TH JULY. 12
Sir, Mr. Mayor and Gentlemen
It's not my fault that I am standing up here in
the pulpit. ( Laughter) I was told that this was the drill.
" Timotheus placed on high, amid the tuneful auire, with flying
fingers touched the lyre." ( Laughter) I think that for e
man who lives a dull, uninteresting life as I do, ( Laughter)
to come here and be confronted by I don't know how many hund:' eds
of Wollongong businessmen, is a great ordeal; because, looking
around you, and I can only see the ones who are nearest me, I
would think that if I took a Galli'p Poll among you, I would not do
all that well. ( Laughter) ( Applause) And as I'have unter my benign
exterior, a certain combative streak, that's what I like.
I can remember once going to the Annual Dinner
of the Chamber of Manufactures in a city that shall be nameless
and being received with frosty silence that would have established
air-conditioning in any house in the tropics, ( Laughter) But,
in the long run, I warmed them up a bit. In fact, I did
frightfully well that night; I got 30% of their votes at the
next election, ( Laughter)
But I like coming to Wollongong, You might think
that that is not true because it is some years since I was here,
but as I said to you, Mr. Mayor, this afternoon in that Reception
that you were so pleased as -o give me, so kind, I have a soft
spot for Wollongong, because I remember so well coming down hero
you don't mind me repeating this when there was a little
" trouble"; ( Laughter) and largely as a result of innate stupidity,
I have always believed that you ought to go to where the trouble
iSo ( Laughter) Now I came down here, and I drove down the
main street; there were placards out; they reflected on my
ancestry. ( Laughter) They invited me to go home, and there was
a certain amount of fun and games and, in the upshot, it is to
Wollongong and Port Kembla that I owe the one title of honour
that I possess. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
( Voice in background) " Name it"
" Pig-iron Bob" ( Laughter)
You know it is very amusing, really, If you
get a title like that, a tag put on to you, you can do one of
two things. You can become very angry about it, and I have
known people silly enough to become angry about such things.
Or you can wear it like a ribbon in your coat, and I must say
I went on wearing it like a ribbon in my coat, until today if
somebody is sufficiently out-of-date or sufficiently inebriated
at the back of a political meeting to say " Pig-iron", everybody
roars with laughter, and I take a bow. ( Laughter)
Now, of course Gentlemen, I road the newspapers,
or some of them ( Laughtor) and I occasionally look at the
Gallup Poll or some of it ( Laughter) and when I do, I remind
myself of a famous occasion when I was Leader of the Opposition,
Some of you are so young, so boyish, you don't remember me as
the Leader of the Oppcsition. ( Laughter) ( Applause) But at that
time, among the Members of tho Opposition we used to have a Party
meeting, it was a courteous thing to do; we had 17 seats in a
&amp; 0005 / 2 
House of 71+. You've forgotten this. ( Laughter) But we had
a Party meeting from time to time and, one day, Billy Hughes,
who was a Member of that Opposition, was sitting there, wiring
himself up to whatever leads might come ( Laughter) from here
or there; my former colleague and great friend, Phil McBride,
was up making a speech. Well, everybody knew but nobody but
Billy was rude enough to mention the fact that at the previous
general election, Phil McBride had been defeated for the
Senate. but by the inexorable law of the Constitution, he was
still a Member of the Senate until June the 30th and tnerefore,
there he was, in the Opposition Party meeting, and he offered
some very sensible views. Little Billy listened to it and
nodded his head. He always nodded his head when he disagreed.
( Laughter) And the moment Phil McBride finished, Billy got
un and said, " Oh, well, you know, my friend McBride; he speaks
with a falling inflection." ( Laughter) Now. Sir, why, having
read the last Gallup Poll, did I remind myself of that story?
( Laughter) Well, I leave it to you,
But, anyhow, before I disappear into the abyss, if
that's the drill, I would like to say that no Prime Minister
of Australia with my experience in that office and with my
knowledge which I ought to possess of our problems around the
world, could fail to be interested in coming here and in talking
to you, because you represent, in this area, a microcosm of the
whole Australian economy and development; the great industry
of iron and steel with all its ramifications, the great primary
industries down on this coast all of these things, coal, coal
exports one could talk about themn for a long time. But you
are very fortunate in being here in an area not unlimited in
point of size, but an area in which primary industry, secondary
industry, tertiary industry, local industry, export industry,
are all to be found. And if this great area continues to
develop as it has so splendidly, then it is reasonable to say
that Australia will develop splendidly in the future, ( Hear,
hear) We can be on the home ground here, We can discuss any
aspect of politics in this city and feel that we are at home
with some aspect of whatever problem it may be. And that is,
I think, tremendously important,
And it i. s tremendously important, in particular I
think, for two reasons there may be four or five or six
but within the limits of time, I would like to talk about a
couple of them.
And the first reason is this: it is much easier to
be on the outside of Government, looking in, than it is to be
on the inside of Government looking out, I hope you will agree
with that, A Government at Canberra with acutely limited powers
must do its best to direct, not to control., the economic development
of the nation, And this is a tremendous problem,
There are somei things that are not within our control,
* o have nothing to do and nothing to say about many of the
aspects of the economy that the outsider would look at, But
we do have a groat responsibility for the Budget, for monetary
control, for the determination as to whether credit is to be
easy or credit is to be tight. I know all this. These things
are very true, And we found ourselves, not all that long time
ago, looking at a state of affairs in which there was a great
inflationary boom going on in Australia, I don't think anybody,
sensibly, denies it, Our overseas balances were running down
fast Now, of course, I am able to tolk to you because you
are businessmen and you understand thcse things, but there are
so many people who do not b,-gin to understand why you should
worry about the overseas balances of a country, failing to
0 0 8 3 
realise that the first thing that I heard about iri -uaela when I
was; there the other day was their balarce of trade and payments;
a balance problem which is beginning to worry them. And what's
happening in Great Britain? The problem of the balance of
payments, the problem of keeping the export market up, of
keeping the importation of material within reasonable limits.
This is a universal problem, not peculiar to us, not peculiar
to the Menzies Government, not created by some arrant folly
on our part. This is a problem which bemuses the whole of the
Western world,. I mentioned America. You know, it is only a few
years ago isn't it, that dollars for us wore as scarce as hen's
tooth, ' No, you can't have them", " There are great restrictions
on access to dollars" And that was because at that time the
dollar was the commanding currency of the free world. But
if you went into VWashington today, and talked with Finance
Ministers or bankers or high people in the Administration, the
first thing they would want to talk to you about would be their
balance of payments problems, How long can they continue to
find a billion dollars or two billion dollars in their language,
or foreign aid for helping weaker nations in the world, Lecause,
the fact is that in the last twelve months, gold has been running
out from Fort Knox and gold has been running out from Canada
whose gold reserves are singularly depleted of late. We are
not the only people to have these problems.
But we, in Australia, decided that we were not going
to allow this problem to become acute, We were going to try
to deal with it. And you can't deal with any problem of an
economic kind in our country without irritating and infuriating
a lot of people, We just have to put up with that, The fact
is that Australia, for the last eighteen months, has had a
balance of payments position, a state of reserves overseas which
is, on the wholo, the envy of those other countries that I have
been referring to, ( Hear, hear) ( Applause) This is not
unimportant, It is not unimportant to know that you have under
your control overseas a volume of overseas reserves which could
sustain a blast of imports or some fluctuations in export income
for quite a long time. This is tremendously important. And as
I have lived long enough and been a Prime Minister long enough
not to care unduly whether I am tossed out, I propose to continue
to do what I think is good for this country. ( Hear, hear)
( Applause) This is oL, of the great things that has happened.
Now, we also set out to restrain inflation in Australia,
Now again, gentlemen, don't let me pretend about this matter.
There may be many of you here tonight as there are many people
engaged in enterprises in Australia who have no objection to a
spot of inflation ' What's wrong with a little inflation?"
" All this boosts up the equities, it develops a state of
affairs in which the population rises and we are all optimists."
I understand all that. But inflation is the most unjust tax
in the world, and it is one of those unjust taxes which fails
most heavily upon the people who cannot afford it. And therefore
we set out to say, '" oll, wo must restrain inflation,"
I have never understood the principle on which
headlines arc allotted, ( Laughter) I always appear to get into
them at the w rong tim, ( Laughter) But I do want to remind you
that for the last eighteen months, that's a long time, the
consumer price index in Australia has been stable. In other
words, for the last eightecn cnrcnts, wo have -ad no inflationary
pressure rcflecting itolf in the price levels. I wondcr if
there is any other country in the w orld on our side of the
Curtain that could say tht. I doubt it, I know we've had our
0 Z 0 3 C 1 / 4 
great periods of inflation caused by causes which you are all
familiar with but in these eighteen months of unpopularity
( Laughter) it is still true that we have had stability in the
consumer price index, Aren't these important matters?
Now somebody and this is the first point I wanted
to make to you somebody will be heard to say, Oh, yes, but
this Government is unduly concerned with stability." I've
heard this. You must not suppose, gentlemen, that because one
lives some of the time-not much-in Canberra that one lives in
what they describe es an ivory tower and is unaware of what
people say. If anybody around Australia says something in my
favour, I never hear it? but if somebody says something against
me, I hear it next morning. You needn't worry about this.
( Laughter) This is all quite simple and quite clear, and I
know that a lot of people, some of you perhaps, have been saying,
" Oh, yes, Stability. That's very good, but what matters in
Australia is growtho And these boys who are interested in
stability are not interested in growth," Now would you allow
me to say ho. silly that is.
Why do you want stability in Australia? Why do you
want the value of money in our own country to maintain itself?
Because you want to be able to invest money in Australia with
some belief in the soundness of the currency. Because if you
are like all of us you want to see your country grow, you want
to see investment in it increase, and as 10-million people
can't find all the money for capital investment that is needed
for a continzat, you want to feel that investors from other
parts of the world will be prepared to put their money into
this country, put it at risk, in order to develop some industry
in this country. This is, I think, elementary.
You can't have growth on an unstable foundation. I'd
like everybody to think about that because there are quite a few
people who believe that the very definition of " growth" is to
have an unstable foundation, to have the value of your money
rocketing up and down. I don't believe it for a moment, and if
there is one reason more than another why, in this period of
stability brought about by painful means, we have continued to
attract to Australia capital investment on the private field
more than perhaps any other country in the world, it is because
we have offered them a firm foundation,
Now, I wonder Sir, if I might illustrate that just a
little. I don't want to be too political about this matter, but
these are great national problems. For the last eighteen
months, we have had this hard-won stability in the currency, this
hard-won stability in the price level, this remarkable achievement
in the overseas balances. Has this meant stagnation in Australia?
Because, you know, thero are a lot of people in the world who are
bemused by words. If you say " stability", they say, " Ah, that
means stagnation." Very simple, dogmatic statemont. Has all
this meant stagnation? Well, really, Sir, I applied myself,
with the aid of my staff, to the problem of Greater Wollongong.
I don't need to talk to you about the development of your great
city. but I was interested to note this: that in the two years
of alleged stagnation, what has happened here has been that the
vessels entering the port have increased from 1,025 to 1,091.
That is, perhaps, no great matter. The coal exports from here
have risen from 628,000 tons to 805,000 and the iron and steel
exports from 149,000 to 454,000. Now I invite you Sir, to be
proud of this place, I invite you to Lake the lessons that you
have learned here in your own place and apply them to our great
country. In this period, when people have been talking professionally
about stagnation what has hapccned here has been the
0 
greatst-s proof of dynamism in the Australian economy that I
could possibly imagine.
As I said this afternoon when the Mayor was kind
enough to give me a civic reception, my memory of the coal
industry goes back a long way. In my earlier and more
respectable days at the Bar, ( Laughter) I appeared for the
coalminers and for the coalovmers and conceived modified
rapture about both of them ( Laughter) and when, in the
inscrutable wisdom of the electorate, at the end of 19+ 9,
I was plucked out of being Leader of the Opposition and
became your Prime Minister, we were importing coal, the coal
industry was in the doldrums South African coal, Indian
coal and some of you may recall on the charter-parties, a
heavy seller's market. There we were, trying to boast that
another half million tons of coal had been secured from some
other country to this wonderful coal-producing country, and
today, the expore of coal has become a substantial industry
and when these coal-ports are completed, like the groat one
going on now here, the export of coal from Australia will
become a very heavy export earner for Australia, And I would
like every manufacturer to reflect that the more we export,
the greater our export income, the more we can afford to pay
for our imports, over 70o of which come directly in aid of
manufactures in Australia.
And, therefore Sir, I find myself in a community
which ought to be, and I am sure is tremendously optimistic,
* ihich sees in all these things the graphic evidence of the
fact that stability is not stagnation, that you can have
stability and have expansion and growth at the same time
because one comes in aid of the other. Now, Sir, that is
really the first point that I wanted to make to you,
The second thing I would like to say something to
you about is that by common consent I get it from everywhere
and I know it in my own bones, there is a certain uncertainty
in the market, a certain hesitation, a certain lack of complete
confidence because of the Common Market discussions. You
know, we are a little bit inclined, Sir, in Australia to think
that the things that happen to us have never happened to
anybody else, a little bit disposed that way.
All I can tell you is, that in London I would
encounter people who would say, " Well, you know old man, there's
a certain amount of uncertainty because we don't know about
the Common Market," And in the United States of America, one
of the factors in their recent recession which would be put to
you would be, " Well, you know, there's a feeling of uncertainty
about the Common Market." And, of course, it is true here,
although the first thing I want you to remember is that it is
true everywhere; because-rhese Common Market negotiations, the
great problem as to whether Groat Britain goes into Europe or
not is one of the great revolutionary decisions in modern
history. Don't let us underestimate it.
People are now all, of course, becoming increasingly
scientific and therefore I regret to say they don't read
history any longer, but anybody who has read any history will
tell you that since at least the middle of the eighteenth
century, classical British policy, foreign policy, has been
to remain out of Europe but to exercise the balance of power,
If the Prussians got too strong, put a hand on the scale; if
the French got too strong, put a h-: ndl on the scale, but stay
outside of Europe and influence the balance of Europe, And
some of the great leaders in Great Britain have decided, I
/ 6 
think, thait; this has gone far enough. They say " Well, twice
in this century we, the British, and we, the Australians, have
been involved in wars which began in Europe. It is high time
we, Great Britain, went into Europe and exercised our. influence
from within." Now, all this is very intelligible, Nobody
need scoff at it. It is a great historic conception. The
only point I want to make to you is that it involves a radical
departure in British foreign policy, No longer the balance of
power from without but the influence from within, And this
is not to be underestimated.
The historians in a hundred years' time will write
about this as ore of the great climactic periods in British
history. And it is because I know that, because I believe it,
that I am not at all disposed to be dogmatic on these things.
But what I do know is that if Great Britain is to go into ttle
European Community, if Great Britain is to accede to the
Treaty of Rome, then the terms and conditions now being hammered
out with the six European members of the Community are of
tremendous importance for us because we, practically all of
us in this room, in our adult years at least, have grown up
to take for granted a pattern of external trade which has
been primarily the Commonwealth pattern of trade advantages
on dairy products, advantages by the sugar agreements, advantages
in relation to dried fruits and canned fruits, advantages in
relation to wheat, advantages in relation to meat.
All these things have become part of the stuff of
our living in Australia and now they are exposed to challenge
because there are countries in Europe who, quite intelligibly,
would say, " WJell yes, you had it, It was very good while it
lasted, but if you want to come into our Common Market, our
customs union with internal free trade and a common external
tariff, then you must play the game according to the rules."
And so Australian dairy products or Australian canned fruits
or dried fruits must pass over the common external tariff
barrier and, quite frankly, that's not much good to us, because
we have disadvantages by distance and otherwise, and by the
very standard of our living, which are not to be ignored;
and, consequently, wo, Australia, have from the very beginning
I want you to understand this quite plainly adopted a completely
active and constructive attitude on those matters.
For the last year or more, Australian officials have
been sitting down with British officials with European officials
hammering out, commodity by commodity, what should be obtained
in order to preserve, if not in its pure form, at any rate in
substance the pattern of Commonwealth trade. This, after
all., was the great reason why I w*' nt abroad in June, because
I thought that by September when the Prime Ministers meet, it
might be too late, I don't think so now, but I thought that
at that time. It might have been too late; perhaps attitudes
might have been crystallised by that time and, therefore, the
right thing to do was to go there while things were still in a
state of flux and, similarly, to America while things were in
a state offlux. I am not at all disappointed with the results
of these errands. Not at all, I don't know what the result
will be but I have no doubt whatever that both in London and in
Washington our position is at any rate clearly understood.
( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
. e are not sitting in judgment, nor should wo, on
the political question, as to whether Groat Britain should go
in to Europe, We may h-. e our own privaet views on those
matters, but in the long run, this greatc, historic decision
must be made by her. Thi: t does not m on to say that we are
not interested. We are, but in the long run, she will make that
decision and on that decision there is an immense complex of
o0o. // 7 
divided, opinion at this very moment in Great Britain itself.
But when it comes to how far our pattern of Commonwealth
trade a pattern which has determined so much local development
in Australia, not something that can be cancelled overnight,
so much development, so much settlement, so much direction of
activity on that matter, we say, must be consulted, our
view must be listened to with respect," and both of those are
completely accepted and, in the long run, we must be quite free
to say whether we approve or disapprove of the results that are
achieved. Now that's fair enough,
The one thing that troubles me about all this is that
I think that there may be exaggerated views, as if we wore now
facing some disaster. Now, I beg of you, don't got into that
frame of mind. I don't beliove, myself, for one moment, that
any British Parliament would allow any British Government to
go into the Common Market on terms which would eliminate all
Commonwealth preferences by 1970. I don't believe it for a
moment. I may be right or wrong on that. I'm pretty sure
I'm right. And that means that there will be negotiated
arrangements on a great variety of matters.
Now, we are not to fall into a panic about this,
What we have to do is to realise perhaps that the old and
simple days may be coming to an end, I don't mean by that
that all preferences are coming to an end. The old, simple
outline of it may have to be modified in future. And it may
very well be, and I am sure it is, that Australia will be
increasingly looking for now markets in the world, and not
only for existing commodities, but for new commodities And
this is the one point, really, that I wanted to make to you.
Here you have in this versatile community, here, with
its immense variety of production and of interest, a great
opportunity for looking at the world and saying, " Well. if
there is to be some modification of our entrance into our
traditional market in Great Britain, if this is to be modified
in some way, then at any rate, we have the world open to us
and we must increasingly find to what countries we can sell
what goods, And the thing I want to say to you about that, and
I believe it is very important, is that we tend, and you the
business community tend, to be a little conservative in our
thinking. W hen we talk about new export markets to the great
countries of South-. East Asia, what do we do instinctively?
We think in terms of butter or meat or wheat or something that
we have boeen in the habit of exporting. It is quite clear
that, increasingly, and I know that the best minds are directing
themselves to this, we must increasingly seek to vary our
exports in ordor to discover into which of these countries we
may sell things that we have never thought of selling before,
There is very active work being done on this on the dairy side
by examinations of the possibility of selling milk in other
forms in South-East Asia, as you know. This is admirable,
It may be that there are things that we can produce in Australia
which we have not so far produced, which are not orthodox for
which a market can be found in a variety of these countries.
Don't underestimate the incredible scientific ability
of the Australians. The C. S. 3I. the people who are engaged
in research, these are remarkable people ard, constantly, they
are discovering now things, now ideas, new processes, but so
far, we have not hnd quite the pier. fct liaison between thor / 8 
and the manufacturing -,; o-rld or producing world, because
somebodyr perhaps snys, ' 1Ob. 1 well, that's someting ne-u,
1Te ' re doing very nicely, than you, cun2itg S14h 1. ine_, 1
ar ging to be fa ce d2 i rat BiAtai roes -into
tUhe Coieimon Market on any terms tha-t are noai ceinprohens'bl a
by m'e, we are going to be., faced, not withi disaster, de'. r-me,
no. but withi a challengre to g: et cracking, to di scover new
in wiaici we can build up our income . broad. and thel'efore)
ncO'. r ways in / ich we can increase our eve-lopment alut-; ome.
I' 1knou more about this after the 2e'atombe-r conference and
whon i come backx from T w! ill take an early oppor'; Lunity
in he Parliament of telling thie Parliament and the pcoepL
thie nature of tiie chiallengo lUhat I t,, ii'nk. is pre3sented to us
and 1 will, end u~ p by saying7, or if I don't say JLI, I imay noG
rcmemnber t, but by tMhikcing thiat once a criallongre is presovlted
to my own people, in mry own ceunt: y, thoy hnava never yet failed
to meet it . c-1 



WEEKLY INDEX NO, 28
% 7EEK ENDING 3 ULY 1L 1962
COMMONVT LTH OF . UIST * rAL" IA * 1
Index of Ministerial Statem-, ents Issued in Canberra
Deputy Irimc Mfnistcr and Minister fur Trade, the Rt. 11on,
John McEwen
No. 728
No. 730
No, 7-31i WROUGHT IRON AND STEEL CHAIN
NEW SHIIr ' ING SE. RVICES AIRNGED
C'WE-JALTH CO1NTRIBUTIONS TO THE INDUSTRIAL
DESIGN COUNCIL OF AUSTRALIA
The '' reasurer. the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt. M. P.
July 11
i 11 No. 725
No. 726 ISSUE OF TREASURY NOTES
LONDON CONVERSION LOAN
The Minister for National Development, Senator the lon, Wh,
Spooner
Ju. y 12 No, 729 MEETING OF ST.,' TFA AN!\ rD C'WE, LH. rH MINYS'rPjYR
TO CONSIDER PROPOSA'L TO ESTAELISH A,
WATER !? OrCES COUNCIL
The Minister for Civil A'viation, Senator Shane Paltridge
July 10No. 722
10 No. 723 LCA, TO SPEND œ ii. 1 MILLION ON AIRCRAtFT
GUIDA'NCE AIDS
MORE THA. N 700 A PPLY FOR FLYING SCHOLRSHIPS
The Minister for External Aiffairs, " he Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
July 10Nc 723A FIFTH SOUTH -L-. ACIFIC CONFERENCE
The Minister for Prii-, i: r Indist~ ry, the Hen, C. F. Adermann
July 9
t 11
ti 13 No, 715
No. 727
No, 733 TOBA^ CCO
A41U UTR) N WHEAT DOARD ELECTION S
XT. X. TH 1W1ORLD'S 1' OULTRY CONGRESS
The Minister for the ', rry the Hon. J. O. Cramer
July 9 No, 720NSW IURY COLONEL FOR SINGAPORE
The Minister fo2 the Navv, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
No, 714
17o. 717
No, 721
No. 731 SHIP" S COMMTISSIOT 1N U. K.
P. N. S711S SAIL ON CIL. RTING PROJECTS
NEWN R. N. SUD14AARITE COMMAI'TDER IN , U STRALIA
NAVY OLSERVERS TRAIIN IN MALTA
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Leslie bury
July 8 No. 713HUTS FOR RAAl', F MEN IN THAILAND
The Minister for Repatriatic, The lion Swartz, M. P.
July 11No. 724RrX'. R-DMYIR API' OINTED TO TRIBUNAL
The Department of the Trearv
July 2 No, 719CONSOLIDATED REVENUE FUNID AT JUNE 30, 1962.
The Department of the Navy
July 9 No. 718
i 13 No. 732 NAVY'S ? NTE'. I! PE. RSONNEL CHIEF TAKES OVER
HALF A CENTURY ' WITH THE NAVY
The Minister-in-Charwe of C0Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
July 9 No, 716C. S. I. R. O. CREATES FOUR NEW DIVISIONS
With the Complimnts of
The Gverrent 1 ublic Relations Office,
Parlinment House,
CA., NBERRZA, C. T.
July 12 12
I 13
July 8
it 9
10
I 13 



S COMMONWEALTH BANKING CORPORATION GOLDEN JUBILEE
DINNER HELD IN SYDNEY ON 16TH JIULY 1
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr, Chairman, Your Grace, My Lord Bishop, Parliamrentary
colleagues and Gentlemen
You will be delighted to know that I am making a
very short speech tonight because, for some reason or other
I haven't been too good today. I mean physically ( Laughter)
and I therefore found mysalf bringing myself here with a little
bit of reluctance this evening. Butt anyhow, Warren McDonald
haa agreed that I need not make one of those forty-minute
talks which are supposed to come so easily from political lips.
As a matter of fact, I have had a very interesting
weekend. I saw a Rugby League match on Saturday; ( Laughter)
I read the rules the night before, ( Laughter) not being
familiar with this strange game, and when I arrived at the
Sydney Cricket Grcund, I said to my hosts, " Well, I read the
rules last night. There are some points in them I don't fully
understand" and they at once offered to make me a referee,
( Laughter) ( Applause) Anyhow, we wcn ( Laughter) That gave
me e great deal of pleasure,
Yesterday morning, just in case I had become a
little elevated by the inspiring events of Saturday afternoon,
I had to go and read the Lesson in the Presbyterian Kirk, and
the Lesson included the Ten Comnandments, No document could
be more disturbing to a practising politician ( Laughter) than
the Ten Commandments; unless, Your Grace, it is the Sermon
on the Mount, That, really, some of my colleagues find
impossible. Anyhow, all I wanted to say to you tonight was that
I can remember in my youth the uproar that attended the
establishment of the Commonwealth Bank. I think it is quite
safe to say that of those who established it few if any, could
foresee its future, Few, if any, could have understood either
the fact or the reasons why it would become some day, in one
of its manifestations, the Federal Reserve Bank of Australiao
Central banking was not very much talked about or very much
understood fifty years ago, It is now talked about a great
deal. ( Laughter) But, Sir, right through the history, this fifty
years of very distinguished history, there has been from time
to time controversy. First of ally the Bank itself established
under a Governor whose picture you will see here on this golden
programme Look at him] He lonks exactly like a staunch
supporter of the Liberal Party ( Laughter) And yet he was
appointed by a Labor Prime Minister, It shows how broadminded,
Arthur, they were in those days. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
This is something you must remember after the next election
( Laughter) And then it went on for a long time. It went on
through the First World War,, It developed, perforce, a
tremendous extent of activity and a variety of activity. It
is a very curious thing that amid all the horrors they produce,
these two Great Wars have produced other things and, in the
case of Australia, brought us measurably nearer to central
banking, Just as in the field of science, the developments
under t. he pressures of war, both times, have been almost fabulous.
8 a ** 000o 
0 2.
Then in 1921a Board of Directors, That produced a
great argument, and a great uproar. And then later on, that
disappeared and then later on, my own Government re-established
it; and on each occasion arguments broke out which were full
of heat and occasionally had gleams of lignt. But, at any
rate, they were full of heat. There were misunderstandings,
there were threats, there were fears. Never, I suppose, has
a great institution passed through such a chequered career in
so relatively short a time. And I believe that today there is,
in the banking world, a higher level of mutual understanding
than we have known for a long, long time. I believe that there
is, right through the banking world of Australia, a warm appreciation
of the significance of the Central Bank, the Reserve Bank
and, equally, a recognition of the skill with which the Commonwealth
Trading Bank, the Development Bank, the Savings Bank are
carried on.
All this, I believe, has brought about an era of good
relations and good relations in the banking world are immensely
important Good relations between banker and customer, yes;
but good relations between bank and bank, And this of course,
could not have happened in the middle of all the political
disputes and the fiery eloquence at Canberra, unless these
Banks had had men of singular talent engaged in directing and
serving them,
I would like to take the opportunity, because at one
stage he was regarded as a controversial figure, of paying a
wholehearted tribute to Dr. Coombs as the Governor of the
Bank, ( Applause) Throughout the whole of my long association
with him now, I have cone to regard him as a man of immense
ability and of the most impeccable integrity. ( Hear, hear)
( Applause) While, of course, on the trading side, subject to
a little interruption occasionally by Warren McDonald, the
show seems to me to be very well run, ( Laughter) He has
referred to Mr. Armstrong who is by common consent, a very
great trading bankero ( Applause, And in the result, I believe
that we have now a pattern of banking, arrived at after almost
the whole of the fifty years have gone, which is calculated to
serve the interests of the people of Australia.
Indeed Sir, tho one general observation that I wanted
to make is this: We, in Australia, have developed when you
come to think of it, a habit of mind on certain matters which
Y believe has proved extraordinarily usefulø We have not
been doctrinaire and said, " That's something that the Government
ought to run and that nobody else ought to run." Nor have we
carried our views on the other extreme to a doctrinaire limit.
The result is, in broadcasting we have a dual system. The
Government stations and private enterprise. In television,
we have the dual system, except at Canberra ( Laughter) where
the Government station has not yet arrived, but is understood
to be on the way. But its very interesting isn't it,
Radio the dual system; television the dual system;
banking the dual system. And when we look back on it and
know these things have been argued about and hammered out
over many, many yeors I thldn most of us, irrespective of
political views, would be disposed to say that this kind of
compromise has been a happy one, because it has given full
scope for the authority of government and adequate scope to
the ingenuity and enterprise of the private citizen. ( Applause)
And none of these things were in the minds of the founders of
the Commonwealth Bank, I think; I don't think that many of
them, although he was a man of ability, could have been in the
mind of the first Governoro 00o 0 
3.
I was sent by kind permission of Mr. Richardson an
excerpt from a newspaper called the " Sydney Morning Herald".
( Laughter) Not a recent number. That would have been an
unkind thing to do; but quite an old one, fifty years ago
in fact, and it contained an account of how Denison Miller
was appointed. There it was, Very interesting pjce of
history in the bank; and on the left-hand column, there was
a vivid description of a game of poloo Polo, That's a
very aristocratic game, they tell me, Ard on the other
column, a vivid description of some of the great cricketers
at work George Bonner and Charlie Macartney and the like.
And I thought, " Well, now that must be a good newspaper
polo, an account of the foundations of the Commonwealth Bank,
and a lovely account of a cricket match, and I will remember
it in my prayers, in future," ( Laughter)
But, Sir, the real reason i referred to it I must
not perpetuate these old reticences of mine, but the reason
I referred to it was that here was the beginning of great
events. After all, nobody could deny the massive size and
quality and extent of the Banks we are celebrating tonight.
Nobody. And yet here is the very beginning. A little
letter from Andrew Fisher " Dear Mr. Miller. I would like
to know whether you would be interested to accept a post in
the service of' the Commonwealth of Australia, etc, etc."
All done with true Andrew Fisher caution. Nothing committed,
a little Scots reserve, very proper ( Laughter), and the answer
is there. It is of a similar character, and in the upshot,
there is an Order in Council, and that; man becomes the Governor
of a Bank non-existent up to that time, not a person on the
staff, not a skerrick of furniture, not a building to work in.
That is how the Bank began and in fifty years, we have seen
its development, its ramifications, its authority and we
have, if I may particularly refer to its Reserve Bank functions,
seen it as one of the great and respected Central Banks of
the world, ( Applause)
Sir, you may have noticed that it is not uncommon
for the Leader of the Opposition at Canberra, ( I don't know
what happens in Sydney) to disagree with the Prime Minister.
I seem to remember doing it myself, when I was Leader of
the Opposition ( Laughter) but tonight though he may express
different reasons, I am happy to say that I am going to be
supported in the presentation of this Toast by Arthur Calwell
who is my devoted political enemy ( Laughter) but, I don't
mind admitting, my personal friend. Now, Arthur. 



AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL OF RETAILERS' DINNER AT
HOTEL CANBERRA CANBERRA, A. CT.
ON 1 8' H JULY. 19
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, RoGMonies
Sir, I would like to say, first of all, thank you
on behalf of my wife. She has been out of action for the
last two or three months, but she did hope to be here tonight,
and then, by the inscrutable wisdom of Providence, she
developed one of those sniffly, wheezy colds, in which she
found herself intolerable company for herself and for other
people. And so she decided, entirely in you. r interests, not
to come and whistle out germs on you, But when I go back
home, as I do occasionally ( Laughter) and tell her what you
said about her, and what other people approved of about her,
I'm perfectly certain that within twentyfour hours, she will
be saying to me, " Why didn't you insist on me going?" ( Laughter)
Because really you have spoken, I was going to say generously,
but I would prefer to say justly, about her and I will have
great pleasure in telling her what was said about her tonight
and how you received it,
I would also like to say, Sir, that apropos of young
Johnson, who has a genius so great that he ought to be working
for the Government, ( Laughter) ( Make a note of that, will you,
Hazel) ( Laughter) I liked in particular, the second-last
verse ( Laughter) There are no press here, so I don't need to
embarrass my partner and colleague, Jack McEwen, but he has
been referred to, as you may know, as " Black Jack" and I
occasionally address him as " Black" and, occasionally, when
I am in c highbrow mood, I address him as " Lo Noir" ( Laughter)
That's only when I don't want the other Country Party Minister
to know what I'm talking about. ( Laughter) And I love this
verse " We've asked the swarthy, crony Jack." Now John,
you must admit this is the best description of you that has
ever been put on the swarthy crony Jack", And'Hal"
now, really, if everybody would start lo call Harold " Hal",
we'd win the next election. ( Laughter) ( Applause) John, you
and I must start this fashion Hal who's gi'en us
mony a crack" ( Laughter) and theni rather dirtily, ( Laughter)
rather offensively, ho adds, which yersel' ye're nae
sae slack." ( Laughter) And I plead guilty, at once, to that.
And then he says, " A fearsome trio". Well, up to that point,
you might almost think you were reading the Sydney " Sun"
( Laughter) or the Sydney " Mirror" ( Laughter) or other humorous,
juvenile publications. ( Laughter) And then in brackets,
young Johnson says bowing in the direction of the balance
sheet, ( Laughter) "( But in a profit race I'd back Hosts Tam
and Theo)" Now this, I think, is the most superb verse written
in lowland Scots since Burns himself, ( Laughter) All that
stuff about " Wad the Puir, the Giftie gie us" it's very good.
My father used to recommend it to me in vain for a long time.
I mean the moral he used to recommend. But this fellow,
Johnson, has in that one verse, concentrated the whole fury,
and the whole glory, of Australian politics and the profit
and loss account, ( Laughter) of the Retailers' Association,
Now, the other thing I want to say to you is that
you may be surprised to know that two such contentious fellows
as John McEwen and I are hero tonight, Well, I will explain
it to you. I must begin on Monday. On Monday, I was in
Sydney and on ionday night I went to a Dinner to celebrate the
So00C oo/ 2 
Fiftieth Anniversary of what was called, in the plural,
" The Commonwealth Banks" and it wasn'c a very happy night,
I received a moderate reception, modified rapture ( Laughter).
Under great pressure, I thought of one or two bright remarks
that they laughed at. But really, on the whole the Government
wasn't too good on Monday night ( Laughter) and we came
back here, and yesterday morning, afternoon and night were
discussing the Budget. Oh, I'm so glad there are no Press
here tonight because if I even mention the Budget, with the
press here, somebody, looking at the left eyebrow or the
right, would say, " The Prime Minister gave a broad hint"
( Laughter) You know what I mean about this or this or
this the poor old fellow hadn't thought of.
And therefore I'm lucky because yesterday, morning
afternoon and night, we discussed the Budget or aspects of
it; today, morning and afternoon, and when we were finishing
up at six o'clock this afternoon, the Treasurer, who is not
unconscious ( Laughter) of what people say about him, though
they could say it with much greater force about me, but some
old inhibition makes them say, " Well, the old fellow, you
know but, anyhow, he said, " I think we ought to sit
tonight" and, obviously, we should. And so we made a little
arrangement under which my swarthy friend and I came out to
tea, having a pair, so to speak, and tonight, they're working
on , omothing or other; well, I hope for the best and so does
he. And in the morning no doubt it will come out all right.
And tomorrow morning tomorrow afternoon, tomorrow night, we'll
be at it again, and by midnight tomorrow night, we will all
look at each other in the anteroom and say, " Well I wonder
what the retailers will say about this. ( Laughter3 I wonder
what the manufacturers will say about it." To which I will
probably add in my well-known cynical mood, " I wonder what
we will say about it when we read it". ( Laughter) And,
anyhow, that's the way it goes.
I must make the apologies tonight, Sir, for my
colleagues, most of whom would much sooner have been here
tonight than whacking out arguments on the Commonwealth Works
and Services Programme. Isn't that what they're on tonight?
Yes. Overall is here tonight Well, that's cowardly on
his part because if he were there, they would chop his vote
down by a million, ( Laughter) That's the kind of thing that's
going on, All I want to say I don't want to say anything
about the Budget except one thing perhaps. We've had the
great advantage, Tom ( Pettigrew), of hearing you and other
people on the state of the economy, I even heard two or
three people say that this was a year in which the Government
might take its courage in both hands and Budget for a deficit.
If you'll allow me to say so I'm not addressing your wives
who are much more sensible I'm addressing the rest of you
" Could anything be more funny?" We are not facing a problem
this year of whether we ought to budget for a deficit or
not; we are facing the problem of how much it ought to be
( Laughter) and this is not all that easy. I don't think
anybody could ever accuse me of ignoring the views of what
I night loosely call the ordinary man, the man in the street,
the man who runs a business, I've never been one of those
people who pretend that he can run a great business better
than the people who run it. It has never occurred to me.
But my business happens to be the business of the nation and
on this, after many many years, I think I might modestly
claim to have serve an apprenticeshipo ( Hear, hear). 
The business of the nation. And this is not only
social and international but it is financialo It is all
these things. And all I want to say to you is, I have no
hidebound rules in my mind, I haven't been given orders by
anybody, but I have an acute sense of responsibility, not
only to my own country in 1962, but to my own country in
1963 and 1964 and 1965, ( Hear, hear) Because the job of
the politician is to say, " How many votes can you win next
week", I've had it; I've no interest tc. serve on this
matter. When they throw me out, they will throw me out.
I won't mind Buit the job of the statesman is to say, " What
is happening to my country and to the world not next week
but next year and the year after and in ten years' time?"
( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
We in Australia are not responsible for the future
shape of the world. No, but we have some influence over
it. It's a great mistake to think that the great countries
of the world go by the headlines. They do not go by the
headlines any more than I do, but they are influenced by
people from the great countries in the world, and we happen
to represent one of the great countries. Don't think that
I am suffering from any form of illusion that 102 million.
people count as much in the world as 200 million. I do not.
But I'd like to tell you that in this very year of grace my
distinguished colleague, what's he called " swarthy crony
Jack" he and I have both been in London, in Europe, in the
United States of America, and I will undertake to say that
between us, we have put ideas into people's minds ( hear, hear)
which they didn't have before we went, ( Applause), And in
that sense, we in Australia exercise an influence.
But for ourselves, in Australia, our prime responsibility,
look, do let me say, our task, is not on any Budget or
on any measure or on anything else to please you to please
John, or to please Bill or to please Tom. Thats not the
job. The job is to develop this country, 10o million people
a vast area to develop it as fast as we can into one of the
significant countries intrinsically in the world. What have
they in America? 180, 190 million people. This is colossal.
The same sort of area as we have ourselves, and we have
We are not going to have 10-forever, The day will come,
perhaps not in my time, w: hen it will be 20, the day will come
when it will be 30 or
Provided we exercise our genius and produce energy,
enthusiasm, a sense of devotion to our country there is no
reason why, at the turn of the century, Australia should not
be intrinsically one of the great nations in the world, or,
at any rate, one of the very great nations in the Southern
Hemisphere, And, really, as one grows older, one thinks less
of the next week or of the next election, about which I couldn't
care less. One thinks more and more of what kind of corntry
one's grandchildren are going to live in or one's greatgrandchildren
are going to live in. This is tremendously
important. And what kind of a country is it? Not one in
which everybody lives on the Government. That's a dependent
country, not an independent one, A country in which we
have made ourselves grow, in which we have understood that
the great industries take the manufacturing industries
must expand, if we are to expand our population, if % e are
to have more and more people; one in which the tertiary
industries are expanding, one in which the primary industries,
which are the very root of our international existence, .2 .6 0 0 
succeed, grow, increase their productivity and do it at a
cost level which does not price them o-. t of the worldts
market, It is simple to state it, isn't it, in that way
and not very simple to achieve. Not very simple to satisfy
the demands of the manufacturer and at the same time keep
the woolgrower, the whoatgrower and the rest of them out of
trouble. Not so simple,
The interesting thing about Australia, the great
challenge about Australia is that every section of the economy
has its own demands, its own ambitions, which somebody might
call selfish ones, but in which all of these must be reconciled,
made loss selfish, made more conformable with the general
set-up of the country, so that when I've been given my
inevitable State funeral twenty years before, people will
be able to sit up at peace in Australia, have friends to
dinner at peace in Australia and in security and say, " You
know that in the last twenty years, this country has developed
to an extent that even the Americans, in the sixties of the
last century, didn't think of."
Now, Sir, this is a great ambition, and all of us
who preserve our sense of responsibility, contribute to it.
I am a great admirer of what is done by the manufacturers.
I am a great admirer of what is done by the importers. I
am a great admirer of what is done by the retailers. You
may go right down the list, and I have never had any stupid
ambition to try to run their business for them. But all I
hope is that all of us will never get so far out of balance
that we think our particular interest is to be preferred to
the interests of other people. I would hope that over the
years to come, difficult years, tremendously difficult years;
I am not only talking about the Common Market or something
of that kind, but talking about the difficult years in front
of this country down in its rather remote corner of the world.
I hope that in all those difficult years we will, as far as
we can, forget to be sectional and practice increasingly to
be Australians ( hear, hear) with one nation to serve and one
end to produce for our children and our grandchildren.
( Applause) o 



pLI. NoJ, 2-
PLANNING OF CANBERRA'S JUBILE
Statement by the Prime Minster the Rt Hon. RG. Menzies
Planning arrangements for the celebration on
March 12th, 1963 in the presence of Her Majesty the Queen
and His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh of the
Jubilee of Canberra as the national capital were announced
today by the Prime Minister, Mr, Menzies.
The Prime Minister said that the Secretary of
the Department of the Interior Mr. WoA., MeLaren, would
be responsible for organising ? he Canberra Day celebrations
with the assistance of a representative local commituee,
The Jubilee would be the central feature of
the Canberra section of the Royal Visit and the presence
of the Queen was expected to give the occasion great
national significance, Organisation of the celebrations would be
integrated with the overall planning of the Canberra
visit for whilh, as already announced, the Chief Ceremonial
Officer of the Prime Minister's Department, Mr. J. H,
Scholtens, would be responsible,
CANBERRA, July, 1962o 



EMBARGO PM J0 1J i2
FOR PUBLICATION MORNING PAP-RS MO-DAY 2 RD JJLY
VISIT OF KING AND QUEAN OF THAILAND
Statement by the Prime Minister te Rt_ ont RG. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr, R. G. Menzies, toda;
annomced the itinerary for the visit to Australia next
month of Their Majesties The King and Queen of Thailand.
This had been settled following discussions in Bangkok
recently by Mr, J. H. Scholtens of the Prime Minister's
Department, who is -he Director of the visit.
Mro Menzies said that Their Majesties would
arrive in Canberra by air from New Zealand on Sunday,
August 26, and would leave Perth for Bangkok on Wednesday,
September 12. They would visit all State capitals, the
dates being as follows: Canberra August 26-29
Sydney August 29-31; Brisbane August 31-September 2;
Melbourne September 2-5; Hobart September 5-7;
Adelaide ( including visit to Woomora by His Majesty The
King) September 7-10, Perth September 10-12.
Throughout their 18-day visit, Their Majesties
would be Government guests and would stay at Government
Houses. The Official Suite would consist of 13 persons,
Their Majesties would also have a personal staff with them.
The King of Thailand would be the first reigning monarch of
a foreign country to visit Australia. Their Majesties had
been looking forward to this visit for some time and would
like to meet as many Australians as possible at functions
and at worko
Mr. Menzies also announced details of the Canberra programme
for the visit ( see attachment),
CANBERRA, July, 1962. 



WEEKLY INDEX DTpah_ P_
ViK ENDINT\ G Ji JLY 21, i962
COMONT ALTH: O'~ TI AU'~ T2AAU
Index of Ministeril Statements losued in Canberra
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister fr Tride, The R-Hon, John
McEwen
July 16 No, 735 GOVERINMIENT TO STREDGTI{ EN TRADE COMMISSIONER
SERV 1CE
s 17 No, 740O AUSTRALIAN AGREEMENT WITIT COMMON MARKET
I 19 No. 748 TOWvELS AND TQ0% 1ELLIG
The Treasure the Rt Hon. Hrold Holt, M. P0
July 18 Nco 744 PAY-ROLL TAX REBATES
The Minister for _ Notional Development, Sengtor -hee lion., , H,
Snooner M. M.
July 19 No, 75L FUTURE OF WOLFRAM FIELD D,-PETNDS ON DEMAND
REVIVAL
The Minister for Labour cnd Ni'onal Service, The Hon, William
July 16 No, 736 REVIEW OF EMP. LOYMENT SITUATION AT END JJNE
J962.
The Minist'Ger for Civdl Avi. ation, Senotor the Hon. Shone PaltridE
July 20 No. 759 AIRL7LN4ES r1, BITR. CTOR A,. PPOINTED
The Postimster-GeneraJ The HonC. W, Davidson
Juily 16 No, 736A SHARING OF FACILITIES BETkWi-EEN THE NA^, TIONAL
TELEVISION SERVICE A ND COMMERCIAL TELEVISION
STA'TIOnS IN IRURA^ L A-REAS
The Minister for Imnmigraio fh Hon. A. R. Downer
July 18 No, 746 RE ITALIAN' IGRATION
The Mirister for Ex ternal AffairThe on Sir Garfield IDarwick
July 16 No, 734 AiUST1;, LAN DIPLrjM,', TIC A PPOINTMENTS
it 17 No, 7-37 AUSTR= IN DELECTTION TO A', NTARCTC TREATY
iNo 758 GAM ICAN ' DDEZICE MTEETINGO
The Minster for rimry Industry the Hcn, C. F. A1dermann
July 17 No, 738 OlVTRSE, S STUDE. NTSHTPt0_. FOR BEEF RESEA:, RCHERS
17 No, 739 NE'I. RLY œ 13 M, FOR SHEEP ATTD WOOL RES) EARCH IN
1962-63
19 No. 753 MORE MOEY FOR DIRY RESEARCH
The Minister for the rmy, the Hon, J. O Cramer
July 19 No. 752. BRITISH BRIGAi-DIER TO VISIT A', USTRA; LIA
I 20 No, 756 AR-MY 1MAL-TRON-IN--CI1EF TO VISIT MLYA
The Minister for the Interior thC on, Gordon Freeth
July 19 No, 751 A. C. T. RA,, TES FOR 1962
17 No. 741 PORT MORESBY HOUSING CONTPLACTS
No. 757 TOOMERA' (. 1' ONT7EAr T
lhi Minister for the qyj_ Senator th'le Hon, JG-Gor-ton
July 18 No, 742 TWI-ENTY NEW ' MIDSHI-LPMEN FOR F. AoN,
19 No, 747 BROTHi'S TO COjMh~ il'D SIS-TER SHIPS
The Miniter for Health. onator the Hon. Harrie W, Wade
JU 15 No, 7375B715 SE= OP FThR7' CZMA" VIRUS o/ 12 



No. 51.-/ 19262
STATEMENT BY T1TH PRIME MINISTER, RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES3
The Prime Minister, Mr,, Menzies, said
today " I have arranged with Mr. Bury that
the text of his speech should be sent to me.
I will study it caref'ully,
Meanwhile, so that there may be no
misunderstanding either at home or abroad, I want
t'o make it quite clear that Mr. Mc~ wen's work overseus
and my oydn latei-visit both to the United Kingdom
and to the United States were clearly based upcn
our conviction a conviction shared by the
Cabinet that the economic problems which would
be presented to Australia by any entry cf Great
Britain into the Common Market on terms which
did not reasonably protect our export trade would
be of very sericus moment. The whole purpose of
the current activities of Australia in relation to
the Common Market negotiations is to minimise
economic injury. I want to repeat that the views
which have been expressed by Mr. Mc~ wen and myself
in relation to these matters are the views of the
Cabinet. I myself' have stated our position not
only in Parliament but publ~ icly in London and America
and in Australia since my return,, There is nothing
to subtract from these statements."
CANBERRA, 26th July, 71962. 



YOUNG LIBERAL MOVEMENT CONVENTION
YoWC. A. HALLo SYDNEY
27TH JULY 196
Speech by the Prime Miiniste_ rtheRt. Hcno RG,_ Menez
Sir I am delighted to be here and I am very
sorry that I didn't hear the whole of that last debates
The three speeches that I listened to I thought had a quality
that has almost disappeared at Canberra, ( Laughter) 3revity
and point. But I would like to take exception to the statement
made, a most misleading statement by one of the speakers,
that in Australian Rules football, there are three umpires.
( Laughter). He said this in a rather derogatory fashion.
I take leave to point out that there are five, ( Laughter) and
they are very sharply to be distinguished from those who
officiate in Rugby League in Sydney, ( Laughter) because some
of them have been publicly known to be right. ( Laughter)
Now, the Chairman has betrayed one of my guilty
secrets, He has pointed out that a long time ago, I was a
young Nationalist: indeed, a long time ago I was one of three
fellows who sat down in the study of my own house in Melbourne
and established the Young Nationalist Movement, And so that
I will be on easy terms with all of you, I would like to tell
you that on that occasion, we said to each other, as no doubt
you have many times, " Too many old fellows in this outfit of
ours0( Laughter) " Time we gave the old boys a bit of a stirring
up, What we need is new blcod." We became very formidable.
We stood at street corners; we had tomatoes and occasionally
a little other garden truck ( Laughter) thrown at us, occasionally
a friendly but fragile egg ( Laughter) and by the time I
became a Minister for the first time and, indeed, the second
time and the third time, it will surprise you to know, looking
at my sunny locks, ( Laughter) that I was always referred to as
" one of the more promising young men." So I say this to you
in order to establish that though times have changed for me,
I hope they haven't changed for you. Because, at that time,
we believed and rightly, that the future of our side of
politics depended upon youth and vigour, with a little age and
experience throiwn in we were always prepared to concede
that but, above all, youth and vigouro And this must always
be the motto of a political party that hopes to have a future
and not merely to dwell on its past0
It isn't so long ago, from my point of view,
back before the 1949 election, before the 1946 election, when
I, myself, being Leader of the Opposition, had occasion to
look over the field in Australia and to say " Are we putting
ourselves into shape to win the election and to govern the
country?" This was a serious question, but not a very easy
one to answer at that time because, under the pressure of
adversity, we split up into various groups and factions,
There were about three different political parties, non-Labor,
in New South Wales. I think there were about four in Victoria,
and so it went around Australia until I think when I convened
the original meeting to establish the Liberal Party, I had to
send notices to at least thirteen different organisationso
I know it well because it was all done in my offices as Leader
of the Opposition and by 1944, we were establishing the united
party; by 1945 we had it well under way, In 1946, we won
a few seats, nou too many, we couldn't hope to win an election,
but we won a few seats, and in 1949, we were swept into power
at what was then almost a record level of majority. 3 e. 0 0 o0 / 2 
Now all that happened because we had something
to believe in, not just something to oppose, but something
to believe in. If we have fallen into any dangers in the
last few years, it perhaps is because we have lost sight
of the idea what is it we believe in and have perhaps
concentrated unduly on dealing with our opponents and demonstrating
how wrong they are,
Now, Sir, nobody could be a greater believer than
I am in the Young Liberal Movement, and for those reasons,
because long after I am merely a dusty memory, there will
be plenty of you in this hall tonight who will be occupying
leading posts in the political life of Australia and carrying
great responsibility in that political lifeo But you will
do iG and do it in positions of power ani responsibility orly
if you and nll the rest of us from tim-6o time sit down and
say, " What is it we believe in?"
Modern history is, as you all know, full of
examples of great movements that disappeared because they
had ceased to have any genuine reason for existence. I
remember speaking about the British Commonwealth a penetrating
man saying to me only six months ago, " You know, there is
a lot of argument about the Commonwrealth but the thing I am
always trying to discover is what does it stand for? what does
it believe in." And this is a great problem. It is not
enough just to accommodate the structure to new things or new
events, the important thing is to have a faith to live by,
And that goes for us, in this Party,
Now, Sir, I don't want to make a sort of thoiogical
speech to you, but I do want to say a few things about what I
believe in and what, as I hope, you believe in. This is not
a matter for some casual, contemporary observations, I want
to talk to you about some of the great things, as it seems to
me, that matter in our country and in which your mind and
your heart and your spirit will be determining factors in the
years to come, ' iJhat is the first objective, Sir, of national policy
in Australia? Not just to be in office or to stay there, but
to build something, to build a balanced nation, a strong nation,
a progressive nation, a civilised nation, in which advances
and advantages belong to all the people, Now you may say
that's almost platitudinous, so platitudinous that half the
people have forgotten ito All the people represent our
constituency of thought and of action,, ve must work for all
the people and build for all of the people and have our vision
of a civilised Australia for the benefit of all the people.
A good deal has been said in my time, politically,
about class distinction. We still have a few hopelessly
reactionary people, like socialists and communists, ( the most
reactionary people in the country) who want to whip up something
about class distinction, A Liberal regards this country as
having only one valid class distinction, the distinction between
the active and the idle If the world belongs to the workers,
in the words of the Communist Manifesto and I believe it's
true Ict it belong to the workers,
Let us believe that it is the industrious people in
a country who matter, that they are the contributors to a
national life, and don't let us, as Liberals above all things,
fall into those easy ideas that the modern conception of life
allows you to be idle, to be dependent, to leave it to the
0 a oo o / 2 
Government, and between a yawn and a yawn, cast a vote about
something. This is a wonderful country; it's going to be
more wonderful still, but it will achieve greater wonders
on the hard work and efforts of its people, and not by a
spirit of dependency, not on that kind of attitude towards
governments and what governments ought to do that our
opponents find so easy,
Sir, it's quite true we must always remember it,
that we have a strong and splenaid heritage in Australia,
We can all look back, most of us at any rate, except those
who have only jus-t newly arrived, Ln our forefathers in this
country. We talk easily about the pioneers. We sometimes
forget what remarkable things have been done. It WGoud be
a marvellous thing for all of us if, by some retrospective
photography, we could be taken back fif-y years. That's all,
Fifty years, and look at how things were fifty years ago,
and then look around us today, and there are those here
tonight who in fifty years' time will. look around them and,
remembering how things looked today, will marvel at the
achievements of this country.
We come of a great race of people. We have every
reason to be proud of them but oiir pride in them will be
worthless unless we are determined to be an even greater race
of people ourselves, unless we are determined that the future
that will be looked at, perhaps by another generation in
Australia, is going to be as astonishing as the one we look
at today. These thingsE Sir, don't call for a spirit of
quiet acceptance of what a Government will do. These things
call for a spirit of adventure, they call for a desire to
contribute, a rising level of civic unselfishness, Again I
say to you, don't take those things for granted. Civic
unselfishness. We don't know too many people, do we, who
would answer to that description We know a great number of
people who want something, who want to have it, who want to
be given it. There are not so many people in the country,
outside this room, whose great ambition is to contribute to
the nation. And yet, if Liberalism stands for anything, and
young Liberalism above all, it's for a passion to contribute
to the nation, to be free but to be contributors, to submit
to the discipline of the mind instead of the ordinary, dull
discipline of a regimented mass of people. These are wonderful
things for us to have in our mindso
If I turn away from that to what might be regarded
as more concrete matters, could I just say to you, quite
briefly, something about the objectives of national policy
other than those I have already mentioned, because they are
very important. They represent a constructive task, The
first one of them is that this country must have more and more
and more people year by year, and this means a very active
policy of migration in Australia. It is very hard for me
to realise that when we came back into office Senator
Spoonor will remember with me at the end of 1949, the
population of Australia was about 2-million people less than
it is today, and that is one of the marvels of this period,
that with this enormous increase in population, an increase
of something like 33% or 34%; in that period of time, our
living standards have risen and our growth has been so great.
We must have that population. de cannot indefinitely suppose
that we are going to be allowed to be the trustees of a halfempty
continent, Migration, the determination to maintain
migration, the rise in the population of Australia will continue
to be one of the great challenges to our national future,
0 0 0 0 0 L) 0 0 0 / 1ñ 
But, Sir, not only must we build up the population,
we must have a busy and employed population, and the maintenance
of full employment of people and of full employment of material
resources in Australia is not an easy thing to marry to an
active migration programme, Don't forget that because every
migrant who comes to Australia establishes, in the short run,
a capital demand whether it is for a house or roadwork or
school or church or some portion of a hospital, He establislhec
capital demands, and his own labour will rot contribute
correspondingly for some years to come, That's what people
mean when they sa: that a larre migration programme is. in the
short run, full of inflationary tendencies but, in the long
run, the essence of national growth. Therefore we have to
watch these two things together.
In the third place and this appears in so. me quarters
to be rather an unpopular idea, I gather we must restrain
inflation and preserve the value of the currency, and the
value of savings, Some of our opponents, from whatever side
they may come, are a little bit i. nclined to say about us
" Oh, these people arE. obsessed by the idea of stability,'
This is only because they don't understand what stability is.
They think that stability is stagnation It's nothing of
the kind, We are not the apostles of stagnation, but we want
stability, so that we may build a great structure on it.
We are builders, not contemplaters of foundations, Builders.
But if you are going to build a great national structure,
then anybody can tell you that you must have some stability
in the foundations, If you are going to have, coming into
Australia from the other parts of the wcidr, investments
capital which we so badly need for our national development,
you are not going to have it if your economy is in a state of
flux, if the value of your money is declining. We know this
from long and painful experience, but give it stability and
the results flowo
And I want to remind you, all of you, that in spite
of all the problems we have been going through, in spite of
the unpopularity that is attracted by many of the measures
we've taken, the fact is that for the last eighteen months,
the consumer price index in Australia has been stable. For
the last eighteen months, we have had no inflation of the
currency because we have had no perceptible movement upward
in the price level0 This, you would agree if you looked
around at the experience of the rest of the world is a very
remarkable thing, and one of its by-products has been, not
stagnation but a record-breaking movement of investable
capital into Australia from people outside who see in this
country all the possibilities of development in the future,
Sir it will be a pretty poor thing if we have less confidence
in ustralia than foreigners have in Australiaø
Then Sir, there is another aspect of this stability,
falsely so-called stagnation. Just look back, if you
wouldngt mind on the last few months, on the last twelve
months just to see what it is we stand for in the objectives
of policy, Have we been sitting down contemplating this
glorious index figure and saying, " Ah, it's the same now as
it was three months ago, This is fine," Have we just sat
back and looked at our balances of payments overseas ar] d said
how splendid they are, how much recovered they are from the
dangers of two years ago? Not at allo o oo0O 
It's over this very period when we have had
stability of this kind, that we've been able to spend
many millions on the Snowy Mountains Scheme under the
Ministerial control of my colleague, Senator Spooner,
millions on uniform gauge works, millions on the Mt.
Isa railway to the coast to develop what will be the
greatest copper mine in the world, full of export income;
coal ports in New South Wales and Queensland, beef roads
in Western Australia, in the Northern Territory, in the
North of Queensland these things add up to almost fantastic
sums of money, and we have been contributing our money for
these purposes at the very time whei we have been maintaining
stability in the currency and in the value of money, I
mention those things becaase to my mind they are practically
conclusive evidence of the falsity of thr claim that stability
means stagnation and that the Liberal 2Paty has lost its
imagination and its drive.
There has been no Party in the history of Australia
that has had such a picture in its mind of Australian
development, There is no Party in the history of Australia
that has so far done more to paint that picture, to bring
it into existence, and with your good help, there will be
no Party over the next ten years tLat will do more to extend
the boundaries of development, so that we may carry a vast
population, so that w3 may improve our security, so that we
may improve the living standards of our people and do it all
on a basis of growing civilisation, ( Applause)
And then, Sir, I would just like to mention a
couple of matters. When I was a boy, in the bush, and many
people think that intellectually I am still there, ( Laughter)
the first political arguments that I ever listened to ( because
I was born in a rather talkative and political family) were
about protection and free tradeo And as it was in the
country, the fashionable thing at that time was to think of
all the manufacturers as evil creatures, battening on the
man on the land you know and because my old man was a
protectionist, he was frequently in strife with the neighbours.
All that is goneo That's as dead as the dodo. The fact is
that it would be a rare person today in either city or country
who didn't realise that the greatest example of interdependency
that we have in Australia is manufacturing on the one
hand and primary production on the other. And I think all
the more advanced leaders and thinkers on both sides have
long since realised that, But today we need to carry our
examination of it a little further.
I said something about population. We must have
more and more people coming here, I said that that presented
a problem, not only to the stability of the currency but a
problem of full employment of men and of materials But if
we are going to have a large migration, we are not going to
have it moving into the rural industries to any perceptible
extento All the leaders of rural industries concede this
point when we have discussions with themn More and more
mechanisation is coming on the land more and more advanced
methods of applied science and greater productivity, with no
necessary increase in the number of people employed.
Consequently, if you are going to bring people into Australia
and have them usefully employed, you must look to the
secondary industries and to the tertiary, service industries
rather than to the primary, This, of course, lends great
point to the necessity of having a growing manufacture in
Australia, to balance our economy, to take up a great
0 . o / 6 
increase in the population and to give us, more and more,
as time goes on, two feet -to stand on,
You know, before the time of many of you, there
was a great depression back in 1929 and a few following
years, and one of the things about -that depression that
everybody ought to know about is this: that at that time,
our manufacturing industries were comparatively small-,
our export industries, as today, were comparatively great,
But because we m~ a lir-it to manufacture in Australia,
because we were, as we confronted the world, standing rather
on one foot, the primary industr-y foot, when the depression
began overseas and reached us, it reached us in the form
of a tragic fall in the prices of wool and wheat and the
commodities that we exported. Fantasti-. NoboQ: T ' U. day,
thinking about tcdt. yls prices, would believe what they were
back in 1929 and 1930, with wool a few pence a pound and
wheat I remember getting down to eighteenpence a bushel,
about 2d. a bushel less than the average freigh-t that had
' to be paid on it to -take it from a country station.
These were tiagic things. That can't happen
to us today because we have manufacturing industries in
Australia which enable us to stand with both feet, and if
we lose a little one way, we hope to gain a little the
othor, We wontt always do it, but at any rate, we have
sought to establish some forma of economic balance, and it
is one of the great tasks of our Government and of our
Party to maintain it, That's the whole case, or rather,
it's the immediate case for maintaining manufacturing in
Australia, not recklessly but soundly, persistently, with
the knowledge that upon the steady growth of manufacturing
industry, the steady growth of Australian population will
primarily depend, I have mentioned to you population, stability,
employment of resources, employment of people, manufacturing
and its relation to immigration, but there is another thing.
We, in Australia, still continue to depend, in terms of
external trade, primarily upon the products of the land
and we will continue so to depOend for many years to come,
Wool, wheat, dairy products meat run through the whole
list -these are the very s~ aplie o. u epr icm and
as another proof of the interdependency of primary and
secondary industry in Australia, the bulk of the export, the
bulk of the money we lay out fLor imports into Australia
and we have imports because we have exports the bulk of
it is laid out on imports for the manufacturing industries,
either in plant or raw materials or whatever it may be.
If you were to abolish the wool industry and the wheat
industry and the others tomorrow, manufacturing in Australia
would come to an end,,
This is a tremendous interdependency, If we are
going to have it then we must never lose sight of the
position of our primary industries. Don't you allow this
to become the perquisite of anybody else. This is our
business. The Liberal Party has always stood for a lively
interest in this matter and I hope th-at it always will,
The primary industries can, unless we are careful,
be costed out of their markets, I have had distinguished
representatives of the wool industry come into my office in
the last thiree-wee . ks and point out to me xv'at they estimated
0 6 v e a o Co o a/ 
to be the cost of production of wool and what was the ruling
price and pointing out that the margir., the difference was not
all that great. The same goes for wheat, the same goes,
with modifications, seasonal and otherwise9 in the case of
the great meat industry. And so on. Primary industries
are not operating on large margins in the markets of the
world, and unlike local industries, they have to take what
the world will give them. It is no use the producer of
one of these commodities saying to an overseas buyer " That's
not enough", because he either sells it or he doesn'to
The world controls our export prices and the
great hope of the primary industry consists of a positive
aspect and a negative aspect, Positively, we must oenourage
the productivity of those on the land by bringinc to their
as3istance all the modern improvements of research and applied
science and improved cransport and the like that we can
possibly provideø We do a let of research work in Australia,
splendid research work. The name of the C. SoI. R. O. is
famous in scientific circles all round the world. I am not
yet satisfied that the research work of its scientists
becomes sufficiently or quickly enough known to the man on
the farm I know that it isn't. The fact is thac we have
gaps here. We hav3 little distinctions between Commonwealth
authority and State authority. We have a problem here to
which we are directing our attention. Not as somebody who
wanus to be complacent but as people who are grossly dissatisfied,
we must do more on this level so that we may, without
increasing the population of the farm, increase its productivity
and by increasing its productivity reduce its unit
cost and by doing that, preserving its position in the world
market. These are the very conditions of advancement, and
that means that positively we must encourage productivity and
the reduction of costs for the man on the land.
Negatively, we become properly concerned, as I am
myself about manufacture and its growth and its protection,
We must always remember that secondary industry must make
itself more efficient year by year so that, in the long run,
it doesn't throw too heavy a burden upon the farmer and
grazier in Australia, That's the negative aspect. The
other is the positive aspect, We must keep down costs not
by some simple rule of thumb People argue about these
things as if they had everything to do with wages. They
have something to do with wages no doubt, but more than
anything else they have to do with our efficiency with
our capacity to paddle our own canoe, to get on with the
job. We need today in industry, manufacturing and
primary, pioneers, don't we? And we need the pioneering
spirit people who want to do it better and better and
better and thereby reduce the burden that their own industry
might otherwise cast on the community,
Now, the last thing I want to say to you is thiso
There will be a lot of people who will want to say to you,
" Oh, you know, the Government's all right We have to
support its" ( Because some people still o) ( Laughter)
" We have to support it, but you know, they do an awful lot
in the public sector" that's the phrase the economists
invented " not enough in the private sector," Now, Sir,
if we stand for anything, it's private enterprise, in this
Party top to bottom, young and old, But do we violate the
oo
L 
8.
principle of private enterprise when we assist a State
Government to carry out public works without which private
enterprise could not carry on? Let's be sensible about this.
How can you develop a vast manufacturing community in
Australia unless you have schools, and schools are in the
public sector of expenditure, unless you have roads9 unless
you have water supplies, unless you have transport 6 nll
kinds. If you were to look over the average list of public
works that the State Governments bring to us each time at
the Loan Counil you would be hard put to it tc find one
that wasn't d-rectly coming to the aid of the develorment
of this country by private enterprise. You would be hard
put to it to find anybody in a great private enterprise
who didn't acknowledgthat without these provisions, he
coaldn't possibly dpvelop hi. s factory or his business.
Here's a comeback to my old and battered friend
the Senator you see. He's been getting money out of us
for the Snowy Mountains, sometimes honestly ( Laughter) but
alwa-rs successfully, for years and years and yea" H01
dig up the most marvellous hydro-electric scheme with great
irrigation storages and therefore enormous potential for
the increase of productivity in the irrigated areas of the
Murrumbidgee and * Ghe Murray. It's all being spent on the
public account, it's all regarded as activity in the public
sector it's all being performed by private contiact, and
every tittle of the advantage that comes from it in power
or in water, as the case may be is something which directly
or indirectly will assist private enterprise in Australia
to do its job and to get on with the development of the
country, I can sum up my own unsophisticated view very
simply. I don't believe that governments provide enterprise.
I think governments may provide the condition in which
enterprise is encouraged, but if you want enterprise, if
you want vision, you have to go to the individual human
being, It is human beings right through the community who
do things, who think out things, who get on with them. A
few of the human beings are elected to Parliement. But to
compare the mechanism of government, as if it were some
sentient creature with the genius of the human being is
absurd. We stand for the human being, we believe that it
is on his basis, on her basis, that this country is going
to have in the next ten years a degree of expansion unknown,
even in the last decade,
So we look forward, and I particularly tonighL,
looking at you, look forward, because I don't expect to
be around in politics J. n ten years' time and there are a lot
of people who would greet that statement with immense
enthusiasm ( Laughter), but you will be around, and I warn
you that unless you carry thi3 torch on as I believe you
will, I shall turn in my grave and reprove you if you can
hear me. ( Prolonged applause)
Thank you so much, You have convinced meo I think
I'll stay for another couple of years, 



MINISTER FOR AIR
27th July, 1962.
My dear Prime Minister,
I refer to your letter of 27th July and to our
conversation this afternoon.
It is clear that I have formed an opinion of
the nature of our interests in the negotiations for
British entry into the Common Market which differs in
significant respects from that of my senior colleagues
in the Cabinet. I appreciate the points you make and
tender my resignation accordingly.
In doing so I should like to emphasise that the
difference is essentially one of perspective and emphasis,
and that I support fully the efforts which you and Mr.
McE'en have been and are making to safeguard the interests
of those of our industries most likely to be directly
affected. This episode in no way diminishes my high personal
regard and feelings of friendship for you and our colleagues.
You may rely confidently upon my support for yourself and
the team as in the past.
With kindest regards, Yours sincerely,
Leslie Bury.
( L. H. Eo Bury)
The Right Honourable RoG. Menzies,
C. Ho, MoPo,
Prime Minister, 



PRIMñ L MD! ISTER
27th July, 1962,
My dear Leslie, I refer to our conversation this afternoon
about your stated and published views on the Common
Market negotiations, You confirmed to me that you had stated your
views, not only in Canberra on Wednesday night but in
Melbourne on Thursday, and that when asked last evening
by the representative of the A. B. C. you had Indicated
that you stood by your statements.
You made it quite clear to me that you were on
these occasions speaking solely for yourself and were
not prompted by any other Minister or, for that matter,
by any official. As I pointed out to you, your estimate that
the impact of British entry into the Common Market would
be of minor importance to the Australian economy runs
counter to the views formulated and expressed by Cabinet
and pursued by Mr. McEwen and myself in two sets of
heavy negotiations overseas this year,
You told me with your usual candour that you
could not honestly retract the views which you had
expressed because they were views which you had held
for some time. I need hardly tell you that I respect your
views and your attitude. But Ministerial responsibility
and Cabinet solidarity are of the essence of our system
of Government. They are always important. They are
no less important when a Government has a narrow majority.
They are supremely important when a Government is engaged
in advocating theo legitimate interests of Australia in a
series of negotiations which we have repeatedly declared
to be the most important in our time.
I cannot allow a state of affairs to continue
in which those of us directly concerned with the negotiations
and with the forthcoming Prime Ministers' Conference can
be met by the argument that our own Government contains
and retains a Minister whose views are not those of the
Cabinet. I am sad about all this as you know. I have
done my best to try to devise some middle course, but I
cannot find one. After all, the very integrity with which
you hold your opinions would make it impossible for you
to change them or to let it be thought that you had done
so, Under all the circumstances, I must, with
unfeigned regret, ask you for your resignation.
Yours sincerely,
The Honourable L. H. E Bury, MI. Po,
Minister for Air, 



STAmE-, 47,, IDT BY TH PRIME MINTSTER. 7HE RT. HON. Rc.. MENZIES
The following exchange of correspondence took
place today
CAFBERRA, 27th july, 1962. Z nL. No 5Z1_ g-6 



% WEKLY * rNDEX NO.,
1 EEKr EYDTThC JTIY 281 962
COYLMiOTR7,.:,' ALTF OF A. USTR,'^ LI1,
index of Ministerial Statements Issued] in Canberra
The Demity Prime MnseridMinister for Trde~ h tHn
J ohn Mc'iwen
No, ITor
No, N o,
No. No.
No. No No. No, 762 762" 764 768 770 780
7801'-783 784 78WA DRIVE FOR WOOL01 TEXTILE EXPORTS TO 14,% MEERICA11
I'USTRIA. OETAINS SUGA" R QUOTA, IN Tjj', yTED STA TES
POLVINYL CHLORIDE PRODUCTS
NEWA Z: 1ALA!'\ TD A DJUST VA LUE FOR DUTY ON
1, bFSRALIAN GOODS
SENI OR,' TRA'DE C OMMI SSI ONER RET IRE S
COMMON . PKET EFFECTS ON L7FtTPAL INDUSTRIES
TAEIIRFLF CHAIVGE2
TIR:" HLORFETHYILEI\
CA-' UTION ON F! SSL RPOT
COF CER" N ON BRUS SELS NEGO T IA'TIONS
The Minister for N&amp; Itional ' Development, Senator the Hon., W1.. H.
f2 c~ p, A1. E
N0 772 LA'TEST APPR7OVALS OF OIL EAjrCH SUBSI. LY
P4AYMf,' ENTS
The Minister for Defencethe Hon,. Athol-Townley
No. 777 A USTRLA ', AIY TRA" I' NING TEALM For VIETLNAM
A. o, 779 AUSRAIA AMY ENGI'NEE-3 FO. 1R NORTF BORNdEO
No. 7812 AR* 1K RZOYA'L TO VISIT 1TrEfSTErT'I AU5STRA LIA
The Postmaster-General,__ JheHe. CT aiso
No,
No. No. 765 767
7 78 ISSU DA'TE FORL EMAPIRLE G.' 11ES POSTA'* GE STAMN1PS
SITES FOa COUNTRY T. V.
12XTENiS: ION OF G";. WEALTH CABLE TO SUE. j ASIAi
The Minister for E xternal ~ farThe Hon. Sir GL-rfield _ Darwick
No.
N o.
No. -766 GENEVA ACO11E\ TTS ON LAO
774B TRINIDA, D INDEPE1TDEIYCE CELEERA'T IONS
700B rNTE1RN1AT'IOFNAL COU'R-T OF JUSTICE DECISION ON
' PIWNC! YINS UN ITED NP . TI ON S MILITAR1, Y OPERATI ONS
The Minister for Primrary Induastjiv_, The Hon. C. 11, Aderrnann
July 23 No,, 763 THEPTM MINI ~ j-R TO OPEN XIIITH WO. L'
POULT1Y COFOR." ESS
No. 774,, R3OMNATT~ FOR1 CENTIRAL WOOL A UTHORITY
The Minister for the 0J0 Cirna. hee.' n
July 2k No0. -1771. CADE. T~ i3 FO' TTiCI
No. 774 NEW" AILE DE-C, 1AMP A'PPOI'FI'E TO GOVElYNCR,-
26 No. 776 AU'STRL'. A'S DIGG-' EST A' 11rMY EXE2CirSE
The MInister for the Novy. Sen,-1tor tke Hion. JGc. Gorton
No. 76213 CHURCH : TOP,,, OUjRSc I-. N,
No,, 775 r, 1hOTIU_-L* 0! JFIG* EL1S 1N FLAjGSHIP
No. 775 _ 7L. AGSH" IP SAILS AGAI
No. 781 PRLJTL TO AN -DMIL
Senator the Hon. Harric Vii. Ws1, de anc St, to Mriiters for Healti~ h
July 24No0769 H: OSPIrTA,-L 7, TI. Y1
With the Compliimcnts of
The Govorrpient Pifblic oL~ tons Offica,
Parliament House, CALUl A. C. T.
July 11 It it It
July 25
July 26
" 1 26
it 27
July 23
It 23
It 26
July 23
It *-2C5
it 26
July 22
it 25
it 26
It 27 



z
2 tMA ~ XE-McvCIL t
1t2av Aght ( Xufsr I ava cautz,) :? azmoacocagsi on a tm-S
Pmz~ 1oz= 1ng at yox Ex 7, ~ ztw -7 Lya An
-0 ZJaaw 1C L1 7 ~ tZ
-r'' 3zass CU11z
40 Ilo r-n
a œ 2 it. rUVj
" CD~"~ thjaazt all Atl
uza _ Just o 92C~ z 0?
l 2L a m uZ. e-' z'Y * 000000ti 
tonight) ( that~ the most polite remark i'll voiks
tong h)( lsughtez!) I tuaep on a rormer occasions~ attended
a ;) inL-or of the &amp; tiX Cluab and I made a speech buat I had
Limeg told. ttwt r was to m~ ake orw and everybaijy lauz&amp; tW
like mad*'-1 d~ itatt gi tteoSn ight, I said to
37 iecetAryj " This is rtehra night off" becuuseg Ica
kno, looking at yo~ j it jogro hoe what 1. had in mind
a fter the la~ st rorty-ii; ht tiowrs was UAuahtor) " If ' twew. e
don., vthon Itix d~ nes then Itiwz. well It vw or done q ilckly
( 4' igh~ tow) If the assassiuAtim) n Id tian~ io up; the
consequene3 And catch with his5 su-. ase suico. is" -Yo
mautn ' t thnitsœ clever I learnt Vadtt, when t was at
tonieht2" 01h, yes, o I oas od khihis nau4
willbe : akinae a speech" and L ) dd a long way to
hear Kieh* : akt -a Speach anid I haie weni wi ti ncw for
a bo-Liuvu lon, time s'-tr) and he haisn't ' Avn tongW
ye't* i.-zt -x tfw Vay u~ p the st* 133 sald to youing
i-joAld boes whas flab.' w-trgsted youa with a certa* in
amounzt fia -ar 1vledja au., hter), I asid first of
al-l t him, " 1low Is Colin?" bowurn5 I am 13! c; clire s
If anssa dy ou tsheaet, aa nv.. ryhe ~ j owoida, v" flrlje ' s heCr6e to0a4l0i6 htIos " the " Aknt, r" wii
( or * htev-r it 4us) anmi he 94adrwd thiis In uedicat te" mS
, rhicht naiurl I didn't undersanrd* an. A theii I said to
blot in~ to be a voruiorfl nigt, I ihvae been
41scussina the Commonf all tho a fdterno An Ith Jackc
Ac.:. wen and Icisterman anid I've ome here 1%) r a quiet,
pleasant eveninge. I kddn' rea is* at thiat time that
1K,= Jo. ton would be hore. Aita ~ it~) youa kia
WhAt L afl And then this aweatures this other' MaJoaialds this
sol -disant doctor this man AP t~ o aL. o-A on's tax
avuy as medical al viser a* nd Viw them all the og ( iautter) l
this deplorable creature said to me, on the second-last
ste~ j s that I m., ldnft stumble, 14 said, " i. op oh no."
I s I, I've no S; Medoh-uakin&amp;? 1 .11 Mcd, Ohl no* * 111 YfOU
have to do is to induct k-ith At" L: said, Plow
on earth do yw Auct him. its a !~ i-oo~ foridstO said*
. Ouihter) " I'm a I'emIxbt oian, OWi car I do thiS? Jo
L it a sjot of something on his bulait tn! 1m? Jo I
.,? oflwmoS the oenedicticin over him; si) ter) AA~ this
man vw knows everythin -azo! t aaon~ oyq o'ut zwthin,; au~ t
: j human bein., ( aLo~ i jte; 1, he Saitd to et " I don't ivlow but
anybovt you have to do It," jo izs jou Is to lndLact Keith
Z but before I doi that . and i d; znlt want to stark1 to
ion., betwen you and this sweat cricketer, icil en~
who Is her., onl,, t IAjauass) t irrt tu suiy two
thitn~ s aaoat two p-Aplo. 4 
rst of aln istend toni#; bt withi rapt attention
to Tony Street whose lae father W, 13 a gret friend or mine
and a vWr great Australian ( Aplause), 9 and I thlr* that &amp;' cqy
prbal rind.;, vnwevhjro in his library today a book celled
" Strutt's ( Gwes and PastImes" because it has aflws been mj
practice, when enjaged Ina a pelitioal crisis you dan't know
as mush about that as I do buat th* s things do ooca ( Lauaghter)
and In the old dajs vhen* Ver a political crisis 0.50 an* the
late aeoff -Street and I would find 32rselW5s this too
fbrturiatelj betbze the days of lot aircraft and thIigs sitting
In a train, pi1ne, fraw ( anbarra to Mali wurne and we always
talked about cricket. This is samething, 0ir, and youg, Sirg
which you = aet rienbr -the civilising influee or oriaket.
It lifts a nn aiove the level of political controversy* Ssa
you ight make a note of that ( Lau~ ter) ( Applause).
And therefore you can understand per featly how
delighted I mus tonight to sit boe and look at yotimg ToWq
anW listen to his and realise that if ever there was a mam
who ouaght to be in the " mntel he's the me. ( tA* 01ter)
Now of ourse, Sm doesn't age. with this ( Laghter) or be
woud not have a8e~ vith It a fbrtnight ago, but J3aa* having
looked at the edistribution of seats Kooyong Is a little
choosey int Sam having lo.-ked at the redistribution of
seats has now decided that itehama, that hot contestant with
ikakisten In the cricket world, is a blue ribbon seat ( Laughter),
I hope it is be" ne 4ea9 y1 an tired of Soing da to
P'rahran to mse. aspeak ( TAv14ter) ( Applause Tt's onw
thing before I * eu to mi subjat, but I know you are here,
. baj tisproves that the ap of mir&amp; Cles is DotPat
Anybosho pe you won ' t be vadee' any inisappreboasion. I ' m
all for avnd if r bave to go to the Pro= m Tom a Hll
again and make a speh for I'll do it so ILlU
exatli what the romarks will be from the oltiamary a mrbra&amp;
at the bak of the hall. I an famillat with tbat.
But the otb-thing theat I manted to say was this*
oiur distinguished visitor tonighti Riohie ,3enaa me of the
got captains In the entire history Of Cricket her beer)
= a&amp; luse) has in his other and Less repuatable oaepsety as
a journalist CrA40" tr) Saill sawnea tings about the
appointamt of Ted Dexter and a bout the apoinoot of the
Date as the Manager. Nom I sW nothing about Ted iixter,
except I think he's a Jolly pod player and he'll do fri gitful
ml. tool indeed, I've riea the papers. ( Laughter) I kww
that I a Uw to bae" namirated the Captain in t~ uitdAM
which I dnI I know there's a popular s-iperstitIon In
Australia that when I do to Rngl'td I look at cricket matchs.
I didn't. Didn't mee a bell bowled9 had no op portunity to
nominate a aptain or to nominate a Manager, Mat when 1 say
tthhaatt t. h1 etb oDuugkhe t otfh * atl bthkis wwaass ainmtroiadtuecdin ga na Cnawp taeinrag io fm daisst csiepyline
because it was my duty and perhaps mW fortune to be In London
when the Coroation wis an and to have to attend ame or two
rehearsals bemeuse I was Primo Minister and therefore I Ct In$
as you mIst say ( 1aughpter) vith -zinston ainds you knw te other
lesser breds. ( Lauster).
I attended one or two of these reboarsals and aernaft
: Norfblk Is one of those follows who looks a little deadpan-faaedo
He's trnoul interested In cricket and very good
but he's the &amp; arl Marshal* His family, for manyp many esJureso
have bad to run the Coronationa and, therefore, ? n ran this ono
and I wont alonz to a rehearsal. eill, it's q~ tt simple tbr mel
becmase all I had to do was to walk up the aisle and silt dowmi.
( Lougbter) and that Isa not a task that exceeds my wost abilities
( r'aughter). I could walk up the aisleg turn to the left and sit
00**/ 3 
3.
dov ~ st he was standing in the middle of what tbq call
the Iateof the Abbey at the Corontion, with a sort of
tcroardvse llinIg dmoincto pozon whayt ouha kpnpoewns, wIni thth e, w ne bouf t tshtsil l Ot
follow holds this bit what he says comes out you know
what I mean, I am riot a scientific tlellov.
from A~ onA nodr athlel tfhires ty-oyuenagr lomredn liantg sv; i olafc bsatigeira nod, r fCrehsrh'is4" t$ th
they ver* there, rehearsing. And I toiglit, " uP. ll this AUi
be very Interesting the kremier Zari and all these young
sprigs of the nobilitysisttiig araund* And he got out In
the -middle and said, l biow when so and so happenal all you
bogs know what you have to do, You have to go across and
stand behind the eoer to vbin you are attached fbr this
purpose, Go." And they got up and slouceld aerees bess
slouching I hhea py to tell you, is not an utter prAostive
of Austeians-they slouched aaros and he had a watch In
his hands and then he would address them In term that would
do your heart -od * Xon, young 3o-and-* o ( namiag the beaver
o f a famous am) g you took tirtyjfIve seconds fbr that
Movement. Fifte is the t~ s all mdo Niow c. We'll
do this a, Xin. And If you Mus't do It in fiten seconds
you gp straight back to Eton ( laughter)". 1 tell yoUp tis
man's a diseipliarziane I woder what's iping to happen,
ihie. I do irtdeed. I thinkv you know if sawe of you
opponents, iorn down by y., ur supqrb tactical ability become
a little i-ary at third slip, His Gracee the '-uke Viillo " m
out and say, buok to Utn" . auhter)* lhough, of cousag
it would be quite uaeless to siy that to Freddie frueman
( Laughter), And1 Lht's why I hope Freddie wiil be here.
Blw that Just restinds we of ore thin&amp; vAt do I
do 4ith this fellow, Ian? Anyhow~ It reminds me of just one
thing, The last time that the ) M. 1C. were out tare, there
was a test match in Adelaide anid the AUStra Lian Jourd of
cricket ontrol ( i hope I have the name righit) they loosened
up . they pve a Dinne. ( laughter) They gave a dinner at
the Adlaide cricket gron and I took one of Wy non-crickating
cabinet colleagues with se because the" e are tines when mne
almost most insist an being at an advantages you see*
( Laughter) I took a non-oriaketIng 00cOllaN with so and
there they were yes, tkmufk you so much, on behalf of
my grandchild, 9 yes and we had this D~ inner and oddly
enoutg, although this was an unexampled piece of pueiOSItY,
the ziglishimen wanted to So sovhere else and eve the
Austra.* ans wanted to do ecmothin6 else, L don't know , and
I had tf' sake a speech@ I am always iiil1Y : ack. 10= 2ay
have to sin, ror my supper* Jut I did raake one remark that
niwrt which 1; think iKeith, In your Presidency you should
no(-orgst because uhs is an izotal obserration.
It had been a Ion,,* long, b-. t day on the Adelaide
groaand, arid Freddie Trumman was bviij from the aim Toa'rens
end, walkinj back fifty yads anil runnin~ uj, forty7five yards;
you know the owt of thing I mean. e ol as he bWot back
towards the Torrens even the amine.-All courtemau&amp; Adelaide
spectators who are the most courteous in the world ( except
to me) ( laughter) even they Ware cal~ ing out in rather
alcoholic voies, * dould YOU like a Pint, Fred?" That's
a leading question ift the strict senoe of the vord ( aiter)
beeause of coup" e he would* kA h e would walk beak a-Ainst
the beeSe muttering, amibing, lookin, shovin.; his teeth
ocoasionady., I thxoughat this ought tol put on record that
night, so I said " A lot or you peoplo have raisuamderstood
Frod , lo ou tikthat when he wa~ s beating Up against tje 
wind Walking book to his marks muttering, ambling, shwAvin
his L. th, that he was LLsic ba langeaps p. hapa obsagwe
langap. s Fowpt about It* for~ et about It* I wun as=*
you that all be was doing w-s recitlias Greek Lambies. ( Laughter)
n4 for the " eat of the toar whnver -aw Freddie -yo
kmpv, bass a roug~ hs tnzui, delightft crestare bod look
at me an~ d says " ft. loia a a a ( t. augtr).
Anyhow, you've gone through your trial peri-4..
Yoovebadtoput up with ydm4= KdWonald# this follow Am3
-oeIi nal ailed to understand th-3 [ arachi tomq and
all thse things from ytilch I havwe suffered myself, wad you
have now tur'ned aside to Keith lRigg Aetww It's up or
down Keith I wouldn't kav, * xoept that you are nov a
sped., of lycoon. All I kaW about Naith apart fronm W
other things that I know about % imitsh at when Keith went
out to bat, he had ahabit or liftn the left foot . You
knov# Like that as If he yew. an old hesmf in
the stallI. And whenevor I saw him do that t" we times, I
know that be woul~ d hit the bell for ( loar next stroke -and
be always did. Alwqs did*
46l19 bare's Keith. Hie's one of the oree.
of my life* He " epresents and Is an eminent persons In
&amp; a overseas corporation M Whaliewer I'm ftelin dreadful at
Lanberreq feeling that L can't stand it any lonipr, be
arrives and v&amp; ulk In with a feW tycoons and I have to get
up and say, 1* Helo, Keith. How nice to s o der bey*"
And that bailds him uip, ( Laugter) ftIlds hmup With, thes
wretched ereestures, vb are taking mey out of Australitag
though I am bound to adults asu a comparatively haneat man,
they also put a gaa4 deal of ieyinto Ito
Jut Keith, you're a famous ovidsterg a
great chioketer. It's 0 pest Pleasure to be -what do I
do to induct yom? Aive me a pie** of btatewil U
( Loahter) Look at œ tS ( Laughter) tau kwv, Xe1 Tolvt
Went to KelbDUrMe Arar chool a roreet classical sehool
and as he would sqj alarm at voebile nonan.
And se, Sir,, induct you is that rigft?
and .1 invite you to take your chair ( Iajahter) ( Applauoe I 



621080 A
TRANS CR IPT OF TELEV1S ION iv: v cV u~
TH E Pci HON. 1I1A IIG1TE. S OHj CTjfjA~ qL 7~ PER~ TH
Oi'l 30OTH 192
Merizies A, A. MY-, Menzies -v~ ji; dA. d you find it necesasry to r'ack
ry 1_ t4er 4* 0
1tell. the roasons WerTe indicated in le0tey toh
and ackno-i.: ledgcd by him and those have bCeen pub. ished,'
M. L' 0Bury is a ;! an of abiit~ ry,~ c'n-aracter and i value
himvmeru h ad i ', sn ' in easy thing to find
myself reachiing thle i-nevit-able decision that 1I must
ask him to rsg bL. afte: z al, lhe hiad state ne
twice, and reaffirmcae it9 v ' iews a bout the Comm1on
Maricet2 about the effect of-" B: idtish entry cn the
Austral ian a ooywhi oh were iaterially different
from the se iihich nad. been expreojsed on beha'_ lf-of the
Governme~ nt by myself and. McEwan, an~ d that was not
a pcositi'.-on -thiat I could acce-pt because these ne-, otiati.
ons are in mid-troam, so to speak, at the present
te2reachitng perliaps ve]-y critical stages and, to
have w-ihat would be treated as a Government view w'iich
ran across the vicws that had been put by Mxr, McExfen
and myself, was not acouot'ahle0 And, therefore,
unqa ppily, Hr0 B-ary had to go.
Do you thins[ iirt Mr., Bury~ s statement bas alr. eady
been damaging to Australia case abr.-oad?
W03-11 it could be u,, ed aiainst Aust-. F-ilia's case, but
the action that htas beo,, n ta u4ou id demons-rrate that
it is no--t t'he . fustxa'LJ. cn CGovecaeintvS view and,.
therefo-e, 1. drjn'r. myscl-f expect that1 our posi. tion
will, as from no&gt; v beo weiakened0
Mr. Bury said thCll Cormn -cn .~ oktwould have a limited
Lind minor-eff-ctu upon AustICra-lia. is there any truth
at all. in theSE VJ. 0Ws'?
I don't agaree with tiem, 0 L espectMr Bury's belief
that tacy ,, ro true, but 1 thinkY that if Great . Eh-tain,
for exnnple., wer3e to go intGo the Common Market
un-onditionally, th-CO; is say, on the10 terms of the
Trety f Relike the othe uropean countanles, the
impact on our economy uouLd be vc; rcy substanLiai-
Generally, do you cesd~-t;[ he Butry affair.-a li-ttle
local difficu.-lty or a; major Party crisis?
Oh, the_-e's-no maJor ar-crisiTs about i Theire,
has been an attemm,, t Jn the_ Ea_-strn States in someo
newspapers to i.! Iip it up inoa Party, cr. isis. in
fact. tiie-y hiave hoen, in sC-fliC sections of thae Sydney
press, indust',, ri. ousl-y tr" ying to ereot'e theo idea that
I was p-asted -into-z asking for Mr., Bury's resignation
by Ilr, MeE',, 7n; the facts ooefi ngc. o, urs, thlat o-" er:
the oer id ~ woday, Ihad tw-o conversations with
Mr. McE-ien, boi. h' on 11. h-. e t~ ephc.--ne, a+ Lid both ini: UtJa'tod
by me. One was 1-' o navc vjord with him about issuing
statements Lo and 1 arid thei etheir cne was ihen
had consideread tho pos-ition of--Mr, Bury. and * r had had
ong -tal~ k with i~ ILOd with. one or toof my ctftor
colleaws-es wh a7. a1i: Lab2o, 2 then -rang up Mr.
Mciluen to, saCy . L0oy ok t sioar~ r y, but I see no
c; s cape_ from ask rres), iusccrp a Ca n you1 .
think'a eñ any, a 1 ti I C I i n 1 t, was iook-Lng
f o no., And. 1 ho saird t. l-at ho_ hLad ' boor. thinking about-
1t ho, 1-as r. eedd as was, and that Lo had not
bec--7 -ob le aorn ' c ioernc::!,., j. xe U2.., I an. at,. 
Q. Is this the first time that you have had to sack a
Minister? Oh, no. But let the dead past bury its deado
Qo Who will replace Mr, Bury?
A, I don't know. I will begin to Uhink about that problem
when I get back home.
Q, Do you think Fred Chaney has got a chance of selection?
A, No, look, i am not going to discuss names, thank you.
Q. In Wollongong recently, when referring to Britain's
proposed entry into the Market, you were quoted as
H saying and I quote, " We stress the need to meet the
new era of trade as a challenge and it must not be
exaggerated into a disaster," Is this a softening
down of your own statements made earlier and mo; e in
line with Mr. Bury's?
Ao None whatever. If you were to read the full text
my speech at Wollongong you would see that it stands
exactly on the same footing as the first statement I
made on this matter and all the ones I have made since,
Qo Was it true that you had to paint a grim picture abroad
to obtain the best terms for Australia and paint a rosy
picture here to retain confidence in industry and
business and boost development?
A, I hope I haven't sunk to that political level, When I
do, people ought to throw me out,
Qo , s it t;--ue 9Mr, Menzies that Australia's position has
improved recently as the result of the œ 127M C-ATT
negotiations between Australia and the Six?
Ao Oh, well, there are some improvements there, but they
are not connected with the Common Market discussions.
There is a process that goes on in GATT quite regularly
in which concessions arc made here or there in exchange
for other concessions, There is a lot of tariff
negotiation that goes on in GlAT,' but that's not the
problem that arises in the Common Market discussions.
The Common Market discussions will determine whether
our preferences inside the Commonwealth, the preferential
pattern of Commonwcalth trade is to continue, or if it
continues, for how long, or on what terms. There is a
great misunderstanding about the position of Australia
on this thing. We have not been overpainting our
picture. We have in fact from the very beginning,
approached the problem constructively, We have had our
officials in discussion with the officials in Great
Britain over the period of a year now, Mro McEwon
has been there, I've been there. On each possible
level, we have presented our views, and all the time,
we've been looking for some process, some agreement
that will maintain to a reascnablo extent our trading
position; though it may not involve the maintenance
in all their original qualities of our preferences,
We have been looking for a middle course of a helful
kind, and I think that anybody in the United Kingdom ooo.../ 3
X This is not a direct quotation from the Prime
Minister s Wollon-nong speech, 
team would agtce th* no ccuntry ha,-s bFan so cons tructlv3,
thlough. we have; I admit, been . rsistent i~ n the no
that we havcn~ t take1 ou-, teeth ou" of this mattgrs,
Day by day, weed: by week, we Lave been pressing cer-tain
views thiat we hold. And thea effect of this ha-i yet to
be seen.* The Si-' c may modify some of thieir ruiles in
order to accommodate Cc'mmcnweath. tv'ade:,, We don~ t know,,
Q. Are you hopeful that Britain wrill or won~ t join the
Common Market?
A, That depends entiroli, on thie terms. You see, the
political advantages that Great Britain seeos in joining
the Common Market well, they are matters for the
British Govorment ' to determ. 1ne0 We -, rc not deciding
th. at proble%, ThIey are,, The ecenomic consideratioils
about joining the Coizqon Markiet stan.,, d in a different
and -it is on those that we have been rresenting
our views riots once more,) to prevent Great Bri c( ain from
making her own decision thatts not our., idea at all
but to secure9 th1-rough her, as good a deal-from thie
countries of th1-e Six as we Can in the interests of our
own export trade,, Of course, if we did not do tt~,
we would be : railing in cur dUty to th . e pople of
Australia, How do you interpret the weekcnd news of a deadlock
between the negctinators?
A, I flavor make an-, y comment on something that I read in
a weekend paper, honcstly; il' wait until I hear
ofcially as -to iwhIat has gone cn, Iwul o
readily accept thc idea t~ hat there is a deadlock.,
I think you will fl: nd th, they wi'll be talking again
i~ n the course o-f* tl-e next few days., And they are
bound to, Both si'des at,-c going to exh-aust thle
poss2. bl. itJ. es before tht-ey aclnovrldge that they can't
get anywhiere0
Q Prime Minister, are you worried about Australia's
unemp1 cyrueii s ituation?
Al No9 thaere is more thian I 1, lculd like,, but if ycu mean
by that do I regard this as being a rncssive, continuing
problem. no, I don't thin]: that, Our idea is that
you must got tile prosent number of peop-Le applying,
re gisatered for emplocyment, substantially dovn,
Everybody would agree about that. And we have some
hopes7 considerable hopes, that as a result of the
general economic irrprovement these niumrbers will fa-'?
and fall during the cou. e ol' this year,,
Theore is a noticeable drop since Do(-ewbrfs :' ecorO.,,
A, 0h, yes, Quite noticeablec and. that is all the more
remarkable because ze had a record intakeo schoolleavers
and so en 7i Novrember, DeCember, January,
The probl. em, in other ors; of finding employment was
inuchi bigger than it had been on any previous occasion,
and yet the imp~ rovement as you knew during the last
faw months has beericiitc rernarkat-. 1. o.
Q. ~ ThLere were still 93, 000 uanemployed in June doe~ s
this mean the oconcmmic reco~ very mes2ures, yrou. took
earlier are notvokngqut ao well. as you would
like? 0 0 C0 0 00 C/' 4 
As It may be that we have yet to see their full result,
We had discussions with a number of business ana other
people to see what their impress. ions were,, I think we
all agreed that the measures are working, that the state
of the economy is improving, but that everybody would
l. ike to see it improve more rapidly. in other words,
it is going in the right direction, but we have yet to
see the full effect of some of the measures that were
t. ker. You want to remember that measures taken in
Febxuary have not had a very long time to produce their
results, Already they have produced some very interesting
ones,
Qo What bearing will the unemployment situation have on the
new Budget?
A, I don't know that I follow that question, The new
Budget will state the economic policy of the Government
so far as it relates to financial measures and in framing
a Budget, you take into account a series of problems
affecting the national economy including the necessity
to improve the employment situation. It is one of the
factors that is taken into account,
Q. The Federal Government did ask the WoAo Government for
details of the development programmes in the North-' Iest.
Is this significant? Does it mean that there will be
help for the North-West?
Ao Look, I beg to be excused from saying anything myself,
officially, about t. his matter0 The fact is that one
of the Wes., Australian Ministors, Mr, Court, has just
been in Canberra having discussions with our people
about some of these developmental ideas and I believe
they have boon making very satisfactory progress.
I had a talk thi. s morning with your distinguished
Premier here, Mr, Brand and Mro Brand himself seemed
quite optimistic about the way these discussions were
goingo I nave not been conducting them myself.
Qo Why isn't your Party contesting the Batman seat in
Victoria, Mr. Menzies?
A, Well, now, I wonder if you would tell me why you think
we should? It costs money, you know, to contest a
by-election, My Party always has less money to spend
than the Labor Partyo That is not very well known, but
it is trueo To run a candidate for a seat that you are
not going to win and which is going to be materially
altered against you in the forthcoming redistribution
and with no Senate vote to concern yourself with all
those things didn't add up in my mind to a good case
for putting up a candidate going through this form.
Nor did it commend itself to the Fxecutive of the Pr. rty
organisation in Victoria, whose opinion I, in fact,
confirm, and they decided not to run a candidate0
Qo How do you think your Party would go if there
is a new election?
Ae I haven't a clue.
Qo Sir, would you tell me what is going to become of
either Mr, Hasluck or Mr, Chaney now that the Perth and
Curtin seats have been merged? o00 0C0C a/ 
A0 I ~ don't 1: now. 1 will be very Ln, p Idnthv
both of them still with mc afe th citiUt
oeats have been th1rough an election~ woul. d be vey
disappointed0 iBut., * Lok), d on?+. a': k me about thiose
things. I am not familiar with tte boundaries bhere0
I don't know what is going to happen, Nor doev
anybody else at the present tinle, I would think
QO The United Nations Mission to Australian New Guin~ ea
was high in its praise for Autralials administration,
' out what are you going to do abouat their Sugesio
for an enlarged and maore represontativo Parliament2
A ' dell, I think you are putcing their recommendation
ipn rttymodrae way when you say that Itoght
they were snying thiat there ought to bc full Parliarentary
Government establish'ed almdost instant~ y, within a year
or two,, Now, that 1, jst doesn'~ t make sense, quite
fOrankly0We have been developing, under the cdoministration
of Mr. FHasluck himself, who iaas done a wonderful
job in relation to Now Guinea; we have been developing
Local Governmaent. There are quito, a niudiber of 1oc&amp;. l
author ities now in whicli tae indigenous inhabitants are
membcrs and conduct the0ir operations. We now have
them on the Lagislat1ive Council, 0 But anybody who knows
anything about New Guilnea withl-ij'Vs hundreds of different
languages and its area and its population many of them
remote and living in a ver_-y primitive staze anybody
who supposes -that you can 1hand cver self -government to
that community cut of hnand has not learned the lessons
of the Congo, tha-t is all I can cay0 We have a great
responsibility for Now~ Guinea, and our responsibility
is to bring up the standard of living and the capacity
for se]. f-gove:. rurent of t, people there, and we propose
to dischiarge thiat roSpOriSibility. It would be a criminal
act on our part to abandon i~ t
QO Do you tlihink theire is a discrepancy between the UN0
Miss. Jon's p-ressure on behalf of th-e Papuans? political
advanceme(-nt i~ n Australian New Guinea in view of what
is going on in West New Guineali
A0 Oh., well, I am not going -to discuss that.
Q. ~ Well, finally M-r10 Menzies, I would like-_ to ask you this.
There have been for many years people often asking the
question " When will Mr. Menzies ro-tire?" Have you
got any plans for retirement?.
A, ~ Dear me, I have frequently [, ad plans for reti re-ment
and -then something happens, that makes it imnpossible0
So here 1 am, chained to the wheel8 I can throw no
more lig-ht on m-y fUr t ha n tha t,
Qn W'ell. I'd like to thank you fo--r coming along tonight,
Mr,, rire Minister. Thank you and good night,~ 



-I2/ o9
PRESS RELEASE TATE GALUARY SHOW IN PERTH
Statement by tha Minister. the Rt. Hon. R. G. Monsies
The Prime Minister said today that arrangements
were being completed to present in the Art Gallery at
Perth the exhibition of Australian paintings which
has been assembled for showing ( from January to March
next year) in the Tat* Gallery in London.
The exhibition " Australian paintings
Colonial Impressionist Contemporary" would
be seen in Perth later this year en route to London.
It has been assembled by the Comonwealth Art Advisory
Board in response to an ihvitation from the Trustees
of the Tate Gallery.
Comprising over 200 pictures, it is the
largest and most important exhibition ever to leave
Australia, and contains many irreplaceable works.
Mr. Menzies said he welcomed the invitation
from the Perth Gallery authorities, not only because
of the importance of this exhibition, but also because
it would give the people of Perth separated by great
distanoes from the other State GaLeries, an opportunity
to see a comprehensive exhibition of Australian art.
The Perth Gallery was also to be thanked
for its generosity in lending pictures for the
exhibition in London. Works by Western Australian
artists Robert Juniper and Guy Grep Smith are included
in the exhibition.
PERTH, July, 1962. 



W. A. CONVENTION OF THE LIBERAL PARTY
AT SOUTH PERTH CIVIC CENTRE
JOTH JULY,-1962
Speech by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Premier and Ladies and Gentlemen
I have really had quite a good day here. I
first of all went to have a talk with Mr. Brand one of
the great Premiers in the history of Australia ? Applause),
then I recorded a television appearance, and those of you
who haven't been through that misery, won't understand what
a misery it is ( Laughter) and that, ltm told will be on at
otclock tonight. Enough, no doubt, to undo whatever good
I may do tonight ( Laughter).
This afternoon, I went to the opening of a new
building; I went on strict conditions that this was my
afternoon off no speechmaking, but after I had arrived
there, I began to detect in the mind and the voice of the
Chairman a sort of hint that, with a little encouragement,
he would ask me to speak and I was resolutely determined not
to speak. Even a chattering fello.-w like myself needs t-Ime
off occasionally ( hear, hear), and just as we were reaching
the danger point His Excellency the Governor had spoken,
the Chairman of the Company had spoken, the Premier was in
midstream a note came into me that I was wanted on the
telephone, At first I thought this was the effort of a
zealous officer of mine ( because I have one or two who might
be so described), but when I went out it turned out that it
was the Prime Minister of New Zealand who wanted to have a
little natter to mel and I said " My dear Keith, I can't tell
you how glad I am to hear you. Laughter) When we have
discussed our business letts keep it going for a little
while" and we did. And so I was saved. ( Laughter)
Now, I said just then something about your Premier.
I'd like to say this. I know that there is a by-election.
There are always by-elections. There will be one for Kooyong
one of these days. ( Laughter) By-elections are terrible
things but on this by-election at Bunbury much will turn for
this State because to lose this by-election, would involve
the Premier of Western Australia in the most tremendous
political problem and I repeat what I said to you, we are all
very much inclined, and particularly in our own country, to
disregard the local product. " Oh, yes, he's quite good."
" Oh yes, he's not bad." " Oh yes I knew him at school." It
is a pity that Australians go outside their own bailiwick so
frequently to be recognised. Every time your Premier comes
to Canberra to a Loan Council Meeting, to a Premiers'
Conference I find myself saying to my colleagues " Isn't this
man absolutely first-class." I have never in my long experience
of office the longest outside South Australia ( Laughter) of
any man in Australia known a man to establish, time by time,
year by year, such repute and authority among the Premiers as
your Premier has. ( App), ause)
And, therefore Mr. Chairman, whatever comes or
goes'on the great issues that we discuss otherwise, I hope
that everybody in the Liberal Party in this State will do
whatever he can, directly or indirectly, sparing no effort to
see that the Brand Government continues to exist and to serve
this State, And, indeed, why shouldn't it? I almost give
up guessing, I've been a long time now too long -in this
c e* &amp; e a/ 2 
busiessand I never cease to marvel at how disposed people
are to say 11Oh yes, whatever is good we must take for
granted. Let us concentrate our minds on what we want, not
on what we have or what we have achieved."' This is a very
human falling. It is just as much as to say, " W1ell, Father
Christmas hasn't been here this year. He came along last
year rather handsomely." But when I look back over even the
last ' twelve months, and remember what has been done by Dave
Brand's Government and by my own in utter collaboration for
the development of this State, I marvel that anybody could
vote against him,
In fact, I will tell you a story about that. I
have a couple of sons who treat me with reasonable respect,
and I have a daughter who treats me with more than respect,
and before she was married, she travelled. around Ausuralia
with me on one of tl'ese grr'at campaigns, you know my wife,
my daughter and myself. We got back to Melbourne the night
before the poll and my daughter leaned against the mantelpiece
in the hotel sittingroom. and looked at me and said, " You know,
Dad, I don't understa. id how anybody could vote against you."
( laughter) I said, " Well, of course, darling, it's very nice
of you to put it that h. ay, but I'll. settle for fifty percent,,
plus one." ( Laughter) I want rather better than that for Mr. Brand,
14oulC. you all think about it, would you all work on it?
Because, really, it would be one of the ironies of political
history to have a Government that has done and is doing more
for this State than any other Government in its history, to
be put in any position of embarrassment over a by-election,
So it's your job. Everyone of you, directly or indirectly,
Now, Sir, I thought I would like to talk to you
as the Fede ral leader, about national policy, particularly
internal national policy. There are quite a few people to be
found who will say to you you know you have met a few of them;
have perhaps said it yourselves " Oh yes. The Liberal Party
stood for something. it has done great work, but what does it
stand for now. It can't live on the past." Now, this is
something that every political party that has had success must
face up to " What do you stand for now. Are you living on
the past?" It is just wlhen you have been in office for long
enoutog hve a reat record of positive results that your
opponents will be heard to say, " Yes, well., that's all right,
but what are they doing next year or the year after or the
year after," Then, with great gaiety, they begin to let
their imaginations loose on what they would do,
I notice that my friend and opponent, the Leader
of the Opposition, has been in the Northern Territory. Dear
me, what he's going to do ' or the Northern Territory after the
next election exceeds all the expectations of his prospective
Treasurer0 ( Laughter) But hevs announcing it0He doesn't
realise, of course, that in my own Cabinet, we have a Minister
who represents or administers the Northern Territory. That's
Paul Hasluck, And iJ. f I were to give you a ball to ball
description of how Paul Hasluck tr* ies to get the extra
œ C100 000, the extra half million, the extra million out of us
for he Northern Territory, you would be Jfascinated as listeners,
and shocked as taxpayers. ( Laughter) And Paul knows all
about it. Nobody has ever understood better the problems of
the Territories than hoe does, but it's so easy, when a Government
has been in office for a long time, for its opponents to say,
" Oh, well, thais is what we'tll do, and so on,," 0904066OS / 3 
And, therefore, I thought I'd like to say something
to you tonight about Liberalism as a living force.
After all, as everybody knows, I had romething to do with
the establishment of the Liberal Party in Australia and
something to do with writing its first platform, and writing
its constitution, and something, I hope, to do with subsequent
achievements in the political world, I dontt regard
Liberalism as a fading force, I think we've run our trial
courses and that we are now at the beginning of the next
great chapter of achievement. But if we are, then we must
know, positively, what we stand for, Don't suppose that I
am going to make you a policy speech about half crowns, oi
five shillings or things, I want to know what it is we stand
for, what we believe in, what makes you come here, what makes
me come here, what makes the whole movement of Liberalism n
Australia a powerful force6 So let's ask ourselv-es what our
objectives are not yet achieved; far from it.
i think that above althings we want to build in
Australia a balanced and strong and progressive and civilised
nation in which advances are shared by all sections of the
people, Now you may say that's platitudinous, Perhaps it is.
There are many great passages in English that are platitudinous
and that, if you like, is a platitudeo But let's look at it.
A balanced nation. That is, a nation in which primary industry
and secondary industry and tertiary industry live side by side
and achieve a common, national purpose, And the moment you
say that you stand for a balanced nation, you are saying that
whatever is done there must be progress, productivity,
advancement for the man on the land, for the man in the factory,
for the man on the truck or the railway train. This is a
balanced community strong, progressive. I'll say something
more about that in a moments
And civilisedo There is a tremendous amount of
talk engaged in about economic problems; there is a great
amount of discussion about how much more money A gets or B
gets or C gets, 4We could easily become man fr many woman
for woman, the richest country in the Southern Hemisphere,
cut it won't matter very much unless we can say that we are
the most civilised country in the Southern Hemisphere,
Civilised because we understand the unselfish duties of
citizenship; civilised because we have come to understand
the importance of tho human being, the dignity of the human
being, the dignity of labour, the responsibility of riches,
These are the tests of civilisation, and our great task is
to produce a civilised nationo
The only supplement I would like to make to that
is that in our time, certainly in mirn there have been many
furious attempts made to build up class warfare in Australia.
We hear a lot about class distinctions. All the reactionary
forces in the country, and I refer particularly to the
socialists and the communists who are, of all people, the
most reactionary, always like to talk about class distinction,
the class war, in the classical phrases of the Communist Party
that you so well remember.
But I have, all my political life, believed that
there is one single, very g: reat, class distinction in Australia.
I insist on it. It's the distinction between people who work
and people who donet; between people who contribute to human
society and people who merely want to benefit from human
society, This is an enormous distinction; and if in the
language of the old Communist Manifesto, the phrase is,
" Workers of the world unite you have nothing to lose but
your chains," I say, " Yes. Worhkers of the world uniteo
That's what the Liberal Party believes ino" ( Applause) e0 0 0 a3 0 9 t 
Iow Sir, the next thing that L want to say to
you is this. Here we are, we are a young nation, not
unknown around the world, sometimes credited with being
aggressive, sometimes accused of being noisy, but not unknown
around the world, and I am happy to say, in all material
quarters, respected around the world,, What we are engaged
in doing, what we must continue to be engaged in doing is t
build this young nation into a strong ans splendid heritage
and that cantt be achieved by people who acquire habits of
dependence. A Slight yawn " Wlhy doesn~ t the Government
( whatever that ieans) do something about it." You can't
build up an independent nation on a foundation of dependent
people. The spirit of independence, this fire that burns
in the veins of an independent nation must burn in the veins
of the individual, We cannot succumb to the ideas of our
opponents which, roughly, are that whatever good is to be
done must be done by the L-ystical being the Government.
This is, a matter for the individual; this is a matter which
calls for a spirit of adventure, a desire to contribute.
You know, it is a cant phrase, Sir, a cant phrase to talk
about private enterprise and every now and then, I will hear
people say, " Oh, of course, your Government is not as much
in favour of private enterprise as it ought to Not
infrequently when I hear somebody .3ay that, I come to discover
what he means, What he means is that his particular private
enterprise ought to be the nursling of the Government. He
doesn't want private enterprise really; he doesn't want
competition really; he wants to be protected from all the
winds that blow, In other words, that particular private
enterpriser has lost the spirit of adventure.
Have we? This is the crucial question for the
people of Australia, because our whole history has been a
history of adveonture sailing wherever ships could sail.
This island continent came out of the mists it was
developed by people who had the spirit of aiventure. it
has been found by people who had the spirit of adventure,
Wherever you go in Australia, you see all the memorials
not cairns of store, but the memorials in farms and stahions
and factories to the people who had the spirit of adventure.
And without that spirit of adventure, Australia can't become
by the turn of the century the great and powerful and respected
country to whose noises I would hope to listen from the grave.
It's the spirit of adventure and it is our task as
Liberals to foster it, not to foster the spirit of leaning
on governments but to say thiat if private enterprise means
what we think it means, it must be prepared to accept risks,
take chances, go forward.
Now, Sir, all that is by way of preliminary. I
just want to elaborate that a little tonight by saying something
t'Vo you about what, in material terms, might be regarded as
our problems. And the first of them is to increase the population
of this country, I think that when at the and of 19&amp;+ 9 we
came back into office, full of adventure, full of hope? full
of' thought, the population of Australia was about 7_ 2 million
and, 9 today it's 1bJ million. There are three million more
people in kustralia than when I went and took my oath of
office at Government House only a few years ago. And we
must do this. We know, do~ t we, what a pressure there is
co 00000 
in the world great populations in Asia, China itself, which
may very well have by the turn of the ' entury, a thousand
million people " suckled in a creed outworn", if you like,
still perhaps under the authority of Communism a thousand
millions. If we, in Australia are to enjoy and defend our
heritage, we can't afford to have 10i or 11 million people
at the turn of the century. We must have our 25 or 30 or
whatever it may be,, And this means that we must do whatever
we can in this country to maintain the flow of immigrarts
and that's not as easy as it looks, because you have fluctuations
in the economy from time to time and there will always
be people to be heard to say, " Well, you must cut down on
Immigration or you must abolish immigra-t'ion,." We irust have
people coming into Australia or we will oerish,
I know about the proble.-. is of ipmigratior, not all
about themi but I know a good deal about them and the
pressures they make on resources and the impact that they
make on the general problems of inflation in the country,
but I am a convinced believer in imnmigration, because I
believe that unless we can go on as we have been going on
in Australia, increasing our population by importation and.
by natural increase inside our own country by about 2 a
year, thun we are going to be in a position in ten years'
time, in fifteen years' time in which thie onlooking world
will not tolerate our ownership of our trusts.
That means, you know, that-. occasionally we ought to
think about our grandchildren; not as rather nice little
creatures, or naughty little creatures or dampening little
creatures you know, all grandparents will understand what
I mean ( Laughter), We musn't think of them entirely in
that sense; we must think of them as those who, as the men
and women of their -ace, will be standing responsible for
Australia in their day, and there can't be too many of them.
Therefore, to build up the population is a great and primary
task. But you canft build up the population, Sir, in that
handsome fashion and, at the same time, ignore the responsibility
of providing proper employmaent for the people who live
hero. Not only proper employment of human beings, though
that is of supreme importance, but proper employment of the
material resources of the nation. And, therefore, our
second great task is to maintain full employment of manpower
and material resources.
Now so far, I suppose everybod~ y would say to me,
" Yes, that~ s quite right. No difficulty in agreeing -to
those things. Why labour them? They are two riat-ters;
they are commonplace." Yes, I suppose they are I hope
they are. But side by side with these matters we have, and
particularly as a Government a profound responsibility to
restrain the destruction of the currency, -to restrain inflation,
to maintain economic stability. Now, the moment I come to
that point because all the pressures of the first two
propositions tend in the direction of inflation the moment
i say, " But, at the same time, we must restrain inflation,"
and I mention the word " stability" somaebody is bound to say,
" Oh, IYes, there you are, you see. That's what's wrong with
this Govirnment. It believes in stagnation." There is not
much evidence, is there, in the last eleven years of the
stagnation that we have produced? Not much. But today, they
say, " Stability? Wel'l, that means Stagnation." oe, ./ 6 
Now, I'll come back to that because this is crucial
to my argument, We have had for the last eighteen months,
pursuant to policies for which we have, or some of us,
been roundly abused, we have had, in Australia, for eighteen
months, complete stability in the consumer price level.
How many people really worry about inflation? I do,
There must be a lot of people here tonight who do, who
know that if their incomes are fixed by any method. at alJ.,
then to have the value running out of their fixed income
is a cruel, heartless tax on them. Of course, people of
responsibility don't w" nt inflation. Gamblers do, becauce
they can chase the market, But do you? Do you want
inflation? It isn't stagnation o The fact is that for the last eightEen
months we have had a steady level of prices-for the lasu
eighteen months in consequence, we have had the most marvellous
flow of capital into Australia for investment. " Here is a
country that is stable, here is a country that is not afraid
to take the measures designed to check inflation." I have
had these things said to me abroad by some of the shrewdest
financial people in the world who inspire their clients to
put their money into Australia,, They say, " You've got a
government there that isn't afriad to take steps to restrain
inflation, to produce stability in the currency. And when
somebody says to me stability means stagnation, all I want
to say is that this is an utter abuse of language, I was
thinking of it this afternoon when I went to the opening of
this big building in the city, If somebody had said, " Oh,
this building is no good because the foundations are stable,"
everybody would have laughed. They would have said, " Well,
that's today's funny story." It might have got into a gossip
column, for all I know. ( Laughter)
These are equally important a building in the city
of Perth and the building of this nation, the building of the
mansions in which we want our grandchildren to live,
Stability and strength, In case somebody wants to tell
you once more that your Government in the Commonwealth has
confused stability with stagnation, I would like to remind
you that in this very period in which we are accused of this
negative, stagnant attitude towards public affairs, we have,
in conjunction with State Governments, accepted a share of
responsibility, and a very large share for probably the
greatest developmental programme in the history of Australia,
( Applause) Speaking in Perth, I wontt take you on a tour of
the horizon to all the other States, though I very well
could. I will just talk about your own, here. In this
period of stagnancy, what has happened.? We have agreed,
and put in hand, ana it is now being pursued with great
vigour, a standard gauge railway line from Kalgoorlie to
Kwianna; we have agreed upon the development, organised
by your own Government, of a great iron and stool industry,
We look around us and we see bauxite, alumina; we look
further up, and we see the most remarkable developments of
iron ore, with pert development, with roads in the Northe
Look, Dave Brand could give you a much fuller account of it
than I could, but he would be the first to say that my own
stagnant Government has played along on these matters with
immense vigour and the result is that whatever comes or goes,
the State of West Australia is at the very beginning of its
greatest period of development in its historyo ( Hear, hear)
( Applause) o 0ooo . oo / 7 
I wonder if I might without wearying you tell you
a little private recollection of mine, When I was first
Prime Minister, which is beyond the memory, I hope, of some
of you who are here tonight, one of my Ministers was Herbert
Collett a West Australian Senator and a great man, a
splendid person, and I was chatting with him one night and
I said, " Herbert, were you born in the West?" He was then
fairly venerable, about the same age as I am now. ( Laughter)
This is a long time ago, I said, " Were you born in che West?"
and he said, " No my family went there when I was about seven
or eight." And I said " What was the population of the ! Jest
then?" He said, ' 36,000 people."
Somebody said this afternoon, no doubt with that
truthfulness that characterises West Australians, tbat the
population now is about three-quarters of a millioi. Think
of it, At the very time that he and I were speaking, the
population was over half a million from 36,000 to over
half a million and this seemed to me to be the most phenomenal
development that you could imagine in a community, I want to
say to you, it's nothing to what is going to happen in the
next fifteen or twenty years. You may say to me, " Well,
fifteen or twenty years, old boy, you won't be here." Neither
I will be, that's quite true, I am happy to say ( Laughter) but
it is going to be true, it is going to be true, and I do hope
that all Liberals throughout this period will keep on emphasising
that it is because we want this kind of thing to be true
that we believe that we serve the best interests of the people
of Australia. The people who talk about stagnation in a period of
the greatest fertility in development in Australian history
are preferring a slogan to the truth and I beg of you to
answer them,
Now there is one other matter that I want to mention
to you. If we are to have a large migration programme, if
we are to build up our population, if we are to have the
fullest employment of our resources, of men and materials,
if we are to have the greatest outlook on the development of
the resources of the nation, then there are one cr two other
things that we must have, and one of them is a growing
manufacture because, with all the good will in the world,
any man on the land will agree that the rural industries are
not going to atcract migrants. As they become more and
more mechanised, as they become more and more improved
scientifically in productivity, the chances are all against
them being able to absorb thousands of new citizens. I
understand that. That is true. Therefore, if we are to
bring into Australia large numbers of imrmigrants we must
look at the manufacturing industries and at the tertiary
industries to help us to fulfil the condition of full employment.
Now that is a very simple conception. It is true,
we believe in it, We stand for ito But it contains onn
great danger. We must guard against ito If we are going to
develop our manufacturing industries as we must, and as we
should, if we are going to encourage them as we must and we
should, to export some of their products to the rest of the
world, we must never lose sight of the fact that today and
for many years to come, the primary industries of Australia
provide the backbone of our export income and therefore
provide a good deal of those imports upon which manufacturing
in Australia will depend, ( Applause) 000o..../ 8 
8.
Therefore, Sir, every time I think about this matter,
every time I speak about this matter as a Liberal and a
leader of the Liberal Party, I keep reminding myself and
those who are good enough to listen to me, that whatever
we do we must do a great deal to develop these other
industries, vastly important for full employment, and
therefore to population growth and therefore to national
strength and national security, The argument is unanswerable.
Whatever we do about that, we must remember that the costs
of production in the rural industries are more important
than perhaps they are in any others. Because if you have
a local industry and its costs go up well, it has its
local list of customers and if their wages go up they can
pay the increased price. It's rather a sort of homely
affair, But the woolgrower gets what the world will pay
him. The wheatgrower, subject to certain limitations, will
get what the world vill -ay him. The grower of meat also
you can run the whole gamut of primary industry. The
essential thing from their point of view is that they should
not be costed out of their market.
And how are we to achieve that? This is where the
Liberal Party has a great task, a great task. How are we
to achieve that? We are not going to achieve it by crying
down manufacturing because I think without an increase in
manufacture in Australia, steadily growing, year by year,
our population will not grow year by year. We are not going
to do it by fine words, we are not going to do it by taking
the world by the throat and telling the world that it ought
to pay more for what we grow. We have to do it by attacking
the problem of rural costs, and in order to do that, we
encounter not just some simple problem of subsidy but a
basic problem of bringing to the service of the man on the
land, whether he is a grazier, a sheep man, a cattle man
or a wheatfarmer or a dairyfarmer or whatever it may be, the
latest results of scientific researcho We must have more
scientific research, we must build up the activities of
people like C. S. I. R. O and so on and above all things, we
must get a common understanding between Commonwealth and
States that the results of research must go in the quickest
possible time to the man on the land. They must travel
from the laboratory to the farm much more rapidly than
they ever have before. And if they do, we will find the
most remarkable results.
I am not one of those statistical fellows who come
around with reams of figures because, although they are
fascinating, I've often found that nobody listens to them,
and therefore I am not imposing them on you. But I will
safely say this, in the broad, that one of the great features
of the last few years in Australia has been the increased
productivity of rural industries, not arising from increased
employment because, on the whole there may have been a
fall in employment but increased productivity, increased
efficiency. And here is a point of time at which governmonts
and private enterprise can meet together.
I still have a few friends and I like to see them
who are on the land ( Laughter) who are sheep men or whatever
it may be. I am always fascinated to find that at a time
when our opponents like to represent the sheep man, for
example, as a rather idle fellow who goes down to the
Melbourne Cup you know and buys a bottle of indifferent
champagne and all that kind of nonsense, I an fascinated
to find that I never encounter one of then on his own
property who isn't at some pains to tell me how much he has
0o0e o / 9 
9.
been able to build up the weight of fleece in his flocks,
how delighted he is to know how he his been able to increase
the carrying capacity of his land by the improvement of
pastures these are men who believe in enterprise, They're
men who know that while they don't mind earning some money;
of course, who does they know that their own country in
which they have a considerable stake will depend on The
skill, the scientific effort that they put into the problems
of production, Now, Si, this is not merely a matter for tLemo
This is where we come in, Tonight, standing here I can
see an old friend of mine the distinguished Minister for
Agric-iu. tw. e in the State of Victoria,, He has been over
here on a conference. He knows, I donst need to persuade
him, and all his colleagues around Auscralia know, that this
is one of the great proLlems to have more and more
scientific efforto ( Between you and me, and I wouldn't like
to have it quoted against me, I grudge all. this stuff vp in
the air). I want more and more scientific effort in
increasing the productivity of the land, the capacity of
Australia to sustain a cost level by making it spread over
a far greater area of production,,
This is our great hope. This is the great tasko
I dontthink our opponents have ever thought of ito To
them, costs are nothing, There is nothing in costs to
them that can't be made up by an extra tariff or by an
extra subsidy or something, or an extra tax, But for
Liberalism, which believes in Australia, for Liberalism
which knows that it is on the productivity of our o. n
country and our capacity to sell what we produce to the
rest of the world that tie whole of our economic future
depends, this is a different problemo Keep down the
costs of rural industries, increase the efficiency,
increase extension services, do all these things, so that
we may extend our secondary industries increase our
population and come, in twenty years' time, to a state
of affairs in which somebody will look around and say,
" This is wonderful, the population of this country is
twenty odd million, the position in this country is that
we still maintain our position as remarkable exporters to
the rest of the world, we still retain our position of
being a country in which the man on the land can survive
and grow and prosper and maintain our position as being,
perhaps, the greatest manufacturing and export manufacturing
country in the Southern Hemisphere" This is a good dream,
isn't it? And it is not merely a dream, it can be made to
come true, It can be made to come true if we, as Liberals,
do not allow ourselves to be beguiled by silly people who
tell us that Liberalism has Pecome stagnant, that it's all
over, that it is about time to give the other boys a go,
These pseudo-Liberals who whistle in your ear some of them
from very well-appointed offices, forget about them. You
don't suppose do you, for a moment, that we would be
exercising such miserable talents as we have in the service
of this country as Liberals unless we had something to
believe in? Not to make too fine a point of it, I have
been Prime Minister, in my second manifestation now, for
twelve and a half years, You don't suppose, do you that
I had some fascinated interest in creating a record? I
would like, very much, to have a little private life, Most
of you have I have none. But I am here, I hope you're
here, because I believe in things, on behalf of my country
and am determined to do every last thing that I have in
me to achieve themo 



P 4, Y 696
APPOINTivIENTTO 4iIN-iSTTIY
Statement ; by thce Prime Minister. Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
I have decided to recommend to the Administrator
of the Commonwealth, Sir Dallas 3rocks. the appointment
of Mr. David Fairbairn, as Minister for Air.
Arrangoments are being Irade for Mr. Fairbairn
to be sworn in tomorrow morning in Canberra.
CAINBERRA, . rd August, 1962. 



P. M. No-, 57/ 1962
SOUVENIR' 3 OF ROYAL VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister Rt. Hon, R. G, Menziiws
It is officially announced that in connection
with the Queen's visit to Australia, consideration has b'qen
given to the policy regarding the use of Rtoyal portraits and
Royal emblems and the arms of Australia in connection trith
souvenirs, mementos, displays, etc., commemorating the visit
of Her Majesty t'% he Queen and His Royal Highness the Duke of
Edinbur gh.
2. For these purposes an article would be regarded.
as a " souvenir" if it contained all or any of the portraits
of Her Majesty the Queen? His Royal Highness the Duke of
Edinburgh or the Australian Coat of Arms, the Australian flag
or any words or symbols which have or could have any reference
to the Royal Visit or the dates of the Royal Visit.
3. No objection will be raised to the reproduction o~ f
portraits of the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh, the Royal
Arms, formal representations of the Royal crowns and the arms
of Australia in the design of articles, subject to the following
provisos The article concerned mustconform
to good taste;
give some indication that it is linked with the
Queen's Visit ( eeg. words such as " IQueen's
Visit, 1963" or " Australia, 1963");,
be free from advertisement, other than the name
of th-e manufacturer or seller, and be free from
any implication that the firm has received Royal
custom or patronage, or that the article has been
purchased by the Queen or the Duke of Edinburgh.
This particularly applies to schemes of decoration
and displays in shop windows;
not be used as a premium or selling aid.
Souvenirs may be sold at any time before the Queen's
Visit, during the Visit and for a period of three months after
the date of the conclusion of the Visit,,
Portraits of the Prince of Wales, the Prince Andrew
and the Princess Anne may not be used for commercial purposes
or be incorporated in the design ofIL souvenirs. They may,-however,
be sold as portraits or postcards and be reproduced on ca-Lendars
and greeting cards.
6. Royal portra, 4A1-s, royal emblems and the arms of
Australia may not be used for advertisement purposes.
7. The copyright in a portrait, picture or photograph
and the ownership of a design are not affected by the foregoing,
and any question in connection therewith should be settled with
the owner of the copyright or design0 ./ 2 
8o, These rules do not extend to the use of -_ e
Royal Gypher, the Royal Standard or the Queen's persoral
flag, which are the personal standa2ds of the Queen and
may not be used or flown by any other person.
9. Printed cloths and textiles, although not
classified as souvenirs of the Royal Visit, must conform
to these regulations, with the exception of paragraph
3( b) and paragraph Proposed designs must be submitted
for approval. If any cases of doubt arise as to the interpretation
of the above rules, enquiries should be addressed
to the Secretary, Prime Ministerts Department, Canberra.
CANBERRA, 7th August, 1962, 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
( RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. . MENZIES, QC.. M. P.)
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
THURSDAY, 9th AUGUST. 1962.
COMMON MARKET NEGOTIATIONS
In my four weeks' absence abroad, I conducted close discussions
on the Common Market problem in both the United Kingdom and the United
States. I did this by way of following up the invaluable work done by
Mr. McEwen in the course of his strenuous and far-reaching journey.
In London, I had a series of talks with the Prime Minister
and with Lord Home, Mr. Butler, Mr, Sandys and Mr. Heath. In Washington,
President Kennedy, Mr. Rusk, Mr. Harriman and Mr. Ball all found considerable
time for an examination of our mutual problems. I was able to
leave each place with a strong feeling that Australia's case was not only
understood but was receiving very close consideration.
I felt that this was important, because it must always be
remembered that in the negotiations now proceeding on Great Britain's
application to accede to the Treaty of Rome and become a member of the
European Economic Community, we are not a party principal and must therefore
do what we can to impress our views, directly and indirectly, upon
the actual negotiators and upon those whose views may influence their
ultimate decisions. Just as I arrived in England, an announcement was made by
the press that an agreement had been arrived at in relation to " hard
manufactures", under which existing Commonwealth preferences were to be
" tphased out" by 1970, when the Common Market arrangements are designed
to reach maturity. Although the exports of both New Zealand and
Australia in this field are intrinsically limited, Mr. Marshall of New
Zealand and I had a discussion and issued a joint statement in which we
said that British entry should not be on terms which resulted in critical
damage to our economies and the impairment of Commonwealth relations.
We recalled that the British Government had repeatedly given assurances
that it would not feel able to join unless Commonwealth interests were
safeguarded. We said that these assurances were of vital importance
in the current negotiations. 
2
We said that, notwithstanding this, neither Australia nor
New Zealand could be indifferent to some recent developments in the
negotiations. Although no doubt the outcome of this week's discussion
on industrial products would come under examination at the Commonwealth
Prime Minister's Conference, it none the less represented a disturbing
development. It fell far short of providingadequate safeguards for
Commonwealth trade in the products concerned. Even more important, of
course, it must not under any circumstances be taken as a pattern for the
type of settlement which might be reached on other products of even greater
concern to Australia and New Zealand.
This statement attracted considerable public attention.
I then pursued the matter of the nature of any " Agreement"
between Great Britain and the Six. Discussions-with British Ministers
made it clear that, until the meeting of Prime Ministers was held, all.
such arrangements as that announced in relation to " hard manufactures"
would be tentative only; that they'were not binding; that they
represented what Great Britain and the Six felt was a feasible basis
of agreement; and that when finally the ground had been covered there
would emerge a package of such feasible arrangements which the Prime
Ministers would be able to discuss without prejudice and without prior
commitment. The second question, that of the phasing out of preferential
arrangements by 1970, was, of course, vastly important, and occupied much
of my time. This phasing out principle has been referred to in many
official messages and records as " decalage", a French word meaning " a
shifting of the zero", or what we would call for the present purpose a
gradual reduction to the point of extinction. When in London I noted
with interest that the " Times" printed it " dIcollage", meaning in one
sense a beheading. We have made it clear that to dispose of the Commonwealth
issue by steady reduction of our existing arrangements without in
some other way preserving our market opportunities, until termination in
1970, would be grievously unsatisfactory to us. It is true that our
current trade treaty with Great Britain has a terminating or terminable
date; that our current meat agreement is for a term of years; that the
Commonwealth Sugar Agreement runs until 1969; and so on. But the point
which we have been making is that, whatever the dates may be, there has
for very many years been an expectation and intention that preferential
arrangements of an appropriate kind would continue, just as it has been
contemplated that a British preferential tariff on British goods passing
into Australia would continue.
advocacy. We have not been blindly obstinate or unreasonable in our
We have, in fact, recognised throughout that the present 
3
members of the Common Market were not likely in 1962 ( whatever might have
been the position when the Treaty of Rome was in process of negotiation),
to accept the entry of a Great Britain carrying with her the existing
structure of Commonwealth preferences. We have therefore proposed and
sought some alternative course which would secure for us the substance of
maintained and expanded access to an enlarged European Common Market while
not requiring the continuance of the strict letter of what I will call
" the old law". Without going into burdensome detail, I may illustrate our
approach by two examples.
For some commodities we suggested that we should be given, on
the basis of our trade with Great Britain, " comparable outlets" into the
enlarged European Market. This means that we should be given a preferential
tariff quota which would apply to the whole of that Market, but be
based upon the normal amount of our existing sales to Great Britain, plus
an agreed factor of normal growth. In the result, each European country
of the Six would enjoy the same cost advantage as Great Britain, up to a
point where the total imports of that commodity from Australia reached
the agreed quota. After that, our exports of that commodity would have
to meet the Common External Tariff.
In some other commodities we felt that the right answer was
to make world agreements, pending the negotiation of which our current
rights should continue.
There were and are many variations on these two themes which
involve technical procedures which I could not hope to cover in a statement
which is designed to explain the issues broadly and concisely.
With these preliminaries, I now proceed to explain, as
objectively as possible, the nature of the two great problems which
engaged my attention. The first involved some examination of what I will call the
political issues involved for Great Britain and the Commonwealth.
Although, as we know, political issues embrace economic issues very
closely, I am here using the expression " political" as distinguishing
such matters as foreign policy and the concerting of external policies,
and putting the economic issues, somewhat artificially, in a separate
category. This distinction is by no means precise, since there are in
and under the Treaty of Rome provisions which could limit the normal
political and legislative discretion of a British Parliament in relation
to economic and social matters. 
4
But, in spite of some confusion and overlapping of ideas,
the making of the broad distinction will facilitate the presentation
of the record to the House.
I will begin with the political considerations.
POLITICAL 1. The British Cabinet clearly is impressed by what it believes
to be the political advantages for Great Britain, Europe, and the Western
World which would flow from British membership of the European Economic
Community. Mr. Macmillan made this clear in our discussions. I think
it fair to say that his views on this matter seem to be fully shared by
President Kennedy. The basis of this belief is a feeling that the old Balance
of Power policy with Great Britain standing outside Europe is no
longer possible in modern circumstances and has been falsified twice in
this century; that the measure of European co-operation already achieved
under the Treaty of Rome is already notable, and will grow more rapidly
with British participation; that Great Britain, as a member of the
European Community could exercise substantial influence in the direction
of outward looking policies and positive resistance to the Communist
menace. We understand and respect these views, but we have never
assumed nor offered to sit in judgment on them. They clearly involve
a choice, a most historic and far-reaching choice, to be made by Great
Britain herself. If the choice is made in favour of entry, the
political effect upon Australia and other Commonwealth countries, indeed
upon the Commonwealth itself, will materially depend upon the nature of
the political arrangements which develop inside the extended European
Community. Primarily, the Treaty of Rome provides for permanent close
economic association between its members, with, for example, common
agricultural policies, a free movement of people and capital, the
harmonisation of social policies, and the creation of institutions such
as an Assembly, a Council, a Commission an executive body a Court,
and a European Investment Bank.
The political implications of the economic association are
visible, but not easy to define. But, as I pointed out to this House
a year ago, the preamble to the Treaty of Rome stated that the signatories
were " determined to establish the foundations of an ever closer union
among European peoples". 
The British Government has given much thought to this great
question; it sees world advantages in involving Great Britain in European
political associations of a permanent kind. We have never questioned the
sincerity of its view, or the possibility of those advantages. Indeed,
in a joint statement by President Kennedy and myself to which I will
direct attention at a later stage we said that we both " recognised that
European unity could contribute substantially to the strength of the free
world". From a Commonwealth point of view, I have taken every
opportunity to point out that a great deal turns upon the nature of the
proposed political ( including constitutional) association. This question
has given rise to much political debate both in and out of the British
Parliament. There is a wide range of possibilities, from regular conferences
of leaders and Ministers at one end of the scale ( an ad hoc
rather than a structural association) to a full-blooded European Federation
at the other. I gathered in Whitehall that Great Britain does not contemplate
the creation of supra-national institutions of government, with
their consequential clear modifications of political sovereignty. There
would appear to be some division of opinion among the Six themselves on
this matter. But it does seem that, to take a single example, the right,
under the Treaty, to the free movement of workers between the Member
States can readily generate political pressures for organic political
association. Many Europeans have already moved from one Member State
to another. Subject to the power of national histories and traditions
and prejudices ( a power which can easily be under-estimated), national
lines will tend to become blurred. If these processes now going on
under the Treaty operated to reduce the possibilities of intra-Western
European wars, such as the two great and devastating wars of this century,
a great thing would have been done for world peace. Whether those processes
would be accelerated and strengthened by British entry into the
European Community presents a great current problem of statesmanship.
What we have sought to make clear is that if Great Britain
went in, and if in the course of time the extended European Economic
Community became a European political community with the structure of a
Federation, the nature of the present Commonwealth would be clearly and
materially changed. For, as we know, a Federation distributes sovereignty between
the central or Federal authority and the Member States. The sovereign
powers of the Member States are diminished, the powers subtracted being
handed over to the central or Federal authority. In short, if Great
Britain eventually became a Member State in a European Federation, she
would no longer be sovereign as the other Commonwealth countries are.
The Commonwealth would have ceased to be an association of sovereign and
fully self-governing States. 
-6-
That such a consequence could be regarded by British Statesmen,
contemplating the importance of European integration, as, on balance,
acceptable, I would not deny. But it would be in our opinion wrong to
pretend that, in that event, the nature and structure of the Commonwealth
had not been changed.
Throughout my journey and my conversations, I felt most acutely
the pressure of these considerations. The question in my mind took shape
somewhat as follows: " After all, the Commonwealth has sustained many
changes since the last war. Only some of its members remain withnthe
direct allegiance to the Throne. It cannot be said that we have an allembracing
community of political institutions or democratic processes, or
of the rule of law as we know it. Should our deep desire to preserve what
we can be allowed to stand in the way of a new European conception embracing
some 300 millions of British and European people, getting rid of their
old local hostilities and forming themselves into an integrated Power
devoted to true peace and determined to resist aggression?"
I believe that we, as a not unimportant member of the Commonwealth,
would answer that question, as I have tried to answer it in
England myself, by saying that United Kingdom membership of an actual
European Federation, involving the great change in the Commonwealth to
which I have referred, would be a mistake. I don't say that it is
contemplated I am sure that it is not but nobody can confidently
foretell the effect of those pressures of the future which I mentioned
a few minutes ago.
It is possible to contemplate with approval a close coordination
of high political policies between Great Britain and the
European Economic Community. It would, as we see it, be an unhappy
thing to contemplate the absorption of Great Britain into an organic
European Federal Union.
But, I repeat, these decisions are not ours to make. All
we can do is to state our views as we hold them and as we are entitled
and bound to express them, and trust to the accumulated wisdom and
experience of Great Britain, as the centre of the Commonwealth, to come
to sound conclusions.
ECONOMIC It is on the economic aspects of British entry into the
Common Market that it would not be right to dogmatise about the views
of the Government of the United Kingdom. 
7
There are those who believe strongly that for Britain to
have duty free entry into a Home Market of 300 million people with
relatively high living standards would mean salvation and growth for
British manufacturing industry in total. When questioned about the
possible damage to British industry by duty-free goods from Europe,
their answer is that this challenge will be met by increased efficiency
in Britain, an efficiency compelled by the new circumstances.
On the other hand, there are competent people who think
that the economic arguments for going in or staying out are fairly
evenly balanced. This is a view which I found more widely held than
I had expected. So much was this the case that I found myself tending
more and more to the belief that the dynamic element in the Common Market
movement is the conviction of political advantage; almost of political
necessity in the cause of world security; and that the economic results
are accepted by some as the necessary condition of political association.
Once again, I made it clear that we are not sitting in judgment
on Great Britain's own economic views. It is for her to balance
the possible gains in Europe against the possible losses in Commonwealth
trade, which has in the past, of course, been vastly more important to
her. Our task is not to oppose Britain's entry on economic grounds
which affect her, and which fall for her judgment; it is to do all we
can, by hard work and persuasion, to ensure that the terms finally agreed
to by the Six do the minimum of damage to the present and anticipated
pattern of Commonwealth Trade, and of Australian trade in particular.
I am not in a position at present to expound the present state
of the Brussels negotiations. They are clearly far from complete. I
anticipate that fairly soon we will be officially and fully informed.
Until then, it would merely confuse the problem for me to introduce
speculation into what is intended to be an objective narrative.
But whatever the outcome of the negotiations may be; whatever
outline of tentative arrangements may be presented to the Prime
Ministers next month; the ultimate decision, when all the arguments
have been heard, will be that of Great Britain, over whom, except for
such current and binding agreements as now exist, no meeting of Prime
Ministers can exercise a veto.
I mention these truisms because they are too frequently
forgotten. Although one is frequently asked for a categorical YES or
NO to the question " are you in favour of Britain entering the European
Community?" no such answer is as yet possible. The position is still 
8
confused. Very able Australian officials have for a year, both in
London and Europe, and recently in Washington, presented to their
opposite numbers facts, arguments, and proposals in relation to a long
list of Australian commodities. The permanent head of our Trade
Department, Dr. Westerman, whose ability, knowledge, and immense
industry deserve great praise, made a long exposition of Australia's
approach to the Council of Deputies at Brussels. My colleague, Mr.
McEwen, this year pursued a powerful advocacy on the Ministerial level
in all three areas. I myself followed the matter up as well as I could
in the journey which gives rise to this report.
All these things have been done in no spirit of hostility.
We know that the British Government has set out to secure terms which
give reasonable protection to Commonwealth interests. We have a high
regard for their chief negotiator, Mr. Heath, who has at all times been
accessible to our views and has, as we know, been presenting the case for
Commonwealth trade to the European negotiators.
It is certain that when we meet in September we cannot be
presented with a complete package of possible arrangements. But it was
anticipated, when I left London, that enough progress would have been
made to enable useful discussion on some important items to occur, and
the relevant principles to be debated.
Both in London and Washington, I encountered some opinions,
courteously but firmly expressed, that the Australian Government was
overstating its case, and that the damage to Australian trade was likely
to be comparatively minor. I know, from an unhappy recent experience,
that this view is entertained by some thoughtful people in Australia.
I therefore took, and now take again, the opportunity of
answering these opinions.
In the first place, nobody is yet in a position to know
what the terms of British entry will be. If she were to enter on the
existing terms of the Treaty of Rome, with its objectives of internal
free trade, a common External Tariff, and a Common Agricultural Policy,
our preferences would before long be terminated, and replaced by
preferences in Great Britain to European products. In addition, our
access to the enlarged Common Market would be restricted by the array
of protective devices used to support the Common Agricultural Policy.
In such an event, blows would be struck in due or undue course against
our exports of such important commodities as ( to takea few examples)
sugar, metallic lead, dairy products, meat, dried fruits, and canned
fruits. 
9
Should the terms of the Treaty of Rome be modified in the
interests of Commonwealth trade, the degree of impact upon our export
trade will depend upon the nature and extent of the modifications. As
we do not know what, if any, modifications may be arrived at between
Great Britain and the Six, who ( not we) are the negotiators, we must,
as prudent people, assess the possible losses to us on the basis of the
Treaty of Rome as it stands; any departure from it in our direction
will be so much saved.
I have not tried to deal with the purely financial implications
of the Treaty of Rome. They were very clearly explained by Mr.
Holt in this House on August 22nd 1961, in a speech which all students
of the Common Market problem should study.
But there is another consideration which Mr. McEwen repeatedly
explained, and to which I devoted a good deal of my time. A general
economic survey which looks at national totals, divorced from consideration
of particular industries, regions, and communities of men and women, can
be most misleading. Percentages, as we know, can frequently be misleading.
Much of Australia's productive development has been related
to the long established pattern of Commonwealth trade, and designed to
satisfy markets which form part of that pattern. In many cases, entire
communities have grown up around export industries of this kind. In
many cases, such industries cannot be confident of finding alternative
markets quickly, or in some cases, at all. I will illustrate.
In 1960-61, our exports of metallic lead ( pig and bullion)
totalled œ 15.8m. Great Britain took œ 10.6m of this, duty free. Behind
this export, we have developed in Australia great smelters, notably at
Port Pirie, whose efficiency is of world standard. We also export
substantial quantities of concentrates. The Common Market contemplates
a Common External Tariff of about 9/ o on metal.
It is not difficult to see that, if our exports of lead are
to be subject to this tariff, Australia could, upon British entry, lose
the bulk of her export of metallic lead; her lead smelters could become
uneconomic; while, ironically enough, as the Common Market will freely
import lead concentrates, the reduction ( and perhaps disappearance) of
lead smelting in Australia could be accompanied by the creation of new
smelters in Europe. It would be difficult to persuade communities like Broken
Hill and Port Pirie that the problems thus presented for their industries,
their regions, and their people, are minor ones. 
Take Dairy farming and the butter export. In 1961-62, for
which we have complete figures, Australia exported to the United Kingdom
just under œ 20m worth of butter, out of our total export of œ 23.5m. It
entered the United Kingdom duty free, whereas European butter pays a duty
of 15/-a hundredweight. Should Great Britain go into the Common Market
on the terms of the Treaty of Rome, Australian butter would be subject to
variable levies and possibly quantitative restrictions, while European
butter would have free access. Is the problem thus presented, in economic,
industrial, and human terms, a minor one?
Take Sugar, a great industry which gives life and significance
to large coastal areas in Queensland and the north of New South Wales.
In 1961-62, for which also we have complete figures, Australia exported
œ 18.3m worth to the United Kingdom, none to the E. E. C. and œ 14.8m elsewhere.
Our exports to the United Kingdom are mainly at a negotiated price under
the Commonwealth Sugar Agreement. On the remainder of our exports to the
United Kingdom we receive the world price plus a preference which is of
the order of sterling a ton.
Surely this is a measure of trade so closely related to the
development and peopling of our North that its protection assumes major
proportions. Dried vine fruits have provided the foundation, in specially
irrigated areas, of large settlements, particularly of ex-servicemen, in
New South Wales, Victoria, and South Australia. In 1961-62 we exported
to the United Kingdom no less than œ 5m worth, out of a total export of
Our product entered the United Kingdom duty free. The application
of the terms of the Treaty of Rome, with a proposed Common External
Tariff of could strike a crippling blow at industries which support
entire communities, and to whom an assured export is economically vital.
Canned deciduous fruits and canned Pineapple also have great
regional significance. In 1961, we exported to the United Kingdom, duty
free, nearly œ llm worth, a nominal amount to the E. E. C. and under œ lm
elsewhere. The proposed Common Market External Tariff is 25%. It is
therefore clear that practically the whole of this export trade is
involved in the negotiations now going on.
I have said nothing about our large export trade in Wheat
and Meat, to which our negotiators have been directing close attention.
These products need a special presentation, and I will not expand what
should be the reasonable limits of a statement like the present one in
order to do what my colleague, the Minister for Trade, can do with
greater knowledge and authority. 
11
But the illustrations I have given will, I hope, convince the
House that it has not been for small considerations that we have been
conducting negotiations and offering advocacy on an unprecedented scale,
including the facilitation of investigations on the spot by leading members
of the Opposition. We are realists, but that is not to say that we are pessimists.
We attach great value to the expressed determination of the United Kingdom
Government to protect Commonwealth interests. We believe that the powerful
and influential United States of America understands our lawful interests
and national ambitions, and the importance of a Commonwealth growing in
political and economic strength and significance.
I am not conscious of any exaggeration in our case.
indeed, I had not thought that the possible impact upon Australia
and is, a matter of very substantial importance to our own growth
prosperity, I do not think I should have so warmly approved of my
strenuous journey or undertaken a similar one myself. If,
was, and colleague's
There is one other aspect of the economic argument which deserves
special mention. I have had a good deal to say about our primary export
industries, which are of vital importance to our balances of trade and payments,
and whose volume of export trade is so important for their unit costs
of production. We must, at our peril, do what we can to keep those costs
from rising in a world in which the terms of trade are by no means favourable
to us. But our manufacturing industry, the steady growth of which is
needed for an increase in our population and full employment, has great
interests in the Common Market negotiations. This comes about in two ways.
First, our export earnings serve materially to determine our
capacity to import. Most of our imports are not those of finished consumer
goods, but those of plant and materials for local manufacture. In
this way, the protection of the export markets of our primary products is
essential to our manufacturing growth.
Second, the accession of Great Britain to the European Common
Market is thought, as I have said, to be likely, through the creation of
a vast home market, likely to increase manufacturing efficiency and reduce
manufacturing costs in the extended European community. This must be
expected to increase its competitive capacity in its exports to Australia.
This in turn will affect the capacity of Australian manufacturing to meet
competition from overseas, and may well give rise to acute Tariff problems
which in their turn will, or may, create cost problems in the rural
industries. 
12
I am not assuming to answer these problems in advance. What
I do want to make clear is that it would be an error to think that the
Common Market problem is of interest to limited sections of the people.
In reality, it touches the Australian economy at many points, and must be
the concern of us all.
When I flew over to the United States of America, my principal
objectives were to discuss with the President, the Secretary of State,
Mr. Dean Rusk, and Mr. Averell Harriman, some of the problems of South
East Asia, and also ( with the addition of Mr. Assistant Secretary Ball
and other leading officials) the problem of British entry into the Common
Market. I am happy to say that, over a period of three days in
Washington, I was given a great deal of time and had the fullest
opportunity to develop the views of the Australian Government.
In particular, Honourable Members may be interested to know
that I found President Kennedy, with whom I had enjoyed most useful talks
fourteen months earlier, not only friendly but uncommonly well-informed
on Australia's special interests in the Common Market negotiations. He
gave me hours of his time, as did the principal members of his Administration.
Assisted by the reports of my colleague, the Minister for
Trade, who had done invaluable work a little earlier in Washington, I
came to the conclusion that it would not be useful for me to rehearse
the arguments justifying the principle of the preferential trade system
of the Commonwealth which was first given comprehensive form at Ottawa
in 1932 and to which the United States has always expressed objection.
Deeply attached though we are to the Commonwealth pattern of trade, I
felt that nothing was to be gained by pursuing what might be called
doctrinal arguments about an issue on which my colleague, speaking with
great knowledge and authority, had deserved success, but had not been
able to achieve it. My own approach, therefore, took two forms.
The first was to say that, in the interest of practical
satisfaction for both Australia and the United States of America, we
should agree to avoid conflicting theories or argument about particular
phrases or words, and find out whether, in a purely practical and
pragmatic way, we could consider American and Australian interests in
particular commodities to the end result that we might do our best,
jointly and severally, to preserve our competitive status in the
markets of an extended European area, and, in the case of Australia,
maintain and expand access for our goods to Britain and Europe. 
13
The second was to make it clear that should the Six insist
upon terms of entry which involved the disappearance of Commonwealth
preferences by 1970 without some other provisions for preserving our
market opportunities, the government of Great Britain would be confronted
by a most difficult qhoice whether to go into Europe on terms which
would invite opposition in other Commonwealth countries, or to terminate
the negotiations and stay out of Europe. My argument was that, should
Great Britain be confronted by such a dilemma, the United States of
America itself would be, though not a party principal in the negotiations,
the witness of a conflict of interests on a matter in which, as I believed,
it wanted to see Great Britain go into Europe, but did not desire to have
a conflict of Commonwealth interests.
After my Washington discussions, which I thought particularly
helpful, a joint communique was agreed upon. Though Honourable Members
have no doubt seen its terms as published, I ask leave to incorporate
the relevant portions of it in Hansard, so that I may direct attention
to some of its terms.
" President Kennedy expressed his strong belief in the
importance of the Commonwealth as a source of stability and strength for
the free world. At the same time both leaders recognized that European
unity could contribute substantially to the strength of the free world.
" They reviewed therefore the implications for the trade of
their two nations of the possible accession of the United Kingdom to the
European Economic Community.
" It was agreed that, in this event, the United States and
Australia would, as great suppliers to Britain and Europe, face problems
in endeavouring to maintain and expand access for their goods.
" The Prime Minister offered the view that it would be a grave
misfortune if, after the negotiations, it turned out that the conditions
laid down for Britain's entry were unacceptable to Commonwealth countries
on the ground that they damaged Commonwealth trade and expansion.
" The Presddent and Prime Minister took note of the fact that
with respect to certain articles and commodities Australia's historic
terms of access are different from those of the United States. They
recognized, however, that Australia competed with the United States in
the United Kingdom market with respect to only a relatively small number
of these items, though the items themselves are by no means small in
importance. They agreed that, with respect to these items, technical
discussions would be held between the two Governments in an effort to
reconcile the trading interests of both nations. 
14
" With respect to the great bulk of articles and commodities
they noted that, as non-members of the European Economic Community, their
countries faced essentially the same problems, and they joined in hoping
that the community would pursue liberal trading policies. President
Kennedy pointed out that under the trade expansion legislation now pending
before the Congress the United States Government should strive, through
reciprocal agreements, to bring about a general reduction of trade barriers
for the benefit of all. Moreover, both leaders agreed that, with respect
to a number of key primary products, the problems raised by the expansion
of the Common Market might best be solved through international arrangements.
" During the course of their interviews the President expressed
his warm interest in Australia and his understanding of Australia's needs
in terms of development and growth, recognizing the problems of particular
regions as well as industries.
" Both he and the Prime Minister were agreed that the problems
for the United States and Australia arising out of Britain's proposed entry
should be approached not on any basis of theory or the use of particular
words but upon a practical basis, examining commodities one by one, having
in mind the protection of the interests of both countries.
" As a result of their discussions the President and the Prime
Minister were encouraged to believe that satisfactory solutions will be
found to those problems faced by their two countries."
I thought our talks and this joint message quite valuable.
The atmosphere of our relations with our powerful friends in America is
of material and continuing importance. It is therefore significant that
the document records that
" President Kennedy expressed his strong belief in
the importance of the Commonwealth as a source
of stability and strength for the free world".
I can assure the House that this is no mere form of words.
The President's knowledge of Commonwealth problems is quite remarkable.
His interest in Australia in particular is quite unfeigned. I am sure that
he is our friend. Again " It was agreed that, in the event" ( of Great Britain
acceding to the European Economic Community) " the United States and
Australia would, as great suppliers to Britain and Europe, face problems
in endeavouring to maintain and expand access for their goods." 
I attached importance to this as a recognition that Australia
is an expanding country with a great need for economic growth, and that
we should be able to look forward to expanding our export trade to the
European area. And further " They agreed that, with respect to these items"
those in which Australia competed with the United States in the
United Kingdom market) " technical discussions would be held between the
two governments in an effort to reconcile the trading interests of both
nations". This paragraph arose from my proposal that Dr. Westerman,
our chief official negotiator, should return to Washington to have commodity
by commodity discussions, " not on any basis of theory" ( as a later paragraph
of the communique puts it) " or the use of particular words, but upon a
practical basis, examining commodities one by one, having in mind the protection
of the interests of both countries".
Pursuant to this arrangement, Dr. Westerman returned to
Washington. On his return to Australia, he was able to report some most
useful talks, which have greatly assisted Mr. McEwen and myself in subsequent
communications with British Ministers. I will make a further
reference to this before I conclude in a few moments.
Honourable Members will observe in the communique our joint
hope that the European Community will pursue liberal trading policies.
This is important. Australia has for years past been carrying out
active policies for the development of new markets and an increased
export trade. This has been done through a much enlarged Trade
Commissioner Service, Trade Missions, Trade Ships, the Export Payments
Insurance Corporation, special tax measures designed to encourage export,
Banking arrangements in aid of rural development, Beef Roads assistance
and aid to the provision of improved coal exports ports and facilities.
But the British and European markets remain very important for most
export industries, and are quite vital for some. It thus gave me
satisfaction when President Kennedy approved this paragraph:-
" During the course of their interviews the President
expressed his warm interest in Australia and his
understanding of Australia's needs in terms of
development and growth, recognising the problems
of particular regions as well as industries".
And finally, on the personal initiative of the President himself, the
final words were added 
16
" As a result of their discussions the President and
the Prime Minister were encouraged to believe that
satisfactory solutions will be found to those
problems faced by their two countries."
I have already referred to the arrangement made for further
official talks in Washington. These occurred, most usefully, and my
colleague, Mr. McEwen, and I have had personal reports on them by Dr.
Westerman. Even more importantly, I have in the last few days learned
from the American Administration of its deep satisfaction with these
talks, their co-operative spirit and their fruitfulness.
I conclude by saying that, in this matter which transcends
normal Party differences, we shall continue to do all in our power to
influence decisions in directions which we believe will be good for
Australia and for the Commonwealth and therefore enhance ( in the words
which I have quoted) " the importance of the Commonwealth as a source of
stability and strength for the free world". 



RAIL STNAD'. T0 T PREBt. KNFL
Sttmnb h rm ise c R. G. Men zies
Following is the ' ext of a 1. etter which I wrote
on 3rd Au~ gust to the Honourable SiLr Thomas P" Layford,
Premier of South Australia 9 on the subject of standardization
of the raiiigay betwMeen Port Pirie and Broken Hill
" Dear Sir Thomas, In your letter of 2nd April, 1 962 you invited
the Commonwealthi to consi. der approlving under the
Railway S4tan'qardizatien Agreement of-1949,-a programme_
of conversion to standard gauge of the permanent way
betwie,-n Port Pirie and iBroken Hill. You estimated
that tis o~ rogrammeq including ncoiling stock, would
costl-some f-17 million or œ-20 milIlion, and suggested
that the expenditure be spread ov er several years,
This is quite a sizable project, and th-ougha
we dr) o of course ac-cept the desirability of a standard
gauge line frcom Fort Pixie to Broken Hill, we have had
to measure the finsncisl commitment in-v olvd against
our gen~ eral. budgetary position present and prospective,
and against our1 other commitm-ants in respect-of major
works projects in the States, par-ticularly in the
field of rail ty. ansporbt, Here we have feltE we had to
pay special attention, in present circumstances, to
improvements in rail facilities whicha will permit a
significant increase in eyport earnings or a major
development of national resouirces.
My Cabinet colleagues and I have considered
closely, inj theD light of' these circumstances, your
request that th" e Commoniwealtn should provi4de the
finance to cnrry out the conversion to standard. gauge
of the permanent -way in, -the Petorborough Division,
But we do not see our w., ay to corhmit funds at present
for this projectQ, W-e are faced with a very large
deficit in the cu-r-rent year, and must tUake account of
this and of othter inescapablo demands on ou,) r taxation
and other revenue. i in this and thle coming two or three
years'But you will of couirse appreciate that our
present decision does not imp+. ly any definitivo rejection
of the Port Pirie-Broken Hll conve,, rsion work,, We
do intenOd to look again a~ t your present pr'oposal as
and when work en other railway projects to Whi! ch we
are financially commnit, 1ted i-s furvthier Ladvance-+ d..
Mearw hi le xwe-share with yKou the hoeand
belief thlat your acceptance of cur offer of finance
up to -Li ,25,000 for thea piirch-, ase of diesel engines and
oro wagons and their use on this route will not only
reduce the cost of transporctation in this area, but
will also benefit the, Scutht J! hUstLriian Railway,, s and the
pooplo Of Your State0 Yourvs sincerely,
) ROBITkT G. MENZIESO
The Ho3nourable Sir homas Payf: rd
Premier of Seutlh Ai.* stralia3
ADELATIDEO, S 0 TTE ATJS r 11 . A L IA
1 0t Augues~ t , 1 


OPENING OF TWELFTH WORLD POULTRY CONGESS, SHOWGROUNDS, SYDNEY.
13th August, 1962
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. R. G. Menzies
&nbsp;Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, Mr. World President, Mr. President Playfair - that's quite a decent mouthful - Ladies and Gentlemen:
About a fortnight ago, I began to assemble a few ideas in my mind for this afternoon because I knew that the Governor General himself, as your Patron, could not be here. As you know he's abroad but will be back, I am happy to say, early in October - or more accurately, at the end of September. I began to say to myself, "Now, my boy,” - you know, one speaks to oneself quite frankly (Laughter) in the still watches of the night - "what do you know about fowls?" (Laughter). I was speaking to myself in an entirely non-political sense, you understand, (Laughter) and I drew on my boyish recollections - there were always a few chooks, as I am afraid we called them, running around. I was familiar with such respectable names as Buff Orpington and Rhode Island Reds and White Leghorns and Wyandottes and with that I ran out, I couldn’t think of any more.
This morning, I had forty minutes looking around the various exhibits and I want to tell you that I arrived here as ill-informed as a Prime Minister could reasonably be, and I learnt more in forty minutes about your industry than I otherwise would have learned in ten years. 
This, I think, is a most exciting Congress and a most exciting collection of exhibits. You, of course, are all very familiar with this industry, you are all very familiar with its extraordinary developments, particularly in the last ten or twenty years; but to the layman there is something dramatic about what has gone on. I can remember, and some of you can, a time when gentlemen would be heard to say, when asked “What are you going to do when you retire?" “Oh, I'll think I’ll run a chicken farm." Just like that, you see. And I used to suffer from the illusion that the world’s perfect chicken farm would be one in which white fowls rambled around on lovely green swards, presenting quite an artistic picture to the eye. Then, later on, when I found myself, years back, being driven from the Canberra airport into the city of Canberra, I would see bright lights running along in rows where I knew there was a chicken farm and I would say, "That fellow is working late tonight," (Laughter) only to discover that he wasn't the one who was working. (Laughter) 
But Sir, I think I might be right in saying that except for a few highly-qualified people a great deal of this great industry was conducted in Australia in a sort of part-time fashion, with a limited number of poultry, limited equipment, perhaps a very limited knowledge of the scientific problems involved. Today, I have been told by my colleague, the Chairman, Mr. Adermann, who is infallible on these matters, that in 1960-61 the total product of this industry in Australia itself was valued at £67 million - a very perceptible percentage of the entire output of primary industry in Australia. 
Now this has happened, I think I am right in saying, in a very limited period of years. So that today, what was regarded by so many people as a sort of amateur exercise, has become a major primary industry with an enormous production and a quite substantial export trade. What is going to happen to export trades in these fields we don't yet know because in all countries, all advanced countries at any rate, there has been a very great increase in production and self-sufficiency in fields of this kind. 
Great Britain which used to be a very large export market for Australia has now, herself, developed the production in this field which was out of imagination fifteen years ago. But there are many parts of the world and many, many hundreds of millions of people in the world not so far away from here who, as their standards of living rise, will feel more and more the need for the production of this industry, bearing as it does so closely and with such immense value on the problem of the feeding of mankind. And that's a great problem. 
By the end of this century we are told by the statisticians, by the demographers, that the population of the world will nearly double and people must eat if they are to live. Sir, I believe that the wonderful work, of which I will say a little in a moment, that is being done in this industry, reaching out into these new and populous countries, in a helpful way, by expert assistance, by training, will ultimately make a powerful contribution to the happiness of mankind. Unless these hundreds and hundreds of millions of people who will be added to the world's population between now and the turn of the century are able to eat, are able to be clothed, are able to live in a reasonable, civilised fashion, then the problems that the world may have in the rest of this century may be even greater than the ones we've already had. 
Therefore, every industry which contains in itself such skill and such enthusiasm and such a willingness to raise the level of knowledge, every industry of this kind is, I believe, making a notable contribution to the welfare of the world for the rest of the twentieth century. 
Now Sir, I thought I would just like to say a few words in elaboration of one aspect of that matter. It is very easy for people like me, and I represent I hope I may say the average layman in Australia -some of them even vote for me - (Laughter) but at any rate I am like them in this respect, that we have rather thought of this industry as a sort of catch-as-catch-can. I didn't know until I came here this morning to what extent scientific research had been applied to an industry of this kind and with such superb results. Here is something that has become a highly-organised industry. 
I walked around, fortunately, for part of the time with Sir Frederick White who is the head of C.S.I.R.O., the greatest scientific research establishment in this country and one of the greatest in the world. He has for years now, with a rather despairing note in this voice, been trying to make me understand that we not only need more and more scientific research in Australia, but we need more and more application of it to the problems of the man on the land and that perhaps we have fallen down a little in not being able to convey to the man on the farm the full benefits, quickly enough, of pure scientific research and of research into applied science, into technology. Today, I have seen it brought into a small compass. I would wish to hope, though of course I can't, that most of the people in this city might have the opportunity of looking at what can be seen here. They would come to realise, as I have, that here is an outstanding example - I am not sure that it isn't the outstanding example - of the application of scientific enquiry to the end of production, preparation, packaging and selling of a primary product. This is really the most tremendous thing. 
As I have admitted to you frankly, I used to feel a little sorry for the incarcerated hen, sitting in a battery with the lights on, laying eggs (Laughter). I thought, "Dear me, you know, this is awfully like being a politician". (Laughter) Except that we don't have any handling system that automatically tells you that the egg is addled. (Laughter) (Applause) But I realise now, having looked around, that all this demonstrates what I believe is the greatest revolution in productive and handling techniques in a primary industry that I have seen in my time. And all the credit must be given to those who have led the way in converting something that was a little casual, a little sketchy, even a little amateurish, into a magnificent industry scientifically and technically abreast of the times and therefore able to present to the people a result far more stable, far more satisfactory than they have ever had before and, at the same time, enable how many people did you say, Mr. Adermann? - a hundred thousand people to be directly or indirectly connected with this industry in Australia is that right? - a hundred thousand. 
We must give up - I would like to say this to any layman who is here - we must give up the idea that raising poultry, either as boilers (I've been learning, you see, this morning) (Laughter), broilers or boilers, or raising them for eggs and so on - we must give up the idea that this is a casual part-time occupation on the fringes of cities. This is a notable industry, and I am sure that the head of the C.S.I.R.O. would agree with me when I say that when in each primary industry we can say, with the same confidence, that the work of the scientist and the technologist has been married to the work of the actual operator in the field, when we can say that about all our primary industries, that will be a very happy day for a very great primary-producing country. 
There is just one other aspect of that. We, in Australia, are of course as we always are, and I hope we always will be, presented with problems. Life consists of encountering problems and battling with them and trying to overcome them. And one of our problems, not peculiar to us, is that as the world goes on, as our secondary industries develop as they must if this country is to grow, we find constantly, don't we, the pressure of costs on the primary producer. The pressure of costs whether he's a woolgrower, a wheatgrower or a chicken-raiser or whatever it may be. You can't solve the problem of increased costs just by some brutal decree that nobody's wages are ever to be increased. This is nonsense. You can’t solve it by some mechanical step which, for example, by abolishing the tariffs, puts half the primary industries out of business. The long-run answer to costs is increased efficiency of production through increased output and a higher level of scientific skill and of scientific management. This is the lesson for us all to learn. It will have to be learned by every exporting industry in Australia. It won't always be easy. The people who conduct these industries are not fools. They have lived their lives in them, they know far more about them than I do, but the one thing that I know in the broad, general sweep, is that if we are to meet the competition of the world and reach out with our products into other countries then we must become, in the widest sense of the word, applied scientists; because science is learning and teaching at a rate of geometrical progression today. There is so much to be learned, so much advantage to be got from what is being discovered.
&nbsp;As I have had those ideas in my mind and I have spoken about them more than once. I want to tell you with all sincerity that thirty or forty minutes this morning, going around to see what's been done, what is being done, how it's being done, has excited me. I have seen here, within a small compass, the living proof of the kind of thing that I have been talking to you about. 
And so I hope that you will allow me to say to all those who organised this Congress, the first World Congress of a primary industry to be held in Australia: "Thank you for a magnificent piece of organisation" and I hope you will allow me to say to those engaged in this industry, not only '" Thank you" but " Congratulations" on what I think will be looked back upon as one of the great achievements in Australia in the last fifteen or twenty years. 
Sir, I have the greatest possible pleasure in declaring the Congress open.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
~ Rt. Hon. R. G. MENZIES, CH, M. P.
ON
BUDGET 1962-63.
[ Fromn the " Parliamentary Debates," 16th A ugust, 1962.]
Mr. MENZIES ( Kooyong--Prime Minishonorable
member for
I. rra ( Mr. Cairns) has a rich vein of
humour that I have always admired; but he
really ought to make up his mind one of
these days what it is he means because in
the last five minutes of his speech, he
Jbpted in his attack on the Government
two utterly inconsistent positions. In the
first place, he drew a picture of the Government
as full1 of low cunning. He says
we arc going to make ourselves more
unpopular in the next six months; we are
getting ready to do something in a year's
time when the election is getting nearer.
You can imagine the low cunning with
which this cold-blooded Government is
planning a political future. That rather
surprises me because after the last election
I was given to understand by the Opposition
that we would not be here very long.
Now the Opposition has us engaging in a
three years' plan, all cold and calculated.
7500/ 62. In the next breath, the honorable member
for Yarra has said that the Government
is frightened-frightened of the
future and of all sorts of things.
You know, I find it difficult to
believe that anybody except the honorable
member for Yarra could be at
one and the same time consumed by terror
and full of cold-blooded, low, calculating
cunning. However, I do not want to worry
about him now. I will do that if and
when he becomes the Treasurer of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
I want to say something now about the
motion of censure moved by the Deputy
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Whitlam),
and then I want to say something about our
own policy, in a positive sense. The speech
by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition
was very interesting. It was a not very
original exercise in phrase-making. I
seemed to hear, as I listened to it, all the
cliches which enjoy currency in half-baked 
socialistic academic circles. I gather from
this morning's press that we may expect to
hear more of these in the future, fresh from
the National University. I know the honorable
member opposite who is interjecting
does not like anything except the sound of
his own voice and the distant waves from a
certain foreign country. But may 1, even
with difficulty, return to what I was saying
about the speech made by the Deputy
Leader of the Opposition?
He accused us-I made a note of a few
of his phrases-of ineptitude, unprincipled
conduct, neglect, callousness, incompetence,
and intellectual and political dishonesty. I
hope I will be allowed to say to the Deputy
Leader of the Opposition that for him to
accuse anybody of those offences really
hurts. It hurts profoundly. Presumably-the
honorable member for Yarra gave a hint of
it in the closing passages of his speech-the
country has suffered from our ineptitude,
unprincipled conduct, neglect, callousness,
incompetence, and intellectual and political
dishonesty for twelve years or more without
knowing it. That is the most astonishing
performance in democratic history. Here
is a community which, time after time after
time, has had elections, but we are still in
government. The poor simpletons, as we
are told-the Australian electorate-did not
know the kind of people who were conducting
the affairs of this country.
The CHAIRMAN.-Order! The honorable
member for Wills is interjecting. He
must keep order.
Mr. MENZIES.-Sir, I do not expect
honorable members opposite to be very
happy. Now that they have decided they
cannot win, they have determined that they
will squeal. Let them squeal.
The CHAJRMA4N.-Order! Honorable
members are still interjecting. The Deputy
Leader of the Opposition was extended the
courtesy of being heard in silence, and I
expect the same courtesy to be extended to
the Prime Minister. If that courtesy is
not extended, the Chair will be forced to
take action.
Mr. MENZIIES-The favourite phrase
which ran through the speech of the Deputy
Leader of the Opposition was that the Australian
economy was a stagnant economy.
We have heard this time and time and
time before. I have heard it ever since we came into office in 1949. Until we had
been here for a year or two we did not hear
much of it, but thereafter there were constant
references to a stagnant economy
The stagnancy of the economy, presumably,
is due to the defects that the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition has enumerated. Sir, I
do not want to labour the obvious, but
what has happened in this stagnant
economy during our dull, incompetent and
unimaginative regime? I will tell you, Sir,
for the benefit of all those who are not
sitting in opposition and therefore are not
professionally bound to disregard it. The
population of this country in that period
time has risen from 8,000,000 to ON
10,500,000. Mr. Ward.-You had nothing to do with
that. Mr. MENZIES.-I had as much to
with it as the honorable member. My contributions
to the population during that
period were all by deputy. The net value
of production in Australia has trebled in
that time. There are very nearly 18,000
more factories in Australia. There have
been enormous increases in mineral
development and production. The value of
our exports has doubled. Just under
1,000,000 houses and flats have been built,
so that already, in the proportion of homes
to population, Australia leads the won",
General revenue grants to the States, whk
have their own great responsibilities in the
federal system, are almost five times what
they were when honorable gentlemen opposite
went out of office. The loan works
programme-sustained by the Comma
wealth Government for the first time in th,
Commonwealth's history-is nearly four
times what it was in 1949.
But, Sir, there are, of course, other continuing
proofs of progress in this stagnant
economy. Too few people realize
that a cash deficit of œ E120,000,000-I will
put it in round figures-will of itself have
a most expansionary effect. We shall pay
out to the citizens œ 120,000,000 more than
will be collected from them. So far from
being timorous-I think that was another
of the words used by the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition-this is adventurous
finance. Add to the deficit the tax refunds 
now being made, and it is clear that purchasing
power in Australia this financial
year will be uncommonly high. The real
task of any government to-day, as well as
of the business community and all sensible
citizens, is to get that purchasing power
exercised. Sir, there are other factors. The gross
national product in the June quarter of this
year-this year of so-called super-stagnation,
but a year in which no change
occurred in the consumer price indexshowed
an increase of 7.6 per cent. over
tJhoe oJfu noef tqhue a" rtsetar gonfa ti1o9n6" 1 . ofH ethree iesc ofnuortmheyr.
eposits in the savings bank, which are not
the haunt of the rich, amounted in 1961-
62-the financial year we have just ended
-to œ 157,000,000. Hire-purchase debts
_ ll by œ 40,000,000. The banks were
) ost liquid. Our external balances, a great
source of anxiety to us only two years ago,
rose and are healthy. And all of this has
occurred, Sir, and is occurring in a period
of stable price levels and stable monetary
values. I say no more about the allegation
that the Australian economy is stagnant.
Most people in other parts of the world
would love to live in a country with so
stagnant an economy as is Australia's.
I know that the professional task of
honorable members opposite is, to use the
Jd phrase, to cry stinking fish-to make
erybody believe that the Australian people
are in the depths of misery. The Opposition
thinks that once it convinces the people that
they are in the depths of misery, they will
vote for Labour-you have to be pretty
_) iserable to vote for the Labour Party, but
. nat is what honorable members opposite
are hoping for.
Now let me say something about the
bases of our policy. The first item in our
policy-this does not distinguish us from
-other people-is to build up Australia's
population. An increased population is
vital to Australia. Whatever fluctuations
may have occurred in our population, let
me remind honorable members that in 1949
the population was a little more than
8,000,000, but to-day it is well over
10,500,000. Our second great objective is
to maintain full employment of man-power
and resources. The two things must go together
if we are to develop Australia. It is true that in January of this year
131,000 people were registered for employment,
but last month that figure was down
to 90,000. That is a magnificent reduction
in that period of time. That process of
reduction will continue. I do not need to
be reminded that honorable members opposite
will cry themselves to sleep if the number
of persons unemployed declines to the
point where it disappears, because then they
will have lost their one great claim to statesmanship.
The reduction in the number of
persons unemployed has occurred with the
full effect of the February measures
obviously yet to be seen, and most
obviously with the full effect of a
œ 120,000,000 cash deficit yet to make its
mark on the spending power and willingness
to buy of the Australian community. Of
course I am optimistic. The honorable member
for Yarra, who obviously has never had
to associate himself with the compilation of
estimates, says: " But your estimated figure
for unemployment benefit is such and such.
That means you have reconciled yourselves
to a certain volume of unemployment." I
would be very sorry for the man who, having
approached the Treasurer with an estimate
of how much had to go out in unemployment
benefit, had to go back and ask
for more. Of course, when the honorable
member for Yarra is older and wiser
Mr. Jones.-When he is grey headed, like
you! Mr. MENZIES.-Yes, when he is greyheaded
like me, or is the honorable member
referring to the honorable member for
Barton ( Mr. Reynolds)? The fact is that
confidence-the important element in
putting all this purchasing power to workis
attacked and undermined by an Opposition
which relies on unemployment to put
it into office, but, as I gladly acknowledge
from the honorable member for Yarra, not
for three years-that is what I gathered
from his remarks.
Our third objective is to restrain inflation.
I did not hear anything about restraining
inflation in speeches made by honorable
members opposite. As far as one can judge,
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition neither
says nor cares whether anything is done
about inflation. In fact, at one stage during
his remarks, as clich6 followed clich6 I
expected him to say that inflation was a 
bogy-but I have heard that one before.
He seems to believe-presumably his party
believes it too-that stability in the value of
income of any kind and in costs is stagnation.
This is something about which everybody
should begin to think. It is something
about which I invite the people of Australia
to think. Do they believe that stability
in the price level-in the value of the money
they receive and in the cost of things they
buy-is stagnation? No sensible person
could possibly believe it.
We have had eighteen months of stability
in the consumer price index, and in that
period we have conducted, or materially
contributed to, some of the greatest works
of development in the history of Australia.
Far from believing that stability means
stagnation, we have proclaimed that stability
is a condition of growth and development.
We have spent vast sums of money on the
Snowy Mountains scheme, on the standardization
of rail gauges, on a great project in
Western Australia, on a now-completed
programme in Victoria and on the Mount
Isa railway. The latter is a very great enterprise
involving the development of our
copper resources and the export of copper
from this country. We have given encouragement
to the coal ports, and we have assisted
the building of beef cattle roads in the
north. It would be tiresome to list all the
undertakings that this Government has
helped. They are all in the minds of honorable
members. The point I make is that
those projects have been completed or
undertaken by us in a period of stability,
which the honorable member for Yarra continually
confuses with stagnation.
Our next great objective is to see that
there is a steady and strong growth of
manufacturing in Australia, because manufacturing
is one of the essential conditions
of full employment in a growing population.
Every honorable member knows that. There
is a limit to the extent to which an increased
population may find gainful employment in
rural affairs. Everybody knows that. We
must find employment in secondary industry
and in tertiary industry for the fast-increasing
population that is coming to this
stagnant" country.
Our next objective is to reduce costs of
production or, alternatively, to prevent them
from rising. I am speaking now abopt manufacturing industry. I remind honorable
members that it is this Government
that has introduced investment allowances
to help manufacturing industry to improve
its plant and to reduce its costs. It is this
Government that has introduced export tax
concessions in order to give material inducements
to manufacturers to get into the
export business and not leave it all to the
primary industries. It is this Government
that has expedited tariff procedures. It is
this Government that has introduced provision
for quota restrictions in selected cases
of some urgency and particularity. It is
this Government that has introduced exp"
payments insurance in order -to encoura,
export industries. I think it will be understood
that all of those things have a great
bearing on costs of production because if
manufacturers in Australia developed N.
large export market their turnover wot)
be greater, their unit costs would come
down and they themselves would be able
to resist other pressures upwards on the
cost level. Therefore, the whole objective
that we have, in the case of manufacturing,
is to increase turnover, to facilitate the
maintenance of plant efficiency and to
reduce unit costs. With the primary industries,
we have pursued, and are pursuing,
corresponding policies.
Let me remind the committee-and I
find that I need to remind the Depu
Leader of the Opposition, because, fromn
first to last, he had not a word or a thought
to spare for the rural industries in Australia-
that the exports of primary products
by Australia produced most of tincome
which enables manufacturing iL
dustry to have the imports of plant and
materials that it must have if it is to grow
and to employ people. Here is the perfect
example of interdependence. Manufacturing
industry needs materials. To a great extent
still, it needs plant from overseas. It cannot
buy plant and materials overseas unless
we establish overseas credits by the export
of primary commodities. As a result, the
preservation of the primary industries and
the strictest attention to their cost level
have a direct bearing on the extent to which
manufacturing industry can grow and
employ the increasing population that I
stipulated for at the very beginning. 
So I can add, in the case of primary
industry, also, that the avoidance of inflated
costs is essentially related to increased productivity
of the land. So far, the results,
in terms of increased productivity, of the
use of applied science or -technology, have
been quite remarkable, as has been the
development of new and wider markets. All
of these things are being attended to by this
Government. The Treasurer ( Mr. Harold
Holt) is a much-abused man. He has been
responsible for some of these things. The
Minister for Trade ( Mr. McEwen) has been
responsible for others. I suppose that I
-may regard myself as the innocent by-
) ander. These things have been done and
are being done by this Government. Yet,
Sir, the problems of production, of costs
and of export for both primary and secondary
industries were not regarded as being
orth five minutes' time by the Opposition
) hen it presented what 1, in my innocence,
regarded as the policy speech on behalf of
an alternative government.
It is quite clear, as all honorable members
who followed the speech made by the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition will remember,
that the first fatal omission from
that speech was his failure to say anything
about rural costs. On the contrary, he
advocated, in a rather broad and undetailed
fashion, a policy of acute inflation,
laughing at the idea that we need to worry
I'Pout the stability of costs because, in his
. Jpinion, stability, if we achieve it, will be
equivalent to stagnation. This is the
thought right down in his mind, or in the
minds of these academic observers and
-advisers of his.
I have stated the first thing omitted from
the Deputy Leader of the Opposition's
speech. I am talking about major matters.
The second thing is that there was in it
not a word about the need to encourage
the productivity of the export industries and
to increase export income, because the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition failed to
realize that those two things are essential
to full employment. Is this a draft of the
policy of those who hope to form the next
Labour government? If it is, let the man
on the land in Australia take warning. He
will be forgotten and irretrievably damaged,
and full employment will be imperilled by
lack of real nourishment for the great
primary and secondary industries. Sir, we hear a lot about full employment.
We are asked questions about it now and
then, and there are arguments about words.
But full employment is not an artificial idea
or something to be achieved by some sleight
of hand, by some artifice on the part of
a government. It is the desired end of
national and industrial actions operating
together to create a ' state of affairs in which
people are employed -because they are
needed for work. In other words, you can
look at full employment as if it were a
theory, or you can look at it as the desired
end of a great co-operative effort throughout
the. country-an effort in wvhich action
is productively directed and people are
productively employed.
The next objective that we have in our
policy, Sir, is to develop the basic resources
of the country. Honorable -members opposite
would * be hard put to it to deny that
during our term of office the most astonishing
development of these resources has
occurred. This development is quite right,
because basic resources and public works
are the foundations of real growth in both
the public and the private sectors of the
economy. I have said this before, and I
repeat it: I do not accept this artificial
division of the economy betwveen the public
sector and the -private sector. We look at
the works programmes of the States and wc
think that tbey are very good programmes.
They are very good indeed. Without them
and without our works programme, private
industry could not grow. It could not
employ people. It could not see them
housed and provided with transport, schools
and all the amenities of civilized society.
So we must not draw these acute distinctions.
But wve must understand that if we
are to have all these things, the roots of
development must be deep in the soil of
Australia. We must look at our basic
resources, wherever they are, and expose
them and use them in the service of thc
people of Australia.
Our next objective of policy, Mr. Chairman,
is to raise the standard of living by
massive assistance in housing, by the maintenance
of industrial peace, by large and
growing payments to the States for transport,
schools and water supply, and by
development generally. I lump those things
together. I wish I had enough time and the 
committee had enough patience to enable
me to take them one by one and analyse
them, but I must lump them together for
my present purpose. Assistance in each of
these fields represents a powerful contribution
to the improvement of the standard of
living. In consequence of this assistance,
the standard of living has actually been
rising in this stagnant economy!
Next, Sir-I hope the Opposition will
pay some attention to this-one of our
great purposes has been to maintain the
public credit so as to ensure the maximum
capital raisings in Australia, a substantial
inflow of capital, on both public and private
account, from abroad, and, generally..
Australia's international financial repute.
Nothing is more valuable to a country than
a good reputation. The Deputy Leader of
the Opposition, speaking, I admit, with not
too much knowledge about this matter, said
that if we would give the Australian Labour
Party the chance it would redu~ ce the
interest cost of raising money on the public
account. That seems quite simple to do if
you say it quickly. It is not so simple
to do. As a matter of fact, it was quite
wrong for him to say this, because he
wanted to create the impression that there
was an unduly high interest rate on public
securities in Australia as compared with
other countries. I will take the long-termi
yield, which always affords a basis of comparison.
On the long term, twenty-year
yield, what were the current figures in July
of this year-that is, last month? They
were: Australia, 5 per cent.; Great Britain,
6 per cent.; West Germany-no one has
ever said that West Germany's was -a stagnant
economy, for it has been throbbing
with activity ever since the war-6 per
cent., not 5 per cent. as in Australia; and
Canada, which has great access to powerful
financial resources from the United
States of America, 51 per cent. Australia
was the lowest of the lot.
Having made those remarks, I just want
to make two particular comments. Time
would not reasonably permit me to make
more. First, we were charged the other
night with callous treatment of the unemployed.
I take it that that is the general
belief of the Opposition. I -hope that all
honorable members on the Opposition front
bench agree with that charge-callous
treatment of the unemployed. Mr. Ward.-That is an understatement.
Mr. MIENZIES.-He will always rise if
you cast the fly enough. That is an
understatement says the honorable member
for East Sydney. Well, well! Sir, I
seem to remember that the Australian
Labour Party was in office for a number of
years-eight years. I remember that well,
because I was sitting on the Opposition
side of the chamber. The Labour Party
was in office for eight years. It was not
notably deficient in talent, compared with
those now on the Opposition side. Labou!
was in office for eight years, had majorities
and ran the country. In 1949-my year'
grace, if I may put it that way-whe..
Labour was still in office, there was substantial
unemployment for a time. I am
not worrying about-
Mr. Allan Fraser.-Of course you ar--
not! Mr. MENZIES.-I know that the unemployment
arose primarily from a Communist-
inspired coal strike. But do not
forget that right through the period there
was some unemployment.
Mr. Allan Fraser.-Three hundred.
Mr. MENZIES.-You ought to study the
figures. I defy you to find any time in
the whole of that period when no people
were registered as unemployed. There
were masses of people unemployed. Any
how,' whether they were unemployed for
short time or a long time, or whether they
were few or many-
Mr. Reynolds.-Many jobs were available.
Mr. MENZIES.-I am talking aboL)
people receiving unemployment benefit.
Even you must understand that when they
were drawing benefit they did not have a
job; so let us discuss it in that way. Few or
many, it does not matter; they were still
unemployed. What did the Labour Party
provide for them? The benefit for an adult
or a married minor was 25s. a week and
for a wife, œ 1.
Mr. Pollard.-And it bought three times
as many pounds of butter as your benefit
will buy.
Mr. MENZIES.-The honorable member
for Lalor will be advocating a reduction
in the price of butter shortly. Really, 
Reggie, you must behavel Mr. Chairman,
I know Opposition members want to
interrupt the reception of this speech.
The benefit was 25s. for an adult or a
married minor, œ 1 for a wife, 5s. for one
child, nothing for any more children, and
a permissible income of This year,
under this " callous" Government which
does not care what happens to the unemployed-
that was the phrase used by the
Opposition, so we had better accept it-
Mr. Uren.-Who created the unemployment?
Mr. MENZIES.-Under this Governent
in 1962, no thanks to you, the adult
married minor receives, not 25s., but
œ 4 2s. 6d.; the wife receives, not but
each child receives 15s., not just one
child receiving 5s.; and the permissible income
is Let me just summarize that.
"' bour provided for an unemployed man
/ th a wife and two children, œ 2 10s. a
week. Mr. Pollard.-You provided nothing in
1939. Mr. MENZIES.-I know you do not like
it, but for once in your life take it. I will
repeat it.
Mr. Pollard.-Why don't-
Mr. MENZLES.-I will repeat it as long
as the honorable member for Lalor does
not want it to be heard.
-' The CHAIRMAN.-Order! I warn the
, onorable member for Lalor that he must
cease interjecting.
Mr. MENZIES.-I know what happens
the moment you get them like this. The
-moment you have them on the hip, they
Sgin to say, " What did Lord Wellington
-say in 1832?" This is the oldest debating
exercise in the world.
Mr. Peters.-What did he say?
Mr. MENZIES.-I haven't a clue. Probably
all he did in 1832 was to vote against
the Reform Bill.
I will repeat this; it will ultimately reach
the public ear. Labour provided for an
unemployed man with a wife and two
children, œ 2 10s. a week, and permitted an
additional earning of œ 1 a week. For the
same family we provide, not œ 2 10s., but
œ 8 12s. 6d., with permitted additional income
of not It is of no use for
honorable members opposite to say, " Ah, but the cost of living has increased No
increase in the cost of living that has
occurred can explain the difference in the
benefits paid. Opposition members have
my deepest sympathy when confronted by
these figures, when they have it demonstrated
that this argument about callousness
to the unemployed is hypocritical drivel.
When this is demonstrated to them, of
course, they run back and ask what happened
in-oh, dear, dear!
The second particular comment that I
want to make-I might well make 50, but
I will limit myself-is that the honorable
gentleman said in his projected budget
there would be an emergency grant to the
States for education. He did not give any
details of this. I confess it puzzles me a
little. An emergency grant! Does he
mean for one year? Does he think -that a
grant for one year will solve the problem?
Or does he mean that it is to be permanent
and therefore not an emergency grant? He
really ought to tell us, I think, at some convenient
time, which idea he has in his
mind. But under this stagnant Government,
in this " stagnant" period in Australian
economic and social history, what has happened?
In 1950, -the States, which have
the prime responsibility for educationgreatly
assisted by us, as I will show-were
spending œ 46,000,000 on education. In
spite of us and our villainy, in 1960-61, ten
years later, they spent, not œ 46,000,000,
but œ 184,000,000. This does not sound
much like stagnation. From 1951, when
we began it, ' to the current financial year,
Commonwealth direct payments to State
universities rose from œ 1,000,000 to just
under œ 16,000,000, and our scholarship
provision was multiplied four times. I will
not take too much time on this, because I
am preparing a statement which will show
how much the Commonwealth contributes
directly and indirectly -to State education
expenditure. The figures will show that in
1950-51 the Commonwealth component of
the œ 46,000,000 that the States spent was
œ 22,000,000, and -that out of the current
œ 184,000,000 the Commonwealth component
was no less than œ 85,000,000. But,
Sir, I will not anticipate because I think
it is due to the honorable members that I
should have a paper prepared-and it is
now well in hand-to deal with these
matters. 
I have briefly explained the objectives of
our policy and I have explained them, I
hope, in positive terms. We know quite
well, if nobody else does, that in any country
economic conditions will fluctuate.
But that does not mean that a long-term
policy cannot be pursued with vigour and
determination provided that it is widely
understood and that targets are clearly
seen. If we compare our progress in Australia-
this great country of ours-for the
last decade with that of any other comparable
country we shall see that our advance
has been steady and sure. True, we have
recently had some recession of business
activity-now recovering-and some unemployment.
But this Budget, coming as it
does on top of the liberal measures of a
few months ago, is expansionary and will,
subject to one element to which I shall
refer again in a few minutes, facilitate a
full return to a rapid but sound national
growth. The large deficit of nearly
œ 120,000,000 is, for reasons I have mentioned,
calculated to stimulate this process.
Sir, our foundations are solid and sure.
Our overseas reserves and our balance of
payments, which gave us great concern in
the boom months of 1960, have been restored
to health. The banking position and
the availability of credit are both satisfactory.
We have cost and price stability.
The inflow of capital for Australian investment
is being maintained. The public credit
is high. We are confident of a good future,
and we are determined to achieve it. Our
task -is not to produce a return to an inflation
which, in its turn, could produce
rapidly rising costs and prices with excessive
labour turnover, inefficiency and damaging
speculation. That that is not our task, I
am happy to say, was recognized by every
businessman and primary producer with
whom we had discussions about six weeks
ago. Our duty is not negative but positive. It
is to promote a climate favorable to rapid
but sound growth of national resources and primary and secondary exports and the new
and enlarged markets that we need in a
changing and challenging world. To do all
these things we must and will accept some
risks, but not foolish risks. However the
chances in this national adventure may fall,
we do not propose ever to lose sight of the
need for growth, which is supremely important,
nor of the basic condition of
growth, the preservation by the joint efforts
of science, management and labour of a
general cost level which will enable us to
meet and overcome competition both at
home and abroad in the products of our
fields and factories.
Sir, before I conclude, may I say thi
Much play has been made by our opponents,
evidently unacquainted with the fact that
the economy, as well as road transport, has
its traffic problems, on the brilliant term
stop-go Adopting this metaphorical ex
pression I can say for the Government tha
economically speaking, we shall drive ahead
on the right road as fast as we sensibly can.
We hope to have the green light with us. We
may well occasionally see the amber light,
which means caution, but we will not drive
through the red light just because some
passing pedestrian would regard that as a
proof of liberal thought.
I said that there was one element operating
against a full return to speedy growth.
That element is insufficient confidence up
the line from consumer-buyer to manufac
turer. For all the reasons I have mentione.
there should be to-day a powerful surge of
confidence. Those who devote their major
attention to the defects of our present position,
and withdraw their attention from the
real foundations of prosperity, do a grer
disservice to the nation. They promote it,
the public mind that very ill-founded uncertainty
which is the sole remaining cause of
the degree of unemployment that still exists.
There is no room for pessimism in a
country whose entire history is a triumph
for hope and faith and confidence.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 


62/ 095
The Austwaiiantgiogle are looking forward
vith reat pleasure to twpportunity which vill
shortly be g n them to weloe to their shores
Their Majestis King Ptmnl a aduen Siz'ikit of
ThaiIand. This will be the first ocoasiom on which
a reigning moaarch of a fbreigi ooumtry has visited
us* Nw appropriat, it Is that the Royal Visitor
should from a onmt with which Australia
has strmaS ties through the Bouth lat Asia Treaty
Or nisation and the still atroager ties of a warm
and abiding fridb~ hip.
Their Majesties will travel far and wide
in Australia antd Inow that wherever they go they
ae destined to reei a welcome which will come
from the hearts of the Australian people.
R. G. KNZISS.
16th Aupst, 1962. 



FOR RELEASE THURSDAY_ 16/ 8/ 1962 FOR FRIDAY MORNING
PAPERS P, No. 1962
VISIT OF KING AND QUEEN OF THAILAND
Their Majesties King Bhumibcl and Queen Sirikit
of Thailand will pa: s through. Sydney earl on Saturday
morning on their way to New Zealand to begin a State
visit, They will return on August 26th for their State
visit to Australia. Their Majssties will leave Bangkok at 11,30 amY
tomorrow ( Friday) in a Qantas aircraft, chartered by the
Government of Thai. land, and after refuelling at Singapore,
are expected in Darwin at midnight. The Royal couple
will alight at Darwi. n where they will be met by the Minister
for Territories, Mro Hasluck, and the Administrator of
the Northern Territory and Mrso Roger Notto
The aircraft's arrival time of 7 am, in Sydney
is the equivalent of 4 a. mr Bangkok time, and with a
ceremonial arrival in New Zealand and an exacting programme
in prospect, Their Majesties have expressed a wish to remain
aboard the aircraft during its brief stopover in Sydney in
order to obtain as much rest as possible.
While the aircraft is on the ground in Sydney,
arrangements have been made to set accommr. odation aside for
any other members of the party who may wish to alight
The Minister for External Affairs, Sir Garfield
Barwick, will be at the airport to greet the Foreign
Minister of Thailand, Mr. Thanat Khoman who will be accompanying
Their Majesties in both New Zealand and Australia.
CANBERRA, 16th August, 1962, 



CRICETERS CLUB OF N. SW, SHEFFIELD TEAM DINNER?
BELD AT SYDNEY ON 18TH AUGUST, 196.2
Speech by the PilMe Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzig-s
Sir, I think it is quite ridiculous for me to
interrupt a programme so full of gaiety, I am entirely
willing to resign instantly in favour of Jim Burke. ( Laughter)
And not politically. ( Laughter) But I've been enjoying this.
As a matter of fact, when he said that the lightmeter
showed zero minus 05 or whatever it was, it reminded me
at once of a time when I was in England and, oddly enough,
went to a Test Match ( Laughter). I arrived in London. I told
my wife and my daughter who were with me that they could enjoy
themselves in their own fashion in London, but I was off to
Trent Bridge the following day and I stayed en route at
Coventry and the next morning I was driven up to Trent Bridge,
This was the time when Lindsay Hassett made a century, but
that was before I arrived and Alec Bedser was having a wonderful
time. And all the way from Coventry to Nottingham, the
drizzle came down; the little bits of fog hung on the bushes
on the side of the road, When I arrived at Trent Bridge at
about 11 it was so dark you could hardly see the other side
of the street. I was received very courteously by the
President of the Club who was the Duke of Portland whom I have
known in his earlier manifestation before he became the Duke
and those of you who remember the present Duke of Portland will
know that he is a stage Duke you know, he says exactly what
you would expect a stage Duke to say ( Laughter).
He couldn't have been more civil. He took me upstairs
into a room and there was a little balcony outside it looking
across the ground and he said to me, knowing that I was an
Australian, " Would you like a drink, what?" and I said, " 1Wells
not normally at this time of the morning, but what did you
say Sir?" and he said, " Would you like a drink?" " Well," i I
said " on the whole, I think I will." ( Laughter) He accommodated
me wih a drink and then I went and peered over the little
balcony. You could tell that there were people there on the
other side, but there was no distinction of faces or anything
of that kind. There were two melancholy-looking piles of
sawdust; it was as dark as a dog's mouth you see. And at a
quarter past eleven, refreshed suitably I said, " You krow
Duke, I seem to be unlucky because I did hope to see tht; play
today and on Monday and I have no hope. He said, " What do
you mean, what?" ( Laughter) " Well " 1 1 said, " when do you
expect play to begin?" He said " ialf past eleven, what",
you see, And I said to him, " It~ s twenty past eleven and yo0u
really can't see the other side of the ground." I said, " In 1
Australia, there wold~ be any play under these conditions,"
and he looked at me with ducal contempt ( Laughter) and said,
" My dear fellow, if we didntt play in this light at Trent
Bridge, we'd never play at all." ( Laughter) And sure enough,
at 11, 0 out came the English fieldsmen and disappeared into
the murk ( laughter) and out came a procession of Australian
batsmen and they disappeared into the murk ( Laughter). They
reappeared pretty quickly. I always remember poor Neil Harvey,
that lovely batsman, just doing one of those tucking-it-roundthe-
corner shots, and when he peered through the murk, he found
he had been caught ( Laughter) so he was off and by the end of
the day the match was a mess. Soafter all this zero minus, this
is a story entirely for Australian consumption. so0o@ s00. 
2
I was also very amused P11 come to the real. topic
in a moment because I made a note of it here, Oh yes
somebod. y was talking about great feats of batzam-nship and Ca
reference was made by you, Sir, to Dainty Ironmonger, A
fine bowler, but a batsman who, in my opinion, and I am
speaking as a Victorian now, has always been gravely underrated.
( Laughter) Because in the great year when Larwood
was wreaking death and destruction and Dainty Ironmonger who
was batting at the Richmond end came into bat my impression
was that he shut his eyes and dealt a stout blow at the first
ball that came along and it bent the pickets at cover point,
And this was a marvellous stroke, It was greatly received by
the populace and, many years afterwards, I am sitting up with
the great in the Committee box at the Melbourne ground, than
which there is nothing more lordly ( Laughter) and I looked down
and I savw Dainty Ironmonger I was going to say talking to
Jack Ellis, but you won't misunderstand me Jack was talking
to him ( Laughter) and I thought thiO ought to be fun, so I
went over and butted in, and this interrupted Jack ( Laughter)
who because he was a friend of rmine and for other reasons,
fell silent for a minute, This let me get in and I said,
" Dainty, I have always wanted to ask you, when you struck that
magnificent cover-drive off Larwxood at the M. C. C. that day
you remember it?" and he said, " Too right" ( Laughter) I said,
" Now I want to ask you, as man to man, when you hit the ball,
were your eyes shut?" and he looked at me and said, " Too
right" ( Laughter), Then of course, Jack resumed the conversation
( Laugnter), A very interesting piece of cricket hist" ory
I think. Anyhow, my job tonight is to propose the Toast of the
Team and this is very difficult for a decent, devout, Victorian
( Laughter) to have to come along here. It becomes so painfully
repetitive, to congratulate New South Wales on winning the
Sheffield Shield, once more, once more, once more, And I
want to say that, although I am a great admirer of the team, I
don't think you need excite yourselves unduly. There's one
simple reason why you win the Shield, not entirely fair, but
it's quite simple,, You chaps win the Shield because you've
got practically the entire Australian Eleven playing ( Laughter).
Well, of course down in Victoria, we don't care for this.
( Laughter) No that we would replace you in the Australian
Eleven not for a moment, but we do occasionally pray for
something to happen that will enable an Australian Eleven to
have all its stars, or most of them, from Victoria and t'ien
the Victorian Cricket Association will snap out of it and
give a dinner for the Sheffield Shield team ( Laughter) to
congratulate them on victory. And if I am still alive, which
seems improbable ( Laughter), I'll be there.
You know, it's a very good thing for Australian cricket
that there is such a place as New South Wales. That's quite
true, Politically, I wouldn't generalise on that matter,,
There have been times in my political life when I though
I could live without Sydney or die with it, ( Laughter) Thut
in cricket, you have in this State made the most tremendous
contribution to what I will alwrays maintain is the greatest
game in the world, ( Hear, hear) ( Applause). There are
certain mechanical reasons for it, perhaps. Would you mind
if I suggested one or two of them to you?
I have always thought as the grand final of the
football in Melbourne is conducted on a mud-patch, which not
uncommonly happens, well on in September, and the following
day they bring out the harrows and they run the harrows over
it and they do a little top-dressing, they roll it out and
o0 * 0 .0. a0. a */ 3 
-3-
pray for rain and if it doesnit r'ain they water the pitch
y7ou know. And after a whi: le, people are playing cricket on
it0 But in Victoria it's quite common when the first Sheffield
Shield match comes along for interstate batsmen to be batting
having had perhaps one innings in a Club match, whereas over
here by the end of September, the cricket bats are out I
see the boys on the spare allotments, I see t-hem, in Moore Park
and therefore you are always able to beat the season as we see
the season in the South. Now I am not complaining about that,
This is very good because it means from the point of vie, i of
Australia you have a certain number of distinguished cricketers
who are in form and in practice. Now that's a very good thing,~
The second thing that I have always complained a
little about is when people have said to me, " You know, the
Victorian batsmen they are very good, they are very good.
You know, useful fellows ' to have in a side but a bit stodgy.
I have even heard Jim Buirke say that ( Laughter) " tA bit stodgy,
you know, a bit defensive" and I have frequently thought to
myself, having looked at a number of crickiet grounds here, that
on the whole yours tend to be a little smaller than ours and
that is partly because of our particular game of football as
compared with rugby, And I think that psychologically, this
has something to do with it because if he boundary doesnt
look quite so far away a fellow will have a go at it, but
in the vast arenas of 4ctoria, he looks through the murk of
the early Victorian summer and he says, " Well, if I can just
push that past point, we might get a couple." Isn't that right,
Arthur? But of course these creatures they just say phtttl
and before you can say " knife" it has hit the pickets and it
is practically self-fielded because it is so near the pitch,
Anyhow that's all just a bigoted, bitter, Victorian point of
view, ILaughter) All I know is that it isn't for nothing that you
have the Sheffield Shield, It certainly isn't because in
these last years, in most of which critical onlookers have been
saying, " Ah cricket is not what it used to be-' you know, I
hate those iellows, There never was anybody as good as so and
so and so and so, All nonsense. To me there was never
anybody as good as the fellow who is out there now ( Hear,
hear) performing. Each man I am looking at and enjoying, and
I hate these bumbling commentators who live in the past,
It's a hateful thing, But here, year after year, you have
been producing and showing the very backbone of Austral: an
international cricket and I cculd stand up here for an hour
and talk about eight or ten of them and never say a word that
anybody would disagree with. But in particular, if you will
allow me to say so, you have been able to make a remarkable
contribution, int~ rnatioiially, to cricket because you have
produced two people Ian Craig and Richie Benaud, whose place
in cricket history 1S9 I believe, quite assured. ( Hear hear)
( Applause) IItave been a politico for a long time and f have
had defeats and victories and large majorities and small
majorities but if there is one thing that I have learned it is
that the first condition of ultimate success is to produce a
sense of morale in your team. ( Hear, hear)
And if Ian will allow me to say so, this is his
eat contribution to modern cricket history in Australia
Applause) as a field captain, as a man who, in some mysterious
fashion almost magical fashion, always takes the offensive.
I've sat up in my lordly box more than once and have watched
him conduct a manoeuvre on the field so &amp;; vastatingly good,
0 00 0.60V4 
4~ e
so aggressively brilliant that even before it succeeded
knew that it would, This is something quite remarkable
and it is made all the more remarkable because, unhappily,
the cricket of our great opponent L. nd I hope always our
great opponent on the cricket field has tended a little
to being defensive, Well, we are not to be beaten,, And it
is a bad thing to start off any contest by saying " Well
I'm not going to be beaten."' It is so important io staR
off by saying, " We are going to win" and this is the difference
between defensive tactics and aggressive3 tactics and aggressive
tactics have paid off,
And Richie Benaud occupies a place in the history
of cricket not only as a New South Welshman not only fur
this team with such success, but in the history of international
cricket which I really believe is unique in my time, and if
it is unique in my time, it is tuique because he has always
had the spirit of resourceful at-tack studying every batsman
who comes in, I saw him get Trevor Lailey caught by himself
off square leg one day by a masterly piece of psychology,
Because the moment Bailey came in I happened to say to the
fellow next to meI " You know, Bailey rather likes to tickle
one quietly round the corner to get off the mark and the
bowling won't help this and he'll get a bit fed up with it,"
This chap came in, flanked himself at short square leg, the
bowling went on and of course, finally even Baileyts
patience was exhausted ( Laughter) and up she went and there
we were, Can't be very easy to be the captain of a cricket
team. I've been the captain of a political team for a long
time and believe me, it s not child's play ( Laughter) though
everybody else thinks it is ( Laughter) and of course, that'S
true about the captain of a team, Everybody understands it,
on the whole, rather better than he does but, at the same
time, looking back over these years, I can't imagine a more
just result than the one that we've been able to produce to
you, the celebration of this enormous period of years of
success, I would just like to say I am very glad to see
here tonight Sid Smith. I am sorry he's been on the sick
list. I sit up with him whererer I manage to arrive at the
Sydney Cricket Ground, tear myself away from the embraces
of the Trustees. I like to sit tip with Sid Smith and t-ommy
Howard and listen to the old and bold telling me about these
matters and as a rulu, at the other end of the Committee
box, there Is a man called Webb. You know the chap Webb?
He's a Q0C. ( Laughter) An argumentative character if ever
there was one, If somebody does a straight drive and it
runs under the sight boards he's quite prepared to say, " Now,
if it ran under the sight board, but it didn't actually reach
the pickets, would it be a four'?" ( Laughter) And he will
argue about that for the next hour. I always refuse to
argue with him0 I wonder if I could just, before I concj~ ude,
say this to you, There's an intimate association between
cricket and the law,, I am reminded of this by Webb? Q40Co
I have had one or two very curious experiences in which my
devotion to cricket has come not amiss. I remember many
years ago when the late Sir Leo Cussen who was a very
distinguished Supreme Court Judge in Victoria and who was
President-of the M. COCO in Melbourne was down at a Test
Match and I wanted to be there too, but a solicitor in the
03a00a80 a 000 a/ 
country had taken an Opinion from me abcout four weeks before,
about some problem of a by-1aw relating to bees and how far
they were to be allowed to fly ( 1Leughter) or one of those
things that country municipalities love so much and I had
written an Opinion and it said that in my opinion the by-law
was invalid and that the conviction of his client was wrong
and that he ought to apply for an Orde-? to Review. An
application for an Order to Review at that time, I think, in
Victoria had to be made within thirty days of conviction and
my country solicitor forgot about it. It was getting near
Christmas and he forgot about the clock until the very last
moment when he suddenly sent down all the affidavits to his
Melbourne agent and said h" You must get Mr. Menzies to apply
for an Order Nisi," 1 and ?; is was the last day. Sir Leo
Cussen beamed at me and said, " I seem to remember, Menzies
therets a rule that if Counsel can assure the Judge that all
the papers are cr, the file and mentions the case, the application
will be treated as in time and can then be adjourned
for a fortnight, is that right?" and I said, " Yes Your
Honour, that is precisely the position as I understand it,"
" Very well he said " I accept your assurance. You. mention
the case, f adjourn It for a fortnight. Get my Associate to
make a note of the name, will you if it occurs to you, In
the meantime, isn't this chap bowling well." ( Laughter)
I always remember that with great pleasure. And could I,
without wearying you, tell you another?
We had a County Court Judge in Victoria who
had actually played for Australia, rather fleetingly, many
years before, He wasn't a very good lawyer. He was a
charming man. He had a rather pedantic attachment to what
he was pleased to regard as good English and therefore he
was occasionally difficult, You had one like that here in
New South Wales. ( Laughter) But many years ago in my
County Court days, I knew that this Judge was devoted to
cricketl c'nooks it all came back to my mind the other day
when I was dandling the White Leghorns down at the Exhibitionand
roses, and it was very important to know what a judgets
-prejudices are, i~ f I may say so, before you appear before
hi: m, So down from the country came a case for me; there
was an argument about a contract and my solicitor produced
a client who was as dull as a man could comfortably be.
( Laughter) You couldn't get a consecutive statement out of
him on anything. He was a decent chap. I've no doubt that,
basically, he had the right ideas but you just couldn'~ t et
anything sensible from him and it was very troublesome,
We went up into court, I knowing as little
about my client's case as possible, in consequence and the
plaintiff Counsel opened hiis case and he called thirteen
witnesses and tUhey were good. I cross-examined them with
all the skill that I could command, but on the whole I thought
they did rather well, and at the end of the day when all
their witnesses had been called I had no witness except
this derelict client of mine ( Laughter) the Judge, the
ex-cricketer, said to me, " Well, Mr. Menzies, you know, I
dontt want to discourage you but I am very impressed by the
case for the plaintiff." 1 Ana I said, with that innocent
air that I am thankful to say always characterised me
( Laughter), I said, " Your Honour I appreciate that, but
I beg of you, Sir, suspend your judgment until you have
heard my case. I am certain, Sir4 that you will be impressed
by it," And he said, " Certainly and we adjourned, Then
I said to the solicitor, " Bring that fellow down to my
. o o. o/ 6 
6
chambers again, will YOU" and we had anothier session. I
coul -dn't discovrer what he thought he was talking about, so
finally I proclaimed my usual gambits when I was before thi s
Judge,, I said, " Itccuse me, Mr. So and So "-he came from
the Bullarook Forest or somewhere near Ballarat, you know
I said, " Excuse me, but do you keep fowls?" 1 He said, " What
do you mean?" I said, " Can you tell a White Leghorn from a
Buff Orpington or a Wyandotte?" " O01 no," he said. " The wife
keeps a few chooks but I wouldn't know what they were" I said,
" Forget about the fowls. ( Laughter) Second : Do you grow
roses?" " Oh well," he says. " I don't kniow. The Missus has
got one or two, I thinik,&amp; I said, " Well, could you tell a
Frau Carl from a La Belle France, or whatever it is?" 1 And
he said, " Oh, no, come off it." ( Laughter) I said, " Out with
the roses.'" So, greatly despairing I said to him, " Cricket,
Did you ever play cricket?" He said. " Oh, now youtee talking."
He said, " I played for Ballarat and District against Ivo
. Blights Eleven." I said, 4' 1Ah, wonderful) What, 1882 or something?"
He said, " Yes" I said, " Conference concluded.
Thank you, Take him away. Keep him right overnight." ( Laughter)
Next morning, I opened the case as well as I could,
called my wretched client, who was all over the place and I
finally said, " Well now, witness, I am going to ask you about
the date on which this particular conversation occurred. And
I know His Hcnour appreciates that it is not easy to remember
a date, Now, of course, if I were to ask you to remember the
da~ te on which you played for Ballarat and District against Ivo
Blights Eleven ( L9aughter) naturally that would be differ'ent,,"
And the Judge turned rouna and said, " What's that? Is that
right? Did you play Well, well 11 he said, and hitched
around his chair and for the next hal hour thay exchanged
ideas ( Laughter) about this fast-bowler, and whether that
spinner was really turning the ball, and my fellow turned out
to have made twentysix runs a very admirable innings9Jm
you Inow ( Lau. ghter) and had taken a couple of wickets and
by thLi. time, of course, I had sat down like the cat thai swallowed
the canary. My opponent, very properly, got up to cross-examine,
and the Judge said, " Well, Mr. McGuiness, of course I want to
make it clear that you have a perfect right to cross-examine this
witness. I will be the last man to deny you your rights, but
I think I should tell you before you do that in the whole of my
j udicial caraer I have never been so impressed by a witness
( Laughter) as I have by Mr. So and So." Whfiether it was just or
unjust, I'll never know ( Laughter).
Sir, those two anecdotes are quite irrelevant to
the task of the evening, but really, when I get among my friends
the cricketers who have given me more pleasure than perhaps
any other people in the world in a leisure that is not too
frequent, I become d little reminiscent and a little talkative,
I am indebted to the cricketers of my own time for so much
happiness. I am particularly indebted to this magnificent New
South Wales team which has once more won the Sheffield Shield
and which, as it now stands9 is probably capable of taking on
any international team in the world,, And that's a great performance,
~ hsis a great event and I have loved it and I want
you all to join with me in drinking the health of the team and
in particular, the health of this talented and courageous man,
Richie Benaud, who captained it and who is one of the great
captains in cricket history, ( Hear, hear) 



WEEKLY INDEXNo._')
Week Edn uu .62
GOMM ON7EALrT.! OP Av'USTR Z IA
Xzidox of ' Mvinistcr,. i_, l S Gatemnente, Issued in11 Canberra
2h Prm . n ~ nse o-Tod. theut 1R tte Hon.
John McEwen
Aug. 12 No0 81-45A SPECIAL INDU3STR~ Y PROIMOTITS
-, 16 No0 866. I 1) E R AN CF AU : TRALIAN PB1ODUCTS TO BE
The Tre asu2e~ the Rt, Hon_ Iiaroid Hol+~ j DI SPLtAYEDj AT
Avig. 15 No. 856 " RECKLESS N: ATEUP): SM't CAN ADIAN EY~ IIBITION,
TheMinister for Territopies0the Hon, Pan._ aeuc0_. P
Av~ g, 3 J2
it 16
if 17 No. N0867 No. 873 TME'T GUIfNEA COFFEE EYPOP. TS
ABORIGI\ AL VJWARDS IN THE NORTHERN TERRIYORY
CATT-1, TIC'K EPtADICATION 1LN PAPUIA AND
NL'VI UIE
TheMinister for La'ccur-andNationalServi. e. The Ho.-W),. a MI . LI l a hon
A. ug. 1.3-No. 84, C REV1V CF EMPLOYMENT SITUATION1 AT END JU. LY,
2. 96() 2
Postmaster-General, The Hon, Davicdson
Aug. 14NO, 853I'SUE DATE FOR AU3TP2ALIAN INLAND MISSION
STZAM
The Miister for Thnirat ion, The Hon., A, RT~~ñ
Au11415No. 860H0~ J,* Y 1MTC-RA'NT J. CCOMMODA'TION OEFNTRE JfT
NORTHAN, TO Ri-OPEN I-, EXT M. ONTE,,
Thq Minister for Exen'Afi~ The Kon SiL? Gifield Dapwick
0,~ c 86-3
Yo, 83' 7A
No. 874 COW V1O PLAN\ AID FOR PJ FLTBLI C OF VIE T NAM
OOLOM111O P12I A71 JAR1DS FOR TRtA' 1INEES I1N PtTBL T
1ATJ5ST Ri. t L, N DITP LOMATIC 11PPOINTMENTS
The Minister for PrinMary Tnd' 2st ry. The;. c, oi C. F. Adermarn, M. P.
No. 859
Yo. 8611 UNTFOLYA10 !-JV-' kGAP. 1N1 12GISLATIrON'
WHEAT T*( T.' USTRY St) RVEY
T1he M1inister-for the Az nL, j, õ he Hon,~ J. 0. Cvrav
No. 850
Nc. 8-57
No. 858 MJ! Y EG1NRE] S' CONFERENCE
FPhL1' DO'M O1P ' bT1FSIOGNRA LS REIMENL'T
APM' 1, Y CA'DZTS TOP FLYIVNG SEFIOGL
. The-M1inister for Social Sevc h ong Hugh S, Robcer~ iot-
A,. ug. 16No,, 865
it 17 No. 870 SUPPLEMENTYARY 11EGIPRO CAL A. GREEMENT 014
SOCI2 EEUITY~ WITH BRITAIN;
C01' iVITTI ON TO PJ. LI. T ATE EXPORTS
Th~ e M0inister for ' the lnteri orlTh Hen, Gci-. cn FPxeeth
Au F 14 No. 851 RAFZ RA
15 N o, 854 PERTH FPIM~ SHOWN IN NEW YORK
S 15 Iso. 861 SA_ 1. TI: UI-IG
17 No., 871 -W1OM 1. OO CONTR:, CT.
S 17 No. 872 THIRD PARTLL1Y '.! T. NU~ jhd CE ! N(_ PT'R/" SES
The, Mir~ ioter fPor the NavySen-. t-or thi Hon. Gorto.*
JAug. 12 No. 844. R~ J~ R AT CN!. VAL'ST
VP 13 No, AL3LT'ED I'RTIN\ G RO0YAl IGT
bNo 855 NAVY PIL0li. TClCMi ~ GT
S 17 No0 868 ~: CG 3D~ jE NEXT 1! VCEl{
Pt 17 No, a, 69 -VISIT POM TA S N FFrR! EAST DFENCE
CHIa / 2
ioug016 ft 16
fr 17 16
AULT, 9 
The Minister for Supply, The Hop., Allen Faijrh&amp; 1
Aug,. 13No. 849
14'. No. 852
' No, 862 YIOOMERA TAPES VOICES OF RUSSIAN
T) VRI'SPORT RIU'jYGEMENTS FOR VeI. P. VISITS
INEE A TTMOSPHERIC PRESSURE MIvUkSUREIVtENT BY
SKYLRK ROCKEzT
The Minister for ir the Hon, David Fairl air
A~ ig0 12 No, 843 AiZ F. IN PlICIFIC hlNTI-ISBMIiAINE
EXERCISES
13 No, 847 OFICER AWARDED SCHOARSHIP Tu
TAT WTAN UN VER TY
With the Compliments of
The c1overnmant Public Relations Office,
Pariiaxmc. ntb House,
ISERR'-It. C. T,. 



OPENIKNG OF CIRIL RU31tIAUN NLUORIAI
4INie AT SIi tO8LS HOiWMIORS JDWI3S
NOW's WNTUS HI~ L3L I
0 N19TR A M11V &amp; 2t1%
r Oaismn, Rabbi Pozush Rabbi Bastm W Mayo,
Parli trl Q most Ldies aadm antlem a
Ithin I ouAt to begin bap ing back to the
begnnig-( thaiv'e' smtking to be said for that) and tban
thia Mayer fbi is wleo to this ld and faoias o1aipalitr
I always kaw that it is old; I read about it in the early
sistory of Sr&amp; Wro and I had no idea that it bad bw properous
a lag uati I sa his Mayoral arbna ( Laughter) I gthered
that there vere 65 affairs tever you all thi . o it,
all looking remzaribly like g1dL
6ht Sir it is very kind of you to oos here to
velom my Wviea 6I yslf to thi mmiaeiplity. We are
delighted to be he And, of eoaaeq we ar pertl * I" I
delighted to be here cam more an an oeaas 11i1bat hi
Whn I wa. about it this morning, I said to m wife,
Owel, it ive years ap that I vat out ther
" a11m0 I aid o tu t I" OJkohinn CCrrawmeor vvmilly 1w the heir of the
bed 0and~ d a Wing U ths s he u And I said,
As it Iswe eiarsagp, the" r is a serious risk of
aIing watl tben said and I my sy it all a In*
boasoiouuly, and people vill be very smvl ustisted.
* owever that's a risk that am has to take. It is all right
for my i M, b, sebers, to say that ha's a van of fI
vOwf. p That seed to m to have all the dm1s of novelty,
that omerk. ( Laughter) Bu, 1 stills be said it and tearefbre
1t stand, Sets a ma of ftv s Nobobdy could vr ay
that about so, ( Iaughth) A man wbe makes " an speads
in the cors of a yar as I do probably repeats himself Most
Intolerarbly, Ba Ifait erch ben wasi ai to bo this
bean and t G einsygi ef it again bemfs ite I was gheIa)
whe I an a abTarear In ity a ed Bnrat itteb
bn i e of ya my mitoyuits m inind. the State of ti
aonedi a serarb e ied. ileyiw ifpr bldift that
ultlto a anti" t blokdo W aIt shc allad the Sam I
Asy~ OnZaothus asa kanda hhaetd a rs ofl alfit
It wao * Ho lttle t ree a f bomie rodt t is
onoisel a If It an Iit) a didg to ogm LY~ I
And thr otb m ofh a liIet w If is thira shano
spirited yoa livg what ot did to the peop tll livedtin i
I can ity as iideoalors this baalar you ban a itbtt
bit ilk the AW own MINA; Dr~'~
is n % oew a omatit to try tod Awo t of that mlo-er
litiately tschdoor bomus sheme. q n know bar
a lot of lofmab" Wmt pensionsI and about oter florm of fi
but do kwhnv the Vmt probla of people tt~ o It Is
the P av~ anogi a howe to live in tat is bir own 91* 00
who" a4 " y lie with Other ve" p10 but vul" n their
Identity as ir i~ r nla I am" It know ow you ma do it* but that
is the thing you ougt to try to dooof Ad out of that mwrpd
thi xeb . Y S W@ O**/ 2 
It bea 1W a provision tNot Vwee ParULly religions
and charitable orpailstians mated to establish a Earn. fbr
elderly people, we tmld subsIdise to the extant of pound fbr
0mdIt wa sleW to Pt pi4Ng. It Is Interesting to look
canIt but the first ' m'I don't think that w. 1laid out
mot than W1t of whet we = antieipat. e bet It takes a little
tise fos' thoe Ideas to gtber ml= bt It tow~ s a little tim
fbr to realise that If you sam Pt Sa.. n* rul-i
9 find a peWA a pound -a pound and have two pounds
s eacho tI3Sg yea develop a Uap ano of momy and you can
do thig that= might not have thoght of, ftt in the
result . the I1s8L ovI think, a little more than see
and a half yeams old4 we hAve a" a Goesfmnt already nue
subsidies or an'qupd for subaldis to the ton of amrly 04M.,
and the aot Is growing, and I mat to tell you, that every
year at ftpt tine, Treasurer* get paler and paler and their
colleaps palr and paler., Iteos of expenditare are
Investipe, aleptions of extra vapgee fly qte reyaod
the roast ;" aa this itan not a pomy off. It cn doble and
w'lbe hspw* ( Applause).
! he sesord thing that it doa I believe, Is to give
an oppoetn'tit to a mioul-Muinded people whether they are
rich or not so, Ash or poor, to do somin at a smarinie to
t~ evas with the knildge that Its effoet will be trobled.
and therefore nothing that th. W do Is quite mll* This, I
thilnk, is a stimulating Idea*
of so se, Sir the Jewish smnmity which-like the
Jeotso has eeftsimLly LZe emae d of being a little mea
you have heard that alleptios hakven't yeW? tNo to m00st
charitabl meI" e in the wrld gave alumy been aeesed of being
a little ebeepq or as they would say in deotlaad, a little
near. Mt yewr emmty has a record of social resposibiityo
partloularly to its am people wieb, I think is = qualled In
thnodern history of the world. It always gives me peat
pride I have been to a anber of o pg of on kind or
another Awm the Jewish ityndh1a re an elewer a M I mist
say that I slum" p with a high feeling of pride that I -n the
Citizenm of a ctjw that prodseepol of soak generosity and
imaginan. of Course hero today you ave it in a big my.
There soas. to he no limit% to What Mr. Romunbem Is Prp0ared
to do. I have knon a Mew popale, havvnlt you who beae
rich and mean and wto seemed to have only one ambition and that
to leav a vast fbrm to their children whe as a rule dissipae
it within two geneations. if have s00a lot Of peOP1e lik1V
that* it's a wonderful thinlg to see a ma pia&amp; along L~ t life
who has money9t hbaesn ored for' it, wh has aeemlated son@
inu~ whefinds his hihs lea Sure In, giving It amsy; and
givn it In eiramstaaees that Will prdoe the meximim
Of pleaMMAr for as nany people as possibLe. ( Applause)
just a quick game around as I eum in Indicated that
parsamisus follow, Sir Adolph ~ srm ee ( Applause
It isn't fbr nthing that your 00 iy a0e~ e soak
peol an wA Rabbi &amp; awas hespais so eloquntlyI I
thoug ha , put his finger on the reason tt o I realised fbi'
the first, tImh, as he quoted the text that with Yost charity
Is not Jt. a Idwss It is In a tfte sense at dutt. And
this is the mat llZWat" l exposition to sy mind that I
have board. It explains so Much. 0000 o / 3 
Ust als referred or was It iHabbi Pemush? -to
the element of dignity.* Sow this Is It about these Bomws...
lon ko the old Institutional Idea of people Just hWW
tosether, gie the minim of attention with all the cold
aura of o olcaldom about it, beamse ef icialdom ha to to
old, that** the way It Is Wuilt bat today in Homes lke
this we have aimed at preserving the digmity of man, the
dignity of voang Instead of berding them together as If they'
weram at the end of their iou and could be fbrgrtten or
trea ted an inbezs in a book* But homn beinags lving in
a Ste to of CIvilisatOU living in a Btot of di i, sooeting
ttbix frionst living Ums asm kinid of lives as te have
always mted to live and doing this in auoutne of
beauty and pleasr anid Social Intercourse and dignity this
is It. Whan a m losem his dignity I don't ma popity,
that's a detestable thina the moment a maw leaws is inner
dignity, be loses much ofhis manbood. It's esertial to
prsev it. W' VsImUaWy all thank God that we have In ourmmit
anid you In yours people eadowe with a divine nwstandIng
of these matter's and a villngess to make pGOworfil contributions
to sahewlag the results.
air$ itsn a Verygreat pleasure to he here spnin*
I marvel more aMno" er at what yona oommaity has beew able to
do and when I say your tar no-one koibetter than I do
that it has not mads, Itself sometig apart In AUstrlIa, it
has infused its influnce throufftout Autralia. TO V bik a
little tim thai. We", not so ay ies in Autralia, In the
early thiris, not so any, relatively fewo The imabers have
inareased wy omnsider'ably sine thene So-" of course have
been here fbr So long and for so man generatonS that t4ey knw
this Is, In a tre ene their own countryand there are otbere
who havw arrived compartively recently who feel strange, a
little diffident, wbo may comes frm cutries where their own
race and their ow religiom have been &amp; bused, and sometimes
topture all these, things we have In Mial. Bat to all of
you I say, 01awgvt all about that. 2his Isa a voedrftil GatrY.
A wonderful omWo ( Applause) It IS 00lY fGols whO nurtUre
pre judices in a emtr7 ikes AustraliA. S0obody Occa sionally
Says to nee * Do you tikthere is any anti-Smitimi in Astralia?"
iw rw Ilokif I thoutt there were I sb= M have
81" Plss 20S. 1couldn't imagine anyting mre stupid.$
Because here we aroep We are ali Agestralians vim tover car
religion way be# watever our pols may weo are all
Australia= s. We all IN" e a LCt and a pleasuare to live with
each other. To live in happiness. There Is nothing better
for a mom-lw, lijo myself, nothing better flor me, than to eame
hero and look arun so and amwhat is belng done a* 4 feel
proud of my Jewish follow-itisns
Sir ar wi fe and I are both dolijkted to be here and
for myself, thOu I think you do me too macb benour 1W Inviting
se twies to the saw lace for myself 1 want to telra
With all sineeritr, t~ t2is a sinealar honour to besbMe to
deals" e this Wing opea. 



rnL. a~ TePrim. Kinit today sent the
foUokdng nosa to ) Ii" s TanU~ leistak s-
000SOTIJLATIOUS WE AIRL AldL FROMD OF IOU
A. J* KIOLZtMOO
caNERImA 2otti Aaust 1962* 



EMBARGOED FOR PUBLICATION MORNING PAPERS, FRIDAY, 24TH AUGUST
NOT FOR BROADCAST BEFORE MIDNIGHT. AUGUST 23RD
P. M. No. 60/ 1962
ROYAL VISIT 1963 ITINERARY
S tatement by the Prime MinisterL the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Her Majesty the Queen has given her approval
to an itinerary for her visit to Australia with His Royal
Highness the Duke of Edinburgh in February and March next
year. The itinerary wa-prepared by Her Majesty's
Australian Secretary Sir Roy Dowling, in consultation
with the State Directors for the visit. The preparation
of detailed State programmes is in the hands of the State
Governments, who will shortly submit them through me for
the Queen's approval. The itinerary for the Royal Visit is based
on the rmaximum use of the Royal Yacht " Britannia" which
Her Majesty will use as her home wherever possible and as
a means of transport and of rest between engagements.
The use of the Royal Yacht will also allow
Her Majesty to enter the cities of Melbourne, Hobart,
Sydney, Brisbane and Fremantl. e from the seaward. Furthermore,
it is Her Majesty's intention to use the yacht for
entertainment purposes throughout the -isit.
The detailed programmes for the visit of
Her Majesty and the Duke of Edinburgh to the Australian
Capital Territory and to the Northern Territory will be
submitted to Her Majesty at the same time as the State
programmes and when her approval has been obtained, will
be announced simultaneously' with the announcements of
State programmes. The itinerary is as follows
February Monday 18th p. m. Arrive Canberra by air
from New Zealand
Tuesday 19th p. mo Canberra to Adelaide by
air ( Royal Yacht arrives
Adelaide)
Wednesday 20th Adelaide
Thursday 21st evening Sail Adelaide for Melbourne
Friday 22nd At sea
Saturday 23rd aom Arrive Melbourne
Sunday 24th Melbourne / 2
m 
9 a 2-
Fe bruary Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday 25th 26th 27th 28th evening a. m.
p . in Sail Melbourne for Hobart
At sea
Arrive Hobart
Sail Hobart for Sydney
March Friday Saturday Sunday
Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Monday Monday Tuesday Wednesday 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13tnh i 4t
I 5th
16th 17th 18th 2 th
26th 27th a. m.
a. m.
a . m,
a. m.
a ; mo
evening
am a . im, At sea
Arrive Sydney
Sydney Sail Sydney for Brisbane
At sea
Arrive Brisbane
Brisbane Depart Brisbane by air for Cooma
and the Snowy Mountains
Snowy Mountains
Snowy Mountains
Depart Snowy Mountains for
Canberra
Canberra ( 50th Anniversary)
Canberra
Depart Canberra by air for
Alice Springs
Alice Springs
Depart Alice Springs by air
for Darwin
Royal Yacht arrives pm,
Darwin Sail Darwin for Western Australia
Arrive Fremantle
Perth Depart Perth by air
CANBERRA, 23rd August, 1962, 


SPEECH BY MR. ROBERT O. MENZIES PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA AT THE OPENING OF THE "SOUTHERN CROSS" AUGUST 24th, 1962.&nbsp;
Sir,&nbsp;
I have not been told whether I am to open the hotel or give a general address on the state of the nation, but I think it might be agreeable if I declare that this hotel has been well and truly opened, and indeed it may be noted that we are standing on historical soil, or a little bit above it, as it is here where the old Eastern Market used to be.&nbsp;
If any of you came to live here in this city and wandered around the old premises you might have encountered a woman who told fortunes and may also have done something else on the shadier side of the law.&nbsp;
Looking at the hotel with all its facilities, in comparison to the Eastern Market with its so called facilities I would say it has taken 15 or more years than it should have to disappear, and now it has disappeared and we have in its place a great modern hotel which is a pacesetter for hotels in this country.&nbsp;
I recall, in the days of my youth, as no doubt some of you can, what was regarded as an average hotel, say in one of the provincial centres, was a good old established nineteenth century hotel most likely with the light in the wrong place and windows that wouldn't open, and when you found you wanted to follow certain rules of nature no doubt you found you had to do a fifty yard march to the bathroom and then unconcernedly stand in a queue for another half hour.&nbsp;
Not so many years ago, while travelling through the United States I stayed in many hotels some with over a thousand bedrooms and a thousand bathrooms. A hotel with a hundred bathrooms would have put our Victorian great grandparents in a state of great excitement to think of all that water being wasted but now we have moved on and the progress of the world we are living in is such that we can come to a hotel such as this one and regard it as a matter of course.&nbsp;
Time is marching on and in Australia this hotel venture represents the bringing together of Australian talent and research and American talent research which we have all come to look on as a happy association more and more since the last war. And so we have a happy marriage between Australian and American talent, capital and experience all brought together by one hotel.&nbsp;
2.
There are some countries in the world which have for a long time understood that the tourist in the world is an important element in the industry of the world. The Swiss and the French are two examples.&nbsp;
I can remember going to Tasmania and trying to convince them to cater for tourists with good hotels to handle people but we have, for too long in Australia thought that nothing could be called an industry if there was no smoke coming out the top.&nbsp;
Development of this section of industry in Australia is remarkable and I promise to help, without a subsidy, to bring it to the attention of the prospective tourists for Australia.&nbsp;&nbsp;
Ending as I began I declare this hotel well and truly opened. 
&nbsp;



WEEKLY INDEX
No. : 34.
August 259 1962
COMMON1TV'EALTH OF AUSTB' LTA
Index of Ministerial Statemrenits : ssued in Canb--rra
The Deputy Prime blinister randMinister f or Trad The Rt. Hon,,
-Johnq McEwen
Aug022No, 892
ty 22 iso089L RETAREMENT CF SENIOR TPADE COMMISSIONER,
HONG KONG
SENIOR OFFICER APPOINTE D TO DEPARTMENT
0i_' TRA. DE
T'he T-r sQ ex'L the Rt. -Hon0IT;-oL. eJ
Aug. ' eO
it 24-i No. 880
No. 9024 MEETING 0i2 THE 1ATIuL Alj BEBT COMMISSION
NEYJ EALTH1 C 1A SH AND CONVEIRS ION LOAN
The Mvinist.' r for TNt-onaa Development. Senator the Hon,, W. II0
Sp o oier
Aug. 20No0883CURVEYORS INNEW GUINEA
The Minister for Territories, the Hon,, Paul Hasluck,
Auga, 2 0088IS1 PUBLIC COOL STORE A'-T DARW'IN FOR THE
STORA GE OF EXYYORT MEAT i. WAITING SHIPMENT
The Minister fo.-Civil Aviation, kSenatorShl-ane Pard
Aug. 21No. 888NEWi Y, IPORT TEltMIJNA-L FOR MEEKATHA-RRA
The Postmaster-Ger1' 3ra1 TneHor. Davidson
Aug, 2 0 8CS2 AU T-ALIJ. N BROA" DCASTINC ' CO3AISON
A'PP NTTMI EN T
20 No, BSL. POSTA.* GE CONCESSIO RATES FOR SERVICES
24. No. 910A AISRAIA POST OFFICE WILL ' SELL U1NITEL.
NA TIONS
The Mnister f or IL'l'( r~. gticn, -The Ho: T1. R. Downer.
Aug. 19No. 879 C1TATLIOSTO MISS TA'NIA' \ TERSTAEK
The Ministe-r for Extermne1 1~ fis, ert, Hon. Sir Garfield
Ba: rwi ck
YAg0 2.3 No. 899 UNITED N* TION S GEYI_ 3LRAL A SSEMBL'Y, 1962
AU S T RAi AN DELIU'AT ION.
if 2 4 No. 905 AUSTRA LliAN = MPLCMATIC APPOINTMENTS
The Minister for the 1A-ra theL Hon0Cramer
Aug. 21 No0887
22 No, 6
24 No0, 9 07
24 N 0. 9' 08
It 24 No., 9Q" 10 A?_ POI TNTIDTENT O. P6 ARMY NTJRSIN G CORPS HONORARY
CO" JlO,'; ET
ARMY MVEN RETUTRNT IROM OVEESE'AS
SENI OR REC-TJIaR APrY I. EGA'L OFFICER PROMOTED
CAP~ iTlL CITY AI" RPORTS AC0 MILITA RY SALUTING
BA SE S
TT LW1' I r7 C 1 " RY COLONEL OF CADETS IN TASMAiNIA
The Minister for Social Sern. c
8577 t37b-, 900 BTTER DA" YS FOP, A'BO. R IGINES
D! IPER SALJ OF SOCIYhL SERVICES
A GFD Pl] RSOF1S HOMES A&amp; CT a / 2
19 23 No, NTo," No. 
-2-
The Minister for the Interior, The Ion. Gordon Freeth
No. 897
No. 906 D! RECTORc OF METEOROLOCY APPOINTED
FlSHING LEGISL. T-T ON IAMEiNDENTS
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon, J. G. Gorton
Aiug. 19 No. 876 VETEAN NAVY SHIP RETIIIES
2-ro. 891 FA. N. SIEJY SHI. P 2Z TU1S FP. O M NE17 GINE
21 No0 886 NEW CAPTAIN FOR IIA'VAL COLLEGE
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. larrie Wl. Wade
No,, 9003STERILITY OF EYE DROPS
The Minister for SuDp 1 the Hon. Allen Fairila:.
No. 893
No, 896
No, ' 1-0 : STRA: IN OCFFICIALS APPOINTED TO E. L. D. O-,
TCTHER " HAD" ROCKET FIkED AT lfOOMERA
ELUE STFEL TEST MISSILE Di\ OPPED ON
EM= EGENCY RAu1JC-E
The Min-ister for Repatriation, Te Hon. TZ. W. Swartz
Aug0 21 No. 889
it 21 No, 890
it 23 No. 898 ALTL .' T., TES INCLUDED IN VISITS
COUNTIRY VISITS BY REPATRIATION
SURGICAL AIDS PRODUCTION IS UP.
The Minister for Air, The Hon. David Fairbairn
19 No, 875
20 No, 885
24 No. 909
No. 902 IN= ii'V\ IET I ALL ST= TES FOR Th1. AF ACADEMY
R, i, F UNITS IN SYDNEY TO MOVE
TTPFL1-%,* dT! IN\ T' IN Ce'O) SP C'. DE TTOO IAVAISYIT IX',,, Yl
CA,' NCELLED
With the Compliments of
The Government Public iielations Office,
ParliaMont House,
CAN'j\ BE2-rRA,% 9 T.
1ug. 23
" 1 24
Aug, 23
Aug, 22
22
i 2: 3
Aug0 ' I It 



P. m. iNo 62 12 6
PORTRAIT OF QUEN SIRIKIT
Statement ' y the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Her Majesty Queen Sirikit of Thailand has
consented to have her portrait painted by Australian
painter Judy Cassib. The portrait will form part of
the exchange of gifts associate. with the visit to
Australia of Their Majesties.
Some preliminary work is expected oi b, done
on the portrait during Her Majesty's vi-it to Australia
and it will be completed by the artist in Bangkok early in
October. Miss Carsab lives in Sydney and is a naturalised
Australian. She came to Australia in 1951 and exhibited
at the Macquarie Galleri) s, Sydney, in 1953, 1955 and
1959. She also exhibited in London in 1959 and 1961,
In 1955 Miss Cassab won the Perth Prize and
the following year won the Women's weekly Portrait Prize,
followed in 1961 by the Archibald Prize.
She has painted portraits of H. R. H. The Duke
of Kent, H. R. H. The Duchess of Kent, H. R. H. Princess
Marina of Kent, H. R. H, Prince Michael of Kent, the
Maharajah and Maharani of Jaipur, the Leader of the
Opposition in the House of Commons, Mr. Hugh Gaitskell
and the British Minister for Defence the Rt. Hon. Peter
Thorneycroft. Miss Cassab is represented in most major
Australian public collections. She is married and has
two sons.
CANBERRA, 27th August, 1962. 



I Send my cordial greetings to members
of the Australian Jewish Community as they celebrate
their Now Your. On this most important holiday In the
Jewish Calendar, It Is appropriate to look over the
past year and to look foriard, to renew friendships.
to cancel disputes, to eschew enmity, and to seek
atonement in its real sense.
These are admirable aims and reflect the
contributions which people of the Jewish faith have
made to Australia throughout our country's history*
In turn, Australia has offered freedom and tolerance
to all who Join her family* de look forward to a
future of peaceful developnent In which, as in the
past, the Jewish comunity . lI play a significant
role.
CA gst, 9
28th August, 1962. 



SPEECH BY HIS M4AJESTY KING EJM1BOL OF THAILAND
AT THE STATE BANQUET HELD AT PARTLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANIBERRA ON 28TH AUGUST, 1 962.
I am going to dispense myself of calling you
Excellencies and so on ( hear, hear) ( applause) because
it takes time,
I just wish to thank you for this demonstration,
just to tell you how much we are touched, And we are
very grateful to the Government and people of Australia
for the warm welcome.
Thank you for the kind words, Mr. Menzies, and may
I add that we have advanced our Visit because no Visit
would be complete without meeting you here.
And thankt you also, Mr, Whitlam, for your kind
words. I will tell you something about Thailand, that
" Thai" means freedom, but before that, I will have to
tell you about a little conversation we had just now,
Mr. Prime Minister and myself, as to how it comes that
we had to put on this very stiff costume ( Laughter) and
I think that many of you would agree with me that it is
really uncomfortable,, ( Hear, hear) ( Applause).
But I also had to mention something else first
as a politeness but not only as a politeness, that we
are very sensible to the kind attention of His Excellency
the Administrator, Sir Dallas and Lady Brooks ( Hear, hear)
( Applause). They have greeted us in a very kindly way
and we are really grateful,
It has been a long desire for us to visit this
great country of Australia, We have heard so much about
the beauty of the land its flora and fauna and above
all, that this country has so many resources, natural
resources, and with these natural resources, Australians
have made much progress with hard work, and now Australia
has become the greatest nation the greatest industrial
nation, in South East Asia. ( Applause)
Mr. Prime Minister, you have said just now that we
have many things in common the Thai nation and the
Australian nation and would add something else, that
we have also the love, the ideal of freedom, of justice.
The Thai people have kept their freedom and they are Thai,
that means free,, They have kept -their freedom with hard
work also and not only hard work, but blood. They have
defended themselves and they have tried to build up their
country all ifDugh the years centuries, as you have said,
always fighting, keeping their freedom and that is why
our people are proud to be Thai, ( Applause)
We have a long history but perhaps you don't know
that we have a long history of democracy also, Seven
hundred years ago, a King in -the old. Capital of Sukhothi
had an edict and had carved in stone about freedom of trade
and also he had a gong beforea his palace where any of his
subjects could come and sound it; he would be received
by the King and would get justice if there was any grievance,
( Applause) I call that democracy, ( hoar, hear) that anybody
can have justice, arid this is se-ven hundred years ago and
all through history, we have this sense of justice anA liberty. 
-2-
Now about tha relations between our two countries.
In the past, you called Thailand, or Siam, a country in
the Far East but you saw that Far East that was from
Europe, not from Australia, Now you have become Australians
and our country is not the Far East, it is the Near North.
( hear, hear) ( Applause). And for tqis reason I can say
that we are much closer now, and the number of our students
who come here is increasing. I hope that this movement
will go on; that means that we will have more students
coming here and I hope also that there will be more
Australians coming to our country, so that we can understand
each other better with knowledge and understanding and
real knowledge, not the knowledge of hearsay ( hear, hear).
( Applause) 0
Apart from this kind of relatlon, we have also the
relations with the organizations, that is the United Nations,
the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East, the
South East Asia Treaty Organization and the Colombo Plan.
I don't have to say that I would like to urge more and more
co-operation in the support of these organizations*
About the recent events in Laos) we were very pleased
to see your reaction and you sent some of your forces into
Thailand, We have visited them and I think it is a very
good thing that they have come. It has demonstrated that
both countries are ready to stand against any aggression
and ready quickly. Back home we are very grateful for
this quick action. ( Applause) Not because we get your
help but because we see that Australians realise now that
Thailand is in fact the front line defence of Australia,
( Hear, hear) ( Applause).
To come back to similarities we have. We have
many more similarities not only in the field of freedom
or sense of duty or all that has been mentioned, but in
industry we have also the same trend of similarities,
You have th wool9 we have silk but the animal or the
beast that produces wool is much bigger than the insect
that prcduces silk ( Laughter) but it is similar, In
sports, Australians we know excel in tennis and we, our
boys and girls, also excel in badminton. ( Applause)
But here again, your tenni. s is much bigger than badminton
and eveA in the faunza, we have in Thailand some birds,
sparrows. You have sparrows, but they are much bigger.
( Laughter) Donvt laugh, because we call the ostrich o: the
emu the foreign sparrow. ( Laughter) I could go on with the
kangaroo also that you are so proud of. We call it jingJo,
but we call also the jingjo a little animal like this which
is like a waterbug much smaller than your product.
In Australia we can see now that you have everything
in much bigger dimensions than the things we have in our
country. Even the doctor is flying; he is a flying doctor.
We have only the very humble mobile units. ( Laughter)
But the principal thing is not size, We have something
in common which is the most important, and that is a warm
heart. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
Mr, Prime Minister, you have been to Thailand many
times, and each time it was a different time now the
first time, it was in 1940? Yes, that is a long time ago.
But he was the Prime Minister. and then each time he went to
Thailand he was still the Prime Ministers, so I just want to
congratulate h-im for this record in uremiership. ( Applause).
o0o o oo./ 3 
.2
I hea-r that you have been bothered by something
on your visits, that is the mosquitoes, You dontt like them
much, It is a shame because perhaps we could receive you
mar. y more times and perhaps we should have the pleasure to
meet you more often. That is why we have to come here to
meet you. ( Laughter) In coming here , We bring the greetings
of the Thai people, 27 million of them, to all your people
in Australia their goodwill, their good wishes, and to
commemorate this Visit, we bring as a token of our friendship,
as a token of our goodwill, this model of the Royal Barge.
( Applause). I dcnut know to whom I will give it because
if I give it to the Prime Ministerg Mr. Whitlam will protest,
so I just want to give this model of the Royal Barge to this
building. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause) And I hope you will
receive it on behalf of the building, ( Uaughter) But as
the building has no hands, I will ask both Mr. Menzies and
Mr, Whitlam to receive it so that perhaps you will have
unanimity in this alsoo ( Laughter) ( Applause) If you don't,
it would be a shame; it would fall down and break into so
many pieces that you could not put it together,
Now I want to wish everly success and prosperity
to this Commonwealth of Australia. My best wishes to the
Government, to the Parliament including the Opposition and
thus to the whole nation and to all the people in this
country, of this nation, of Australia,
Thank you, ( Applause), 



STA. TE BANQUE T AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA,
IN HONOUR OF THEIR MAJESTIES THE KING AND
2UB OF THAILAND
2,8THAUGUST 1262~
Speech by-the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Your Majesties, Your Excellencies, Your Serene Highnesses
and Ladies and Gentlemen ( I call you all that, whether you
come from the Senate or the House of Representatives)
We have now come to that pleasant period of the
Dinner when I am, and following me, Mr. Whl ' tlam, your
humble instruments to offer some words of welcome to the
King and Queen of Thailand. ( Applause)
I must say, Your Majesties, that this seems to be
an entirely unnecessary and almost iri'elevant performance
because you have not had your experience in various parts of
the world witnout realising that here, in the capital of
Australia, you have received a welcome in the minds and hearts
of all our people. ( Applause) And as a sense of welcome is
far more a matter of feeling than words I don't need to
elaborate. I am sure that I have some Idea as to how you
feel. I -think I would like to say, on behalf of some
of my colloagues at least, the travelling members of the
Government, that we are infinitely grateful to you for
iaving advanced your visit to Australia by a week so that,
in the last few days and tomorrow, Tbhe Prime Minister and
the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer might have the
opportunity of seeing you both, of welcoming you, because
otherwise, the three of us to say nothing of anybody else,
were bent on a journey to Lndon to discuss the scmewhat
theological problem called the Common Market. ( Laughter).
But I would like to tell all my Parliamentary colleagues that
Their Majesties couldn't have been more kind or more understanding
and they advanced their time by a week and the result
is that those to whom I havu referred, including myself, will
at any rate be able to bid farewell to them tomorrow in decent
order and form and then as they travel to the less privileged
parts of Australia ( Laughter), some of us will travel to what
might or might not be the less privileged part of the Commonwealth.
Anyhow it has worked out very happily.
And I don't say that Your Majesties just beca use
it has turned out to be convenient from our point of view.
I myself, and I am su-, e my colleagues will agree with me,
will always be delighted to think that our departure for
London for this vastly important conference occurred at a
time when we had had the great pleasure, the great opportunity
for two or three days in Canberra of having some of your own
charm brushed off on us so that we might take it with us as
a happy memory. ( Applause).
Itts very interesting to look back on recent history.
I know that there are people in this Parliament, Your Majesty,
well, I presented a number of them to you and said these were
my opponents and I know that some of them think that really
I've been here long enough ( Laughter) and this Your Majesty
is a feeling I entirely share, but even an old doddering
fellow like myself looking back over the last ten years, can
realise what reoluhionary changes have come in the world.
eo o/ 
2
The:' e was a time not so " Long ago when your country was known
uo the ignorant outsiders as Siam when we looked at it and
said, " Oh yes, tht' somewhere L Asia you know and
long way away." I've come to realise very vividly
that for me or for any other politician in Australia to
tIVravel from here to Perth, all inside Australia, is only
two or three hours less than travelling to Bangk~ ok. We
have in the modern world in point of time become close
neighbours and I am happy to believe.~ Your Majesties, that
we have become close friends. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause),
We are, of course, friends by treaty because we
both subscribe to the South East Asia Treaty and it's a good
thing to be a friend by treaty, but it's a better thing to
be friends in the heart, in the spirit and in the mind.
( Hear, hear) ( Applause).
I was saying to myself last night, I think it
was last night, you never know in Canberra ( Laughter) that
we have all sorts of great things in common your ancient
country our modern, new country we have wonderfuhl things
in common, and the first of thq perhaps, is * T'hat we are both
monarchies, ( Hear, hear) and, Sir, speaking tlo you, His
Majesty the King and to you, Her Majesty the Queen, in this
country I can say with no reservations whatever that just as
in Australia we are all the Queen's men and women ( Applause)
so in our country we are all delighted to see a King and
a Lueen presiding over a country which has literally centuries
of history behind it. And so, Sir, we have that and we have
a love of peace, a profound love of peace in our hearts; we
have, I believe I may say, a deep sense in both countries,
though we occasionally affect to conceal it, a profound sense
of spiritaal values. Neither you, nor your country nor this
country has a prosaic dull belief that the only values in
the world are material values, We share this with you,
We share with you, though we haven't so many
marvellous examples of it to our hand as you have, a love
of beauty a nice kind of love to have, in a world that is
so frequently ugly, ( Applause) And, Sir, as I suggested,
we both have a sense of history; your history going back
in your own country for, what, seven hundred yeors; our
history going back in our own country for one hundred and
fifty, near enough0 But going back beyond that, to a country
whose roots are in the very soil of history, far removed as
they were from you in point of space and at that time i~ n
point of tirmes But when you come to Australia derived~ as
we are from that old civilisation, the old faiths and the
old loyalties you are coming to a country which, of all
countries in this part of the world, is destined to undei-stard
yours, to be friendly with yours and to look back, as we all
will, on this Visit of yours as an occasion on which we met
with great respect and profound affection two great people
who were also our friends, ( Hear, hear) ( Applause),,
Your Majesties, this is one of those precious
occasions in Parliamentary history when there is unanimity
on both sides of Parliament and I am going to ask my friend
the Acting Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Vlhitlam, to support
me. ( Applause). 



PaM No~ 63/ 1962.
FOR PRESS The Prime Minist. er, Mr. Menzies, will leave
Sydney for London on Monday, September He will
arrive in London on Tuesday, September 1travelling
by Qantas through the Middle East,
The Prime Minister expects to be absert from
Australia for less than four weeks and may return via
the United States.
He will be accompanied by Dame Pattie Menzies.
Other members of the Prime Minister's party will be the
Secretary to the Prime Minister's Department, Mr. E, J.
Bunting, Mr. R. P. Deane of the Prime Minister's Department,
Miss L, H. Craig, Private Secretary and Mr. RC.
Maley, Press Secretary,
Mr. R. J, Randall, Dep-' ity Secretary to the
Treasury, will join the Prime Minister's party in London
next week3
CANBERRA, 29th August, 1962, 



Message to Eariwood Branch
of Young Liberals for
incorporation in their
ma gazine.
Nobody could be a greater believer than I am in
the Young Liberal Movement. I sincerely look forward to
the day when I shall have left the political scene and you
who now are our younger members will have succeeded to the
positions of power and responsibility in our country.
Liberalism offers us much to believe in, not just
something to oppose. We in our Party have a faith to
live by and I am sure that it is a faith which appeals to
the Australian spirit of independence and to youth, and
not to the spirit of dependency on what governmentscaught
to do that characterises 59 many of our opponents,
I wish success to you in the Earlwood Branch
and commend you upon your paper and the effort that you are
clearly putting in to the Party in your area, ith
Branches such as yours operating with the vigour that you
display, the future of the Liberal Party is assured.
R. G. ME4ZIES.
CAtNBERRA, 29th August, 1962. 



MESSAGE TO GOVERNOR OF
STATE OF ARIZONA, U. S. A.
4M2* to talm this oppwt f4ity
thooift the Yisit of mebmw. of tim hotel Fedewatics
Of 4atre11a to tb* 8Ut of Ariaw9 to oonwjy
oot4USo latiigs to YWA on behalf of symelt and
th* aovjrmreat and people of AUtIjae
iJ% are em' " Adfa of the wmth of
AeLatons baetween sumlves and the people, of
the Uit-ed dtates or Aawes asaocatons wtiab
I am wutcn only grow iLn strength as both omw
owutries ' owk togethor in tbo m ss of fr.. 4m
and Justle withln the 1~ evork af the dmmamtie
my of kiNo.
-9tb Auoi3to 1962 


I extend my sincere congratulations to the President, Councillors and citizens of the Romsey Shire.
The celebration of the 100th anniversary of your thriving district is a time for remembering the pioneers from whom we have gained so much but it is also a time for looking to a future which I am sure will be one of continued growth and prosperity.
R. G. MENZIES
CANBERRA,
29th August, 1962. 


I extend edial Utina an
songntaitilms to te All Mations Club an this
important arissr7 of its tfo uMitiono
The work that your Cib has undertaken
is of tremedous laportanos in thersation or a
nautml respeOt S6dVIU betmen ttme uf uas
Wb ~ e born Ln this couantry and our rw citiamea
wW hav ebomen to 0= 0 har.
t Ash you ooiitiaaed grwth and sucoosse
2th * ustt 1962. 



SPEECH BY THE RIGHT HON R. G. MENZIES AT THE OPENING
OF THE PHYTOTRON AT C. oS. IR0o CANBERRA, A. C. T.
ON 229H AU 2T
Sir, Your Excellencies, and Ladies and Gentlemen
I have been very much struck today by the profound
difference there is between politics and agricultural biology0
You have just had it explained to you, those who are not
already expert, that what is to be done in this place is to
control the environment. In politics, it's the other way
round, Thus today I've been down freezing at the airport
saying goodbye to the King and Queen of Thailand, and acting,
as nature has equipped me to do, us a windbreak for the Queen,
with the wind blowing piactically at freezing point. And
here I am this afternoon being gently cooked, feeling all the
germs that I acquired in the wind this morning getting on
nicely, being encouraged, being cultivated inside me.
Now there is one other thing that I would like to
tell you about the phytotron and I hope this won't go any
further I beg of you to keep this dark. When C. S. I. R. O.
first of all decided that a request ought to be made to the
Government to find the money for a phytotron, the proposal
fell into the hands of a relatively junior officer in my
department who read it, and in all good faith, scribbled out
a note saying, " This isronsense0 Oliphant already has a
cyclotron, why do we have this overlapping and duplication?"
Now that's not a it's a true story, but it. s a good story
because it exhibits something that people don't always understand
the astuteness of the civil service to avoid overlapping and
waste. Thus " cocking a snoot" at Parkinson's Law with a
vengeance. Well, Sir, you came along or somebody came along
and explained to me what a phytotron was and I must confess
that from that moment I found myself vastly interested in J. t.
The idea of taking what has been in the past field work in
remote places conducted under great difficulty and concentrating
it in point of time. and space -that seemed to me, even to my
ignorant lay mind, a dramatic thing, the value of which I
thought quite obvious,
It isn't always easy to resist the C, SI. R. O. though
it thinks we resist it too much, Sir Frederick White referred
to his great predecessor, lan Clunies Ross. I always thought
of him not purely just as a scientist in himself, though he
was, but as the greatest public relations man for science that
this country has ever had.-a phenomenal genius for not sparing
himself, for going out day after day, week after week, making
other people understand the importance of the work that's being
done in scientific research and, of course, in particular by
C. S. I. ROo I suppose that if we were to ask ourselves what in
the last twenty yearsup to fifty years, had been the great
distinguishing feature of this century, apart from wars and
political confusions, the answer would be the flowering of
science and the growing application of science to technology,
to the problems, the practical word-a-day problems, of the
worldo And I7m perfectly certain that this is, in particular,
true of agricultural scientific worko Each time we open a
report by a statistician or by a demographer and we are told
how rapidly the population of the world will double and how
rapidly it will treble, we would need to be very insensitive
to the problems of life if we weren't almost appalled by the
idea that the same earth will have to sustain so many more
thousands of millions of people, And. it will sustain them
0 0 0 U 0 0/ 2 
only if, literally, the earth is encouraged to bring out its
harivosto And in this field of scientific investigation, I
think we see one of the great hopes of the future of mankind
ne of the great hopes of fthture peace, oddly enough, because
in a starving world there will always be war, And the great
hope of peace with a growing population in the world is th't
mon of devotion and women of devotionr. and distinction should
give their talents to the kind of inv-estigation that will be
conducted here. Now it isn't al. ways easy. is it, to make peoyle
understand how important that is, fie're a bit given to taking
things for granted. We ought to be able to bring up, not a
few hundred people but a few scores of thousands of people
to Kave a look at his and see wlhat is in the wind, see what
is going on, see what the great objectives are, because then
I think we would have a more understanding and encoaraging
public. But there's another aspect of that which I want
to mention to you0 We are in Australia I speak only for
Australians here this afternoon we ar: e not a cynical race
because cynicism is " well, whatts the use?", But we are a
sceptical race, We need to have it proved " Show me, show
me about this." I can remember and Ive said this before,
I think in the presence of Dr. Lckson, I can remember a
time when I was a small boy in the country, when the agricultural
scientist put himself to tho trcuble of going up into
the wheat country where I was born to try to explain to a
collection of wheat farmers that a mysterious subjoet called
superphosphate, if applied to that light sandy loam in that
part of the country would bring about an enormous increase
in productivity, ind you know, I could just almost hear
wdoheast wit as cogsoti? n" g onS o ina ndth eso. r m" iOndh s well", O h, I Id odno'tn ' ktn okwno, w, t hew hoatld
man didnyt use " Uh wcll you see, and in the end
about three reasonably enlightened farmers decided that they
would. give it a go,,
I think from the long memory of it that they were
told at that time in this particular soil that they ought
to use a 1hundredweight of super to tbe acre And these three
decided that they would try it out rather tentatively with
half a hundredweight, And when they got ancther three bushels
to the acre as ompared with their neighbours, then a few more
people came to the conclusion th. lat it was prett1y good, You
see, this is not a cynical attitude of mind but it's a
sceptical attitude of mind and if I were asked to say, to
name One defect in our pr'esent technological equipment in
these areas, I would say it is that there i too great a gap
in point of time and in point of space between the work done
in a place like this and the work done on the farm and shoep
station, In other words, we ale, so far in Australia, rather
failing on the extension of the results of research to the
man on the farm,
This requires, of course, a great deal of co-operation
between C! ommonwealth and Statos we hKave divided authorities
on it but it also requires in the farmier himself a realization
that he will not get the benefit of these investigotions until
he is not only interested but enthusiastic and keen and
demanding about getting it brought to him and his farm. And
I know Sir. that you, because you! ve spoken many times to me
about this, that you. woCuld regard it as a state almost of
paradise, if the wol'k done, the magnificent work done by
found its way out qaite quickly, quite effectively,
C 0 0 JO a2/ 3 
3
to the people who are engaged in production, because
there is no doubt about it, all the old ideas have gone,
Going back to that remote period wrnen I was a boy myself,
Australia was a desert, it had a few sketchy bits of
cultivable land around the margins, it had some areas
where the rain fell agreeably, But oh, it could never
sustain a population of more than ten millions. And
then some bold fellow said, oh no, twenty, twenty some
day, not this century, of course, but some time in the
future twenty.
Now we are casting loose from all those silly
prejudiced ideaj and if we are now discovering that the
same area of land, and of course it's been enormously
extended, that the same area of land, with the benefits
of scientific research brought to it, can produce twice
as much, three times as much, four times as much as it
did then we're ourselves making a contribution to the
sus enance of an enormous, relatively enormous population
in our own country and also making available for developing
countries, which have much more acute problems of
population and feeding, the results of the work that will
be done here,
So, Sir, I say that I'm grateful to you for
allowing me to come along here and have the pleasure of
saying a few very inadequate words on what I helieve
to be one of the exciting occasions in applied science in
the history of our country. Sir, I declare the phytotron,
the controlled environment the CERES I'll call it I'm
told now for short Vhatevcr you call it, I declare it
open, Y~ Y_ 



CBIONWEEAlTB EAILAXS 00 WQIN JUBItfl
We ealeb rat today a most iportant
aniveisary. Rali a entury age with a ombimatioan
of vision, born of a apiwited nationalim# and the
labour of same three and a half thousuad inon, there
began in Part Agusta the sonstruotoan of the
Trans-Australian Railway.
The decision to undertak this gat
task was an indicatiou of the capacity of or
forefathers to beyond their Imediate present,
and a demonstration of the energ and sal of our
young country. NOd mnua labour built this line
and whder the most arduous and eacting condtions.
Today, by contrast, we have groat
neehanisal an toahnologoal advannts0-assoeiated
with vast -lalth projeats which are oontributing
so remarkably to the progress and prosperity of
Australia. If we oatine to veld the foresight and
datruination of the pionws with the facilities at
our command today then we will help to build a nation
capable of meting atir challenge.
I offer vW beat wishes for a memorable
re-enaoment of a notable event in our history.
H. 0. MENZIES
CANBM~ iA,
August, 1962. 


I be" ve ry INIh Pleasure in . mudi"
ordial gmet" a to the ( Qeek Othdx * web
and4 * mot~ y of the ClI of Greater 4olUonpng
your aotivities in catowring to the
spiwitmzl, ad social needs of the adhewents, of
the Greek Orthdox Custar w. met . ndable.
Australia wAn Greece have san iomim bonds, not
least of wbiob in thiri Gm~ 0" St~ an berltSP.
I oongitalato all of you who thwmaA
faith a&amp; W meal be built thi* hause Of WwshiP
ad Qmmk COnitY Centro*
&amp; upst i 1962. 



A01TMLLb" JamiOR COaM= BRF G92OM H
I * 92A BY beat wihes for the succss
Of your metlngs I trust that yoar dismosiionm will
proT fruitful and help to further the tzditio
of srvice to the crmmnity which youzr ornisation
has alreay establimbe4. R. G. f4RB
CAtBh kuAo, Augpmst, 1962 



P. M. No. 64/ 1962
MINISTERIAL ARRLANGEME~ NTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G, Menzies
Parliament has now gone into recess until October
to enable Ministers and senior members of the Opposition
to take part in lmportr~ nt discussions overseas on the
proposed British entry into the European Economic Community.
I regret that Mr0Caiwell is not suf~ ficiently
recovered from his recent illness to be able to make the
journey overseas at this time.
I have made Ministerial arrangements to meet
the situation during the recess when other senior Ministers
and I will be absent from Australia. Both Mr. McEwen
and Mr. Holt will accompany me to the meeting of Commonwealth
Prime Ministers in London where the proposed British
entry into the Common Market will be the principal matter
for discussion0 Mr. Halt will go on to the meetings of the
International Monetary F'und, the International Bank and
the International Finance Corporation in Washington,,
In addition to these meetings the General Assembly
of the United Nations will open in Now York in mid-September
and Sir Garfield Barwick will lead the Australian delegation.
While these Ministers are away from Australia
and the Parliament is not sitting, the following acting
arrangements will apply
Senator Spooner as Acting Prime Minister
Senator Henty as Acting Minister for
Trade
Senator Paltridge as Acting Treasurer
Senator Gorton as Acting Minister for
External Affairs
Mr, Freeth as Acting Attorney-General.
CANBERRA, 31st August, 1962. 



Um~ 1A FOVXb ' A1RiOMW~ h
Published kV The Haski
Mw. pwoottl bF Aastnlia publishws of
ve. evwe ustarild about Astwslla for thesiaS POL. W
of Austrelja * aboo stolentas an . A4UjetpS@ t,
? TbW is e dfU sB IsAN'it o 6e Md. &amp; but
tbes risk md vl,* laui ot i~ and In Mme 12 of
of 03tafiet's Iftrld* tin t1 MCOoA8 1A a tA. Uy
s" tislma anmd Oxeting mnm".
ilittw, W Au~ twalans &amp; An ILUMsststd
JW Austialia aitiSta tbase bb~ as tae. the ftistoq
and Speft o am Mt fr. th. quiet 4mm of emIlY
œ 1Sobay to the wigWOUS &amp; gty of the OUmmsiesl-thi
at v~ ktodaY. SvW apst of AwaI. Ilan life is aOmerd
IA a hil1, UnMIMting MY A * 77 iup@ tntll
Australla is shown in ber ti. s ow1 mettinz*
I bellrm that ' 93twisats, det~ d" PWOnpsU
ak " OUtMst aiVMWe I. i Austalian yAbiiihinS ar* A haVe
be &amp; uubt that thoe 20 w ftM~ ing their plum. In
selmL a" bom libei., vinl OnWIibotemsfantm
to thea eiution or YOUSS AustWSAafls for uuv Ys to
SOW 11* a
C % jMA
lot soptmberg 1962. 


I send best wishes to the sponsors and to the crewmen of Australia's "Gretel".
Every Australian hopes for their success.  I know that they will bring credit to Australia.
The whole enterprise has caught the imagination of millions of people, and has added greatly to our already high position in international sport.
R. G. MENZIES
CANBERRA,
2nd September, 1962


I had the great privilege of naming "Gretel" in Sydney, and have a very lively interest in her success.
My warmest good wishes go to her captain and crew and to those who have made her challenge and construction possible.
DAME PATTIE MENZIES
CANBERRA,
2nd Septmber, 1962. 


A few years ago at a meeting of Prime Ministers, not on such an important matter as the one &nbsp;we're going to discuss next week, I proposed that we ought to form a Prime Ministers’ Union with one rule -no press or television interviews within twenty-four hours of arrival after a journey of more than 3,000 miles.
Mine was 13,000 &nbsp;but I put that in for the benefit of the Prime Minister of Canada.
I did not get a supporter but I think the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to" Animals - if not Dumb Animals &nbsp;-ought to do something about it.
Now quite obviously I’m not going to start talking about what may turn up one way or the other in this Conference about the Common Market, that, I think, would be quite foolish.
As a matter of fact, I made a statement which I wrote myself with loving care and with an economy of language and delivered it in the Australian Parliament a few weeks.back, It took fifty five minutes but unfortunately it doesn't appear to have been reported in Great Britain.
Still if you are care to get hold of it you will see the full statement of the views of the Australian Government on the broad issues that; will present themselves.
I don’t want. to try to concentrate into three minutes what took 55 &nbsp;minutes to expound with some care.
Of course its a very important conference and indeed., in some ways a &nbsp;very remarkable one because there will be more Prime Ministers here this time than ever before.
I’m rather an old hand at these things. I remember that the first time I attended a Prime Ministers' Conference, which was then called an Imperial Conference, was&nbsp; when I wasn’t Prime Minister &nbsp;That sounds a ' Little bit paradoxical but I attended as Deputy to Mr Lyons who was then Prime Minister.
That was in 1935 - &nbsp;&nbsp;27 years ago&nbsp; - and I’ve been to a great number of them since.
But this time we will have more Prime Ministers &nbsp;- considerably more &nbsp;- than we’ve had before, and we’ll &nbsp;be discussing not a problem but a nest of problem as connected with the Common Market, in which some of us may have some particular interests in common, &nbsp;others &nbsp;quite different interests and, therefore, we may well expect that we’ll have fourteen or fifteen rather different views put forward. in the Conference in the first instance and that, of course, is quite right. Each country has a right to speak its own mind in the broad.
I don't know, but I imagine that at a certain stage, we'll need to go into some : form of Committee business.
I will be seeing Mr, Macmillan who is an old&nbsp; friend of mine and I'm seeing him, as q ma tor of fact,&nbsp; tomorrow, and I'll be seeing him later on in the week. I will&nbsp; see other Prime Ministers.
I noticed that somebody thought that Canada, New&nbsp; Zealand and Australia were going to " gang up". This is a delightful expression. It takes me back to the bushranging days in Australia, We're "going to gang up". Well, that if&nbsp; I may say so, is quite foolish, We always discuss things&nbsp; with each other. I discuss things with other Prime Ministers.&nbsp; Not infrequently we stay at the same hotels. You don't suppose we cut each other in the corridors.
Of course we talk to each other, and when it comes&nbsp; to such commodities as wheat, dairy products and meat all&nbsp; right, we have a good deal in common, It would be pretty&nbsp; remarkable if I didn't want to have some talks with Mr. Holyoake&nbsp; about those matters, or with Mr. Diefenbaker, about wheat? etc.,&nbsp; or with any other Prime Minister whose country has a particular&nbsp; interest in these matters.
Now, this is going to be a remarkably important conference, It may not be the last conference on this matter&nbsp; I don't know but it is going to be a very remarkably important&nbsp; one, and it is not going to be assisted if all of us start to&nbsp; announce what is our minimum demand and put our hands on the&nbsp; table.
This is going to be a conference that will require&nbsp; a great deal of mutual understanding and considerable patience&nbsp; and very few slick off-the-cuff remarks. I said "very few''&nbsp; but I habitually understate things, What I mean, of course,&nbsp; is none.
And now, I think that having failed to establish the Prime Ministers’ Union, and having a head that's going&nbsp; round in circles after 33 hours of this flying business, I'll call&nbsp; it a day, or at any rate a morning, because I strongly&nbsp; suspect that since&nbsp;I can't form a Union, at least I can be&nbsp; an individual and go to bed this afternoon.&nbsp;
Thank you very much.&nbsp;
LONDON,&nbsp;
4th September, 1962,


No. 65/-1962&nbsp;
Statement by the Acting&nbsp;Prime Minister, Senator W F &nbsp;Spooner
4th September, 1962
The Acting Prime Minister, Senator Spooner, announced today that the present Secretary of the Department of Primary Industry Mr. JV Moroney CBE , will be appointed Chairman of the Australian Wheat Board in succession to the late Sir John Teasdale, as from 27th October. The period of the appointment will be three years.
Senator Spooner said that Mr Moroney had. been associated with &nbsp;the production and marketing of Australian primary products since the formation of the &nbsp;Department of Markets and Migration in 1925. &nbsp;In particular, he had been in close touch with wheat marketing and stabilisation developments. In his official. position, he was closely associated with the late Sir John Teasdale.
The Acting Prime Minister added that Mr. Moroney had taken part in discussions in London and Brussels on the effects on Australian exports of Britain's possible entry into the Common Market, He is at present &nbsp;in London as,, a member of the Australian Delegation to the Commonwealth Prime Minister’s&nbsp;&nbsp;Conference,
Mr. Moroney has been Secretary of the Department of primary industry since early 1956 and was Secretary to –the Australian Agricultural ' Council for a number of years. He was &nbsp;educated at Hamilton in Victoria
The Acting Prime Minister also announced that Mr Moroney would be succeeded as Secretary of the Department of Primary Industry by Mr ACB &nbsp;Maiden, at present Director of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics.Before taking up his appointment as Director of the Bureau in May, 1959 Mr Maiden had been &nbsp;Commercial Counsellor and Australian Government Trade Commissioner in Washington. His previous appointments included Assistant Director of the Bureau and Assistant Secretary (Tariff) in the, Department of' Trade.
Mr,, Maiden led the Australian Delegation in the final stages of the International, Wheat Conference in Geneva this year and more recently led delegation to the FAO, Comittee. on Commodity Problems and the United Nations Commissionon International Commodity Trade.&nbsp; Mr Maiden is President of the Australian Agricultural Econmoics Society.
In announcing his appointment-Senator. Spooner mentioned that Mr, Maiden’s &nbsp;services had been sought recently for the position of an Assistant Director-General of the Food and. Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations, T he Director-General of FAO had, however, graciously agreed. To his release; from, this appointment,
Mr, Maiden was born in Taree in New South Wales. He was educated at the&nbsp; New . England University College and holds B. A. Degree from the University of &nbsp;Sydney .
CANBERRA4th September 1962



P. Mn No 6rJ
DEVELOMEN OF TENTH9E-' OF WESTERN
AUSITRAL1 IA
Statemetbythe AZc n~ Prim MiJtr Senator
W. 1. Spooner
The Acting Prime Minister, Senator Spooiier,
and the Acting Treasurer Senator Paltridge, today raet
the Honourable C8W. Cnur%,, MinistL-er for the North-West
in the Western Austaralian Government, to disc-uss certain
imatters related to tn1e developmnt of the North-West of
Western Australia,, Senator Spooner recalled that the 1962/ 63
Commnonwealtluh Budget provides for a furth~ er grant of
œ C700-000 to Westein Australia for cattle roads in th. e
Nort -Vlest of the State and also for œ F300,000 towards
the construction of a neii jetty at Derby which' is also
related to the shipment of cattle. Senator Spocne~ r
said that today's meeting had discussed the detailed
arrangements under which these measures for special
Commonwealth financial. assistance would be made available
to thie State, Vie talks had been quite satisfactory
from both the Commonwoealthn and W est-Uern Australian points
of view. However, fie woul~ d need to discuss tfie matter
further with hlis colleagues in the Commrronwealthi Cabinet
before any announcement could be made0
CANBERRA, 6th September, -1962, 



WEKLY INDEX No, 36
WEEK ENDING 8th SEPT. 1962
COMMO'NIA. 7J LTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ivinistei-. al Statements Issued in Canberra
The Acting Minister for Trade, Senator the Hon. Denham Henty
No, 942
No. 946
No. 948
No,, 951
No. 958 MEMBIE'RS OF TRADE MISSION ANNOUNCED
IMPORTS RISE FOLLOWS PATTERN
HANDERCHIEFS ITALIAN TRADE MISSION TO VISIT AUSTRALIA
AUSTRA2LIAN SUCCESS AT CANiADIAIN NATIIONAL
EXH IBITION
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon, W, H.
S~ pconer, I1M.,
Sept. 3
11 6 No, 936
No, 950
6 No. 953 INDEX TO PESOURCES MAPS WILL AID RESEARCHSRS
CONT I NUED INCREASE IN AUSTRALIAN REFINERY
OUTTURNIU
AUSTRA'LIAI'h' INSTITU1TE ~ T NUCLEA. R SCIENCE AND
ENGINEERING GRANTS FOR NUCLEAR RSEARCH
The Ministor for Defence, the Hon Athol Townley
Sept. 7No. 960R:,, AII SABRES IN SEA', TO DISPLSaY
The Minister for Territories, the Hon. Paul Hasluck,
Sept. 3No, 937 POLITICAL EDUCATION OF NATIVE LEADERS
OF PAPUA, AND NEW GTTINEA1
The Minister for IM grgation._ the Hog. A. R. Downer, D l. P'
Sept. 5 No. 947NEW CHAIRMA*, N-OF IMMIGR'. TION PLAKNING COUNCIL
The Minister for Extornal A'ffairs, The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
No, 935
No, 941
No. 944
NOR 947A
It 7 No. 957 COLOM'BO PLA. N AID FOR LAOS
A; USTT, LI.* Y RhEPPDSESEINTI. TION A'. T INDEPENDENCE
I--RUAN, EARTH QUAKE DISASTER RELIEF
AUSTRAi'LIA', N CONTRIBUTION TO THE WORLD FOOD
PROG. 3, A. MM1' 1E
S. E. A'. T. O0 DAY
The Minister for the Army, the Hon, J. O, Cramer
Sept. 3 No. 938 SENIOR BMiITIFH 1. RTILLSERY OFFICER TO VISIT
AU STRJ'SLIA
3 No. 939 CANDIDATES SELECTED FOp ROYAL MILITRY
COLLEGEI
4 No. 940 FREEDOM OP CITY FOP I. POOKI CiIP
6 No. 954 NEW DEPUTY COMM, NDER IN TASMANIIA
6 No. 355 C. G. S. DESIGNA. TE GOING OVERSE, S
6 No. 956 rMY APPOINTMENT CHA;, NGES IN N. S. 1v
The Minister for the Davy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Sept0 3 No. 939L R. SEEKS TUG MISSING IN TYPHOON
The Minister for Re atration, The ion. Swartz
Sept. 2 No0 933 REPAiTIATIY= ON AND LEGACY AS ALLIES
The Minister for Air, The Hon. Davi Fair'airn
Sept. 2 No, 93L4 CHAN111GES FOR R; iF EQUIPET OFFICERS
No. 943 7,62 111 -IFL BEING INTRODUCED INTO P,'. AF
I 6 No, 952 R,-AAF ES OPEN FORZ INSPECTION
7 No. 960A USi'P HIGH ALTITUDE A! IR SAMNPLING AlIRCIRAFT
1 -JIV NEXT WEv7EK
Teprtmont of jth0 Tf , a'u'ur'y
Sept0 5 110. 9345 COSOLDTED REVENUE FUN6D AT AUGUST 31. . l9 2
Chairman of Eport Development Council, Sir John Allison
Sept. 6 No, 949 GREATER EXPORT A'CTION NEEDED
President of Ass. Chamoers of Corner'j0 Mr. C. C. Verce
Sert. 2 No. 9353A A'USTIA' S FRSTI EXPOIRT DIRECTOR. Y PLAiNi\ TED
No. 959 01 iNCELIED
Sept. it It
It If
Sept. 2
11 5
0. J
r-Io0
HO
0 . Q0 p4
CO -4-3
P4 P'
04 0L
-E ci
OOd4
00U 0) 0 


Statement by the Acting Prime Minister and the Minister for National Development, Senator W H Spooner , M. M.
The King and Queen of Thailand’s Australian tour had strengthened the bond of friendship and understanding between the two countries, the Acting Prime Minister, Senator Spooner said tonight.
He was speaking on the eve of the Thai Royal couple’s departure fop home. They are due. to leave Perth by air for Bangkok tomorrow morning ( 8am Western Australian Time) &nbsp;
Senator Spooner said the tour had been an unqualified success from everybody's point of view.
"We all feel that vie have been hosts to a Royal couple whose qualities are such as to endear them to the Australian in every walk of life," he said.
"As a result of the tour, Australians have learned more about the Thai people. and have been inspired with a desire to learn even more.
"In particular the visit of Their Majesties has brought Thailand closer to the : parents and families of those Australian servicemen now; serving over there", the Acting Prime Minister said.
"The King and Queen have made a significant contribution towards strengthening the links that &nbsp;bind our two countries,. We are partners in SEATO. With air travel, we are virtually next door neighbours in SE Asia.
" It can do nothing but good that we are now getting to know one another better. Already there. are many Thai students in this country. They have been welcome and they will always be welcome
Senator Spooner, with Mrs. Spooner, will farewell the Royal couple at Perth airport tomorrow morning.&nbsp;
Canberra11 September 1962.



WEEKLY INDEX No0 37
W-, eek Efcnd~ n Se'nternber 14,. lq62
CO M? 4OY7," EALTH_. OoF_ AU ST R'JLIA
Inde0x of Ylinist~ jria1i tjw: otq ISsucd i~ n Oborra.
TheActincr 11niste-fr ndCnao the Hon,_ D-nalfn Heflty
Sept, 9. No,, 96JJA AU 8TPJLIA' S TRD) E DRkIVE J1APA. tN
i12 N~ o. 980 SALE OF'GMLIr TOYS IN VICTORIA
It 13 No. 985 IPLiST TC BUTLDING GHI&amp; ETS
" 14 No. 991 EXTENSION OF' TPl-Dfi A1GREEMENT WPIT14 . NDONESIAll
11No, 9711 DRIVE POP, WOOL TEXTILE EXPRTS TO N. AMT4TLICA
The Minister for National Deve lope-.;_ 2. Senator the Hcn. V. H.
Sept. 10 No. 96' 7
If 1] No. 970 OIL SE1? APCH Sc.. UBEIDY REP ORTS ON TWO7ll . A. WELLS
D) El-; JZTUJPT2 OF THE KIFG , TTD QUEEN OF TH: JhA" N D
Th re Ar, c t eao the H~ on, _ Sha-e Paltrid&amp; L.
Sept. J14 No. 9914A TTA O. K BY MRT. RILEZY ON SIR P. OL: AITD WILSON
The Minister -or Defence, -the Hon, thol Tom1L~
Sept. 10 No. 96-3
it 10 IO 968 VISIT TO j) JSTRYLLJtOF IT. W ZrE-iAAND MINISTER
OF LDTFENCE
! ATTENPDETTC: F 0F , lASTP. ALIA* N OFFICERS A'T THE
UNIT2L'D KINGDOM JOINT SE-a\ TICES STA4FF COLLEG-E
The hi-ni-i ster for Labour ca. nd-National Service.,__ the lion, Wlilliam
sopt. Il NO, 9714 CllfWElALTH DEvJEL OPMLEUT D* ITKPOT-Ap&amp; ICf{ r
Thel~ inister for L-v. J Avi-. 4tion,, Senator Shane Paltridge
Sept. D-1 No, 995 VISCOUNT A'CCIDELNT REPORT
The Ptte20nrITho Hcm_. C1.1,1, * Davidson
il e.-t 12 o 0 579
If J. 2 No. 9Q81 s36 988 9L69
No., No.
No. n-TLL CLCJUR RE. PPODLTCTIOYS ON i962 PINKX PAGE
1ELEPHON" 1l DI1? ECT'r( TUI ES FOR. SYT) NEY AND
MELDOUMiTTE NE50 KILOIWAITT LOI DIZOADCA STING
STA. TION TO SERVE THE EMEPiJLD ,', PEA
S TS FOR T STA: TIOlUS
SPE Il kHRISTMAS i-LPOGPL'. 131E
PHILJTLIC FAIMLTIES FOR. PERTH BL~ 3Y
JET A* IRSEVC
Tho Minister forLtr ir~ The lion. A. R. Downer2I. P.
ep. 9 No~, 96~ 2
N1o096 9
13 No" 9837 AUSTP.' LIA1', CITIZEIISHIP CON~ VENTION OF 1963
TO1 BE IELD IN OANBERRA IN MA'Y CR JI27TE OF
NEXT YA. F1-
; dPPOT1MENT if 3O TI-' FE CIVWEALTH IMMI1GRATION
1.1 VISORY CO7JNCI L
llECOO,' D NUMBER OF 5: i111377 PEOPLE NTl = PLI ZED
AS17TSTRLL-d GITI ZENS URING i961,'/ 62
Tho Act i~ Ai72r&amp; lfeator the lion. J. G,.
ThuIxt ., 7-Iolrli ", s" xe+ r enal ffmorot 5
eept0 10 NTO. 9-65A
11 12 No. 97_ 5
If 13 No0 93
13 Xo, œ S1 R-6rPO*! R'T OF TEUTITE2D NATIONS S* CIENTIFI0
cOTTTOFIT TE EFETS OF ATO TC P[ TIOr.
SIGfN. ATUlIE: OF T., dR GiRLAVES IIGREEMU1TC W ITH
AG. E; MrTORT SE AUSTRA LIAN, TLEGATION IN
VIENUANEfu' TO EBM) 3ASSY c) j4 / 2 
a -2-
The Ministcre. r thrmy, the I aci Cinmar
Se~ pt. 13, No. 9614IF1JATOl7h. VISIT 7, Y % 1= 1i UEfDITC i. L
The Ministecr -rr Cvui torn ond Exccise., Senator the Ho~ n._ fDenham
Sei,: t, 1.0 NTo. 966 AU CT: TI. ~ T -01 '. 1LTTG
1.3 I'Th. 977 P " T'alISSION\ NOT Gll,' rTTED r; Oil T7E TT PI, O F
SPIIllIT IMADE FitO f3BSTA TI) LL) ~ i
c. ST : kAl. l. M r62PACK FOA"' FOI'TIFYING VW= iN,
3-F I~ o 990 c TTU* TO-. Y -iULIES 1962 N~ os. 82 and 83.
The Minister fu~ r the Navy, SE. nat ox tbe H-on, J, G. Gurtcon
Sept. 9 No, 9 61 DICG ANTlLll-SUBMAUIN-',, E EX -, ERCTSE ] 3EGINS
.12 No. 978 l*' IG', TEE PET C tj S Pl HOME
1L:. No. 995, CCMAB111TD INAVA. L TO MAKE ' LEET ENT. RY
ThecNMdni ms t e r-r Heclth0 Scnn tcr the Hrs. Harrie W. iiad-Ce
clept. 14 No. 993 OTlEA C AYN ACTE llE&amp; FI. Li. TOLY DISEASE
IN C'.! jTP&amp; L '' EA O1. 1' USEAL
Tjhe Miitrfo r The Hon. Allon Fairhall
Set. 11 No. 9 75 UET2fl TO TIS-A. OF U. P. NAT'I", TA
The Minister for T.
Se--t 12 No. 97' UPPEIZ ATb: SPHILL-L ThEA Y KY112 YOCE
The Hini. Stur . eaoiaon The Hen, XW . Swartz
S-t, 10 1,70 9,65 1,1iINIST'I: ' WAILL JVT. CT',-1 G
i 12 No, 9832 rPc: o' BIG JOB ! N EDU'i, TILrO*.
The MiniFctco f ' dAi Theo Han, DnaviJ. Fairbairn
, Se, t. 11 Nc.. 9729 YT'~ Th" T TO LT: lAA PLHTCjT cr'HBE
1.1 992 uV L. I ' fziT . I. vL I CLLEGEUJ
VItj 1h the Corn;:-ILTents of
The %],: vc.-. r-mxnnt ' Pubiic Uelat i jns,
Parlirment House,
C: AN PLllTj C. Th 



P. mL_ Nc, 68/ 1962
COMMUNIQUE ISSUED AT TUTE CONCLUSION OF TH COMMONI\ JEALTH
PR. IME MINISTERS CONFERENCE I IIN , O'iDON ON 19
SEPTEMBERv, 162
The meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers was concluded
today. This was the first occasio i on which Sierra Leone,
Tanganyika, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago have been represented,
as independent countries, at a Commonwealth meeting, and tha
presence of their Prime Ministers, together representing 15 million
people who have achieved independence since the last Commonwealth
meeting in 1961, was welcomed by the other Commonwealth Governments.
During the course of the meeting the Prime Ministers were
informed that Uganda, with a population of nearly 7 million, will
attain independence in October, 1962, and they agreed that Uganda
should then be admitted to membership of the Commonwealth.
They also noted with satisfaction the great progress made
towards the establishment of the Federation of Malaysia by 31st
August, 1963. This would enable the State of Singapore, the
Territories of North Borneo and Sarawak and, it is hoped, the
State of Brunei, with a combined population of about 3 million,
to achieve independence as part of the enlarged Federation.
They were informed that Tanganyika would adopt a republican
form of constitution in December, 1962, and they agreed that Tanganyika
should thereafter remain a member of the Commonwealth as a
republic. In the course of their discussions, the Prime Ministers
have taken the opportunity to hold their customary review of
internationalaffairs and have exchanged views on the political
situation in various parts of the world. They took note, in
particular, of the proposals relating to the Congo which were
recently put forward by the Acting Secretary-General of the United
Nations, and they expressed the hope that these would prove to be
the basis for a speedy and constructive settlement,
The Prime Ministers agreed that the need for disarmament
had been intensified by the steady development of ever more powerful
weapons. They reaffirmed the principles laid down in their
statement on disarmament of 17th March, 1961, and expressed their
conviction that the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee at
Geneva should continue its efforts towards a treaty for general
and complete disarmament in accordance with these principles.
They noted that discussions on the cessation of nuclear weapons
tests had also been taking place in Geneva and expressed the hope
that these efforts would be successful in bringing into being an
effective treaty to eradicate this source of fear and danger to
mankind. The primary object of this meeting was, however, to review
the progress made in the negotiations in Brussels about the conditions
on which Britain might join the European Economic Community,
and to examine the nature and prospects of safeguards for the trade
of other Commonwealth countries. The greater part of the meeting
has been devoted to the discussion of this complex question.
Although this discussion has disclosed many differences of viewpoint
and many uncertainties, all the exchanges have been conducted in
the frank and friendly atmosphere which characterises Commonwealth ./ 2 
meetings. This has reaffirmed the common determination to strengthe1
the links between the countries of the Comnonwealth.
The Prime Ministers declared that, in all the countries of
the Commonwealth, the constant objective of policy is to promote
peace and economic progress throughout the world and thus to help
to create conditions in which mankind can flourish in freedom,
unfettered by poverty, ignorance or disease. In furtherance of
this purpose, all Commonwealth Governments are resolved to do their
utmost to foster the harmonious development and steady expansion of
world trade, They note with concern that trade and industry in the
developing countries, as well as in some of the more developed
countries which are large producers of primary products for export,
have been adversely affected by widely fluctuating commodity prices
and a progressive worsening of the terms of trade. They see this
as a problem which calls for progressive policies in relation to
international trade and finance so that demand for the products of
those countries can be sustained and increased, and larger and
more dependable trade outlets assured to them,
To meet the needs of the developing countries they will
support policies designed to raise the living standards of the
peoples of these countries and to help them to achieve the
economic, social and cultural progress to which they aspire, To
this end they consider that improved opportunities and conditions
for trade are even more important than financial aid, They
recognise the need for the developing countries to have eas r access
to outside markets for the products of their industries as they
become established and the desirability of this being reflocted in
the policies of the more developed countries.
To meet the needs of the producers of agricultural
commodities, Commonwealth Gcvernments will support policies and
initiatives designed to maintain and expand world trade in those
commodities and to improve the organisation of the world market in
a manner fair alike to producers and to consumers. They will
support a fresh and vigorous approach to the negotiation of international
commodity agreements to this end. In any such approach
principles of price, production and trade access aiould need to be
applied, on a commodity by commodity basis, so as to encourage
maximum consumption without over-stimulating production and to
offer to efficient producing countries adequate access and stable
prices at a fair and reascnabl] leve.. They believe that, in the
disposal of any surplus of agricultural products, opportunity
should be taken, to the fullest extent compatible with the legitimate
interests of traditional suppliers, to meet the needs of those
peoples of the world who are in want.
The Prime Ministers expressed the readiness of their
Governments to join in comprehensive international efforts by
all available means to expand world trade in both primary products
and manufactures. They recognised the important contribution
which the European Economic Community and other regional groups
could make in such efforts. They hoped that the general objectives
set out above would be shared by the rccmbors of the European Economic
Community. They also took note, in this connection, that legislation
was at present before the United States Congress which could
materially assist in this aim,
The Prime Ministers were informed of and considered the
stage reached in Britain's negotiations with the European Economic
Community, and discussed the arrangements which might be made to
meet the special needs of other Cormmonwoelth countries if Britain
joined the Community. 0* 0 * J C.*/ 3 
British Ministers. st out the broad political and
economic considerations which had led the British Government
to initiate the negotiations in Brussels' They emphasised that,
in the view of the British Government, Britain's accession to the
Community on satisfactory terms would have the result of
strengthening the po. sition of Britain, of the Commonwealth and
of Europe, They explained in detail the position so far reached
in the negotiations in Brussel. and emphasised the principal
points among the many provisional arrangements which had been
worked out. In the first place, an offer of association on
advantageous economic terms was open to Commonwealth countries
in Africa and the Caribbean and the majority of British independent
territories. Should certain of the countries not become
associated, the provisional agreement reached in Brussels offered
further discussion in the course of the negotiations with a view
to the possible conclusion of other arrangements.
Secondly, the Community were prepared to negotiate as
soon as possible trade agreements with India, Pakistan and Ceylon
which would have the declared objective of developing mutual trade
to maintain and, as much as possible, to increase the level of
their foreign currency receipts and in general facilitate the
implementation of their development plans.
Thirdly, as regards temperate products, the enlarged
Community would make, at the time of British accession, two
important declarations. One would express their intention to
initiate discussions on international commodity agreements for
temperate foodstuffs on a world basis. It would recognise the
greatly increased responsibilities of the enlarged Community by
reason of its predominant position amongst world importers.
The second declaration would relate to the price policy of the
Community. While taking appropriate measures to raise the individual
earnings of those engaged in agriculture in the Community,
the Community would do its utmost to contribute to a harmonious
development of world trade providing for a satisfactory level
of trade between the Community and third countries, including
Commuonwealth countries.
British Ministers considered that the policy which the
enlarged Community intended to pursue would offer reasonable
opportunities in its markets for exports of temperate agricultural
products. The representatives of other Commonwealth Governments
wdlcomed this opportunity for personal consulation on this issue
and for supplementing the exchanges of information and consultation
which had already taken place between Ministers and officials.
They took note of the considerations which had influenced the
British Government in deciding to accede to the iLropcan Economic
Community if satisfactory terms could be secured. They recognised
that, after full and continuing consultation with the other
countries of the Commonwealth and in the light of the further
negotiations to be held with the members of the Community, the
responsibility for the final decision would rest with the British
Government. The representatives of the other Commonwealth countries
freely acknowledged the strenuous efforts which the British Government
have made to ensure on the part of the Six a full understanding
of the safeguards required, if Britain's entry into the
Common Market is not to be on such terms and conditions as to
impair their vital interests. Tiey expressed their hope that
00 0, a / I 
4,
the members of the European Economic Community will wish to
preserve and encourage a strong and growing Commonwealth, in
furtherance of their own ideals of an expanding and peaceful world
order. At the same time, the representatives of various
Cormmonwealth Governments expressed anxieties about the possible
effects of Britain's entry into the European Economic Community.
They trusted that, shculd there be closer association between
Britdin and Europe, it would not be allowed, as it developed, to
weaken the cohesion of the Commonwealth or its influence for
peace and progress in the world. They drew attention to the
difficulties to which these developments could give rise in
relation to their trade both with Britain and with other countries.
They explained the economic points of special concern to their
respective countries and the extent to which their interests had
not so far been met in the Brussels negotiations.
Some independent African countries considered that
association with the Community under Part IV of the Treaty of
Rome would not be acceptable to them., On the other hand, the
Government of Sierra Leone wished to consider further their
attitude towards association, after consultation with other
African territories which are not members of the Commonwealth.
In the Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago will be willing to accept
association, and Jamaica will wish to consider their attitude
further. The Prime Ministers were informed that the Federation
of Rhodesia and Nyasaland is willing to accept association, and
they were also informed that, after appropriate consultations, it
seemed likely that the majority of the British dependent territories
eligible for association would wish to accept it.
The representative of India, Pakistan and Ceylon urged
that, if Britain entered the Community, the trade agreements which
the enlarged Community had offered to negotiate with their Governments
should be concluded as soon as possible and that, meanwhile,
no change should be made in their existing trade arrangements with
Britain, They expressed their apprehension that if the treatment
of their products in the United Kingdom was altered before wider
trading arrangements had been worked out for the enlarged Community,
their foreign exchange earnings and investment in export industries
would be adversely affected at a critical stage in the implementation
of their development plans.
Importance was attached to the need for securing
adequate safeguards to protect the essential interests of Commonwealth
producers of temperate foodstuffs and other agricultural
products, including tropical products, as well as certain raw
materials for which zero tariffs had been requested. The
importance for some Commonwealth countries of trade in a broad
range of manufactured and processed goods was also emphasised.
The Prime Ministers took note that the negotiations in
Brussels were incomplete and that a number of important questions
had still to be negotiated. Only when the full terms were known
would it be possible to form a final judgment.
It was agreed that, when the negotiations were resumed,
British Ministers would take full account of the views, both
general and particular, which had been expressed on behalf of
other Commonwealth Governments at this mooting and would continue
their efforts to safeguard essential Commonwealth interests,
The British Government undertook to continue to arrange
for the closest consultation with other Commonwroalth Governments
during the remainder of their negotiations with the European
Economic Community. _ UI 



FOR TH138 1020
INCREASED COAL EXPORTS TO JAPAN
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister and Minister
for National Development, Senator W. H. Spooner, M. M.
The New South Wales coalmining industry had increased its
trade with Japan at the expense of the United States, the
Minister for National Development, Senator Snoonor, said in
Cessnock yesterday.
The American share of coal exports to Japan had fallen from
60.2% in 1960 to 53.4% in 1961, he said.
Australia in 3960 supplied 16.6/ o of Japanese coal imports,
but by 1961 the proportion had risen to 23.
" This is a feather in the cap of the New South Wales
coalmining industry," the Minister said. " But we will need to
fight hard to maintain this trade. Export business is always
fiercely competitive.
" We can expect to be challenged for the Japanese market.
This is why, when the New South Wales Minister for Mines,
Mr. J. B. Simpson, and I went to Japan two years ago we
arranged with the Japanese steel industry to purchase their
coal requirements on long-term contracts in consideration of our
respective governments pushing ahead with the port
reconstruction prograrmme at Newcastle, Port Kembla and Balmain.
" The main proportion of this expenditure falls upon the
New South Wales Government. But I am glad to say that the
Commonwealth is providing œ 1 million as a grant to New South
Wales and lending another œ 1,650,000."
Senator Spooner was speaking at the inauguration of a new
bowling green at Cessnock, With Mr. Simpson, the Minister for
Mines, he handed the green over to the Cessnock Bowling Club
on behalf of their respective governments.
The Senator said that Australia faced great changes which
would follow Britain's entry into the Common Market, They would
necessitate re-thinking, and some readjustment of many of
Australia's trading activities
" We have anticipated this," he said. " Much has been done
already and in particular the coal industry has given a national
lead. " We foresaw the effect in local markets of competitive fuels.
We sought export business and sought it successfullyo
" Six years ago the total overseas sales from the State was
204,000 tons. In -; 96-1/ 62 we sold more than 3,162,000 tons
overseas, Although it is unlikely that we will repeat this
level this year, yet we anticipate that we shall sell approximatel.
2 million tons, and the Joint Coal Board is confident that there
will be steady increases thereafter."
The Minister went on to speak of great improvements
which had occurred in the coalmining industry in the past few
years: Coal was in ample supply;
Quality of coal had been improved by the introduction
of washeries and treatment plants;
Coal prices were about -15% lower than they were in 1952;
o There had been a great decline in industrial disputes,
In 1949/ 50 the percentage of possible manshifts lost
was 14.28%, whereas the figure was down to 1.91% on
June 30, 1961, ooo
L 
2
One of the contributing causes for these big improvements had
been the betterment of social amenities on the coalfields. These
had been made poEsible by grants from the Welfare Fund of the
Joint Coal Board.
The Federal Government had contributed œ 1,890,000 to the
Fund, and the N. S, W. Government œ 969,502: a total of œ 2,860,402
by the two governments.
The Welfare Fund had contributed to the capital cost of the
new Cessnock bowling green to the extent of œ 1,000, which had
been provided in equal shares by the Commnonwealtn and State
Governments. Other guests invited to the special luncheon and handing-over
ceremony included Mr. G, NEILLY, Mr. K. BOOTH, M. L. A.;
Mr. A. JAMES, M. HR,; Messrso S. C. COCHRAN, S. FLOWERS and B. W.
HARTNELL, of t-he Joint Coal Board; the Mayor of Cessnock,
Alderman BROWN, and the Deputy Mayor, Alderman BLAIR; Mr. J. W.
STEPHENSON, Town Clerk, and Inspector SEWELLo
SYDNEY.
Septcmber 24th, 1962. P. M. 



P. M. No, 69/ 1962
PROVISION OF COMMONWEALTH FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
FOR DEVELOPMENTAL PROJECTS IN TI, KIMBERLEY
REGION OF WESTERN AUSTRAIA
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister_ Senator the Hon,
WoH, Spoon(,, r
The Acting Prime Minister, Senator Spooner, announced
today that the Commonwealth Government has agreed to extend
beyond the current financial year the provision of financial
assistance to the State of Western Australia for developmental
projects in the Kimberley region.
Senator Spooner recalled that the Commonwealth has
for some years been actively participating in the financing
of developmental expenditure in the northern part of Western
Australia0 Under the provisions of the Western Australia
Grant ( Northern Development) Act 1958-1959, the Commonwealth
undertook to provide up to œ 5 million towards the cost of
developmental projects undertaken by the State in the area
during the five years commencing 1st July, 1958, Expenditure
under the Act to 30th June last amounted to œ 3,568,000 and a
furthe-2 œ 1,432,000, to bring the total Commonw'ealth payments
to œ 5 million, is being provided this financial years The
projects assisted under the Act include the Crd River diversion
dam and certain port improvements and investigations.
In addition to the œ 5 million grant, and also to
its regular annual payments to the State under the Commonwealth
Aid Roads Act 1959, the Commonwealth made a grant of œ 500,000
to Western Australia in 1961-62 for the improvement of the
Wyndham-Nicholson and Wyndham-Hall's Creek roads for the
transport of beef cattle During the year, the State Government
also spent at least an equal amount from its own resources on
other beef cattle roads in the Kimberley region. Improvement
of road transport facilities in the region is expected to lead
to a significant rise in beef production and thus to an increase
in export earnings, and Senator Spooner said that the work
being carried out has already begun to show tangible results
in terms of an increased off-turn of beef cattle. Cattle
numbers transported to the meatworks at Wyndham were nil in
1960, 3,902 in 1961 and 11,167 in 1962o
As announced by the Treasurer in his recent Budget
Speech, provision was made in the Commonwealth's 1962-63 Budget
for a further grant of œ 700,000 to Western Australia for beef
roads purposes, and also for payment of an amount of œ 300000
towards the construction of a new jetty at Derby to facilitate
particularly the shipment of cattle from the region served by
that porto Senator Spooner said that inter-governmental arrangements
in respect of the further assistance measures provided
for in the 1962-63 Budget were recently discussed between
representatives of the two Governmentso The Commonwealth was
represented at these discussions by Senator Spooner as Acting
Prime Minister and Senator Paltridge as Acting Treasurer, and
the Western Australian Government was represented by Mr. C0W.
Court, the State Minister for the North-West, o. 0008 oo/ 2 
2
At the discussions, Mr. Court on behalf of the
State Government emphasised in particular that to enable
the State to go ahead with the construction and improvement
of beef cattle roads and the Derby Jetty project on a properly
planned basis, it was highly desirable for the Commonwealthts
position in relation to the future financing of the two projects
subsequent to 1962-63) to be determined.
With regard to beef cattle roads, Senator Spooner
said the Commonwealth Government has now agreed to provide to
the State in addition to the grant of œ 700,000 this financial
year and the grant of œ 500,000 last financia year further
grants of œ 750,000 for each of the three years 1961-64, 1964-65
and 1965-66. In effect, the scheme of Commonwealth assistance
will be extended to take the form of grants of up to œ 3,450 000
over the five year period 1961-62 to 1965-66 inclusive, on the
understanding that over the period the State will from its
own resources spend at least an equal amount cn the construction
and improvement of beef cattle roads in the area.
Senator Spooner said it is intended that the Commonwealth
grant of œ 700,000 in 1962-63 will be spent on the same
two roads as the grant of œ 500 000 last year ( namely the
Wyndham-Nicholson and Wyndham-Aallfs Creek roads). As to the
future the State Government has prepared a general programme
of road works covering the five year period, and the roads on
which the Commonwealth grants after 1962-63 are spent will be
subject to the Commonwealth's approval.
Senator Spooner commented that there will now be a
comprehensive scheme of Commonwealth financial assistance
totalling œ 13 million for beef roads covering broad areas of
northern Australia. In addition to the grants of œ 3.45 million
to Western Australia, the Commonwealth has already undertaken
to provide grants of œ 5 million for the construction of beef
cattle roads in Queensland over the five year period from
1961-62, while in the Northern Territory a programme of beef
roads to cost œ 4.57 million over three to four years is under way.
With regard to the Derby Jetty, the project is
scheduled by the tate for completion by the end of 1963-64 at
a total estimated cost of œ 800,000. Senator Spooner said
the Commonwealth Government has now agreed to provide to the
State financial assistdnce of up to the full amount of œ 800,000,
of which up to œ 300,000 is to be provided in 1962-63. One
half of the assistance will be in the form of a grant and one
half in the form of an interest-bearing loan repayable by the
State over 15 years.
Senator Spooner added that legislation to approve
the arrangements for the provision of Commonwealth financial
assistance for beef cattle roads in the Kimberley region and
for the Derby Jetty project will be introduced during the
forthcoming sittings of Parliament.
CANBERRA, 27th September, 1962. 



WFhlY IDX No. 3
VEKENDING 29th cEPTE24BIEP,
COU7NW2A' 1OJ: FT; Q TRALIA
iidex of Ministoe'iai Statements issued in Canberra,
Th ciLgLaise o~ ae eao the Hon. Denhra H'en t y
Se,. 25 INo. 10 24 NE,' TPIDE COM IS-' S3OPER FOR CAIRO
11 25 No,, 1029 MENISTER OOMT~ PTJ-TD E CRZEDIT
26 No, : 1031 ClTRUS', JUICES
27 No. 10Q35 Ui LDICIDES A-YD IETO1DS
27 qoc 1037 TRtIDE' IMISFPI0N TOSUTH tlJ4ER. CA RESPORT
28 No. 1050 AtiS TriALIAIN SUCCESF AT FRP. NICFURT BOOK FAIR
29 No, 7.05.3A RETUR7M'T OF 1IVISTE'j FOR TRADE
The Actina Treaslurer. Senatci-: a the Hen. 8ohane -P2t e
Sc-ptb 21-To 102 . E ATH CASH ' ND CONTIVEl RSION LOAN,,
Tihe Actinw, Prime Min-isten and f~ itrfo Niol
DeveornxteaoiWL,. b cv
Sept. 24 No,, 1.020 INCREASED COA'L EXPORTS TO JAPAN
26 Nc0 10-A ILACI\ ETIC AyND RI. TJIMTOMRI, S3URVEYS PT' TW.-O
27 No. 10L10 RBPGrI' O. N GRAVITY SLTR-\ TY IN BOU'LIA EA
12eii~ dse or ei E the Hon. Athol Tovmle-1
Sep0 24 Nc . 1022 A'kRMY OFPJ: Clth3ER 0P, jiOKMT A TO TPJ. ITl IN
A, I STWALTA
27 No, 104: L AU 2STT).' L! LN DFFEl*, C E RrPL3) IT WTIVE IN
NEV! ZEAIA ND
25 No. 1025 SEITO EXEFIRCISE TO DIE HE~ LD IN AUSTRLdJIA
N10o 2 APFINThFKNT O. F TH-IRD NAVA-L MEBRO. P
RVAL IDOARP
Tlhe Minister for Labour and Nationral ' csrvice The 1-lon. Will. iam
Sopt0 27 No. 1038 SILLFED W! 0RlICRS FOR AUSTPLA LIA
28 No. 1 0W1 MR. jlJY' S OUTEBU-flCT A" T IvIETING OF UNION
SHOP -T~ IJND SSY DNEYo
T" he Poc, rmntor Gene. ril, , The H-on. C. W. Davidson
Sept. 25 No. 1023 P-RCPOSBI) COMMERCIAL 13ROA. DCASTINqG STATION
it 26 No. 10152 CON CESION POSTAGE RAT'. ES
it 28G No,, 1040 '. EPA TEL'E0Oi1. fA[ UNICA,' TIONT\ S CO1MMTSSTON
The MiistGer for External YAffairs( The Hon. Sir Grfield
Sept. 28 No. 1052 RI TURT OF MINIST1111 FOR EXTERN*. AL A-FFAIlZS
TO Y, US TP 1.1.1
it 28 No,, 10513 PB FLOOD DISASTERl
TThe Maairma 5. Lj~ trO QF. Adeqrme Minister for Pri-a Indus try
Sept,, 24 Ne. 102211 PESULTS OTP THE CONFERENCT.-E OF C' 1'. 1EjLTH
The Minister for he the lion. J. 0. -Cra-mer
Sep'-. 25 No. 10l6 ' 1EW~ CIEF OP FT!. FF FI', T. ZARMYv DIVISION1
28 No. 104-6 TIZOPICA11L TRIALS FOR AMY VEHICLES
The Mimjstcr for So-7ial Scrices, the Hon., Hugh loberton
Sept, 26 INo, 1051. DE% E'NTRll,--T r-4ITI ON F! JJ71T L Al-lOWVANJ-CE B7LJ. NCl
'' ifL OCl! I,-f,-LLAARAT
The Minister for the Interiar. The Hon, -Gordon Froeth
Scot0 28 No. 1045 NEWi R,' D2, R STO0RM V.!' AR-NITLiG UlN IT / 2 
Th. i , notl? -0or tha e T~ jV,, Senctc: r the 11011, J. CG . Gorton
Se-pt0 2 3 No, 10-1.8 NAVXY FL,,. TS1 T7fo TTEL COPTEP-, SQTJAU! T) flOS
27 ' Al 0 1031 F'll'ThT . J 1 IL) U: G c., U 1 D s TA7? P
28 No. 1OL CAB3~ P GETS 7TIRST TJOV,. RELE'A! S E OF NAV~ Y
DO CU'VYTAr-R Y
O ct, 1 No. iO. A 4 OUIR N,.. XVES F 011 COllrON7 ALTT G.; AIES
Sept,; 2C0 No. 10) 4l9 : S 1T" 0O1FTUT NV AIG
T'he Minister for He,-) r~ to the Hon. ITHrrie W Vadfc
Sept. 25 No. 10350 1RrM-iTvENlTl OPDil C. E. COOK
if2 N0 -, 105.3 lMOh--TATION OF OPA! L VACINE
Th. Mirstc f or rj t i The Hcn-, 1, P W. Swa rt z
Sept0206 No. 10-3 LS3O UTH, AUSTRALI'INTA'IDES TO GlRADUATE
The MVinister ) rIAr The Hon. Dtvid Fa,'-rbrarir
Sept. 27 110, 1o-g EAAF HERCULE. 0D BIG JOB
23 N0119 1' -F ME! Bi] TS GOING TO Fl-ANCE
The De-oDartm( nent cf Ex'Corna 1' ffar2.
Sept. 2) 4 No. 1021 -POLA R TTUXVERSE
The DoL. 12rtnnt cf Piar~ y Ind'astry
Sept. 20 No. 103310 1XCT~ U~ : A'
No. 10) 42
With thie CGornp3 inints of
The Jcovornrnt Public d clnticrns Off ice,
Fcarliax~ nict -Hous
CANLEW C. T 2 


30 September 1962
QUESTION&nbsp; Mr, Prime Minister, what would you say Australia’s&nbsp; prospects were after-this, perhaps final, Commonwealth Conference on the &nbsp;Common Market?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; I don’t think it is possible to answer that question very positively. &nbsp;You see, the position is that all of the commodities with which we are concerned – export commodities into Great Britain and the Common Market most have not yet been negotiated with the Six. They have been the subject of a great deal of discussion between Australia and the United Kingdom, both on the Ministerial level and on the official1 level. But the one item so far negotiated. up to a point, out of What they are pleased to call temperate foodstuffs, has been cereals with particular reference to wheat. The discussions there have been in the direction of some international. That led to a considerable discussion about international commodity agreements generally. But the other matters that are of great importance to us – certain &nbsp;metals, sugar, meat, dairy products, processed fruit, either canned or dried and so on, have been thrashed out a good deal. between ourselves and the United Kingdom, but they have not yet been negotiated by the United Kingdom with the Six countries of the Common Market. And therefore &nbsp;it is impossible to say at this stage how we will come out. &nbsp;I believe that the negotiators for the United Kingdom understand our position and sympathise with. it and will do their ' best to achieve a result that is satisfactory to us, But nobody can forecast the result
QUESTION Sir after your Conference in London, would you regard our loss as being no more than about 50 Million pounds a year?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; .I would not put a figure to anything, because you are now asking me to say how much we &nbsp;will lose on certain assumptions. 1 don't make.any assumptions, because I don't know what the result of the negotiations will be. It is quite clear we can lose heavily. It is equally clear that if the negotiations worked out well, our losses would be substantially reduced,
QUESTION: Could I put this question to you? Do you now regard a changing world as representing a very heavy challenge to us?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; I think it does but it must be said - and this can’t&nbsp;be said too frequently &nbsp;- although we have-somehow achieved&nbsp;the reputation as wanting everything left alone, we have&nbsp;never adopted the attitude in those matters, We knew&nbsp;that Great Britain couldn’t go into the Common Market,&nbsp;taking, with her the&nbsp; existing structure in its present&nbsp;form of preferential Commonwealth trade, and we therefore,&nbsp;from the very beginning, looked for some practical substitute, some middle course in relation to commodity, which would give us a reasonable prospect of&nbsp;increasing access to the European Market at prices&nbsp;relatively stable and payable, Therefore we haven’t stuck &nbsp;to the old rule If we had been thoroughly pig-headed, no doubt we could have. But we have looked&nbsp;at it in a pretty, practical way.
QUESTION&nbsp; Do you think it could reach the stage, Sir, where Australia might protest against Britain joining&nbsp; the Common Market?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; This is a highly speculative question. I am not making any protests in advance. No. Our main business is to see what we regard as the interest of our own industries are never lost sight of.
QUESTION Are you satisfied that Britain is seized with that, Sir
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; Yes, I am
QUESTION How do you think we would benefit from this United States Trade Expansion Bill if Britain should join on unfavourable terms?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; Well you can leave out the last bit. of the question, perhaps. The question is still valid -whether she joins on good terms or bad term. I think there is considerable importance to be attached to the American position. As a matter of fact, in the communique we had a sentence to emphasise that point. I thought I had my finger on it but I haven’t. But the trade expansion legislation which the President has now, for all practical purposes, got through Congress - only a few little purely verbal things to be cleared up&nbsp; - the effect of this will be to give him and the American Administration a lot of room for manoeuvre. Instead of just protesting against the level of a common external tariff, for example, under the Treaty of Rome, they will be in a position to negotiate a reduction of that external tariff and this may be quite material from our point of view. You take a commodity in which we are interested, like processed fruit, in which the United States is also interested. &nbsp;If the American Administration can negotiate a substantial reduction in the common external tariff on such an item then it is quite clear that outside suppliers like ourselves will be less prejudiced than we would be if we had to meet relatively high external tariff. &nbsp;In return for negotiating a reduction of that kind, the United Sates would be in a position to offer reductions in her own tariff within the upper and lower limits allowed by this new legislation .I know from talks I had the other day that the American Administration itself attaches a great importance to this and feels that some of the danger of over-economic nationalism in Europe by over-protection and over-production of certain things internally can be modified very much by appropriate tariff negotiations.
QUESTION In effect, Sir would you agree that this _means that the effect of the Common Market on Australia could. be modified by the American legislation,?
PRIME MINISTER:&nbsp; I believe so,, That is not saying it will, but it could.
QUESTION&nbsp; Does it raise the problem that if you have a reduction of external tariffs in Europe, it comes back to a reduction of tariff in Australia. How do we get on then with our manufacturing industries, because we would almost certainly have a whole scale reduction of tariffs?
&nbsp;PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;The United States could very conceivably reduce a tariff on goods passing into the[ United States in exchange for a reduction in tariff on goods passing into Europe and under the GATT arrangements. We would stand to secure an advantage from that. If at any time we want to negotiate some tariff reduction on goods passing into Australia for some reduction on our goods passing into another, we can do that. We have been able to do that already, because that is one of the reasons why GATT exists and GATT is the proper negotiating forum, But with a very powerful negotiator like the United States, ready and willing to have some reduction in tariff both ways, into our own country and into Europe, I think we stand to secure advantages from that., And that does not mean that we have to abandon our own protection for our own manufactures. Not at all. That would be entirely inconsistent with our national policy,
QUESTION Do you think Sir, after your talks with President Kennedy, Australia's position is generally understood?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes, I must say quite frankly that I am delighted once more to find that President Kennedy not only has an interest in our position, but has a really very good knowledge of it. Both.in the broad and in particular,
QUESTION Would you say, Sir, that he appreciates the difficulties and dangers of the break-up of the Commonwealth?
PRIME MINISTER: You can take it that he does not want the Commonwealth disturbed; Ho does genuinely attach importance to it.
QUESTION Sir, would you also say that the Six do not want the Commonwealth disturbed?
PRIME MINISTER: Well as far as I have been able to gather, that would represent their view, You can't speak universally about the S. ix. You know, there are internal differences of opinion
QUESTION In other words, you feel that the Six would want to try and preserve the Commonwealth and build up the Commonwealth, rather than to try and destroy it?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, they said so, and I have no reason to disbelieve them. That doesn't mean that we don't have to watch our own interests like hawks,
QUESTION Sir, do you feel that the negotiations on the international commodity agreements must wait on the final outcome of the Common Market negotiations?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't think they are likely to reach a point of conclusion about any commodity agreement before the Common Market negotiations end. I say that for reasons of timetable. These negotiations some people when we were in London thought they might be concluded by the end of the year. I see now that there is a more realistic view that they might take until March or April of next year. Well, you wouldn't get an international commodity agreement negotiated by March or April next year, even though you were all driving very fast cars. And therefore I think that what we have to aim at is to secure international commodity agreements in appropriate cases before the Common Market arrangements come into full operation, that is to say, before 1970o I would hope, for example, that there is no reason at all way, given goodwill, a wheat agreement shouldn't be concluded in 19b63 No reason at all. In fact, this business of commodity' agreements I regard as one of the great advances in this Conference because, in the past, the Government of the United Kingdom, for intelligible reasons low, relatively low, food prices on imported food-stuffs and favourable terms of trade one understands all those things have been somewhat reluctant about commodity agreements. In fact, I reminded them of that very plainly in the course of the Conference. The great advance here is that they., with all the rest of us, have come out completely in favour of international commodity agreements, and I believe that they will pursue that and be quite willing now to make agreements Of course, a willingness to make an agreement is a very good thing. But it is the agreement that matters and what is in jt, And there again, there were two I think considerable results pointed to in the communique, The first was that they agreed that the policy of the Six, which would then become the policy of the Seven on their entry, was not to be directed to overstimulating domestic -production of the kind of things that we export. It would be very easy to overstimulate the production of soft wheat in Europe, for example, as a result of which our market disappears. Canada is in a better position, because Canada produces hard wheat. And therefore a resistance to overstimulated production No. 1 that's been agreed, And in the second place, we were very much concerned, of course, about price because a fluctuating price&nbsp; could easily put us out of business, if the price that the Six or the Seven agreed upon was a price unprofitable from out point of view, And it has therefore been agreed that one of the principles is to be that we are to have access, effective access, to the Market, and at prices fair and reasonable, Well, these represent, I think, quite material advances.
QUESTION&nbsp; Sir, how do you see this operation on the Common Market in relation to Communism?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, that takes you to the political side of it. There is no doubt about it that the general feeling of those in favour of British entry for political reasons the general view is that this . will prove to be an element, a very material element of resistance to Communist advance in European In other words, if Great Britain goes in with outward-looking policies, this will help to have outward looking policies right throughout the Community, and that would lead to considerable co-operation between them and the United States in the political field and in resistance to the Soviet pressures.
QUESTION Do you accept that argument, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: I think that that is true,
QUESTION Sir, going on from there, if America is then relieved from a certain amount of defence expenditure in Europe and comes back into South East Asia and ultimately relieve a certain amount of defence expenditure there, how do you see this operating say in Latin America where she poured in more money?
PRIME MINISTER: Now, look, I would prefer not to speculate about that. These are ideas that vaguely move in people's minds, but it is much too soon to speculate about them.
QUESTION: Sir, in view of what you have said about the achievements of Australia at the Conference, and the prospects of the Common Market, would you think that much of the pessimism, which is rife in both Britain and Australia, is unwarranted?
PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;I don't say that, I didn't think I was exaggerating any particular achievement, I was pointing out that, in relation to international commodities, I thought there had been quite a material advance, but you must remember all the time that whatever damage we sustain from the existing position in relation to a series of commodities cannot be entirely eliminated by commodity agreements, Commodity agreements anyhow are not appropriate perhaps in all cases, but they would be modified by effective commodity agreements, and that is the reason why, when I went away, I felt perhaps this was a card that we ought to play pretty hard and not without success as it turned out, But let me emphasise once more that nobody sitting in my chair, or anybody else's chair, will be able to cast up a profit and loss account on this matter until we know the best result that Great Britain has been able to get on these individual negotiations and that leads to another matter that perhaps I ought to mention, There was some talk at one stage of having another full Prime Ministers2 Conference, One or two of my Prime Minister colleagues seemed to be suggesting it. Personally, I don't think that is a very good idea, because there are 16 of us, and those who are interested in temperate foodstuffs are about four and those who are interested in the great run of tropical foodstuffs I am not forgetting sugar in our own case are four or five or six, They fell into groups with a variety of interests. Therefore my own view was, and I think this is accepted, that when the United Kingdom, keeping in close daily contact with us, as the negotiations go on when it has reached the point of saying, " Well, now, that is the best we can get on that A, B, C. D, F" then if we want to have a discussion with them on the Ministerial level before they finally say " Yes", we can have it, And if a group of us wants to have a further conference, say Canada, Australia and New Zealand, on those matters, we can have it. I wouldn't think it advantageous to convene 16 people to discuss what might turn out to be the particular interest of four out of the 16.
QUESTION: Mr. Prime Minister, at this distance, there seems to have been a considerable departure on the side of Britain from the earlier assurances that they would not enter the E. E. C. without adequate safeguards for Commonwealth trade, Do you think this is so?
PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;I think it is a little early to say that.
QUESTION: You don't agree then, Sir, that Britain will go in whatever happens?
PRIME MINISTER: Not a statement that I would like to commit myself too One is not to assume that that is the position.
QUESTION: You felt that even after hearing Macmillan speak, Sir?
PRIME MINISTER: No, I’ll reserve any comment on that matter, to see whether it happens?
QUESTION: But isn't it true that Britain will be the sole judge as to the terms, as to whether they are good or bad?
PRIME MINISTER: Well, you must subdivide that a little, It was agreed by everybody that Britain was to be responsible for the final decision, and the reason that was stated and restated and finally put into the communique, was that not one of us wanted to take the responsibility -nor indeed should we of saying, " In principle, you are not to go into the Common Market, and we will resist this by all means available to us." Not Australia, with 10, million people, saying this to a great country like the United Kingdom. No, we all reached the same conclusion "' Well, it will be your business and it will be your decision. &nbsp;But it is also our business, of course, to have a profound interest in the terms that you will work out. And therefore when we know what the terms are, we will be completely free to express our views on them, as to whether they are satisfactory; as to whether they are reasonable from our point of view. But when we have done ' that and you retain your own mind and judgment, then it will be your decision that will operate."
QUESTION: Will there be any field of possibility for Britain to operate after Australian protests, if any?
PRIME MINISTER: Yes. They won’t sign on the dotted line until they have heard what we and other people have to say,
QUESTION: Sir, swinging off the Common Market just for a moment. Can you tell us anything further about the proposed Royal Visit next year as to when a full programme is likely to be available?
PRIME MINISTER: I don't know, but I am under the impression that Sir Roy Dowling is now visiting the States, one by one, in order to work this out, I didn't discuss any details.
QUESTION: In your absence, Sir, there has been a report that you invited the Queen Mother to open the, Festival of Arts
PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;&nbsp;Goodness gracious me. &nbsp;Did the Queen Mother make a statement about that?
QUESTION: Was any consideration given to the future shape of the Commonwealth and arrangements between the countries if Britain enters the Common Market?
PRIME MINISTER: &nbsp;&nbsp;No. A proposal was made by one of my colleagues for a world conference, but that wasn't a Commonwealth Conference. Well, maybe there will be a world conference. I've heard talk of it in United Nations circles but being a practical fellow myself, I don't think there would be much advantage in having 104 people sit around to discover the future access to the European Market for Australian metallic lead or of Australian wheat or New Zealand dairy products,
QUESTION: Bringing it nearer home, Sir, can you tell us if you have had any enlightenment since you were in London about the special treatment promised for New Zealand?
PRIME MINISTER None. Nothing has been said about it. All that people like myself know is that they had in all-night sitting at Brussels. The Chairman had to go to hospital at three o'clock in the morning; the Acting Chairman presided until they finished at 7, and then somebody said, " New Zealand" and he said, " Yes, we must do something about New Zealand," and people nodded said there it is
QUESTION: &nbsp;If nothing were done about giving New Zealand any special treatment to enter the European Common Market on its dairy and other commodities, will this lead to a closer liaison trade wise?
PRIME MINISTER&nbsp; This is much too hypothetical. I am too old in the tooth, you know, to be speculating on what might or might not happen after I am out of office, It is quite true from New Zealand's point of view that mutton and lamb and dairy products, in each of which they are splendid producers and have a big export trade are as important to them as probably wool is to us; and unless something is done about their problem, I can see they will be in great trouble, and no doubt, something will be done, All I know is, to the extent to which we produce similar things, we would expect similar treatment. I am not saying that because I don't want New Zealand to have a good deal. I want New Zealand to have an effective deal on this matter.
QUESTION: Can you tell us when you will be reporting to the Parliament on your overseas tour?
PRIME MINISTER&nbsp; The first date that was suggested to me from one of the people on the other side was the 9th, but I have understood since that Mr.Calwell, for a variety of reasons would prefer to have it a week later, and if he does, then that is all right with me. So it maybe the 9th, but more probably I believe the 16th, But you must realise that I have only just walked into the building and I don't know what Parliamentary arrangements have been made.
QUESTION: Can you make any comment, Sir, about any other topics which were discussed at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference?
PRIME MINISTER:. I would just like to add one thing about the political business, because somebody just now asked me whether I agreed with a certain proposition. And this has to be made clear on the political side, and it was made clear as far as I was concerned at the Conference. The United Kingdom Government is clearly enthusiastic I don't think that is too big a word about the importance of going into Europe. And the American Administration is equally clearly enthusiastic about it. That does not mean to say that the Americans have been pushing them into that position, It means that the Prime Minister of Great Britain and his Ministers are enthusiasts for this idea. And that is a problem for them to determine. It is a very big historic decision for them to make, involving enormous change in many things. We might have taken up the attitude " No, Look, in principle, we are against this. Our slogan is ' No Common Market'" for the reasons I have just mentioned. That was not the position that I was prepared to take up. But I did point out at some length that much depends if you are going to assess your effect on the Commonwealth, on what kind of political association they achieve, If it were a Federation, quite obviously the effect upon Great Britain as a member of the Commonwealth would be profound, I don’t see how anybody could deny that, If, on the other hand, they merely had an ad hoc relationship of periodical conferences on the Foreign Office level and this sort of thing then the effect would be considerably smaller and might be, perhaps, forgotten But I did point out to them that the lesson of history was that when rations became associated in some form of political confederation not a federation but some kind of political association of a confederate type, then either that developed into a federation or it broke up into fragments, and that it had never been known to stand still, and it is because of that that you will find in the communique some words, " They trusted that should there be closer association between Britain and Europe, it would not be allowed as it developed, to weaken the cohesion of the Commonwealth.," etc, Now that is putting in the language of diplomacy a view that a federation as we understand the term is not to be desired. And so far as I understand the position of the present British Governments it does not want a federation. But I pointed out that if there is one thing clear, it is that once a nation becomes a member of a federated union of federated states, then it ceases to be a sovereign community,
QUESTION: Does this mean that Britain is seeking to create a balance of power between Germany and France?
PRIME MINISTER: Don't ask me to speculate about the variety of reasons they have in their minds. It would be most improper for me to say, " This is why I think they are doing it; this is what they have in mind," I couldn't, And if anybody can explain with precision the relations between France and Germany, except in terms of the relations between de Gaulle and Adenauer, I will be deeply indebted to him,
QUESTION: Can you say whether there will be any frequent discussion with the United Kingdom on the question of political union and what the form of association will be.
PRIME MINISTER: Discussions between us and them? Look, in the forthcoming period we are going to have our ears back on. these economic matters.
QUESTION: When we reach the political questions, will the Government be consulted?
PRIME MINISTER: I don’t know that I can answer that, If they achieve finally a result, or results, on the economic side, which after debate and discussion with us they think are acceptable, they will then accede to the Treaty of Rome. The political institutions, if any, to be set up under the Treaty of Rome will then be a matter of discussion between the Seven and not the Six, and no doubt the British Government would anticipate with its political experience it could exercise some influence, At present, one of the political dangers in this matter is that quite obviously there will be very large revenues in this Community variable levies on various types of imports, common externa! tariff revenues which will run into hundreds and hundreds of millions a year, and I displayed a certain vulgar inquisitiveness as to who was going to manage the funds, At present bureaucracy will attend to it. And in my own view, a de facto federation in which the central financial power-is hold by officials is not the most satisfactory for of federation that I have ever heard of, However, they are in possession of our views on that matter.
&nbsp;



62/ 1 1
73/ 1962
ROYAL VISIT 1963
The Australian Secroery to the Queen Sir Roy
Dowling, will visit Perth, Darwin, Alice Springs and
Adelaide during an eight-day tour beginning on Mcnday.
During the tour, Sir Roy Dowling will have
detailed discussions with Royal Visi t directors in Western
Australia ( Mr, R. Doig), in the Northern Territory ( Mr, R,
Nott) and in South Australia ( Mr. L. King),
Sir Roy Dowling will also tour and inspect the
places which it is proposed the Queen sh~ ould visit in the
two States and the Northern Territory.
He is scheduled to arrive in Perth at 6.15 P. m
on Monday in Darwin at 7 p~ m. on Wednesday, in Alice
Springs a 5 p. mb on Friday and in Adelaide'at 2 p~ m. on
Sunday ( October 14).
The tour will complete the series of visits being
made by Sir Roy Dcwling to all State capitals,
CANBERRA, October, 1962,, 



W~ ech_ 1jrp, 1rng October_ 6., 12
COMM. ON;' ., E" i-JTH'F OF_. ITJT!
EIdex. of Ministori iStatc, -, nts Isqueo. in CCanberra
Tphe Deputy Pri. mca Ministcer and iiso for Trade T he n
John Md'~ wem
Oct. 2 No,, 1.059 EXPO. TLT TSUIV, 1 1i-' 33UL-NT'-SC T-iZi Sp
T ejl. c-bi i nis't , rf~ f T rade Er. tr th-I on, Donha Henty
et28 TNo01Q50 21T'Fi~ ALh PKUT13B0JCK~ Ah
The Treasurer 2tHo n, Hp. r Id. H M, P,
Oct 2 No, 1061. A NEW MOIX LOAN
The Mininorfor ' Territ-ories, thoison, Paul Hac'uluclr
0ctL. No010,62 iAGR! CULTURi'-L ?. t~~ IrV0 IN FAPUA AD
Toen re Lr-Ceeri he W. D, ai cdon
Oct. 4 No,, 10' 2i POCSTA11G]". TM FOIZROA VIST T
It 5 No. 1075 POST OFF10E~ FOP: ' GtT CORrROBORF. E, HrOBA17, TU,
The lALJzt~ o ~ ii-roati on, 7he Hon Downe-r, 1, p,.
0ept. 0O lNo. 1O5Lj 1000 VVTITF RJSA TT) G-1i, 01 A'T OlL\ EGIlTIJA
Oct0 2 1, o. 106.1 j%: 1 L1c JL1OO&gt; D T TO VISIT HYrCV. 0R. E
it 4 D.) 694 N1EV! RF2: E() NT Ul,, IER~ TIRIAL IN W1L. TL", Yl
T. 1he Mini stcr -cr the I r The t
Oct0 c _ i~ o66 Ei SEES 4.3TA IP ITIhES
U 5 c 2.073 STUE1O CX) TTIR: CT P ORT MOI'd'SDY
The I! ii stor ffir I? e Nci vy, S, n-t or lh e M' n, J. G crt on
' ITr o) ON D! 2 Jl,' ' y
P O-C , T V
0 1. 1c, 1.0 6 0 V1IG rT OIJ. N TIJAV A'L rO W T
1O~ .~ rL. IILMO 3TpN~ r -UC r.
e0t50 No. 1.0 5 8 POL1LUTION COF0 THF E~ LA Y OIL
The-Minister for~ FHealth9 Senator theHrn, Harrie,' d 0_* V1a:, e
Oct. 3 No. I US5 GI FT OF EQL-ETTO FAiF D HOSTITALMe
The_ niU Lr _ o u_ _ Nr, The-Hcn._! Allen Fai-rall
OC-tL 7 No 1S6 SE~ TQ'LITE-IN CEPDIT
SL N o, 1070 IMINISTEhI CO. Z1', l'UL . TES AThNU
ThMi ni s t or f c r TPe i-LeHrtrinr,. T_ Swn'rt z
It. 2 Nio, 1060 1B. EV PPINT.' ET\ :'. fC'JY 3 O
No~ 1068 No ah_. K OLCT'NCHL. 1' CES FOR E. RTTO
4No, .1071 1IITi L U h. LGC JOTSA
The Ylinist-or for Air he hu. n, 1Ja-vi. F: irlbai. rn
Set 0No,, 29057 N rVW lT. hNI-*.-' IOH' 0 E7 I-MENT F01', PcAA* F
Te Doartmoent f tho Tre
0ct 4 Nc., 1072 CONS41Cl TDAT E D : zEv' E FTN AT' SEP T 3 019 62
The Derprrtmn c. fheY
Oct02 No., 2.6APJ. H: FLYPIAST DY i j* AL\ CY'P J3*, T
. t'h the 7. cm-iTV 1iñ lCnt s at'
TheI -vr~ et3ubli eoicsOf : e.
i ar 1. i ampen Ifc 7. 


&nbsp;8TH October, 1962,
Mr, President, Mr. Minister and Ladies and Gentlemen
I want to make, I think, two preliminary remarks.
The first is that there is a certain benevolent quality&nbsp;about this meeting this afternoon dommercial broadcasting&nbsp;stations meeting under the benevolent smile of Sir Charles&nbsp;Moses ( Laughter), I think that's very agreeable,&nbsp;The second preliminary remark is that by some&nbsp;error somewhere, I am at present somewhere else having&nbsp;had the rare experience of being double-booked Loday. And,&nbsp;as " somewhere else" involves me talking with three Premiers&nbsp;and you kniow what Premiers are like I have craved leave&nbsp;of the President to enable me to depart when I have said&nbsp;what few things I have to say to you,
I don't profess to be an expert on brcoadcasting.
I speak over the air more than I listen. That, I suppose,&nbsp;you might say was an endemic disease of politicians. I leave&nbsp;all the fine work, the expert work, the neat parry and thrust&nbsp;of wave lengths and things of that kind, to Charles Davidson&nbsp;who, though he doesn't understand them any more than I do,&nbsp;( Laughter ) gives a very, very good imitation as a Minister,&nbsp;of knowing what they're about.
All I want to say to you in reality is that Ihave now lived quite a long time, as any opponent of minewould tell you. I am not unacquainted with change for, afterall in the last Parliament, I had a majority of 32. Andso Lir' I know all. about change which is the law of life.But, like very many other people, I can look back to a timewhen nobody had ever heard of wireless broadcasting, or oftelevision, or of aircraft. And it is one of my minorboasts, that I can go back to a time in my boyhood memory whenthe first motor vehicle arrived in the district and it wasa motor buggy. We have lived through the most extraordinary seriesof miracles, haven't we? And, interestingly enough, most ofthem haven1t been so much miracles of understanding*-I doubtwhether we understand much better than we did but miraclesof communication. It seems only the other day that anybodywho wanted to broadcast, some amateur was regarded as a harmlesscrank. I remember when the first stations were set upcommercial stations. I confess to you, I thought that thepeople who put their money into them were mad and now Iknow better ( Laughter). The way in which, what began as asort of bit of fun, has become a tremendously powerfulinfluence in business and in social life is, I think, oneof the miracles of my time0
I shall always feel glad that when these mattersbegan, Governments in Australi. a were intelligent enough, asI believe, to decide that they would have a dual system;that we would have the Broadcasting Commission, and thatwe would have commercial stations with advertising, iand allthe rich variety of programmes that result from a hghlycompetitive system0 This, I am sure, has been a wonderfulthing, I. for one, would not wish to go back on it. I thinkit has boen a great thing for Australia,
Now I know, Sir, that now -that&nbsp;television is descending&nbsp;upon us one mast on Black Mountain when I went away,&nbsp;almost two masts on Black Mountain when I came back we&nbsp;have the rich privilege of seem what the movie stars looked&nbsp;like twenty years ago, ( Laughter)
1 know Sir, that a lot of people, many ofi. s perhaps,felt that when television came in, broadcasting would go oi..; t,Quite frankly I don't believe it and I believe I am rightin saying tha? there is nothing i~ n your own experience whichsuggests that. Broadcasting and I am now talking in particularabout commercial broaacasting, brings to millions of people,the direct voice, thle direct statement, the direct song, thedirect piece of drama whatever it may be and that is awonderful thing because there is a constant conflict in -themodern world between what a man says and what he is reportedto have said these are entirely different matters; andalthough I witnessed with a certain amount of wry humour thedevelopment of Parliamentary broadcasting I have seen thatlittle instinctive movement that takes a Member a littlenearer to -the next microphone ( Laughter) and I have watchedwith regret what I believe to be the decline of the intimacyof Parliamentary debate in favour of the set speech stillit must be said that, wherever I go in Australia, I willencounter somebody, perhaps one, perhaps a dozen, perhapsfifty who were able to say, " Well, I was following thatdebate, such and such a point was made and I didnvt find itanswered." Now this I think is an advantage for thoughtf'ulpeople, But above all things, when somebody like myselfsits down in front of a microphone to address this wretched,unresponsive piece of metal backed by a blaril wall, he of-tensays to himself, " Oh dear, I wonder if anybody is listeningto -this. If I stopped suddenly would anybody know?" Youall know this feeling that we get perhaps you get itoccasionally, I don't know but I get it.At least one has the knowledge that whoever doeshappen to be listening, and possesses the patience to hearyou through, will know what you said and will be able toform a judgment about whatever personality accompanied thewords over the air.I am speaking now purely as a political person butconsider how many people in how many remote places in L7stral jathirty years ago cut off from their nearest neighbour 161miles away, thirty years ago, living in remote places thirtyyears ago9 perhaps not all that many miles from a Capitalbut on a little branch line in the country with one traina week and a batch of newspapers once a week, and then considerwhat broadcasting has brought into the lives of thesepeople, consider the way it has contracted the geographicalarea of Australia and integrated the Australian mind and theAustralian feeling. All I can say is that I don't think thereis any invention that has done more for social developmentand individual enrichment in our own country,Now you gentlemen of the commercial broadcastingstations are of course open to the gravest of suspicionyou are deeply suspected of trying to make a profit ( Laughter).That, of course, is something which a lot of people dontt carefor so long as it is practised by other people. Good luck&nbsp;to youi may you go on and make profits, because the successof your enterprises will maintain this rich flow of competitivematerial and competitive secLvices -to the people ofAs t , ali a I very well remember when I was small boynot such a difficult feat I suppose living up in ' theMallee. A train arrived once a week and everybody wentup to see it arrive. Newspapers came in and I used to cutout of them, when they reached me and the family, the picturesof the celebrated cricketers cf the Clay and paste them onthe wall0 This was the one injection of pabulum, the pab~ ulumof instruction or of entertainment for the week. Wisepeople emulated the old gentleman that dre read about inSomerset Maughamts stories if not in his autobiography( Laughter) who, having received seven copies of thenewspaper for Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday Friday,Saturday, perhaps Sunday read them one day at a Zimc,so as never to be ahead of the news,,
Today all that is gone and it is very largely&nbsp;due to you tnat it has gone. Therefore, as the temporary&nbsp;occupant of the post of Prime Minister temporary for the&nbsp;next two and a half years ( Laughter) I welcome the chanceof coming down and saying to you just a little about how&nbsp;I feel over the work you are doing, over the service you&nbsp;are rendering. I express two hopes one is that your enterprises&nbsp;will go on forever, and the other is that you will never&nbsp;be in the red on the profit and loss accounts.
I declare this Conference open.


P. M, No. 71/ 1962
His Royal&nbsp;Highness the Duke of Edinburgh will&nbsp;travel to and from Australia by regularly-scheduled&nbsp;Qantas&nbsp;Boeing flights, on his visit to Perth for the British&nbsp;Empire and Commonwealth Games. He will arrive in Sydney&nbsp;from London via San Francisco on Tuesday, 20th November and&nbsp;come on to Canberra by R. A. A. F. Metropolitan Convair.
On Wednesday, 21st November, His Royal Highness&nbsp;will travel to Perth by R. A. A. F. Convair and will officially&nbsp;open the Games the following afternoon.
His Royal Highness will leave Perth on his homeward&nbsp;journey again by the Qantas scheduled Perth/ London service.
The Commonwealth Government has arranged with&nbsp;Qantas for the Duke and his party to travel in the forward&nbsp;section of the aircraft. Normal seating facilities in the&nbsp;rear compartment will be available to other passengers.
As His Royal Highness will be in Canberra only&nbsp;briefly after the long flight, he will have few engagements.&nbsp;Details of these engagements are not yet available.
CANBERRA,8th October, 1962,


PM.&nbsp;&nbsp;No.&nbsp;&nbsp;73/1962
AID FOR SCHOOLS
My attention has been drawn to published statements&nbsp;attributed to Bishop M. L, Loane at the 32nd Synod of The&nbsp;Church of England in Sydney yesterday.
I am concerned first with his claim that a fresh&nbsp;and direct approach has been made to the Commonwealth&nbsp;Parliament by members of the Catholic Church for aid to&nbsp;church schools.
No such approach has been made to me or, so far&nbsp;as I know, to any Minister or Member.
Bishop Loane's second assertion on which comment&nbsp;is necessary is that a Commonwealth White Paper on&nbsp;education, to be published soon, will claim that expenditure&nbsp;on education by the States is out of proportion and will&nbsp;propose reduction of the allocation to each State to create&nbsp;a fund for the support of independent schools. This&nbsp;assertion is false, without any shadow of foundation,&nbsp;irresponsible, and reckless.
I regret that a member of the hierarchy of the&nbsp;Church of England should give currency, as if they were&nbsp;facts, to baseless rumours.
CANBERRA,9th October, 1962,



P, M. No. 72/ 1962
PRESS RELEASE RESIGNATION OF SIR WILLIAM ASHTON FROM
THE COMMONWEALTH ART ADVISORY BOARD
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt._ Hon. RG _ Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies announced today
that he has accepted the resignation of Sir William Ashton
as Chairman of the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board. sir
William was 81 on the 20th September this year.
The Prime Minister said, " Will Ashton has given
a lifetime of service to Australian art, as an artist
of great distinction, as a Gallery Director, and as a
member and then as Chairman of the Commonwealth Art
Advisory Board. He has served on the Board for 44 years,
nine of them as its Chairman. I regret that ill health
has made it impossible for him to continue the work with which
Le has been so long associated."
CANBERRA, 9th October, 1962. 



EI4BRGO NOT FOR PUBI, ICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE
9 P. M. THURSDAY 11TH OCTOBER.
FOR PRESS P. M. No, 75/ 1962
HIGH COMMISSIONER'S TERM EXTENDED
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzies
The Rt. Hon. Sir Eric Harrison, K. C. M. G.,
has been re-appointed as Australian High
Commissioner in Britain for a further term until
October, 1963. Sir Eric was first appointed High
Commissioner in 1956 and has occupied the position
continuously since then. He was formerly a Minister of
the Crown and Member of the Commonwealth Parliament for
many years. I am grateful to Sir Eric for agreeing to
the extension of his appointment in a position in which
he has served Australia with great distinction.
CANBERRA, 11th October, 1962. 



PRESS RELEASE P. M, No, 74/ 1962
GRANTS COLMMSSION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
The Prime Minister ( Mr. Menzies) announced
today the re-appointment of Professor Wilfred Prest
as a Member of the Commonwealth Grants Commission for
a further period of three years commencing on 1st October,
1962 Professor Prest has been a Member of the Commission
since 1st October, 1953,
Other Members of the Commission are the
Chairman, Mr. PD. Phillips, Q and Sir Alexander
Reid, I. S. O.
CANBERRA, 11th October, 1962. 


&nbsp;P. M. No. 76/1962
The Commonwealth Government has offered to provide&nbsp;financial assistance to Queensland over a period of four&nbsp;years for the sealing of beef cattle roads in the north and&nbsp;west of the State.
The Commonwealth has already undertaken to assist&nbsp;Queensland by providing £5 million for the construction of&nbsp;beef roads over the five-year period from 1961/62. Last&nbsp;financial year the Commonwealth contributed £650,000 under&nbsp;this scheme, and this financial year will be providing an&nbsp;estimated £1 ,480,000. The decision to provide an additional&nbsp;£250,000 in 1962/63 for sealing roads included in the programme&nbsp;was announced in the Budget. The Queensland Government has&nbsp;now proposed a sealing programme extending over four years&nbsp;from 1962/ 63, at an estimated cost of £3.3 million ( i. e,&nbsp;including the £250,000 for which provision has already been&nbsp;made). and has requested Commonwealth assistance up to this&nbsp;amount.
The Commonwealth Government is convinced of the&nbsp;need for improved road facilities to assist Queensland's&nbsp;beef cattle production, which is an important source of&nbsp;export income, and is satisfied that the provision of special&nbsp;financial assistance by the Commonwealth for the purpose is&nbsp;warranted. The Government has, therefore, decided to agree&nbsp;to the Queensland Government's request. This assistance will&nbsp;take the form of loans with interest at relevant long-term&nbsp;bond rates. An agreement on the matter will need to be&nbsp;concluded between the two Governments, but quick progress&nbsp;with this can be expected and the Government hopes to presentthe necessary legislation to Parliament during the current&nbsp;sittings.
This assistance to Queensland, added to the increased&nbsp;assistance to Western Australia for development projects in&nbsp;the Kimborley area that has recently been announced, amounts&nbsp;to a very substantial Commonwealth contribution to the developmont&nbsp;of the North, with particular reference to the development&nbsp;of its export potential. The Commonwealth's special assistance&nbsp;for beef roads, including its £4.6 million programme for theNorthern Territory, will now exceed £16m,
A request by the Quieensland Government for further&nbsp;Commonwealth financial assistance&nbsp;for the development of an&nbsp;extensive area of brigalow cou.try in the Fitzroy Basin is&nbsp;under close practical consideration between the two Governments&nbsp;concerned.
CANBERRA,12th October, 1962.


&nbsp;13TH OCTOBER, 1962.Sirs, As the weather appears to be threatening, I think&nbsp;I had better begin by declaring the E. D. McKinnon Wing open.
( Laughter) ( Applause)
I am really not the best qualified person to do&nbsp;a task of this kind because, in my own fashion, I am a&nbsp;bigoted what is the word? Ballaratian, or Ballarat. I&nbsp;have been called worse names than that in my time. But,Sir, I want to thank you for what you have said about my&nbsp;wife and I am happy to tell you that I have no reasonable&nbsp;doubt that by the time she arrives back in Australia she&nbsp;will be completely restored to her normal and almost turbulent&nbsp;vigour, ( Laughter)
I was delighted when I heard about this appeal.I was a little taken aback when my colleague, Dan McKinnon,procured somebody to write to me about it and gave me abroad hint that a little donation from me would not comeamiss, And, as usual, he succeeded, I am not an old BallaratCollege boy, I am an old boy of a school in Ballarat whichhas long since disappeared and if I am feeling a littleexpanded occasionally I always explain to people " GrenvilleCollege you see" ut it disappeared twelve months afterI lft ioe ( Laughter) It was a small school and when Ilook back on those days, towards the en( of the first decadeof the century many of you won't remember it I rememberGrenville College a school so small that I got a game inthe football team ( Laughter). There was Ballarat College,too just around the corner, under the headmastership of agentleman who I thin! I am right in saying was irreverentlyreferred to as Joe Garbetto I am open to correction on thatpointo Grenville College was nearby, and across the street,was the boardinghouse of Ballarat College, We had welllet's say about 3' boys in our declining years, BallaratCollege might have had 50 or 60. The Ballarat GrammarSchool, well, it was small in numbers but high in Anglicanpride, and between the lot of us, we didn't amount to morethan a fraction of the other schools. The Agricultural HighSchool was established, Oh dear, Sto Pat's next door,And I want to tell you that I can very well rememberan occasion in the winter when, strangely enough, the snowhad fallen in Ballarat, fourteen inches of it, and we, beingless than the dust went around to Ballarat College and theybetween us less than the dust, We collected the BallaratGrammar School and still we didn't have enough numbers and wewent to the School of Mines where we secured a few earnestvolunteers. Having recruited our strength in this fashion, wewent up to St. Pat's determined to storm them out. ( Laughter)That was where we fell in, because with that low cunning thatcharacterises some people, they had waited for us ( Laughter)and we were stormed out and we recovered some form of orderabout a mile south of Lake Wendouree, Anyhow, theseEae simplerecollections. 00 0 0 0/ 2
But the great thing was that just as these schoolslooked as if they might fade out and disappear, there cameabout here a great pride in the idea of the schools, and whathas happened since then to Ballarat College what has happened,on the other quarter of the Lake to the Grammar School? Thesethings give me immense satisfaction. In the case of BallaratCollege, I am happy to say -that I expect them, because thereis no greater tradition in the world than the Scots traditionol" scholarship. It would have been a monstrosity if BallaratCollege had disappeared. As it is, it is in the full flightthis magnificent growth, this great Appeal so magnificentlysuccessful, under the auspices of my distinguished friend,Mr. Dan McKinnon. These are all proofs of the fact that ourtradition from Scotland is a tradition of scholarship, atradition of pride, a tradition of independence,I used to be rather fond of telling people that yearsand years ago, being in Scotland on the estate of a well-knownman, I walked out on a Saturday morning and found myself talkingto what is described in Scotland as his cow-man, This washis hired man. In most countries he would have been regardedas instinctively, a rather illiterate fellow but very goodwit~ h the cattle, And inside ten minutes we had walked to thecorner of the field, and inside another ten minutes we wereleaning on a railing, and he was talking better philosophy andmetaphysics to me than any profesor I have ever met. He wasthe man in charge of the cattle. This is a tremendousinheritance, a tremendous instinct.The other ' thing I want to say to you is that ther'eare a lot of people who think that schools exist2 even goodones, and universities exist to provide people with a certificatethat will enable them to earn a certain amount of money a Year,This, ofT course is, in a sense, true. 3 ut in a profound Aense,false. The great task of a great school is to produce,not necessarily great men -that's a matter of chance butmen of quality, women of quality, people who have a sense ofthe community in them, rather than a sense of their ownindividual advantage. Therefore, I hope the day will nevercome when schools like this chutrch schools, independentschools will disappear in the great name of uniformity, Infact Sir, that brings me to the last thing that I want tosay Z-0 you. Because the rain is falling.There is, in our own country I say this to youafter great experience and thnought a frightful passion foruniformity. This is a disastrous passion whoever goes toschool in Queensland must be taught in exactly the same wayas whoever goes to school in Tasmania-whatever rules applyto people who live in the tropics must be exactly the same asthe rules that apply to people who live in the half-frozenSouth. This, I venture to say, is nonsense. The genius inour race, and in the history of our race has not been a geniusfor uniformity. It's been a genius for Aifference, for individuality,for personality developed, for a superb conflict of mindwith mind, so long as they are all instructed, civilised, sensibleminds. And that's why I hope the day will never come when schoolslike Ballarat College will have been submerged in the broadstream of purely State institutions,,Don't let us be too uniform,, Let us be individual.Let us have our own character,, Let us believe in our own traditioiLbecause if we do that we will contribute to the sum total ofAustralian nationhood something superbly valuable and indeedimperishable. Now, on the whole, I am getting wetter than you are,but I think the time has come to say, " You are now relieved fromduty," I have the singular privilege of declaring the DanMcKinnon Wing of this great and famous school open.2



Weekl1y Index tiIo, 41
l~ eek Ending Octocber 1962
COMMj~ ON~ lT! ThI. TJTH OF AUJ STRlI! j'
Index of Ministerial Stbatemenf. s Issued in Canberra
TliDhe ltj reMiiso n, Minister f, rT ade., ThefltHon, Jon ct'wen
Oct. 7 No,, 1081A
11c No, 1087
It 1d No. 1092 NEW7 TRA. DE CONSULTA1NT J'OINTJ-T
IU. STRA* L:[ A* N BOOK DIEPLAY IN WAEST BERLIN
APPGINT~ l*. ENT TO TRA.* DE COMMlISSIONER SERVICE
Thle Minicter for National Develo~, Sntrth o. WH
. gpoonar
Oct, 7 No. 1081
if 9 No. 1088 EXHIBITION 01T DEVE LOPPIENT
OVER 139000 WA'.' R SEiQVICJI HODAES PROVIDED IN
196.1/ 62
The Minis-Ger for_ Defcnc; e2L the, lloii Athol Tow~ ney, P,
OcN't. o ~ 1 196 I~) TO~ 1-TH LIITI. ZY ADVISERS CONFErENCE
The Minister for Territories, thie Hon. Paul Hasluck, M. P,
Oct. 12 No. 11.03 REPO. PT OF 1~ I'OR COMM1ISSION IN P. A* PUA AND
The Minister for Labour 3nd National Service. The lion. Willi-ami
McMahon
Ott. 9 No. 10901. INDUSTRIAL PE11CE, IN AUSTPRA-LIAl
ThePot er-Gencral ' Lhe Hoy, C. W. D-vidson
Oct, 10 No. 1091. NA. TTON. . L BROADCA', STING STATION\, S. W. QUEENSINTN
Th e Mi n is ter for Extqrnal Affairs~ -h. e Ho~ vrGril wc
Oct. 7 No, 1081C0 Pr), D . UILDING E! UPlvl. 1 T FOR NORTH 13OFNTmo
it 11 No. 1098 ' SOUTH P,. CI5IC COMISSION 24TH SESSION
The Minister for thc__ Ar:.-fy, The Hon. J. O. Cram-, er
Oct. 11 NOZ 1097NEW; l 1. J'POITi," ErTS A RMY HEADQ) UA'. RTERS
The Piinistezr for the Interior, The linn. Gord.-nFreeth
Ocz. 9 No. 1086
11 9 No. 1089
it 10 ' No. 1093 BUSHFIRE FROBLEEl'tS INVELSTIGA'TION
PERTH PUI: IL5BD IN U. S5 .1,.
FORSTPY ScCHOLARSHIPS
The Ministrr for the_; Nav, Senator the Hon.-J. G. Gorton
1077 1083 1100 1101 YTE. FRIG.. , TT, S -OME
! TA'VY SH-OWS CH.-RTING TECH!' NInUES
NA'LVY IN FOCUS
N,. VAL-. 1 RSVlS Bi* LLED F17OR SEA'TO E. EP. CISE
The Mi11nistur for Ship~ ing alnd Transprt Tb Hon, Hibort g22Lvmni.
8 No. 1084
S8 No, 1085 ME'WGEI SSUE~ D T0 1, TSR. . IA UTOILOBI1LE
A'SSOCIA'TTIONj 0' 7 OCCA'SIONl\ 0OF" THlRTY--KiIFTHi ANNUAL
C~ rLJCEBY HOIN. HUBERT OPPEPM9N0 0 73. E.,
M. P. YIN'_ l~ cT2R llFOl S a T
MO: ORL VILHI CLE FOPULA'T I OI JIN AU STIR.. LIA. WOULD
PflOBLY DOUBLE IN IJHTDEC,. DE, 0 .0
Cot. it 8
to 3-2
tl 12 N o,
No, Nk-ft 
The Mii~ rfor~ henitbQ Senviator the le-on, Harneie V. I. Wade
Oct. 71 No. L076
If11 No, 1099
I12 No. 1102 CQIMIA0NYiLTH POI SONS IRECT STER
ti ST j OF O. LA,! POLl OIVYELl T S VA CNE;
1i10AEDHSPIT * L CT,-,{ J2. ZGF. S
The MliniL srf'or Rptrjten! The. Hon, ",,._ wartz
Oct0 7 No,,
it 9) No.
it k6 No,, 1080 1090 1095 WA ILIK3. DED IITC!-k'SE
GIFT C,* RS FOR 1EX-1-ZRVIC,-MTN
S... SELECT OIT F0P Pi. RpAPLEI' GAMXES
The Minlstcr for Ar TeHon, DE! vid Fa-irlbairn
Oct. 7 No. 1079
1 .10 No,, 1094 EX'IESIVE IF0VE'TSTO B,'*.] 3SE9 Di* RWIN
1b*, ALF PILOTS GET " 7JI \ GS"
The N! avy~ Public RlelationsOffice
O ct. 7 No. 1078 Cl, LNITE RPIA PRLPE 0 FOR-, I N TP~ T MI 01TALEI
The Department of' Trade
Oct. 8 No,, 1082' USTPTj" L iN Di ' ST IGE HIGH
With the Compliments of'
The Governmn'rt Public Relations Officef,
Parliairenit ! HoLmFe.,
0 A BJ.-0 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
( RIGHT HONOURABLE R. G. MENZIES, M. P.)
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
TUESDAY, 16th OCTOBER, 1962.
THE PRIME MINISTERS' CONFERENCE AND THE COMMON MARKET
The Prime Ministers' Conference which began in London on September
was, in its own way, an historic event. I can well remember the time
when there were five Prime Ministers sitting around the table. On this
occasion, no less than sixteen nations were directly represented, most of
them by Prime Ministers, but two of them by Ministers. Those who enjoyed
direct and full membership of the Conference were the United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Malaya, Ceylon, Ghana, Nigeria,
Sierra Leone, Tanganyika, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago, Cyprus, while, following
practice established in the past, the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
was represented by the Prime Minister, Sir Roy Welensky. In addition, such
countries as Malta, Singapore and Uganda were represented b'y their Prime
Ministers, sitting as observers. This was therefore the largest Prime
Ministers' Conference in history.
We met in Marlborough House, the famous palace designed by
Christopher Wren. We met, therefore, in a place which was, itself, full
of history, and old history at that, but we were making new history. Out
in Pall Mall there were many people standing with placards and banners, most
of which expressed opposition to the Common Market. The press gave great
space to the proceedings, most of the newspapers being, as far as I could
judge, strongly in favour of Britain's entry into the Common Market.
Now, in so large and diverse a gathering, it would not be reasonable
to expect any high measure of unanimity. We were met . to consider a great
economic problem which is also a great political problem. But on the economic
side, there is an extraordinary mixture of interests. The countries of Asia
were largely concerned with such commodities as tea, cotton textiles, jute
goods, and other products of their developing industries; the African countries
with tropical products;~ the West Indian countries with tropical products,
including sugar, in which, of course, Australia has a very material and indeed
essential interest. Canada, Australia and New Zealand were largely concerned
with temperate foodstuffs, with raw materials Including certain metals, and with
manufactures. Australia wa~ s also concerned with the way in which the products
of Papua-New Guinea would be treated, including such products as copra and
cocoanut oil. The countries of Asia were made offers which included the
negotiation of special trade treaties between them and the European Economic
Community. The African and West Indian countries were offered associate status
under the Treaty of Rome, although most of them expressed an unwillingness to
accept it. One has only to mention these problems even briefly to realise that
we were not discussing at any given moment, any particular commodity in which
we all had an interest; it became increasingly important to divide 
-2-
the proceedings into committee stages in which the nations interested in
particular commodities could take part.
Under these circumstances, it is not so remarkable that we
failed to produce an agreed statement on all of the economic matters
involved, as it is that we were able to produce a communiquf at all.
I should say at once that the Conference did not produce anything
particularly new. Yet I do think it quite important that certain of its
features should be put on record.
Mr. Macmillan, in opening the Conference, made a speech of great
lucidity, a speech which expressed views which clearly he held very strongly.
I thought that he made it quite clear that the Government of the
United Kingdom had come to the conclusion that entry into the European
Economic Community was of essential importance to Great Britain for both
political and economic reasons. He stated quite explicitly that Great
Britain could not expect to have any steady influence on the formulation
of Community policy from the outside. He thought it reasonable to suppose
that if Great Britain were a member of the Community, its influence would
be important and might be decisive. He thought that if Great Britain
remained outside the Community, it would be inevitable that the realities
of power would cause the United States to attach increasing weight to the
views and interest of the Six and other countries who might accede to them.
He thoughtit inevitable that the United States and the Community would
concert policy on major issues without the same regard for British views
and interests as present relationships with Washington afford. He felt
quite clearly that to lose influence, both in Washington and Europe, would
seriously detract from British standing and would greatly impair the usefulness
of Great Britain to the Commonwealth.
I need not elaborate these matters. It is clear, and we should
conduct all our own examination on this footing, that the Government of the
United Kingdom has worked hard on the problem and has, under present
circumstances, come to the conclusion that entry into the Community is
something which must be achieved for the future of Great Britain and, in
its view, the future of the free world.
As honourable members know, we have never assumed to sit in
judgment on this point. We see the arguments quite plainly, and we
appreciate, quite soberly, their weight. Yet, as every Prime Minister.
at the Conference agreed, the ultimate decision on these matters will be
one for the United Kingdom and not for us. I will return to this matter
at a later stage in order to express with more particularity the views which
I offered on behalf of Australia. 
3
On the economic side, Mr. Macmillan said that his colleagues
and he felt sure that the consequences of joining the Common Market would
benefit Britain from the economic angle. This, again, as it related to
Britain, was a matter for their decision. As I said in my final remarks
at the Conference, we could not sit in judgment on that issue because there
must be a mass of economic arguments for consideration, pro and con, with
which we are not acquainted but which have, no doubt, been taken into account
by British Ministers. It would therefore be as wrong for us to be offering
an uninformed approval as it would be quite wrong for us to offer a blank
opposition to the decision which, in principle, they have made.
Towards the end of his opening speech, Mr. Macmillan made a point
to which I later on referred myself. It is a point of considerable moment
when we come to consider the effect that British joining will have on the
existing structure of the Commonwealth. He recognised that, on the political
side, the Community will either break up or grow stronger. This, of course,
is quite true. I am not aware of any history of confederations or political
associations in which there has not been either a tendency to break up or a
tendency to become more concerted. I know of no example of such an
association which merely stood still. Recognising this, Mr. Macmillan said
that he believes that the European Community would be more likely to develop
and to grow in political strength than to fall apart.
The Prime Minister was followed by Mr. Heath, the Lord Privy
Seal, who is the principal negotiator in these matters with the Community.
Mr. Heath gave us, with great lucidity and care, an account of the progress
in the negotiations in all their various fields. That he has been unflagging
in concentrated hard work and devotion is quite clear. We all had a great
respect for him and his work.
In the case of the Asian countries and the African countries,
considerable progress had occurred in negotiations. In the case of ourselves
and Canada and New Zealand, the progress made has been extremely limited.
In our own case, for example, there have been considerable discussions about
world commodity agreements with particular reference to wheat. But on the
other large matters that concern us, there was no progress to be reported.
This means that in the negotiations which are now being resumed, very
important Australian interests will be under consideration in relation to
meat, dairy products, processed fruit, sugar, metals and so on. In other
words, it would have been impossible for any Australian Prime Minister to
give a general benediction to the British proposal to enter Europe, because
we will not know for some time yet the terms that are to be secured for
these important export commodities of ours. Until we know those terms,
we will not be in a position to size up the effects for us of the bargain
that is made. 
4
Having said these things, I would like to say something more
particularly about our approach to what I will call the Commonwealth problem.
I endeavoured to analyse the matter in this way. Did the United Kingdom
expect Australia, in a matter so full of implications for her, and with so
many factors as yet entirely unsolved, to pronounce a general benediction on
the enterprise? This, I said,' was, of course, completely out of the
question. Should we, going to the other extreme, object in principle to
British entry? Should we simplify the problem by saying that whatever the
conditions might be, Great Britain should not enter the European Community?
Again I said that we could not possibly put ourselves in the position of
objecting in principle, even though we had reservations in respect of the
possible implications for the Commonwealth itself. But those reservations
would not lead us into a position of blind opposition. The whole decision
was one of historic and almost revolutionary importance. It would fall for
decision by the Mother Nation, a nation of fifty million people, of great
power and prestige and experience. It would not, under these circumstances,
be appropriate for us to seek to dictate.
These two extreme views being thus disposed of, I pointed out
that how Australia at the final stages would regard the terms of the entry,
as distinct from the entry itself, was a question which no Australian
Government could answer in advance. On the contrary, we must completely
reserve judgment. I then went on to' explain more closely the nature of what I
regarded as the Commonwealth problem. The Commonwealth, of course, has
sustained many changes. In the days of the Balfour Declaration and the
Statute of Westminster, it was a community of independent and autonomous
States, equal in all things but united by a common allegiance to the Throne.
The common allegiance has gone, except in the case of the monarchical nations,
like our own. The Commonwealth has become a loose association of nations
who value their friendship with each other, who recognise, for the purpose
of their association even though they be republics, that the Queen is Head
of the Commonwealth, and who, with some notable exceptions, enjoy somewhat
similar institutions and traditions of government. But it is still true,
however tenuous the nature of the association, that each member is, itself,
sovereign and independent.
Now, what effect upon this body of ideas will be made by British
accession to the Treaty of Rome? I am going to state the views which I put
to the Conference. But I want to make it quite clear that whatever my
views about the effect of accession upon the structure of the Commonwealth,
I was not, and am not, prepared to say that Australia should seek to exercise
a veto or use its not inconsiderable influence to persuade Great Britain not
to go in on any terms. 
The European Economic Community is, of course, at present far
from being a Federation. It clearly hopes to have closer political union.
Indeed, if it did not, it would be self-defeating. One of the great intended
virtues of the European Community association is that its very existence and
its mutual functioning will tend to reduce, and ultimately eliminate, those
old hostilities in Western Europe which have twice in this century brought
the world to the brink of disaster. Every European statesman will, therefore,
naturally wish to see a closer and closer integration of political
policies and a closer and closer economic co-operation. Under the policies
now operating, there are large fiscal considerations. A common external
tariff needs to be collected and this will mean very great sums of money
presumably coming into some central treasury. Variable levies will be
imposed on certain imports. These again have to be collected and handled.
Inevitably there will be at the centre of the Community a large financial
and administrative organisation exercising functions which, as we see them,
are functions of government. They are not likely to be left indefinitely
to officials, since the control of such great matters by a central bureaucracy
would be inconsistent with British democratic ideas.
It seems to me, therefore, probable that, unless the association
disintegrates, there must be, at the centre, more and more a body of elected
persons exercising the powers and performing the administration involved in
the further working of the Treaty of Rome.
The British Government says, and I have no doubt with the utmost
good faith, that it is not contemplating a federation in Europe, that it looks
at its political association in ad hoc terms, with periodical discussions
between Prime Ministers, Foreign Ministers and the like, but without the
creation of Federal institutions. I sincerely hope that it works out this
way. But I keep remembering the undoubted truth of the proposition that
political associations do not tend to stand still, that they go forward
until they assume what we would call a Federal structure, or even a complete
union in certain cases, or they come apart.
The next point that I made was that, should the day come when
the European Community became a Federation with Great Britain as a constituent
State, then Great Britain would cease to be a sovereign community. It would
assume a position quite different from that which it now occupies or from
that which is occupied by Canada or Australia or any of the rest of us. My
point was that in a Federatinno, State retains complete sovereignty; the
sovereignty is, in a sense, i Each may exercise sovereign powers
within its own field, but some of its sovereignty is shorn off and put into
the central Federal authority.
I took the opportunity of referring to the fact that this great
issue of State sovereignty was at the very heart of the American Civil War.
There had, in that country, been several schools of thought. One was that 
6
when the Federation was established, the States preserved their full
sovereignty and that that sovereignty was paramount to the rights of the
Union. Another school of thought was that State sovereignty was suspended
by the Union, but was capable of revival by secession. And the third
school of thought was that State sovereignty as a unitary whole was finl'ly
renounced when the Union was effected. There can be no doubt whatever that
the third view was established by the Civil War. If it had not triumphed,
then the United States of America would have achieved nothing like the
cohesion, and strength, and growth that it has since this disastrous episode.
It seemed to me no more feasible to say that Great Britain's
position in the Commonwealth would be unaffected by participation as a
constituent State in a European Federation than it would be to say that
Australia could join another great Federation and still remain an independent
sovereign member of the British Commonwealth.
Now, of course, one answer to all this and it has been clearly
made in London is that Great Britain has no intention of going into a
Federation. I repeat that this must be accepted, and that if she does
not, then much of the comment which I have made disappears.
I think that twenty years ago I might have become more impassioned
about this matter, but the Commonwealth has changed a lot since then. Its
association has become much looser. For most of its members, the association
is, in a sense, functional and occasional. The old hopes of concerting
common policies have gone. Under these circumstances, it may well prove to
be the fact that even if Federation should be achieved in Western Europe,
the anomalous position of Great Britain in the Commonwealth which would then
emerge, would be regarded as no more anomalous than many other things which
have been accepted, and with which we have learned to live. In any event,
so far as Australia is concerned, nothing can shake us in our allegiance to
the Throne, an allegiance which will always give us a very special relationship
to many other millions of people in Great Britain and elsewhere.
If I have devoted a great deal of time and thought to these
aspects of the matter, it has not been with any desire to be pedantic or
obstructive, I have merely felt it my duty not to let a great and crucial
Commonwealth event occur without some record of our basic views.
For the truth is that any argument of principle, any exposition
of the hard practical realities of the Federal system, any traditional
feelings we have, must yield the ground when it appears, as it does, that
with all these considerations before it, the government of the United Kingdom
has decided the political issue in favour of going into Europe. It is an
historic decision. It involves great possibilities of advantage and disadvantage.
There are material economic risks for us, to which I will return
a little later. But, in the eye of the world, the major problem is for 
7
Great Britain. Should she find that her voice in Europe is less influential
than she hopes, and that alien political and constitutional ideas prevail,
her risks are clear. Should the economic balance turn out to be to her disadvantage,
her risks are clear.
Her government has considered all these matters, and has made a
decision, at least in principle.
Under these circumstances, I felt strongly that we should not
lodge an objection in principle, saying " whatever the terms, you must not
do this thing'" We have no right to say it. We have no desire to say it.
On the contrary, when the negotiations have ended, and our consultations are
ended, we will be well entitled to assess and state the economic effects for
Australia. But on the great issue we will hope and pray that the British
judgment proves right, and that a stronger, more concerted Europe will result,
with advantages for the peace and prosperity of the world.
This has been, of course, a difficult and anxious exercise.
The temptation to engage in dogma has had to be resisted. While it has
been, and still is, essential for us to battle for the best economic conditions
for Australia, we have felt called upon to be careful not to create
any impression that ours are the only interests involved, or to seek to
force Great Britain into political or economic judgments which, in her
considered view, might prove disadvantageous to her.
In the end result, therefore, we devoted much time, and will
devote much more over the next few months, to the protection and expansion
of our own development and trade. We have avoided hard and fast ideas;
we have not just sought, vainly, to preserve the status quo. For Great
Britain simply cannot secure admission to Europe taking with her the existing
structure of Commonwealth preferential trade. But we have sought fair and
reasonable opportunities to sell, at remunerative prices, to Britain and
Europe the commodities we can produce efficiently. We have, indeed, construed
the British undertakings to us as meaning this. We will be bitterly
disappointed if events turn out otherwise.
In short, we have pursued a pragmatic approach to the economic
problem, treating the political problem as one which is now beyond our
jurisdiction, and making constructive proposals. As I said to the
conference " If Commonwealth members, as individual nations, can have
secured for them terms and conditions of trade which hold out a
genuine prospect of increased access to the enlarged European
Community at payable prices, and if Great Britain is right in
thinking that overall increased trade with Europe will result
from the enlargement of Europe, the Commonwealth changes will
be accepted by many people, for purely practical reasons." 
8
I turn, therefore, to those aspects of the economic problem
which affect Australia.
The facts are that, both before and during the London Conference,
we pursued a reasoned and reasonable course. It has to be remembered that
Australia is not a party to the negotiations. Britain and the Six are the
only negotiating parties. We have made clear both to Britain and the Six
the nature and extent of our interests and have made constructive proposals
towards safeguarding those interests. We have been positive in our approach.
As I have said, we did not seek to retain the status quo. But, as so much
of our export industry has been developed to satisfy trade outlets in a special
Commonwealth structure, we have sought conditions which will preserve our
access to Great Britain and the enlarged Common Market, will enable that
access to grow as the Community grows and prospers, and will secure such
access at price-levels which will allow Australia's export industries to
grow and prosper. All this is quite fair. It is not greedy. It is not
asking for guaranteed prosperity. It is not dogmatic or unreasonable. It
merely says that, as the Treaty of Rome aims at increasing domestic prosperity,
and an increase in world trade, Australia is entitled, in exchange for the
British preferences she now enjoys, to her fair share in an increasing world
trade on terms which will contribute to her own continued development. This
is where we make our stand.
I interpolate at this stage that quite a few commentators in
London seemed to think that preferences operate only one way. This is,
of course, completely wrong. It has been a system of great mutuality. As
I pointed out at the Conference, Australian trade with Great Britain has for
a number of years shown a substantial balance in favour of Britain a balance
to which tariff preferences on British goods passing into Australia have made
a substantial contribution.
There is, of course, a view that even if Britain entered the
Common Market on terms which, initially, involved some cost for us, it would
be all for our good in the not so very long run because of the great increase
in prosperity it would bring to Britain and to the other Common Market
countries. This cannot be taken for granted. True enough, if countries
abroad, whether they be in Europe or anywhere else, grow in respect of
population and industrial output and general demand for goods, there is at
least a first expectation that they will need more of the sort of things
we produce foodstuffs and raw materials and the like and so our exports
to them should increase. But it does not necessarily happen that way;
not unless one other great condition is fulfilled. Growth and prosperity
in industrialised countries may not mean very much to us if, instead of
taking more of our commodities, they set out to produce them for themselves
behind protective barriers. 
9
Have we reason to fear such a result in the case of the Common
Market, enlarged by the accession of Great Britain? At least we have had
some rather discouraging experience in recent years. For while growth in
the E. E. C. countries during recent times has been very rapid, that unhappily
is not true of our exports to them nor indeed of the exports of other
primary-producing countries to them.
I may be allowed to quote a few figures to illustrate this.
Between 1957 and 1961 industrial production in the E. E. C. countries rose
by 30 per cent outdistancing the growth of world industrial production
through that period by 10 per cent. In the same years, however, exports
of sterling area countries, other than Great Britain, to the E. E. C. countries
rose by only 4 per cent. To other parts of the world they rose by a good
deal more than this.
I have taken first this group of sterling area countries
mainly exporters of primary commodities because they are a wide spread
group and therefore diversified.
If we look at our own country alone we find that, through these
four years when industrial output in the E. E. C. rose by 30% a quite
remarkable increase our exports to them actually fell from œ 236m in 1957
to œ 168m in 1961 a decrease of 29%.
I know that particular factors contributed to this fall
notably the decline during that period in the price of wool, which we sell
in substantial quantities to Europe. But the larger fact remains while
industrial production in that region was growing at a quite remarkable
rate, our exports to it did not increase at all they fell quite heavily
as the terms of trade moved against us.
We therefore cannot lightly assume a ready and certain compensation
for any loss we might suffer from British accession to the E. E. C.
through a lift in the prosperity of Great Britain and Western Europe.
Because the hard fact is that, as a first consequence of that act, there
would be not a lowering of barriers to our trade but in the case of Great
Britain, an extension of them.
We are not alone in our desire for access and a fair price
stability. Our discussions with the American Administration, both through
Mr. McEwen and myself and the permanent head of our Trade Department, have
clearly established two things.
The first is that the U. S. A. as a non-member of the European
Community, like ourselves, shares our lively interest in avoiding a state
of affairs in which Europe becomes economically self-sufficient or inwardlooking.
As exporting countries, we are both profoundly interested in
I 
maintaining and expanding our access to an expanded European Market at
payable but not extravagant prices.
The second is that, armed with the new powers of negotiation
created by the Trade Expansion Act, the American Administration can contribute
powerfully to negotiations with Europe designed to achieve the first
objective. Suggestions of " panic", sometimes heard in Australia, are absurd.
We are a sturdy and resourceful people. We have fought and will fight our
battles in the world markets with vigour and determination. But we will
not silently abandon positions which have been hard won and strenuously
sustained. There are many communities in Australia largely dependent upon
the British market. We cannot regard any of them as expendable. We will
await the results of the negotiations, having in mind our own legitimate
interests and the adequate safeguards which have been promised to us.
What then, is the position as it stood disclosed at the end of
the Conference, and stated in the final communique?
I will not try to answer this question in detail. But I should
say at this stage that while the Minister for Trade and I have been involved
in the political and economic aspects of the Common Market, the Treasurer,
in London, New York and Washington, was concerned with the special financial
aspects of the problem. He was able to encourage and to report a rapidly
growing interest in the problems of primary exporting countries, and the
need for effective international commodity agreements. I hope that the
House will have the opportunity of hearing from him.
On the trade side, my colleague, Mr. McEwen, will fill many of
the gaps in my present record. I take this opportunity to say that the
Australian public will perhaps never fully know the full measure of the
devotion he has shown, with no consideration of health or personal comfort,
to the task of forwarding our interests in these great matters.
Broadly, the first thing to record is that, save for " hard
manufactures" and cereals, with particular reference to wheat, Australia's
exports have so far not been negotiated with the Six, though they have, of
course, been extensively discussed between Australia and the United Kingdom.
In this category fall substantial items such as beef and veal, mutton and
lamb, sugar, butter and cheese, metals, dried and canned fruit, wine and
fresh fruits and leather. We cannot at present prophesy the outcome of
the negotiations. Plainly, we cannot comment on unknown results. But
we can and do say that anything like a phasing out of our present preferences
and agreements by 1970 without some other proper provision for preserving
our market opportunities, would be vigorously resisted by us. When these
negotiations are nearing conclusion, it is agreed that we can have further 
11
conferences on the Ministerial level, either by ourselves or in concert
with other interested countries.
The second feature concerns the making of international
commodity agreements. Australia has, for some years, been perhaps the
leading advocate of such agreements, driven on by the steady decline in
her terms of trade. It has become, particularly in recent years,. a
characteristic of world trade that countries exporting primary products
have seen a steady decline in the world price of these products, while
their imports from the highly industrialised countries of Europe and
America have risen in price. I will give one example. In the decade
1951-61, Australia's export prices fell by 42/, while import prices rose 6%.
Under these circumstances, it has not surprised us in the past
to encounter on the part of some overseas countries, including Britain,
considerable reluctance to make commodity agreements designed to produce
a stable and payable price level for primary exports.
In our London discussions, we asked for a dynamic approach to
the negotiation of international commodity agreements.
We argued that principles be followed on price, on production,
and on trade access, and on a commodity by commodity basis, which would
encourage maximum consumption, which would discourage uneconomic production,
and which would offer security of access and stability of prices at a level
remunerative to efficient producing countries.
We argued that the internal price policies of the enlarged
Community should be such as not to stimulate internal production so as to
reduce the access of outside suppliers to their traditional markets or so
as to prevent the expansion of commercial imports as consumption levels rose.
We urged that talks between major countries interested in
particular commodities should be called at an earlier date and certainly
before the United Kingdom made its decision whether or not to enter the
European Economic Community. For instance, we said that we thought that
the G. A. T. T. cereals group might resume its discussion on wheat in the early
part of next year. This would enable the possibilities as to the way in
which arrangements for individual commodities might work out in detail to
be decided in actual negotiations.
We realized that in none of these matters could Britain declare
a policy on behalf of the Community. What we sought to do, was to secure
on the part of the British Government a full comprehension of our views
and of our trade needs so that they would be reflected and pressed in full
degree in the further negotiations. 
12
We indicated in a variety of ways that the forum of the G. A. T. T.
should be used wherever practicable reconvening of its cereals group, the
discussion of the Community's price policy, the negotiation, in a manner
analagous to tariffs, of levies on agricultural products.
We pressed this argument with vigour, especially in relation to
the levels of world commodity prices.
In the result, though we did not secure full acceptance of our
views, I think it right to say that a material step in the right direction
was taken at the Conference, with, in clear terms, the full concurrence of
Great Britain. Thus, in paragraph 9 of the communique, a paragraph in which
the expression " Commonwealth Governments" includes the United Kingdom, it is
stated that " To meet the needs of the producers of agricultural commodities,
Commonwealth Governments will support policies and initiatives
designed to maintain and expand world trade in these commodities
and to improve the organisation of the world market in a manner fair
alike to producers and to consumers. They will support a fresh and
vigorous approach to the negotiation of international commodity agreements
to this end. In any such approach principles of price,
production and trade access would need to be applied, on a commodity
by commodity basis, so as to encourage maximum consumption without
over-stimulating production and to offer to efficient producing
countries adequate access and stable prices at a fair and reasonable
level."
Later on, in paragraph 12, which was inserted by the request of the British
Government as setting out in summary form their own attitude, it is stated
" Thirdly, as regards temperate products, the enlarged Community
would make, at the time of British accession, two important declarations.
One would express their intention to initiate discussions
on international commodity agreements for temperate foodstuffs on
a world-wide basis. It would recognise the greatly increased
responsibilities of the enlarged Community by reason of its predominant
position amongst world importers. The second declaration
would relate to the price policy of the Community. While taking
appropriate measures to raise the individual earnings of those
engaged in agriculture in the Community, the Community would do
its utmost to contribute to a harmonious development of world trade
providing for a satisfactory level of trade between the Community
and other countries, including Commonwealth countries. British
Ministers considered that the policy which the enlarged Community
intended to pursue would offer reasonable opportunities in its
markets for exports of temperate agricultural products." 
13
References were quite frequently made to the need for " Trade not Aid". But
this needs to be more than a slogan. The practical problem is well expressed
in paragraph 7 of the Communique
" They note with concern that trade and industry in the developing
countries, as well as in some of the more developed countries which are
large producers of primary products for export, have been adversely
affected by widely fluctuating commodity prices and a progressive
worsening of the terms of trade. They see this as a problem which
calls for progressive policies in relation to international trade
and finance so that demand for the products of those countries can
be sustained and increased, and larger and more dependable trade
outlets assured to them."
We have throughout emphasised our belief that the expenditure
of many millions on aid to developing countries defeats itself if the products
of those countries are excluded from the markets of the donor countries. In
other words, aid tends to defeat itself unless it increases trade. Commodity
trading agreements which raised the price and increased the access of the
export commodities of what I will call the new world by even a small percentage,
would be of more value, for development and good will, than all the
financial grants put together.
If the proposed declarations about commodity trading agreements
are vigorously followed up, with the prospective co-operation of the United
States of America under its new Trade Expansion Law, some of our own problems
may be resolved and the world's trade will be on the way to becoming healthier
and better balanced. Before I conclude, I would like to return to what is, in hard
fact, the core of the problem.
That problem is access to the enlarged Europe, and fair prices.
The Community as at present constituted arrives at its own price
structure and mechanism. If Great Britain enters, she will be a party to
these decisions. Are these to be arrived at without reference to outside
suppliers? We believe that there should be, in a periodical way, consultation
between the Community and exporters like ourselves. We see the
established machinery of G. A. T. T. as ready-made for this purpose. Failing
such consultation, we see, in the European market, a precarious future for
our exports. We believe that Great Britain understands this problem and
that, in Europe, she will exercise her influence in the direction which
we seek. But there is a great responsibility on the present negotiators..
We took the opportunity, in London, of reminding those concerned
that the Six had a great responsibility not to insist upon conditions of 
14
British entry which would weaken either the growing members of the Commonwealth
or the cohesion of the Commonwealth itself. We thought that the
present community should be aware that its " grand design" of growing economic
strength and the furtherance of international trade and prosperity could
wholly or partly be defeated if the interests of the Commonwealth, so
essential to the " grand design", were either set aside or materially prejudiced.
In the result, the communique included the statement that
" The representatives of the other Commonwealth countries
expressed their hope that the members of the European Economic
Community will wish to preserve and encourage a strong and growing
Commonwealth, in furtherance of their own ideals of an expanding
and peaceful world order."
I add, for Australia, that the next few fateful months will show
whether that hope is to be realised. 



STATEMENT BY-TIEPRTE ISE
( The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, Cli, QC, MP.)
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WEDNESDAY, 17TH OCTOBER, 1962.
ANNOUNCEMENT OF ECONOMIC ENQUIRY
Over recent years the Government has had requests
foj. a-nujber of organisations for public enquiries into
various aspects of our economic affairs. Some of these requests
have related principally, if not wholly, to the Customs Tariff.
Others have sought a wider coverage and, at the extreme, have
wanted an enquiry to comprehend all the main aspects of our
economic affairs. The Government has given much thought to these
requests. It has found difficulty in seeing that an enquiry
limited to the tariff, or any particular aspects of the tariff,
would be a sufficient undertaking. Apart from anything else
there would be great difficulty in confining any enquiry to Lhe
tariff because that subject is connected with and dependent
upon so many other issues. On the other hand, a general economic
enquiry, as some have proposed, might have to become almost
illimitably wide, take more time than is justified and by its
very breadth, lead to conclusions so broad and vague and
qualifiud as to be of little practical use. We have decided,
therefore, to institute an enquiry of a particular kind.
We feel that it should serve the requirements of
the widest number of people and organisations, that it should
be helpful not only to the Government and its various agencies
but also to trade and industry, to all who play a constructive
role in the growth of our economy. What we all need is light
upon possibilities rather than guidance upon how to go about
achieving this or that objective. We hope to have drawnm upas
far as it is possible to do so with the information that
can be had a chart or prospectus of our economic potentialone
that would show both the extent of our resources and their
capabilities and also the limitations upon those resources.
It would also be valuable to have some competent
and objective advice of an analytical kind upon certain great
questions regarding the best use and disposition of our resources,
For it is one of the fundamental facts about our economy that
while many of our resources, so far as we know them, are good
in point of quality, they are also limited in extent and subject
to various handicaps upon their development. This makes it of
the first importance that we should put them to the best and
most productive use.
These are the main considerations which have guided
the Government in drawing up terms of reference for an enquiry.
These terms of reference are as follows
" HAVING IN MINI) THAT THE OBJECTIVES OF
THE GOVERNMENTIS ECONOMIC POLICY ARE A HIGH RATE
OF ECONOMIC AND POPULATION GROWTH WITH FULL
EMPLOYMENT9 RISING STANDARDS OF LIVING EX( TERNAL
VIABILITY, AND STABILITY OF COSTS AND RICES,
TO ENQUIRE INTO AND REPORT ITS FINDINGS ON THE
FOLLOWING MATTERS 
-2
TIE TRENDS IN POPULATION AS A alHOLE AND
IN THE WORK FORCE COMPONENT;
THE AVAILABILTITY OF KNOTWN BASIC PHYSICAL
RESOURCES;
THE GROWTH OF DOMESTIC SAVINGS;
OVERSEAS INVESTMENT IN AUJSTRALIA ( INCLUDING
LIKELY SOURCES AND TRENDS AND AN ASSESSMENT
OF ITS SIGNIFICANCE TO THE AUSTRALIAN
ECONOMY);
THE LIKELY PATTERN OF GROWTH AND GEOGRAPHICAL
DISTRIBUTION OF INDUSTRY, PRIMARY, SECONDARY
AND TERTIARY ( INCLUDING THE GOVERNMENTAL
SECTOR);
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THIS FOR THE OCCUPATIONAL
PATTERN OF THE WORK FORCE;
QUESTIONS INVOLVED IN THE PRODUCTION IN
AUSTRA" LIA OF GOODS THAT WOULD OTHERWIISE
BE IMPORTED;
THE DEVELOPMENT OF PRODUCTION FOR EXPORT
AND THE SECURING OF ADEQUATE EXPORT
OUTLETS; AND
THE EFFECT OF CUSTOMS TARIFFS AND OTHER
FORMS, DIRECT OR INDIRECT OF PROTECTION
ON THE DISPOSITION OF RES6URGES AND ON
THE BROAD ECONOMIC OBJECTIVES STATED
ABOVE. I
As they s-tand, these terms of reference are largely selfexplanatory
and need no great elaboration. No doubt, when the
Committee which is to conduct the enquiry has been assembled,
we will have some discussion wi1' th them so that they will be
quite clear in their minds as to what it is the Government
wants them to do on its behalf and for the community.
Appointments to the Committee will be made as
soon as possible. it is not intended to establish the body as a formal
Royal Commission. Within its terms of reference we want the
Committee to hiave the greatest possible freedom in deciding how
it goes about its work.
The Committee will obviously require considerable
staff assistance and we shall certainly see, to that. It -also
seems likely that the Committee will w'ish to call on various
people or institutions to undertake special enquiries. The
facilities of relevant Commonwealth. Departments and authorities
will be available to the Committee, and we do not doubt that we
will also have the co-operation of State Governments and their
associated authorities, so for as this is necessary.
Especially do we hope that industry, in its various
branches, will co-operate in making information av. ailable and
perhaps in undertaking investigations which only they are
capable of carrying out. It should be emphasised again that,
in the degree that it is successful in throwing light on our
economic future, the results of the enquiry can be of great
value to industry and trade as well as to governments. 9a &amp; / 3 
-3-
For its part, the Government hopes that the enquiry
will be helpful to it in providing information which will help
it in the determination of many fundamental issues of policy,
Amongst these, obviously, will be the important issue of tariff
policy in its broadest aspects. It should help particularly
in setting the role of the tariff in its due context and
perspective and integrating it with economic policy as a whole.
Naturally the Government will wish the report of
the enquiry to be available to it as early as possible. At the
same time it realises how wide and complex and difficult are
the subjects it is putting before the Committee and it has not
therefore laid down a fixed period within which the Committee
should make its final report. That is something on which it
will talk to the Committee when it has been brought together.
The Government wishes to make it clear that it has
the firmest intention of preserving the full independence of
the Tariff Board as an advisory body established by Parliament,
its system of open and public enquiry and its high public
standing and prestige. These things are of the very essence
of the Tariff Board system which has, over many years, served
Australia well and has won admiration and respect overseas.
The Tariff Board is, to repeat, an advisory body.
It is not a policy-making body although its recommendations
necessarily have a considerable influence on policy and it
is not an executive body. Its principal and best-known function
is to consider, on reference from th, Government, applications
for protection by way of tariffs or bounties or, alternatively,
proposals for the reduction of such protection. It also has
power on its own initiative to review existing duties, to
conduct enquiries on certain matters and to report to Parliament.
But tariff policy as such is the responsibility of
the Government. Only Parliament can enact tariffs; only the
Government proposes tariff legislation to Parliament.
The tariff and other forms of protection such
as bounties and subsidies are means to provide a degree of
shelter for local industries against the competition of imports
from other countries and so to sustain and promote the growth
of these local industries. Protection has been the policy of
all Australian Governments since Federation. Our own policy
is clear; we are for effective protection for efficient
Australian industry. Tariff policy involves broad issues of principle
how far one class of industry should be encouraged by protection
as compared with other classes of industry, whether diversity
of industry should be sought or specialisation, what relative
weights should be given to the effect of tariffs on costs
generally, on rural incomes and on consumers, how far international
reactions to tariff increases should be taken into
account and so on. But tariff-making is also a matter of
decision in individual cases within a general framework of
principles and under a changing context of circumstances. In
that sense, tariff policy is built up and elaborated, precedent
by precedent. It is equally apparent that policy on tariffs and
protection generally must form part of, and be consistent with,
economic policy as a whole. It must serve the same broad 
4
-obje-ct-ives of policy, external as well as internal. It clearly
must be related to overseas trade policy our relations with
other countries as well as to internal policy on the industries
which provide the exports for overseas trade. it must be
related to population growth and full employment but it must
also be related to the problem of costs and prices.
More and more as our experience widens, it is
borne in upon us that sound courses of action depend on our
ability to see ahead and, having seen ahead, to prepare
a head. The need for more information and better information,
more light on what is going on today, what may or may not be
going on tomorrow or next year or the ne: ft five or ten years,
is common ground with everyone. Business demands,. rightly
enough, to know what thec Government is trying to do, what
its objectives are and what its lines of policy will be.
The Government, on its part, feols the need to know more of
what business hopes to do and plans to do.
The work of the Committee should help us all. 



SIXTH PLENARY MTING OF THE WORLD POWER
CONFERENCE HELD AT MELBOURNE
ON 2.0TH OCTOBER, 1962.
Speech by the Prime Ministelr, Rt. cno R. Menzies
Sir, Your Excellency, and ladies and gentlemen
It is my very simple task to offer a warm welcome
to the members of the Conference on behalf of the Commonwealth
of Australia.
As one who occasionally has to go aro-nd the world
and become involved in arguments in the world, sometimes
fruitful and sometimes fruitless, I want to tell you in a
minute or two that to my mind two of the great problems in
the world today, as you survey the whole globe, ' ire, first
of all, the enormous and growing pressure of population on
resovrces and second, the maldistribution of the benefits
of modern life between the highly developed countries and
the lesser developed countries, These are two enormous
problems. In the first place, how can the world provide a
decent standard of living for the thousands of millions of
people who will be living in it by the turn of the century,
unless something is done to bring the benefits of modern
discovery to the service of all people in all countires?
And this is where you come in, because there is no
single element so significant in raising the standards of
living, in increasing production, as the use of power, the
diverse use of power, the ultimate cheapening of power, the
putting of pow. er behind the man who works in the factory and
the man who works on the farmo
This is a tremendous task and, unless it is accomplished
by the end of this cntury, we will find a mass of
problems produced by pressure upon limited resources that
can lead to disaster in the world.
And, in the second place, Sir, this gap that
exists between those who have and those who have not, the
gap between the highly industrialised countries and those
that are still living on the soil, this is not a gap that
is closing; and it will not be closed merely by kindness or
good will or monetary help. This is a gap that tends to widen
and the right way to close it is to devote more and more
talent and occasionally a flash of genius to the bringing to
the service of people the benefits of power, its applied use,
its availability on terms that can be accommodated by the
country concerned. Now, I mention those very brieflyo They are two
very, very great problems. They will not be very far from
your minds as you go on to consider the changing pattern of
the world's problems in your field, I am confident, as I
have been here this afternoon and as I have read your
preliminary documents, that this conference itself and the
work that stems from it may well turn out to represent a
very great contribution to the solving of problems including
those to which I have briefly made referenco,
Sir, I think you will. understand how warmly indeed
as the head of the Ccmiuonwealth Government, I welcome you all
from overseas or from here to this Conference and to this
country, 



W EL-,-KLY* INDEX' No~, 4P
Rrdlip t obeP22 j92
C-OMMO0Nlr-ALTH OF A U STRA LI
Index of Ministeri,, Statemnt's Issued. in Canberra
Thea pt Prime I'inister. and Iylinicter for '-rade__ The Rt. -Hon.
J oh'. I M volV~
Oct. 14 lNlo. 1106A4 BUILDIDG IiTDSTRY PSLLINTG D,:[ ISMTOl TO
ti 15 No, 1.0) 7 ASUINTrGPALPIONRTE/ NMDALUI, ATRDjL CAPP CTTY ON SHOW IN
NEW',, ZEALA-ND
Th--e Treasurer, the RL., Ijon, Harold Holt, M. P,,
No. 1114
No. 711 YORK L. OA" K
PAY-ROLI L TAX l-, B1PjTES
The Minister fror Nati onal DG-lreomnm enator the lion. liW.,
N o. 1109,
0To1125 1959-60 OILJ DRILLI-NG SHWDTRACES
MA,' PCS OF SIMTAYBlASIN
2O rI, 7 OTT NICK'LEj.
The Minister for, Territoriesi. the Hor,, F~ lic suck, M.. P.
Oct. 16 14o 1112
il 19-No,, 1128 C Ol 3T I T LIT 10. AL REFODJV I'N PAP UA A'ND NEWV
POLITICAL. 1 EDUO'ATIOI N P! I1UA AN'YD NINW GUINEA
The Minster o the ] Najvrv. Ic~ trteoJGC~ o
No. 1127ADMLI. n VISIT U. N. RADIO STAT*, IO IT TE
The Miister for Tilabour~ Nlrdi tionoj. Service. The lione M Mahnrt
Oct.. 15 Nu. 1110(-OCTE OF EMPLJOYMENT SITUTION DT
SEPTEMBER, 1962.
The Fe LrGro. The Fon, C. W0. Dravidson
Oct. 16' No, 111' 3
L 6 N011
~? 16 No, 1117
17 No, 1119 SITE F071, COUJT" A-Y T. V. STATIONS
SPECIA' L 09OLOMBO PLAN POS'TMAR,-K
SPEC[ TIL IEE GMMUNCTINSFCLT-rIES FO1R
N. C. 0. TOURPl
iDDITI0' NIL EA'ST -W ! EST T. RUNX LINES
T1 i. e! Mi i i z-) t er f or F xt a1_ L f f ai rc-. 1T he HIo n. S. ir Ga r f i e. d Bri r wJ c 1
0Oct, 18Nc, 11122
I 19 No. 1129 A,, pOINTMENj' 7T OF MR. 17. D -7OL. S Y THi'Al S
SECR= TARY-ET -EML OF SOUTH PA,* CIFIC
2ONh N. ER: JYOF RATEOF EL " Mr/ EIN
The Mntrfor Tnterf or The THn CodonFreeth
No. 1108
No" 11,10
No. 1115
No. 112.3 TIMBER SUPPLY REVIEW
B3EEF ROADJS P20OT'ECT IN N. T.
liEVvSU7. EME JORTBUILDIY! G FOR DA" RWI7N
11E! WARRO FOR' H.. M HilTMAN
TbfMinister for the LTmry, nntor the Tlien. JGG Gort-+ on
No.. 1120R. AN . TO jTTEITPT SALAGE OF U. S. AIIRCR!,'-T
The Minister for__ Shi; an~ nd T-ransport. The Hion,. Hubert 0 perrnan
No. 1126MMETING OF J. M-OTOR VEIIICTL ST AiN * D. AtRZD S
COMMAITTEE TO Bl-E MTELD IN ADELA'IDE OCT. 23-26")
0 1 0 / 2
Oct 17
11 19
Oct., 15
ti 18
ti 18
Oc t 19
Oct. ' I
Oct, 18
Oct. 18 
2.-
The Mi. rister fo~ r MeIh. Scxrtor ' ho Hon.~ t'hmc jo c
OC4u-J9I~ IIB~' TTON 3AL OF TH[ I. IPODI' DE IN THE
The ~':. itrfor-Sv~. yTHeon, j'. 21en Yirhoill
Oct,, 19 No. 3.1.30W~ OOTMLR~ 1C2 $ MJU~? 5 POR. I'TII'TE HOURS.
Th1, e Mi s t er f o r 11ea i . iauicn2_ T 7a1t , Hoin l Swou
Ocbt, 1LS116 SZXXICE PE'YSIOlTS FOP. Z JIt) NF-R'
N 0, 111OD MI4NI ST'Ll-. T Tl'J P," UT; AL O71iH
The Mivipter for Thfon. Tavid. fairboirxj
LA' PA**, TY FO1P LliTIj?. O TICY
Yhe De) art! rlent 0Tyv~ ~~ 2r
Oct~ 15 No, 1111 jA!: lTA. CTIOTT IUC _ J L -CC) N
it NI. 11 PPO TNTi'. tE~ TO Uj~, Li DlPLOr-A. TIC
9 No,, 1126A YI. NTA&gt;-CTIC El'CPL0LATIOTT FR. O" L VAw'tON EdSE
The Dejpaatrent of thie -Navly-
No. 1105
Vol 11101)
No., 1-119A S-HIPP rTT1 COOT. OL BXC3B ETS
SH I'PP I FG GCONI~.[) DL~~ L~ I~
' L~' ACA~~" CONVO-IS ON THE MO~ v7
With the Oola* pCtiWlto of
Ti e Govc-ramen) t Pubic 1lat icns Off ice,
a' r 1. 2L-n ei t-HP) uue, ( J'hiF~ A~, C'
C3t0
Oc ll Nc,, 1104 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
in the
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES,
Tuesda 23rd October, 1962
Honourable Members will bi aware of President
Kennedy's broadcast in relation to Cuba,
It is a declaration of historic importance.
He has demonstrated that offensive nuclear weapons are
being installed by the Soviet Union in Cuba and that the
Americas are therefore being submitted to a very grave threat.
at close quarters, The President has demonstrated the decei
practised by the Soviet Union, and its determination by threat
of qgression to terrorise nations whose only wish is for
peace. We commend the President's statement. Though
inevitably dramatic, it was in essence defensive. We
appreciate his reference to tihe vital importance of regional
defensive agreements agreements which are authorised by the
United Nations Charter and which are necessary for the common
safety of those living within the region, We welcome the
readiness of the U. S. A. to bring the matter promptly before
the United Nations. Both in his broadcast and in a personal communication
to me this morning, the President has indicated that
he is requesting an urgent meeting of the United Nations
Security Council at which the American Ambassador would
present, on behalf of the United States, a resolution calling
for the withdrawal of missile bases and other offensive
weapons in Cuba under the supervision of United Nations
observers. We have instructed our own Ambassador to the
United Nations to do all in his power to support the passing
of this resolution, We do not under-estimate the gravity of the
situation, a gravity profoundly demonstrated by both the
tone and substance of the President's broadcast, We hope
that his statement and the steps to be taken pursuant t it
will bring home to tho Soviet Union the nature of the
consequences which may flow from its overseas policies,,
Indeed the whole matter will serve to test whether the Soviet
Union's constant advocacy of poace possesses either shoarity
or substance. 



AU0) r. IVAL3* A. U, P?. IMART PRODUCEiS UI\ IION
fCN 2~ R ,-) rZf T r 1L 6
e iePieM~ itr the~ RJ. hon. R Me: n zicoe-
, Li d ies and. Gentlemcn
I thin~ lk 1 will foVollow my u lprdn; course and
decla-re th e Confcrence open, Anything, I have to say thlen is
9but TeConfirence Is now Oran,
1 i. ave recollections of teA P.? 0 th. at go back,.
a long ti. me., They are rnot all goode, I have forgo: ten hovw
long ago i-t was tbhe belvtr parit of twenity years ei; en
perac -bu Iremember going to 1Wrrnahibooil ' Jere any of
y%: ou there that night9 It ias a very wet., &amp; dxaughity n: gh&amp;, t, just
a very dra-ughty day, Th-je blew fr-Loi behind
the olatfOrm at th~ e Town Ha1 nd( iv(-wore overcoalts a t tne
top table; masses of food and drink.. z st.-i.. nngely ernougi, but
no tiimle to apply ours'ilves to anny of tlhe;. j3, becau-: e theare wo(-re
tweTntynirie speechaes ( Laughter) and mqy good ftrieiid, tihe Dote
A1I. En McDonaid, v. who had -oersuaded me % to go, taci ! lecl me again
a yeor or t-vo jate; r and cd " You must, cor." e. 0110!, 11 1 Said,
711 don't think I can go ; rug tetnn speeches a gain.,"~
Ihad to I.-sten to twerntyeighit, you s ee,. ( Laughte,). So,
-1) yr. ow? 1 didnit go Yei d reporteu atrad ta hr a
been a ; narked. improveiaeAu-you hnad oii. Ly twen tvthlre a ( Laughter)
Lt tiI-U-he Ii: iliara t Con fererloc,
But ith. o:. se we-?-e conja: atively early days. wore. nit
thle y' And i muist seoy, p.:, rKcuay i1-the State of Victoria 9
M17olt. Mta n d morng oSrinoOoutli A-ustralia and intLo
thie hiverina and nrew vrith ver y clo: se tissociat. I-ons with Tasmania,
th") e AO + PC La s b e. cmrce ra a and highJ. y-respecte'. bod~ y
Ce1rbracing, of ccursef, myMany aspeets of rural liffe. I -3M
always delig~ ted: 1 to fnd. bodiLes + iho are-actvivoe in this sense,
becai1sSC unt ,4.1 we hav , e reached that sta-cge of perfect wbsdo. T inl
which~-1 edtoha1': aet-h --J s. Ldo ~ ga it'sa a -very oodI
-LifLrtg to htear botI sides of thie quesin. An I av e
pa! rti-cuiariy consoicLus of in -hrntt + ies
have Lad an L.+ L tca.--ñ aCL. p: b m and weLave no--vjr
OX, coutroae2 an exter.-nal erobLom-develo. ping fairly quickly., Ja ch
of thI-ese problems ' concerns pncd11-h -nd ustries that you
s p eak f o r The i1nternal probleri is t! he problem of rnaintai:.-Ing
a high rate of irnigralk-ion. encoiaragirng the davelop: aent; of-L
secondarry and. tertCiary industry, as the industriLes whi. cl can
give employment to a rapidly-g-owing poato -tee are
Vep' 1m,, otalnt niatters, We nlever must consider thIem I nevrer
do myselIf witUhout :-omembering that each. of' those matters can
put OreSS'Ures on tLhe co st level i~ n Au!. stralia whI+ ich will ultimAtely
come back to the primaily produicer0And I hope you irill allow
moe sy tat as tI-e hec-ad of the Goverrnment, I take some
pleasure out of the thiought thiat for a long time no-, w, the, better
part of two years, there ' has bee.,, as viewed thI-rough-the consumer
price index, stab+ Llity0
Now what you want i-s stability of costs. lfh a t y ou
wrould like oven more to see iw-oulIid be a edconoff cos-Ls0And
( 3 0 00 06 b / 2 
ou2r great Jinternai -rob" -, T; is to See tha" t whatevor pressures we
put on tal-e ccriomy, Jhcnwevc'r much -ee encoura go. th'Ie grCWt. h of the-,
economy and. . Lin, nI 3; t17emc-ndously 1a oarat the grcwth of
A'ist~~~' haO rwh or0pap uj.&amp; Lato it should all, be done
on termis which enable the11-o or*. i. m-aryr industrie7, teget xot
Lflg -Indutri~ es, not only to survive, but to be proofitable arid
tIJo ex-oand as A astralia expands~, On the whole, we haven't been
e,: ntirely withaout success in that field, but this last year Or
eighteen months, several of -as as yeu Know have been iir-mersed
in thne problems of the Common Markct.
I thought I might just tell you a litt-le about that
this afternoon. I dontt want to detain you too lon, But these
are great problems end a Prime Ministers' Conference is in a
sense not a very suitable piece of machinery for dealing with
them. A lot of us, particularly old-fashioned fellows like
myself, look back cn the Comrnonwealth and think of a few
countries Gireu-t Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand
what you the " old Corimonweicalth" where we hlad a greet
deal of commrunity of inte~ rest, and you could really have a
Conference and discuss most of your poroblems prett'-. y affoct,. ively.
But -the Commonwalthi today has growna enorm'u sly, This last
time in London, we had sixteen Pri. mo Ministers, orL their
representatives, sitting at a long table, each accompanied by
a Minister or two., a coip-le of ot'ficials, so that in the rjsult,
we had in this Conference room not less th-An * 100 people. And
thr-m becomes rather like a public meetLing, Itts not very easy
to got intimate and matey with 10C, people at a Conferexnce, as
you no doubt have discove-, ed., ( Lauighter)
But more than that, we haave i* Lnterests wh1ich are
diverse, We are greatly concernod, Ourselves, nbout our exports
of whaeat, of mutton and lamb,, of beef and, 1 voci and dairy products,
sugar, of metals i~ n various forms matters o) f this kind
greatly concern and they conicern Canada, or some of them. do3
they concern New Zealand, or seme of themr do; but thney don t
greatly-concern an Asian country, except perhaps in some romrote
s po ts f or s ugear0 T'hey donlt gr. eatly concern a West Indian
countr;-excep.! for sugari: and the result is thlat we rapidly found
-that we had a series 01' diverse-interests0 The Asian members
of the ComrInnwa. thl Co) u-. d freelIy discuss the prrrticular problems
that they had Like textiles arid matters of that sort, and tea.
The Arancountries were greatlyv concornod about a vairiety of-Ltropi
-cal r)-oductS, some of whiclh, of course, affect us in
New Gluinea, and the Wes-st Z-ndies ,, ereagreatly concerned, of
couse aoutsur as we ara. and othier tropical pr&amp;. oct~ cts,
i~ n th e long run, the-1refore, we came to realise th--at the future
of Aistralia Is inter-ests depeDndod upon a concentra tion of affort
by oursolvcs end Canada and 11ew Zoaland upon -the matters which
primarily co-icern us,
On those topics the fact was, when the Conference
met, that the negotiations botweon reat Britain and the SI~ X had
not gone very far, There had been considerable discussion about
cornmmdity agreements. li ll say sometiiing about that in a
m-. oment, But on ail the other commodities thuft 1 have referred
tthere had been no no-gotiat-ion3 There had been a great
deal of to and fro between ourselves and Great Britain, for
example, through offficials and Ministers, including myself, but
no actual neg-otiation. 3 iA1l thatl is going on now, and until
It is concluded, we won kno the nature of the bargai0 W
do know that if', being con-stantly informed as we will be ais to
hor it is going on, getting near-the ond of thne period, we want
to have a farther conference za that we may, on the spot withl
Grreat Britain, ompha13sise Our views, we can have it. That being
so, I dont at all exclude the possibility that somebody will
have to pack his bag-s and engage inthis kind of discussion again, 
Tt s ea-y. The Six tool; years to cre-ate theo
Treaty of Pome ye;; rs o-f di fl~ aic-ne go tiation, n hrfr
you can hardly wondc-r a t it if The-ir attituda is~ " 1VIl1 it
took us a long time to get t-eTrnoaty of Rome. You dori t think
ar going to r'eopen tic waol~ e busi1necs ag-ain, do youcev
1. s h: lghiy anderstandab-le,, But, of course, it is not theono.
of the argumant, J-ust as Great Britain atahsL mu
political importance -this is undoubtedlyr true to going j-n-to
Europe, so I have a pretty shrewd idea,, that most of the European
nations also attachi importance to Great, Britain. going in because,
this will create a stronger Wstern Europe and that's wha-t theyi/
alI want, 0 They Xnow that it can~ t be as strong as it otherwise
wboeu l f Geat ritin is standing aslde from it.
Therefore I think we ought to assxae one of the
facts of life, that the British Government wants to go in for
-Doli-tical reasonis and that the European nations, with one
posibl exepton9also want Great Britain to go inl for
political reasons. Well that's thieir judgment, not ours. We
dontthave to determiine Zhat question, But it doesma I
thiink, that one shouldn't despair too quickly abou-t something
reasonable being hammered out en thce economic side as the price
of entry,, Mind you I hiaven't yct seen any symptoms of it,,
vl,, v read a 8reat I3ca! so far about Phasing out all the old
preferences by 1970,. -whicha is moromTy postponing the evil hours
not avoiding i-t0 B-L't We kncw whlat we want and the Britishi
Government knows wvhat we want on theAnse matters aInd I've no doubt
-that Mr. Heath as the chief negotiator will. do h1is best to
achnieve the rfesults -that we are after.
But there.. was one aspect1 of tUhe Conference in w'. ich
I felt that we had made somec headway0You will all remcmbor
itts years now sin1ce we first began, part. Lcula(-, rly through Mr,
4o1E1A(.. n at vnrious ConforenCes, tdirect at-tention to the ,-jnde--
l. ying fact of international, trade, a asLeaittdxe. heo
sInce the war, and thiat Is that thie primary exporting countries
like ; Iustvalia have ha7_ d theo terms of ty, ade move against triem
steadily, year by year,. ' The price of what we buy has risen out
of proportilon -to tii price of what we.. rE ell, anrd the te-rms of
i-rade for a priinrary-pivoduciLng and. exporting country have fallen
steadJ1. ly, lnde&amp; d IF th-irk they cre 4+ 0 per cent0 worse now thian
they were eight or ten years ago,,
We've boon directing at-tention to this and sa ying,
in ef-fect5 to theo nations of th-e old wol-ld, the rich, industr!., aliZed
nations, " There is not muchi point in your hLar.&amp; ing out mlin
and mill1ions of eolI ars or pounds to help developing countries if,
having ihelped them to develop thoir productlion, you refu~ se to buy
their product on reasciiable torms0 1This is crazy, anld we have
been saying so for years. T-Ihea ve pointed out that an increase
of P trifling porcentago In the prices of-: primary products b-oughtJ
by these industrialized countrics from overseas, an increase of'
trifling percentage would mere tha-n compensate for the loss of
financinl aid that has been gi-ven0
It is oractical and sensible and. therefore we have
constituted ourselves thlie great advocato for international
coimodity agreements de~ s-Lined to produce payable prices for these
conuiodities -and some stability of'th price level and some stable
assurance of marketS for th", ese conmoditi--s0 Now this is
tremendously importar-, n,, It, of cours-c. doesn't cover the w-, hole
field., You ca' solvo 113' these pr-oblems by commocdity ag. ese
but it is not difficutlt to thllin 0of a few in whiich the existence
Of commodity agreernents subs cribe-d to by all the relevant countries,
bothi sellers and buyers, would be of tromendous value to a country
like our own. * 0 0 a a 0 // 4 
lWell., they have had a good deal of discussion about
thatt t Brussels, They had particularly been decling with
cereals and in Uarticular, in that bracket, with. whato Now,
we have had a rather fluctuating experience of international
wheat agreements and one of our principal buyers over a term
cf years, Great Britain, has quite frankly never been very
keen on commodity agreements. For a long time, she didn't
associate herself with the International Wheat Agreement.
She was never very keen on it, and that, of course, is something
you can understand. There was what was called, in the early
part of the century as part of the policy
in Great Britain, " the cheap breakfast table". This is an
intelligible doctrine. ' If we in Britain can buy our foodstuffs
cheaply," the argument ran, " and sell our industrial commodities
at a good price, well, we overcome our balance of payments
problem and we are able to do things for other people in the
world," Now that's very admirable, but the people who grow
the commodities and who sell them and see them bei. ng destroyed
in price by a temporary glut or messed around because of some
loss of market or some particular treatment in another country,
don't get much comfort out of knowing that people are buying
these goods cheaply in some other country.
Therefore, we were very anxious this time to see
whether these negotiating countries were at last prepared to
go seriously into the business of negotiating international
commodity agreements, And the best thing that we came out
of the Prime Ministers' Conference with was the communique
which indicated that every Commonwealth country, includin!
Great Britain, wanted to secure commnodity agreements of this
kind, providing for a proper access to the market and a
remunerative price level and that the countries of the Six
were in agreement, in broad principle, that commodity agreements
ought to be made,
Now this is a good step forward. It won't be worth
a thing if, having been written down, it is forgotten about,
but I can assure you that we are ourselves, keeping up the
pressure and, happily, keeping it up with the assistance of
the United States of America, with the President of which
had some most useful discussions earlier this yearo
The United States is now armed with the Reciprocal
Trade Act which gives the Administration of the United States
great power to negotiate international arrangements and I think
between one thing and another, if we can keep up the pressure,
and we certainly will, we may very well expect to see, in the
next year, effective steps in the direction of practical,
determined negotiation, genuine negotiation for some commodity
agreements. If we could start with wheat and get one est, blished
there with the relevant countries involved in it, this
would be a trial balloon' this would be something that would
have great value in itself and by demonstrating that such
agreements to preserve access and stabilize prices and keep
them at an effective level can be achieved,
All I want to say to you, ladies and gentlemen,
is that I have been in a lot of these discussions this year
over there twice, in America twice to have talks there and
you need to have a lot of patience, I remember when I was a
small boy in the country, somebody told me that the seed that
would grow most quickly in the garden ( I was very young then;
I wasn't in politics; I was about eight)( Laughter) was a
radish. I'd plant them today and then at the end of the week
pull one up to see how it was going. Well, we can't do that
on this business. We will, I undertake to you, be unremitting COO&amp; o/ 
iTh oil those Lratters., VIc will. righ. t ;: lrn ,.--. rnugh
t-ie rert. ianing ngotia tions ' be in conston; and pec-l-Ps daily
associaticn with thp . Er Llis-i negotiators on the cfficiz. l level
ei weWl9a altm reserve to ourelves the right to
say bofo: e finality is reached9 that we w; a nt Once more -to be
her:;) d at; the topo leve'l in order that before they make the
co., ncJ~ vded bargain, our interests will have been considered and,
so far as we can b~ ring it about, reasonably proteocted,
Now I am sorry to talkh so long about t;. iat, Sir
It's all very old hat to you but I thought that spoalking
directly to you 1lke -this you might be interested in one o~ o
two of the aspects of a Cornforence tiic high paint of a series
Of Conferences the most impartan-for -as, ever, in time of
pea Ce, But -the whole objective must beg and. is, to improve
our terms of trade, to give to ti-is exporting industries a pro per
chance of risiLng-markets9 increasing access to thle buying
comamunities of tbhe world and some price assurance which will
moan that'k they can go along and produce witha thae-i cost level
reasonabl. y held and therefore withi ev-ery possibility of expanded
production. That's may' policy, as you rnigiat -sayq in a few
sentences and having expounded it to you very briefly, I'll
probably now go back anda get into some other argLunonts in
t~ trhter place, burt I remind you that before I began, I declared
-this Conference opon,
1 conclude by sayinig that I wish you and your
organisation tfte g.-eatest possible success. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT.
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 24th October, 1963.1
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister).-by leave-Mr. Speaker,
on 22nd May of this year, I made a comprehensive
announcement about a review
of Australian defence, of the defence programme
and of defence expenditure. I
remind the House that that was a time
before any announcement had been made
about an election and before panic had
broken out on the benches opposite. The
decisions that I then announced involved
an average increase in the defence vote,
over a period of five years, of the order
of œ 41,000,000 a year. At the same time,
though I stated the nature of the extended
Mirage fighter procurement, which will give
our fighter forces unsurpassed strength, I
pointed out that neither the programme nor
the figures included any re-equipment of
the strike-reconnaissance force. I quote
what I went on to say, because I think it
is important that this be kept in mind. I
remind the House that it was said on 22nd
May. I went on to say-
This is an important matter. The Canberra
is by no means obsolete...
I wonder whether I may interrupt myself at
that point, Sir, to say that to-day I have
10857/ 63. observed that the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr. Galwell), who goes into print on these
matters so hastily, has had his views published
in a not-always-reliable newspaper. I
want to quote from this report, but I do
not vouch for the accuracy of it. Oh dear,
no! I quote it for what it is worth, for it
records the Leader of the Opposition as
having said-
One thing is certain. The Government could
not have gone into the election campaign without
having at least some plausible story to show
that it was at least-
Perhaps last was meanttrying
to replace the Canberra which has been
obsolescent since 1949.
1 am always willing to concede the chances
of error in that journal.
Mr. L. R. Johnson.-What journal is it?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-The Sydney
" Daily Mirror
Mr. L. R. Johnson.-The Daily
Mirror Sir ROBERT MENZ~ IES.-Yes-your
official organ. I am always prepared to
concede the possibility and, indeed, the 
probability, of error in that journal. I
take leave to point out to the House that,
so far from the Canberra being obsolescent
in 1949, not until early in 1951 was I
invited to go to an aerodrome in England
to name this new aircraft " Canberra" and
to see it taken up by the test pilot
on a demonstration flight. Therefore,
long before it was born, it appears
to have been obsolescent. This introduces
a new problem into obstetrics.
With that human aside, I go on to quote
what I said in May-
This is an important matter. The Canberra is
by no means obsolete; it is still being used by
overseas air forces, including those of Nato. But
we are giving close consideration to the future
as we must. There are, of course, great financial
problems, but there are vital questions as to the
availability of suitable types to meet our requirements.
Having regard to our special geographic
circumstances, we must consider range, the
capacity to perform both reconnaissance and
attack and the ability to use existing runways and
services. An on-the-spot evaluation by a team of
qualified experts is necessary, as it was in the
selection of the Mirage. Such a team will be
sent overseas at an early date, under the Chief
of the Air Staff to investigate and report. Then,
of course, the Government will consider the matter
further in the light of the report.
We sent the evaluation team overseas and in
due course received its report. It was clear
that, subject to problems of the time-table
and of payment and of interim provision to
supplement if necessary the Canberra force,
the evaluation team regarded what was then
called the TFX in the United States as the
most modern and complete answer to our
requirements. I then decided to ask the Minister for
Defence ( Mr. Townley) to undertake the
very onerous task of going to the United
States to examine these problems more
closely on a government level. He had, of
course, one further objective. He was not
to discuss aircraft in isolation from, strategic
needs and priorities, but he was to have
close political consultation with the United
States Administration on those very matters.
It is very easy, if I may say so to the Leader
of the Opposition, to say, " We will procure
a Canberra replacement as if all
we had to do was to go, so to speak, to
the shop and buy it over the counter.
Honorable members will realize that this
is not the position to-day. Both of the two
most recently designed reconnaissance
bombers, the TSR-2 in England and the TFX
in the United States, are still in the developmental stage. It will of necessity be some
time before they become available. The
cost of such modern instruments of war is,
of course, enormous, although the cost tends
to come down if very large orders are
placed. The Minister for Defence has the great
advantage of being on very close and
friendly terms with the American defence
administration. My colleagues and I felt
that he would have a reasonable prospect
of fruitful discussion. I am happy to tell
the House that his mission has been most
remarkably successful; so successful that I
have found it necessary to advise the United
Kingdom Government that we propose to
go ahead with the arrangement he has
negotiated. Before going on to state the substance of
the arrangement that my colleague has
made in Washington, I would like to say
that I have observed some inspired statements
in one or two newspapers to the
effect that our discussions in the United
States were either accelerated or affected by
some statement made in this House by the
Leader of the Opposition. I did not have
the goad fortune to hear it. The answer to
this is that we had our first full and
promising report from the Minister for
Defence before the Leader of the Opposition
spoke at all. Having received it and
studied it, we were attracted by it, but we
sent one or two inquiries to him so that
he might clear up a few outstanding points.
This he has done, with the result that I will
in a few moments announce it to the House.
The whole business of re-equipping the
Air Force is extremely complex. It cannot
be solved by a few rhetorical phrases. It
has in the present case required most
exhaustive technical investigations by our
highest technical advisers and this rather
remarkable negotiation which has been conducted
by the Minister himself in the
United States.
In the result, the defence programme I
announced, which represented a large
increase, will be very substantially added
to. But the arrangements made by my
colleague will unquestionably result in a
very substantial saving to Australia, as
against the. original estimates of TFX costs
as formulated when the evaluation mission
made its inquiries. To this must be added 
the other practical defence advantages
which will appear.
I will now state in agreed language the
nature of the arrangements that have been
made. In pursuance of the Government's
policy of improving Australia's defence preparations,
the Minister for Defence has
been in Washington discussing with Mr.
McNamara, the United States Secretary of
Defence, the re-equipment of Australia's
bomber squadrons, together with other
defence matters of mutual interest. As a
result of these negotiations, the following
most favorable arrangements have been
made with the United States: The Government
of Australia has agreed to purchase
from the United States two squadrons of
F-I IIA aircraft, which used to be called the
TEX. By special arrangements with the
United States of America, the aircraft will
be available to Australia at the same time
as delivetties are made to the United States
armed forces, which will be from 1967
onwards. I emphasize that date because of
rumours that made it a couple of years
later. Financial arrangements are entirely
satisfactory to Australia.
In a most favorable package deal, if I
may use that phrase, the United States has
agreed to supply the aircraft on the basis
of a purchase price that includes one year's
initial spare parts including engines, ground
handling equipment, training aids, and the
initial and operational training of crews,
which would be carried out in the United
States. A further important and valuable consideration
is that the United States has
agreed to integration of the Royal Australian
Air Force and the United States armed
forces logistic pattern so that Australia will
be able to draw future requirements of
spare parts and equipment from American
stocks and therefore secure the advantage
of much lower prices than would be the
case if Australia itself had to procure
independently the full range of stores.
The financial arrangements for the purchase
of the F-il11A aircraft enables Australia
to spread its payments to suit its own
budgetary requirements over a period of
years. As Australia will commence progress
payments immediately, a special and
important part of the deal is that Australia's
payments will attract interest from the United States until such time as payments
are in fact made to the United States contractors
for the aircraft. The F-il lA aircraft
will now be available to Australia at
least two years earlier than had previously
been thought possible. At the same time,
in case the years between now and 1967
were to see a deterioration in the international
situation, the Government has been
concerned that Australia should have, if
necessary, some additional long range strike
and reconnaissance capacity in the R. A. A. F.
over the intervening years.
Arrangements have now been made to
ensure that there will be suitable strike
reconnaissance aircraft available to the
R. A. A. F. until the F-i111A comes into
operational service. Agreement has been
reached with the United States that up to
two squadrons of B47E aircraft will be
made available to Australia with no leasing
charge to the Australian Government. Australian
personnel will be trained by the
United States Air Force on the basis of
reimbursement for actual costs, and ground
handling equipment and logistic support
provided at satisfactory prices.
Performance details of the F-il11A are
classified-that is, they are not available for
general consumption-but it can be said
that it is a two-man bomber which can fly
at two and a half times the speed of sound
and well above supersonic speed at sea level.
It can take off and land from short and, if
necessary, rough airfields. It can fly to any
place on earth within 24 hours.
The F-il11A programme embarked upon
by the United States is the largest programme,
both in numbers and in cost, of
any aircraft since World War II. It is, in
other words, the last word. Twenty-two
prototype and development aircraft are
scheduled for delivery to the United States
in 1965 and we are told -that we will secure
our first deliveries in 1967.
The B47E is now used in the Strategic
Air Command of the United States and will
be in squadron service, particularly in this
part of the world, for some years. It has
proved a most versatile and effective aircraft
in operational service to date. Its full
operational capability is still partly classified
that is to say, partly not for general publication-
but it has a sub-sonic speed of 
over 600 miles an hour and a ceiling of over
40,000 feet. It is also particularly effective
at low level. This is important. It is a
six-engine aircraft with a range of over
3,000 miles and a capacity to carry over
20,000 lb. of conventional bombs. It is
equipped for air-to-air refuelling.
Putting all controversy on one side, I am
sure that all honorable members will agree not only that my colleague's mission reflects
credit on himself but also -that its success is
an indication of the genuine goodwill which
the United States has towards our country
and of the high opinion which the United
States Government has of the capacity of
the Australian armed forces and of the
reliability and importance of Australia as a
nation and law in this area of the world.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



OPENING OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES AND
PRODUCTION BUILDINGS OF MERCK SHARP&amp;
DOHME ( AUSTRALIA) PTY. LTD. AT SOUTH
GRANVILLE, N. S ON 26/ 10/ 1962.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. RG. Menzies
Sir Mr. Deputy Mayor, Mr. Uren, Mr. Connor and Ladies and
Genhemen I think I ought to begin by coming clean with
you about something. We've a lot of problems on our plate
at this moment at Canberra and having, to put it in the
vulgar fashion, managed to get rid of Parliament last
night I was horrified to find that I had either talked
mysell into coming here or been talked into it. So I
flew down this morning and I am due back home at six
o'clock, I don't remember how it came about because, you
know, this business of politicians, particularly reactionary
conservative politi1cians like me ( Laughter) opening
works is a very dubious one. I frequently, when I am
opening somL. factory somewhere it may not entirely apply
here today but I frequently find my opponent, the sitting
Member, standing by, and the more enthusiastically I commend
this wonderful piece of development, the more enthusiastically
he counts the additional votes he will get at the next
election. ( Laughter) Still, you can't have it both ways.
I am very gzLateful to the Deputy Mayor for
having so pleasantly welcomed me here this afternoon. All
I can say is that I used to have a very high regard for
Parramatta I still have momentarily because Parramatta
has long since had the admirable habit of electing to the
Federal Parliament a supporter of mine, but now the busybodies
have got to work and there has been a redistribution.
It isn't through yet, and I understand there are yet problems
to overcome but I am told by the wise men t hat as a result
of the redistributilon, Parramatta will become a hostile camp.
I leave it to you, Mr. Deputy Mayor, to see that that doesn't
happen. ( Laughter) I would just like to say this about the Company
and about the new development here: when I looked through
the record, I thought that here we had a most astonishing
sto~' y of growth in ten years0 I repeat, of course, ten years,
because that proves conclusively that the success of this
Company and its amazing growth has occurred in spite of the
fact that I have been Prime Minister over the same period.
( Laughter) But it is a remarkable story of growth and it
demonstrates two things, both of which perhaps we need to
understand in Australia even better than we have.
The first is that the great ingredient in growth,
to which must be added skill and all sorts of other things,
is confidence in the country in which you are establishing
yourself. This is a pretty strange, confused world hgettin
stranger and more confused almost every minute, and here n
are not all that many countries in the world in whom some
long-established enterprice can feel confidence so that i. t
may invest its money and its talent and its experience in
that country. It has really been a very great assurancd to
all Australians, a very great source of pride to all Australians
that in this period since the war, Australia has attracted the
confident investment and skill of so many people on the other
side of the world. Peopjle lose confidence, of courses very
./ 2 
-2
easily or some people do, I am happy to say that this
Company is a splendid example of a body which has at no stage
lost confidence but has gone right forward. Now that to me
is a splendid thing confidence in Australia,, But it also
exhibits, of course, confidence in the future0 It takes the
long view. I remember a few years ago delivering one
night what people were pleased to call a Zittle Budget, in
wtich we clamped down on the motor car industry this is
about five years ago through some adided taxation. When
I arrived in my office the next morning, having made this
powerful but, of course I don't need to tell you, most
unpopular speech thatis no novelty for me my staff said
to me, " You know we don't know whether you ought to be given
the Victoria Cross or sent to a hospital for the insane," and
I said, " Why, whatts wrong?" They said, " Do you know that
youtre lunching today, you're giving a luncheon party to
the representatives of one of the greatest motor ear organizations
in the world?" So I screwed my courage to the sticking
point and went down and acted the host and tried to make up
by amiability for the terrible things that I had. done the
night before. But the head man from overseas smiled at me
and said, " You know, I heard you last night," I said " Yesq
well, I'll take it, What is it?" He said, " I entirely agreed
with you. I don't see what else you could have done. Of
course, it will cost my organization something, but you don't
want to get it into your head that we've become a big organization
by just looking forward a year at a time; we look forward
twentyfive years at a time. This won~ t be the only knock we'll
have a little knock In the course of twentyfive years but
our planning is based on the fact that we will develop and
grow steadily in the long run over that period of time."
That's elementary enough9 but it isn't everybody who thinks
like that. I am perfectly certain that those who are
responsible for this Company do think like that0 What they
have done already in the last ten years is conclusive evidence
of their long-range thinking,
The other thing that I wanted to say to you
is that I gathered, I hope rightly, thatamong the plans of
this Company are plans to produce at least one commodity for
which tiley design to have a substantial export sale. Now
that when it comes off, will be a very good thing. I
cons~ antly find myself saying to manufacturers of all kinds
that we must get further and farther away from the idea that
the only things we can export are the products of the soil.
They will be the main things that we export for a long long,
time. They are of tremendous importance. But we must more
and more translate the undoubted skill of the Australian, his
undoubted capacity to do his workjust as well as anybody
else in the world, into getting for our manufactured commodities
increasing markets, particularly in the rising, newer countriespolitically
newer countries of the East and North from us.
It is nothing much to the point for anyboay to say, tOh, well,
you know that's difficult0Of course it's difficult, My
experience has been that almost everything is difficult, but
that if you try bard enough, it may ultimately become easy,
We must have, more and more from Australia
export markets which arise frjom what I will call broadlyth
manufacturing processes, And for a very good reason, or
two good reasons. / 3 
-3
One is that we have, periodically, problems in
our balance of' payments. The price of wool slumps and then
our overseas reserves begin to rtun down. If the price of'
wheat slumps or we have a drought or something of that kind,
down goes our export income. Our import bill doesn't move
around in this fashion. It's pretty steady and has a
disposition to grow, but our export income can fluctuate
with seasons and world prices to an almost alarming extent,
Therefore, whatever Government is in office in Australia will
find itself occasionally maybe every few years forced to
take some particular measures to protect our overseas funds
and assure our international solvency. I want to get away
from that. I don't like these Emergency measures, And the
way to get away from it is to put our exports on an increasingly
stable basis and the exports of manufactures from Australia
will contribute to that more than perhaps anything else could.
So, Sir, wh-an I heard that you had your eye on the
export fteld, I thought, " This is a splendid thing". Now I
have given you the general reason for it. I will conclude
by saying that we now have, of course, a particular reason
for wanting to increase our exports, because we are confronted
almost imminently by the problem of the Common Market.. and
however the negotiations work out, it will be certainly true
that we will have to put increasing pressure on a drive for
new markets not just new markets for old th-ings but new
markets for new things and that is whty the variety of things
to be exported, extend-ing into the chemical field, extending
into a hundred and one different varieties of ac-tivity, will
be of such tremendcus importance to us,
Vie are not just to content ourselves by saying
" Well, there are certain traditional exports, and they will do."
We must develop untraditional exports,) naw things, produce
new things in Australia, not be afraid to produce them; because
if the gentlemen who have spoken to you this afternoon feel
confidence in this country, what should you and I born in'this
land, feel about our own country? T have an unlimited
confidence irn it and I hope that people will not allow their
proper confidence to be withered too promptly by an occasional
cold windt Sir, I have the greatest pleasure in declaring
the offices and plant open. 



E ELY IN DEX NO. 43
-W'EK ENINTGOCCjIjR 272_ 92
COMMO'e\ 0 L i OF_ A" U1 ST TRAIT A
Index of-Ministerial Stcatements Issued in Canber., ra
The Duty L Prime31M inister and Minister for Trade, the Rt. Hon,
John MIcw ei7n
Oct. 21 No. 1134A FOOD CAMPAIGTN IN MALT EAST AFRICA AND
HONG KONG
The Minister for Ncitional Develop t9 Senator the Hon. W. H.
pocner. M. M.
Oct. 25 No, 1147
26 No. 1157 LATEST APPROVAL OF OIL SEARCH SUBSIDY
PAYMl ENT S
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF CENfTRAL IUSTRALIA AREA.
The Minister for Defence. the Hon. Athol Townley.
Oct. 23 No. No, No, No. 1142 1144 1145
26 No. 1160 U. S. NAVY AIRCRA FT TO CONDUCT GECiiAGNETIC
SURVEY IN AUSTRiALIA
S. E. OT. O MILITiRY PLA NNING OFFICE, B, . TGKOK
R; IiF *. ND USAF2 CANBERPAS IN JOINT EXERCISE
THREE R. A. F. VULCA-NS TO FLY Pi ST FOR GAMES
A1T PERTH
rAAdF HELICOPTER SELECTION TEM TO GO
OVERSEAS
The Minister for Labour and National Ser-ice, The Hon. William
M cMahon
1136A
1150 1152 SKILLED WORICERS
DElAITH CF MR,-WILLIAM FUNNELL9 I. S. O,
FIRST NA' TIONAjL CONFERENCE ON TRAINING FOR
SKILLS IN MELBOURNE
The Postmaster-Gennral. The Hon, C, W. Davidson
Oct. 21 No0 1.33
23 No, 1143 EXTENSION OF NA. TIONAL T. V. SEC', RVICE TO
COUNTRY A REAS PROGRESS
ENQUIRY INTO THE MAl KING OF FILMS FOR T. V.
The Minister raticn~ TJher Hon. Downer, MP.
Oct. 25 No. 1248
26 No, 1156
The Minister for BIGGEST SINGLE A IR-LIFT OF MIGRANT\ TS FROM
BRITA1IN
GREEK MIGRA/ NT GIRLS ARRIVING BY OJ! NTAS JET
, xternal A'iffairs9The HcnSir Garfield Balvwidkc
Oct. 21 Ne. 1134B A-lUjSTRALIANIT DELTG-. TIOY TO 14th ANNUAL MEETING
OF COLOI: BO PLAN CONSULTATIVE COT: MITTEE
23 No. 1143, UNITED NATIONS DAY
I 214 NoT, 1144!, ; lPPOIN'-I'ENT OF HEA" D OF THE A', USTRALIA. N
PERPLA NENT MISSION\\ TO EURATOM
26 No. 1160j A USTRA-, LIATN ApID FOR VIET HAM11
The Minister
Oct, 25 No.
TheMinister for Primary Industry, the Hon. C. F. Adermann
1149AiJSTRILI, Aq I/ HET BOA', R. D IPOINTMklEYNLT OF
MEMBERS
for the Interior, the Hon. Gordon Free-th
Oct. 23 No, 1139LIMITS ON L;* KE USE
he Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Grton
Oct. I, I?
i, No, NTo. No. No,
No. No. No. 1136 1135 1137 1138
1146 1155 1158 TRIBUTE T-O 60 YEARS.' OF NA'VAL SERVICE
FRjGA-TE TO VISIT OUTLIG ISlANDS
NE'W-i FRJI ATE BEGINS SEA TRIA: LS TODAY
1NRANS PRES" 7T CT -E( C, Ul TO HOSPITAL
RECORD NAl'-VY BUDGET IiNG FOrI NEW EQUIPMENT
PjLPUA. N SAILOR SEL, EC'TED FOR GAMES
MlCHA'NICL -FAU LT DELA* YS DELIVERY VOYAGE a
Oct. 22
" i 25 No, No. No, 
-2
The Minister for HelhSeao h Hon. Harrie Wa~ de
Oct. 22. No. 3.137A" CO" N. AT SSISTANCE TO HOSPITA" LS
It 23 No. 11) 40 CHOLERI, PROC. LLMA-TICN
The Minister for Supply, The Al. len Fairhcill
Oct. 25 No, 1154
it 26 No. 1J. 58A U. S. TO L[ AUNCH ANNA.
N~. S . TFfM TO SURTP. VEY NEWV SA'-TELLITE
TRA" CKING SITES IN ; lUST2,' LIlA
The Minister for Air. The Hon. David Fairbairn
Oct. 25 No. 1153 CANBERRA BA'SE FOR RliF HELICOPTERS
21 No, 1134 NEW OFFICER COMMi. NDING FOR RAA,.'-F FIGHTER WING
" 21 No. 1134C RIJAF i'IRDRhOP WILL BE tNUTCRLCKER" LIFELINE
The Department of the Navy
No. 1132
No. 1151
No,, 1160B SEAITO EXECISQE RE'J. CHI'NG-' ITS PEAK
PROMINENT PUBLIC SERVANJ\ T J. RETIRES
SEAS&amp; r-CA,' PE" CONVOYS REACHING PORT
Wtli hn Cuinpliments of
The Govern-mont Dablic lRelations Office,
Parliament House, CANBTERTA', C. T._
Oct. 


PM No 77/1962The&nbsp;Prime Minister has sent the following&nbsp;message to Mr. Nehiru thirough the Australian&nbsp;High&nbsp;Commission in New Delhi
"'We would like you to know&nbsp;of&nbsp;our sympathy and support in the difficult&nbsp;situation on your northiern frontiers.&nbsp;The&nbsp;Australian Government has the greatest &nbsp;respect for the independent and courageousstand which the Indian Government and people are taking in the face of new acts of provocation threatening Indian territorial integrity. "CANBERRA
28th&nbsp;&nbsp;October, 1962.



P. M. No. 78/ 1 962
FOR PRESS AMPOL TANXER ALXT. LTO REPRESENTATIONS
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, today received
a deputation from the A. C. T. U. led by its President, Mr.
A. E, Monk, on the question of manning the Ampol tanker, " IP. J,
Adams." t The deputation proposed that the Commonwealth
Government should subsidise wages by at least œ Q5,000 a year so
that the operating company could use an Australian crew.
The Prime Minister rejected the proposal and,' in
doing so, drew the deputation's attention to Clause 21 of the
Agreement between the Commonwealth and Ampol covering the registration
of the s hi p. The Clause reads
" 121( 1) The said vessel shall be registered as a
British ship. The company may, but shall
not be obliged to, register the vessel in
Australia but should the vessel be registered
outside Australia the port of registration
shall be London in the United Kingdom.
On or before delivery of the vessel the
Commonwealth shall deliver to the company
all documents necessary to enable the vessel
to be registered in the Registry selected
by the company."
Mr. Menzies pointed out to the A. C. T. U. representatives
that when the proposal to subsidise the building of
the " 1P. J. Adams" was before Cabinet, Ampol made it a condition
to the placing of an order for building the vessel in Australia
that they should not be obliged to register the vessel in
Australia. The Government decided that it should, nevertheless,
agree to subsidise the building of the tanker at 4hyalla because
of the substantial employment this would create in the shipbuilding
and related industries.
Mr. Menzies further noted that Ampol's intention
to operate the vessel on the British registry had, in fact,
been known for a long time and had been the subject of questions
in the House of Representatives in 1958.
The Prime Minister added that, having entered into
an agreement with the company in the circumstances outlined, he
could not agree that the Commonwealth should now consider a further
and continuing subsidy towards the operation of the vessel.
CANBERRA, October, 1962. 



N. S W, C* 14DBER OF I4ANIJFACTUB. ES DINNTER
AT HOTE. L ATSTRDLIA, S'ThNEY
N ':? 1SI TOFcjhE.* i
S ehb the Rf-J-rig Mrister, R t. J1orn., IG Menzies
Sir, Your J ccellency and Gentlemen
I thirdk this is a splendid toast Australian
Industry, No doi; WLt thlis is a comprellensixe expression.
I can dwell on thte problems of pirimary iLndutry, touch
lig'atly on th e problems of secondary industry and go to
town on -the pro bleri of 1ertiairy incus try,, I tiir tihis
is* splendi. But before i begin -to anako wha,, t you Will be
delighted to know%-will be a very shlort sipeci it'~ s all
right, thle Lord Mayor has, stipul-jated for an hour ( T-aughter)-
* im. Kirby th-inks ho can comp-ss himself withi n thee quarters
of. an houir and so I am goig to make P very short. spe) ch; q
but before I do2 I worild. like to rnak%, asSI usually do, two
orelim-inary Observ. ations,,
The first iLs Tha t' i-hvo bcen h. er e boefore( L gt)
I can remsmlber one year wvIien profit and loss -, ccounts were
ra thler healthy-I-, whien I got a rg~ fL. l goo., d reception and
another year when I froze in my pla~ ce and thel -ic--cagulated
around ine,. ( Laughter) But I wn1 dwell, on thlese thiings.
Thie fact is that, looking a&amp; r-cand i was delighted to
find thaat there aie more yo Lzrg ma. n at the D-irmar than I ever
rememe( ein eoe ( Aplue) o, as your vresident
said to me, this may be merely the resuilt of t! he old adage
tt ur get. n old wihen y-ou -L~ rnk thIe poli-Jcez;. en look
youig, ( Laughl-ter) and of co~ urse, to , ne the pold ceme-. n have
looked childishly you-ag for' years and. year-s,, I ain bound to
s ay t o ycu, Mr, r~ ne th. at whoin I am being drivenl thr oughl
Sydney, your young paliceman 11o doubt wel~ l disciplinted by
you, always sal~ ute meo,, ( lraugt-ter) if I kept a diary I would
makle a note of thtfact, But th.-is ivC. a splendid thiing that
-in this Chiamber in a couna'ry In whicha m-anufactul-ring is going
to be more and%, iore iprattas the population grovis, as the
S-U-rengit[ 1 Of the coU; n'tx7y grows, you sliould have so mrany men who
ar. e young men, I wonder if I could tell you a story about that.
I have tried it on scoebody,, Soma of thle younger among you
may have forgotten thlat by some accident.-Lal circumstance, I was
Prime : KLinister cf the cvuntry in 1939 -it's only 23 years ago
and I hiad * brought bacIh Sir Brudenell Wite, tht great man, to
be Chnief of thle General. S-laff(, 1 was sitting in my office at
tile Victoria Barracks and he came in and we walked into town
together. Some of the mor-e travelled among you will know
Melbo~ urne, I( aughter) There is a road calle-. d St. Kilda Road,
Brudenell White and I, hie being at least fifteen, sixteen,
perhaps seventeen years older tlln me were walking in side
by side. He, slim and elegant and precise and I, as you
might suppose. ( Laughter) We ad thiat day been discus. sing
who oughlt to be given thLe conLmand of a division, because the
War was on,, Brudenell ; daite said to me, " You know. Prime
Minister, ( very courteously) I am a good deal older thllan you
are~ l Aknd I sort of shru-Lgged my sho0ulders at th-Iat i. f a s mwu ch
to says " Well, donft make too much of a poi-' nt of it", you see,
He towantto say to you is that Jit will fallt your
lot tomake many appointments i~ n your time; if you have a man
who has the brains and the character and thle quality and some
experience, never refuse to appoint him because you think he's
too young." Now that was brilliant advice. And he then went
00a &amp; OaO ao/ 
on -to add with a wry smile.) and I remeinbcr this because hie
vwas killed in an aircr; ., ft accident only nine months later,
" You know, wh,, en I was first the Chief Staff Officer of the
First Australian I was thirbyfour, and there hoave
been people so kind as to th-ik I didn't vake a moss of .1
Now this is something I have always remembered. And that's
why, whien I walked i~ n b~ tonight, I was so delighited to fee'L
that, hl have suffered froin the older members of the
Chamber, year after year, ( Laughter) theewl b Am
to come when ray success or will be a ble to deal with the bih
and. mpcming and intelli1gent membors or_* the Cliarbor, ( Laugneter)
( Applaus3) el tat' myfis preliminary observatioli,
Hy second is this--I haven~ lu been able to size up
yet completely who Might be here, but 1 have caught the eye
over there or S" ir Frank Packer, and I don't th-ink IL ought
to let the occasion pass, on our, first joint appearance in
your city, withoutv saying that the chall-enge for the, Atmrica's
Cup produced for Aust: calia moregoi~ 1l morc interest, more
ernthusiasm, more news in t'Pe United States of Areica than
anything else I can -rememer, ( 11ozar, ( h~ pplauze) c
was natural~ ly a little hurt rull th-is because ( Laughte~')
Lord knrow, VLve bleen thr~ ough th e United. States and tGrafficked
witti the great and made ptoerful spcUes yeL ya
after year. I -th. nk th ~ p3sLnis I v ncver ratd ro-re
than a quarter of a clms ( Laughcetr) And tie got t-wo column-S
a day, in every newspape-r Fi-ank, itts a fair thing to say to
yuon behialf' of all of us, th). a-t w aeveyfrtf' to 01ou
and those associatod with. you for' t1-is marvellous peeo
enterprise. ( Hoar, ( plcTa' , r il
Having said. thiat, Sir, 2' coma back -to my toast
Australian Industry -aind as ' T said. l, t~ s a t'r-Irartitoe affair,
but of course I krnow tha-t at hea-rt m-ost of YOU are mar, 7ufac-
Curers and therefore yc-. u are properiy and pi': ofounCLy initerested
iLn secondary indu-stry, There : L oin hp hn r w
things that I want to say toyou about thi. S8
First of' ali, as for ti-io attitude of Austra: lia tGo
nmaniufacturing, th2 ssur; is, closod Every party at every
rphase-4. modern Jaistralian histor-y believes i* n secondary
industry and believes in a polic( y of protaeotion. ( Hear, hear)
( Applause) I amn so oll now and doddering that I can remember
a timo whien people actually argued about protection and free
t r a d It secms intere sting tL. o go back on it,, 1 remember my
father in a lit. tle country village bir-ing the great prcotectionist,
Oddly onougli, he won the .1oca? 1 seat in Par-. liament and as his
protectionist views became better 1kno; wm, ho of cou'rse lost it,
I don't noeod to pursue that line any further. But all those
old false issues have grone, I don't think[ any man would be game
to stand up in any Par-liameont Federal or State and say that
he didn't believe in an effective meaure of protection for
effective Australian secondary industr-y0 And it is theoro,
And so that is where we all st.. and,
flut perhaps we occasionally have a temfttion to
look at our section of industry and to think thnat you can
look at it in a watertight co-_, partzment0OWll, Ilm a manufacturer
and thais is my prime interest and we have, inevitably,
differences from the primary indiistries and the secondary
industries; of course, i-n part1cular, from time to timre, with
the Goverrnment" ( whiich always means tha Covex'ninment c~ f t-e
Commonwealth) ( Laughter). Now, gen-Ltlemen, all I want to say
-to youa is this. The tiine bas come in Australia for us to
realise that our commnon interests are inuch-superior to our
-iLndividual interests, We are really moving in-to a new phase
of our history. I don't want to make so:-cme contentious speech
a* 0 a** 0e / 3 
abc-, uit heCormmonm Mark et but anybod. y ~ I red h nw il
Inow per ct'ly, well tat -in al' probabiliL ? Le pti
that way G.-( eea b Britain is going int;, o the CoLmon M3,.' Ket9 and
that Groat iBritair-zind e Si. ur who,-C a ltoh cre feel that
one of the great stroingth s about the Common Market will be
t~ tthey will have an enormous honze market; and. th'at the-refore
they can increaso their officiercy, their tL-Iurnov~ er, reduce
heir costs on the goods thit they sell t h re? o h
world including Australia. This is wher e manufacturers come
into Lhis -oictuc0, Now th-is is9 tilf-k in all pvrobability,
going to happen. Idother what have roead : racontly inproves the
bargaining position of Groat Britain or not, I don~ t venture
to say, except privately, but 1 tink thle truth is that this
enormous modern development is going to occ-ur and, of coarse1,
it prese-nts problem.,-to Australia0 So peozle triinik thal;
-nlss you fal~ l into a pa-siona, at fmidyu cL
treat the prlobleri sec iously0I o treat itscrioJ-sly, ThtiIs
is a great problem0Bu,, t. Lho-grea ter the prolom10 I the more
rea. l the problem, thJe les s rea-, son there is for an Aas tralian
to fall into a panic raboat it,, WeT have a highi tr-adition, I
thaink, of clar. ity of' mi-nd and of courage and dcioand
I-re Coll face these problem-' s -' T1hey carc great p,) roblems.
' You may be disturboa6 about a problem but niot
depr-essed0 I am disturbed"' but, of course, I am, not depressed,,
Bu~ t i do say to you thiat wo ha--er here ain enoriaous -problem
which~ we can meet, bat we iron1t ia1ewe iie 0t usle
up into rection: 3 6nd fall bsc*, k inlta an Idea th-at j. f you ara
going to do soraethin. Eg for mnacrngYou ough-t to do it at
the expense of the Trian on t1; ea n. This is n): Dscnmso beca-use,
of Course today if -it vi'Gre rnot for thie man-on tLhe lan-d and
the., expor? income thai; he earns mnfatr in Austraia3
could be crippled almost ov. nih: byJ laclk ofJ imports of rav,
matorials, Thberei: oo we are all, as you mi-, ght, say, in the
samane boaw emus inrcaingy think of ourselves as
be-ing in thei saneo boat,.
I would venture, Sir, looking arou~ nd this audierce,
to soy be. L~ fo vryod ! present thlat ue all know tha-t
if ' this counatry is to stanid firmly on its own feet in the
ntwexet~ n4ty t thve: ei mcre and more poople.. it
can't have more and more? people unless these people are
employoC+, I~ t can"'; have them-eomployed uonless -manufacturing
ind-tr tetir ndItrny ai re able tCo take them up and
employ theCm beciuse oreo more i the, ru. ral industries?
mechoanization re + placer, manpowor0All this is so true as to
be hardly worth mentioning, but at thae same time, those whio
manufacture should, and I knw wi] I, avoid thae temptation to
Say, 111, ell, if you want us to employ + the increasing population,
you must simply give us protection however high it may go and.
whatever it may cost somebody else0The truthi is that while
manufacturing develop:-: ent in, a growing economy is vital and
I hope th. at my on people have-C sh-ownm tnat in what we ~ vo been
doing it is st-ill tr,, ue thac-t the vo~ percentage of our
export incomae is earned on farms and stations an d gardens of
Auis tralia and t hat we muast not Pvrsue policies whicoh pr,. ice
them out of exist-ence. Now thI., at7Ls elementary. Of course it
is, D! Bu what it mean-s is that perh-aps over thne next five or
ten years, we. should not so mu~ ich th'Liink of ourselves as
manufacturers withi special i'nt-orcsts and no connection with
thie firm next door or prinrjry prorluoer', graziers councils, wool
and meat fedorators1 with no c-Dnnection with the firm next
door, or tzansport -w&amp; tto iis i conncto wih h
03 a 0 0~ 0 0 
firl-1 next door. Ibelieve that what ixve have to do on those natters
is to get tc'gother arid roalise thaL14* hav aCVom i00 ity o
inteiesit on this riatt,, 3., a corimrnrlty of' interest whiici wei
w sacriftce at our own par: Ll, And, realily, it was having
-oil th ose things in mind tht Iecny announced publislyl
that we were going -to conduct, throughi a competent commttee
as Ihcw~ ewil ascmb]. e, an investigation into a great
number of these miatters -not to discover ways and means of'
pushing thE tari-ff up or pushing tho tar-', ff' down, not to
discuss ways and means of subsidizing some primary industry
or not subs idizing it but to get together on -thi. s matter so
tat we may discover Uhat in this marvellous country of oiirs,
ttere is a profound comm. unity of' interest.
' Ae all have, gentlemen, unsuspectod capacity fo.-r
unselfishxiess and this is what we must call on, because I am
perfectly co'ir~ ain that if over the nes-t decade, and 1 ama
happy to assure you that i won't be Primeic Minister at te
end of that time ( Laughter) this will be-i a weight off your
minds -but if -At the end of the next decade, , ie find tGhat
Australia,~ conflronted by new circumastances strategically
placed as 11slhe ise in this,, corner of' the worl. d, has donE; great;-
things in developing tier o-wAn indistries, i er ownr maarkets and
increasingly stands on her own fe,: et and has1 pride w-itliout
arrogance, confidence without elaserinss t~ riis will
be a wonderftft thing for ouro cout-L-~ y,
Every now and. ther., as 1 look at my g r-ndc-_ hildren,
of whom I have novr qulitE! a and, tUhanyd are respect:[ Xl
to me because the eldest is on. ly n e or-t e n ( Tau . te r1 -v k-ry
respectful Grantpal" No, Grandpa" 0"' lrandpa
very important?" Oh yes, and the answer~, of course,, " Vory,
Yes0 Yes."~ ( Laughte57) Baiu when I ami ju-st dust and ashe,
I~ d like to think that th~ ese bñ atts, having come to inan~ s
est-ate and womangs estate, would. look at me and look at you
at this end. of this room and say " They understood the
problcm2 ' they knew-i-t tbice:{ coped u~ ith it and that's why
Australia is one of theo g.' eat9 great, countries of the
world, Now, gontlenr, as used to be said in somie papers
" Tfteras my sc-ntiments1And as 116hem's my sentiments",
an going to ask you al a stand up and drink tGhe health of'
Aus tralian Industry. 



ANNUAL GNEACONVENTION OF rT* IIñ N,, S
OF jE JJI. BERJAL A
AT SYDNEY--' Otc 13: 11M1.9R6 2
Sir, Parliamentary colleagues and Ladies anid Gentlemeni
I have learned at least th-Yroe things since I arriTed
hero tonight, and for an old fellov like ma to lea-rln anything
is such a novelty that-to learn tharee tG11ngs is quite exciting,,
( Laughiter), The first thing is that I hlave some resemblance
t~ o a gentleman whom I don't know the President of Puerto
R-Iro4 Now if I had known ' that you wer: ie going in for these
analugies, I would ' nave hired from. a theatrical outfi-uter a
very straggling dark beard and would have-presented myself to
you as the President of Cuba. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
The second thning T have learned I warn. my
col]. oague, Senator Spooner is one thiat I will in future
employ inr thie Cabinet room,) I aTA in thae habit of letting
every Ministea.' who wants to say something., say s.-mething
sometimes briefly and sometimes at considerable length. But
i have learned tonight thiat the right drill is to hear a little
argument not too rnuca arnd th; say, 17Those whlo agree with
me, 3ay ' Aye'" and if a loud noise comes out, I say, de-clare
it carried6( Laughter) You have no idea how mnuch time thiis
will save me in future, ' in Canberra. 6 ( Laughater)
Tlie th) ird thing I have . laarned ia that it Is not a
bad idea when people have spa echios to mraike with! I which you may
not agree, to make them stand -in a corridor with so many pillars
in, it that you can't see tbhem at all., ( Laught'er) I could sec
Bill Arthur and hoar him well, I aeheard him before toda-,
But two or three speakers here, standing in the middle will go
don,, n in my meomory as diser~ bo-dicd voices0 ( Laughiter) I~ think
perhaps,~ Bill, we inight do something about thiat in the Cabinet
room anid have a broad. pillai!, put between you and me and between
Bill Mci~ a'ncn and me ( Lsrnghter and then uhat will-bc th. a result, 7
, Je don't undertake to sa-y0
Bat, Sir. I am very gl~ ad to have: com--e in h. ere just
at the end of a d.-SCus: L* Lr. about thle United States of
America boc. iuso thLis is onie mat tat I was going to say somethling
to you about, I don' t th-ink we are so badly k-nown in
America. I don'-t think so,, I can :, omembe~ r years ago before
he wa r, one could go tUg t U ne Stte of Amyzerica and
find the vaguest possible ideas as to wheore Austral. ia was0
Indeed, oncza I went into a shop in San Francisco and the feJllow
identifying my accent as something weird and wondercftil, Saidi
to mn, " Where do you come from?" I saidg, " I come from Australia,"
and he said, " Where's thiat?" " Well, I said, " don't you kn) ow?"
He said, " IT ought to know0 I have an idea it's out on the
East1 Coast.' ( Laugter) But i must say that after the Second
Wqar, I nave not found anything of that kind, For aL ra nme
of young Americans we have become muchi better knownm than we were.
Ard on the Government level, I amn ba-. und to say that I thiil., and
I say it ww th great p1Loa' sulco that cur stocks are high withn the
Administration of thae Unditod'Statcs0Indeed in that supnosced
s-ink, of iniquity, Ne-, w-York, wich happens to be the centre of a
great deal of private financiJ'al en-terprise in the United. States,
our stocks are so h-igh t[ hat cuar credit rating to use that
abominable expression is hi. glier than u: erhaps any other country
in the world) 0 a0a 0/ 2 
But I wanted to refer to the United States of America
because quite recently there have been arguments going on as
you have all noticed and, indeed, I have seen them continued
on the Agenda Pape-r about Australian defence, I am not going
to enter into a long disquisition about Australian defence.
My distinguished colleague, the Minister for Defence recently
made, with our full approval., a considered statement on tiis
matter which, in most quarters I think, has been pretty well
received, But I think that as Liberals and that's what we
are here tonight we really ought to clarify our minds by
going back to the basic differences between ourselves and our
opponents those basic matters which determine on wthat side
we are, You can have all sorts of arguments of detail and I
don't resist them and I don't resent them. They are all very
healthy, But if we get so taken up with arguments about
particulars that we forget that we have basic differences a. Id
that these are the things that create the whole Parliamentary
controversy in Australia, then we will all into a most grievous
error. I wonder if we all remember that the Labor Party,
the Australian Labor Party, not so long ago committed itself
to the proposition, and it regards this as its pride and joy,
that we should seek to establish a nuclear-free zone in the
Southern Hemisphere, that no nuclear weapons should either be
established in the Southern Hemisphere, or fired from the
Southern Hemisphere, or stored in the Southern Hemisphere, or
in any way used from the Southern Hemisphere, This has been
their categorical statement,
This. afternoon when I got back I blush to tell you
from looking at a very, very good innings by Norman O'Neill,
I read the Communist Review and it, of course, seized the
Labor doctrine with the warmest possible approval and claims
it as a triumph for a long-sustained Communist propaganda,
Now just think about it. This is one of those catchpenny ideas.,
calculated to appeal to us if we don't think. Wouldn't it
be wonderful to have a Southern Hemisphere which was immune from
all the possible trials and struggles of the Northern Hemisphere,
Wouldn't it be a wonderful thingo This is what they say, in
effect if in Australia we could live quietly and comfortably
while Great Britain and the United States and Western Europe
and the Soviet Union tore each other to pieces. Even stated
in that way, you know, it doesn't appeal very much, does it?
Look at it a little further.
We have, and. it's thanks to your present Government
that we have it an ANZUS pact with the United States the
United States Australia, New Zealand under which we all come
to each other s aid in our mutual defence. If somebody attacks
us, if somebody attacks Australia, then we know that the United
States of America will come to our aid. Not a bad thing for
us, don't you think? Not a bad thing for us to have, metaphorically,
alongside of us the greatest power in the modern worldo
Do we want to dispose of it? If you had secret ballot, would
you vote to repeal the ANZUS pact? Would you vote to say that
Australia should have no alliance with the United States?
If that's the way you feel then you can support the Labor
Party's recent policy with complete conviction. Because that's
what they are saying to the United States and T know that
the United States understands this because I've been there
twice this year and I have discussed this very problem with
them, Suppose Australia is attacked say by Communist China,
directly or through devious routes, attacked some day by a
country which today has seven hundred million people and which
is reaching out into South East Asian countries Laos o 00 aP
C 
moderately successfully North Viet Nam, successfully South
Viet Narm placed in a state of imminent peril so it goes
down the map, towards Australia suppose Australia is
attacked with nuclear weapons and who is there here tonight
who can say that won't happen some day and suppose the United
States of America said to us, " Very well. Now we are going
to come ino We are going to take a hand in this, You are
friends. You are our allies. We accept responsibility for
you," And we say to them, " Well, that's all right but you
can't put a nuclear weapon on Manus Island in our defence,
because it's south of the Fu. ator; and you can't bring in any
ballistic missile into Australian territory and fire it deeply
into the strongholds of your enemy because we are South of
the Equator, In other words," United States of America, you
can defend us, thank you very much, with conventional weapons
but in the event of a global nuclear contest, you keep out,"
Now, what nonsense it iSo Does anybody suppose that any one
of us wants to see a war of this disastrous kind; but how
suicidal, recognising that such a war is always possible, for
us to say to the United States of America and to any other
power Great Britain " You keep out of the Southern Hemisphere,
You attend to your business North of the Equator, We won't
have you here."' Now, ladies and gentlemen, if such a grim event
happened nobody in Australia could be found to warn the
United States off the course any more than anybody could be
found in the last war to warn the United States off the
course and say, " You are not to come in here. You are not
to come into New Guineao You are not to fight in our defence
in our own area," Yet the tragedy is that our opponents have
made this great single contribution tthought, They have
said, " A nuclear-free zone south of the Equator, and we don't
want any ally who is not prepared. to respect it." Well I've
been Prime Minister a long time as you know and I have found
a fair number of extraordinarily difficult problems to consider.
I find no difficulty in this one, I will never be heard to
say to the United States, " You keep out" if we are in danger,
Nor would you, But our opponents, who are now masquerading
for the first time I think; I am not sure as advocates
of improved defence for Australia, nullify the whole of their
argument by striking at its very basis, by striking what they
. intended to be or what they ought to understand to be a
deadly blow at the ANZUS alliance which is increasingly the
sheet anchor of Australian security,
Well, . thapte rihaps enables me to go on a little
from that point, because what I have been saying to you about
that merely exhibits what I'll call an isolationism of mind.
Now, we came into existence as a party because we were not
isolationists in mind. I don't mean merely in terms of
defence, I don't mean merely in terms of international
relationso I mean in every sense of the word. The soul of
Liberalism is that we are not divided into little isolated
units. We don't say, " Well, we are manufacturers and therefore
we couldn't care less about anybody elseo" We don't say
" We are primary producers and we couldn't care less about
anybody else," We don't say, " We are employers" or " We're
this or we're that and we couldn't care less about other
people," There are plenty of pressure groups in the country.
There are plenty of pressure groups in the world. The whole
of the remarkable events of the last ten days brought to a
point by the courage and skill of the President of the United
States ( Applause) the whole of those events has arisen
because of the existence in the world of pressure groups, the
O. a0 0. 0/ 4 
grca't Communist pressure group not only in1 the Soviet Union
but in all, the satellite countries of Europe -a pressure
group reaching its way out into Asia9 into Africa, constantly
maintaining tension, constantly making people Live with the
fear in th~ e back of thieir minds of disasters to come this
is the greatest pressure group0 But wo have some ourselves.
It is in a sense the age of the pressure group. It is in a
sense a period of time, politicllyaditrainlyi
which people seek to promote differences, seek to promote a
clash of interests, so that in the waters so stirred up they
may fish to their own advantage.
We are Liberals, we are not a sectional party.
We represent no pressure group. It is our historic mission in
Australia to see that the interests of the community as a whole
at all times prevail over the interests of any individual jr
any group. This is our great mission in Australian politics.
And I really came tonight so that I might remind you of it and
beg of you never to lose sight of it. Are we the employers'
party? Are we the employees' party? Are we the party of the
rich or the party of somebody else? Our opponents will
frequently try to pretend that we are, but the fact is that
we have frequently reached our most unpopular moments by
running contrary to what were the superficial interests of
people whom we were supposed to represent in Parliament.
( Applause) I remember this and remember i~ t with considerable
satisfaction ( Applause) and we've done that and we'll continue
to do that because we believe that the whole is greater than
the part, we believe that Australia has interests as Australia
and that the people of Australia, men, women and children,
have interests superior to those of any particular group or
section. ( Applause) And therefore I say to you, " Away with
all this pressure group idea." Personally, I ea sick to death
of it and I am happy to say it no longer retains the fain~ test
impact on my reasoning mind. The Liberal Party of Australia
is a unique experiment in the history of ! nstralian politics.
Just let me remind you of it because this is not
only our future task but it's part of the pride that we ought
to have in our own history. I have been in Parliament, one
way and another, man and boy, for a long, long tire, and ever
since I was a boy at school, I have been hearing politics
talked in the house. Therefore I night claim in a rough and
ready fashion to know something about politics in Australia.
But look back on it. d'hon did we ever have a completely
concerted body until this party was established? I was
Leader of tGhe Opposition from 1943 on and I very well remember
sitting down and casting up how many organization-there were
that were theoret'ically on our side in politics in Australia,
and there were fourteen. Fourteen. Well, you remember when
Woodrow Wilson produced his fourteen points, old Clemenceau
said, " Le bon Dieu n'avait que dit," 1 Ten was enough he
thought, for the Lord0But we had fourteen like Woodrow
Wilson0 And with an effort, with a lot of understanding men
and women, we created a party of one out of a dispersed number
of groups of fourteen0 I dontt think this ever happened
before. There have been parties, there have been compromises,
There have been changes across the floor of the House. I
don't think in the history of Federation until then, we had
over had one party which was united not by a series of
particular doctrines but by a consuming faith, a faith which
is superior to doctrine or to dogma. We had people who a year
before were arguing with each other because " You're a bit too
far to the Right you're a bit too far to the Left" -some of
you will remember this; and then we realised, all of a sudden,
a o a 
that there's room for many mansions even in our heaven, tha. t
there is room for many views in a party which gets together and
which has one ultimate faith, Let us argue on the sidelines
about what we think of this, or this, or this. I dont grudge
all the argument that you will have on the various resolutions
that are on the Notice Paper. I~. 1 read others when we come to
our Federal Council Meeting. And I'll say, " Good, Let's fight
it out. Let's thrash these things out, but don't let us believe
that the details are more important than the whole," Don't lot
us believe for one moment that we ought to allow our magnificent
unity in our task to be dispersed by partisan disputes, Now
this is tremendously important in Australia, Tremendously,
We've been in office a long time, I know even
my best friends when they meet me in the street will say to
me, ' By jove, old man, now how long is it that you've been in
office?" Well I shrug my shoulders and admit to the truth
and they say, 1Oh, yes. It's a long time," And I wonder what
they are thinking about in their minds, ( Laughter) Now,
I've no great ambitions on these matters Any man who is not
content to have been the Prime Minister of his country for a
quarter of its Federal history is greedy and I hope nobody
will think I am greedy. ( Laugher) So don't think I am
displaying any personal interest on this matter ( Applause) but
I tell you that much more important than who is Prime Minister,
much more important than who is a Minister, is the importance
of this party as a party not growing old in its ideas, not
losing sight of its historic mission,
Men may grow old; wome. n, in my observation, never
do, ( Laughter) ( Applause) Men may grow oldo We all get
older, We get tired, , Jo perhaps worry a little more about
things than we did once. Well, that's in the course of nature,
But the Liberal Party as a party is yourg. Have that in your
mind. There may be people in it who have grown white-haired in
the service of the party but the party is young. Compared with
the great historic parties of the United States, of Great
Britain, this is a boy, this party, and if it is to retain its
youth, if it is to grow at all., sturdily, into maturity, then
it must do it by remembering that its great mission is to serve
all the people of Australia, to keep up our friendships with
great nations around the world, to preserve our standing, our
credit, our repute, and to allow sectional arguments to be
dealt with, but not to cause divisions at the heart of the
party. ( Applause) Now, Sir, that's one great mission we have,
There's another one that I would like to say a word or two
about because I don't want to speak too long, We are living
in a Federal community. We are living in a nation which was
created as such only sixty years ago, but it was created as
a Federal community with sovereignty which, in the long run,
attaches to the people, divided between a Commonwealth, a
great central administration, and the administrations and
governments and parliaments of the States. The essence of
federalism is that there is a division of sovereignty not
that somebody is sovereign and that somebody isn't, A division
of sovereignty this is the complete essence of our democracy
and of federalism, Federalism in Australia for which we stand
whih is one of the keynotes in our policy, will not be destroyed
by overt actso Nobody is going to come along and put up a
referendum to abolish the States, Well he may, if he is feeling
gay and enterprising, but he won't succeed. The people of
Australia, once you put the question to then " Do you want to
destroy the States?" will never say '" Yes", 30 o. 0 / 6 
But things can be changed by subtlety more easily
than they can by direct attack, and one of the subtle things
that is going on today, practised perhaps by some people in
this room inadvertently, is to put more and more and more
responsibility on the Commonwealth and still pretend the
Commonwealth powers haven't increased, Ladies and gentlemen,
if this bad habit of taking everything to the Commonwealth
something crops up; well we're short of money, we want to
do this or want to do that " Let's go to Canberra" and you
know this happens every day I get only a percentage of them
on my desk, but it happens every day. What do you suppose is
going to happen if the Commonwealth is ultimately given all
financial responsibility? Then it will have a pretty powerful
case some day to have all political authority because it is
a pretty good thing to have responsibility and authority married
together. Now I say to you beware of this. The States have
great powers. We have great powers. Admittedly in the
financial world by reason of a number of events, we have
predominant financial powers in the Commonwealth, but it is
still true that there are things in the hands of the States,
masses of administrative responsibilities which, in my
considered opinion, after a lot of experience, they are much
more competent to attend to than we would be at Canberra.
Therefore it's one of our tasks it is the other
task that I wanted to mention to you to preserve the Federal
structure, to preserve a system of Government under which
the national Government the national Parliament have
responsibility for great national affairs and the State
Parliaments, the State governments have responsibility within
their own borders for very great local affairs. It would be
a dreadful thing I think if this came to an end, because, you
know, to talk of freedom, individual freedom, may be thought
occasionally to be rather old-fashioned, but it is the great
thing that matters, individual freedom and if you get all
power concentrated into one set of hans then freedom begins
to disappear. It is in the division of power between governments
, hat freedom flourishes. The moment you get some other
state of affairs there is an enormous temptation to subordinate
the freedom of the individual. I will take a single example
from overseas. In the United Kingdom, all power is at Westminster
and therefore you have the possible danger that I have referred
to. But the British inv. nted self-government but for Great
Britain, nobody would have heard of self-government. It is
not only the mother of Parliaments, it is the only mother of
Parliaments in the world and because they understand these
things and because there is a passion in the British heart for
freedom, no tyrant for hundreds of years has been able to
prevail in Great Britain. ( Applause) But across the Channel,
in France, a country of which we all speak with profound respect,
we have had a different history, Somebody was under the
impression in fact I said something about it at the London
Conference that because the French had had a Revolution, in
the latter part of the eighteenth century, it must be taken
that they understood democracy perfectly. This, of course, is
a complete non sequitur, because the plain truth is they don't
understand democracy very well. For years and years, right
through this current century, their system of Parliament has
been so dispersed, the Frenchman himself so individualist in
his views that any average government lasted six weeks, sometimes
six months changes of administration, changes of administration,
five years, 22 governments or something of that kind and in the
result, what we call parliamentary democracy became ineffective
So. ./ 7 
I71
and th. e country was increasingly run, if there was to be
continuity, by what they are pleased to call the bureau or
what we are pleased to call the civil. service.
Bureaucratic control is the inevitable result of
grave uncertainty of government because somebody has to carry
on, somebody must do the job. In the last two or three
years, of course, we have had the remarkable episode of
President De Gaulle who has, let us face up to it almost
dictatorial powers, but who because of his strength, his
flaming patriotism, has restored the pride of the French, as
I ventured to tell him the last time I spoke with him in
Pari. s But after him, what do we know?
Now, the one thing I am illustrating to you is
that you must have a passion in the mind for preserving
individual freedom and for restraining the powers of government
then, and particularly so in the case of Australia, You do
well to say, " We have a system of division of authorityo We
have a great country that is going to be greater and greater
as time goes on and we must be careful not to allow ourselves
by folly or inadvertence to lose a Federal system which has in
reality served us so well." ( Applause)
Sir, there is just one other matter that I would
like to say before I conclude and that is that the task of
government in Australia was at one time thought to be
distributive. " We have so much wealth, lot us divide it upo
Let us reduce the inequalities between the rich and the poor.
Lot us develop our social services, so that there will be
a proper protection for people who have, so to speak, fallen
by the wayside." All this is great stuff and your present
Government has had a hand in it9 not to be surpassed in the
history of the Commonwealth, but we are rapidly reaching a
point of time when the main business of government is not to
distribute but to create, to help to create ( Applause) to
help to have more and more production, because if the mind
is concentrated blindly on sharing out what you have, then
before you can say, " Knife", you won't be having any more
next year or the year afterwards. The creation of resources in
Australiao their development, the creation of markets for
Australia, their development, the creation of ingenuity in
research in technology in Australia and, what's even more
important, speedy application to the problems, the practical
problems of production these are the great challenges of
the next ten years, I have only to mention them to you?
this great creative task, for you to realise that in spite of
some commentators I am not sitting down in ai armchair at home
with my back turned to the future, and contemplating the
glories of the past, not at all.
We haven't done all that badly in the past, but we
have a great job, and that is to do twice as well in the
future. It is a creative task, a task which will be based
upon our undertstanding of government and its function and
its division, It will be based primarily upon our realisation
that the time has gone by for little sectional conflicts
between farmer and manufacturer, between employer and employee.
The time has come in a pretty difficult world for ten million
of the best people living in the world to go on and demonstrate
that they can command by their own efforts a magnificent
future, 



Weekly Index No. W41
Week Ending November 3, 1962
COMMONVWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Nov. 1 No. 1179
2 No. 1184 MAJOR G.: PS IN , USTRALIAN INDUSTRY
FOOD SURVEY MISSION TO VISIT JAPAN
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon0 W. H,
Spooner, M. M.
Oct, 31 No. 1174
Nov. 1 No, 1178 VISIT OF WORLD POWER CONFERL: NCE DELEGATES
TO CANBERRA
RECOVERY IN THE BUILDING INDUSTRY
The Minister for Defence, the Hon, Athol Townley, M. P.
Oct. 30 No. 1167
30 No. 1168
Ncv. 1 No. 1180 CITIZEN MILITARY FORCES MEMBER OF THE
MILITARY BOARD
HIGH ALTITUDE UPPER AIR SAMPLING OVER
AUSTP'RLIA
INDUSTRIAL MOBILISATION COURSE, VESTERN
AUSTRALIA
The Acting Minister for Territories, the Hon. William McMahon, M . P0
Nov, 2 No. 1185 CATTLE INDUSTRY IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY
The Postmaster-Goneral, The Hon, C. W. Davidson
Oct. 31 No. 1169 FOUNDATION STONE CEREMiONY SYDNEY MAIL
EXCHANGE BUILDING
31 No. 1172 POSTAGE STAMP FOR 50th ANNIVERSARY OF
CANBERRA
31 No. 1173 LETTER RECEIVER AT THE SUMMIT OF MTo
KOSCIUSKO 1962-63 SEASON.
Nov. 1 No. 1181 OFFICIAL OPENING COMMERCIAL TELEVISION
STATION TNQ7, TOWNSVILLE.
The Ministrfor External Affairs, The Hono Sir Garfield Earwick
Oct. 31 No. 1170
Nov. 1 No, 1175
1 No. 1176
The Minister for
Oct. 29 No,
The Minister
Oct. 31 No.
Nov. 2 No,
The Minister
Oct. 28 No.
29 No.
Nov, 2 No, 1163 UNESCO TWELFTH GENELTh'rL CONFEiRENCE
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION
AUSTRALIAN Pj-. TICIPATION IN THE SPECIAL
C'" WEALTH AFRICAN ASSISTANCE PLAN
AUSTRALIAN CONTRIBUTION TO ASIAN TRAIiNING
INSTITUTE
Primary Industry, the Hon. C. F. Adermann
WHEAT FIRST ADVANCE ON 1962/ 63 CROP
for the Army, the Hon. J. O. Cramer
1171 NEW VIGOUR IN ARMY RECRUITING
1186 ARMY GUNNERS HAVE NEW TITLE
for the Nav. v Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
1161B FRIGATE TO CHART UNDERWATER MOUNTAINS
1162 ,: USTRALIANS TO SE.: VE IN ROYAL YACHT
1183 SWEEPING CHANGES IN NAVY PROMOTION SYSTEM
a / 2
The Minister
FOR PRESS 
The Minister for Health,, Senator the Hon, Har-ie Wade
Oct. 29 No. 1164 WiPNN NUT r AnKILN DRG
0 No. 1166 IMPO= 1TANCE OF, IMMUNIZATION
The Ministo-r_ for-Supply, the Hon.-Alleon Fairhall
Oct. 29 No. 1165 2KXC SH=-ET HOESPC~ TAKN
SITES
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hion. R. W. C. Swartz.
Oct0290 No,, 1j. 65B œ 860 MILLION OSpEIJrL 1N -14YAR
The Minister for_ " ir The Hon, David Fairbai. rn
Oct. 29 No. 1* 65A, CU. ENT ON ' dZTICLE IuN 1SYDN1 jU"
Nov. 1 No, 1182A BLOODHOUND SQTTADRCN\ RLEADY NTIEXT YEAR
The Dep m'tMent of Ext erna I ff-is
Oct. 28 No. 11_ 6ijr JNTjJI'CTIC F. XPLO' 1hATI4' ON PROG _' hESS OF
aEDITIOF' FROM WILKES BASEE
Thne Department of the Navy,.
Oct, 30 No. :. 1681A EXRC. ISlP SET2, ENGTHb'NS SEA LTFELINES
Nov0 I Bo' 1.182 APEDCIT TS O?. ILRATION IN CHIN' SEA"
Oct. 28 No. 1161 P. 1A. N. FIAE IN CHINAt1-
The Depairtrrent of Primary T. du , r,
Oct. -31 Zo. Th77 EXPORT FUGAi" R REBA'TL'
With Compliments of
The Governmtent Public Relat ions Office,
Parliament House, 



" MEE~ T THE PRESS"
Ztjeyision InterviewL givenu by-tbg Prime Minlister~ the Rt. Hon.
R. G. Menzies. on Channel TCN. Sydney onSunday_,*" th November,
MR. McNICOLL:
PRIME MINISTER:
Q.
P. M,
Q.
Pam. Good evening Ladies and Gentlemen, We are
very honouxed to have as our guest this evening,
the Prime Minister of Australia, the Rt. Hon.
R. G. Menzies. Mr. Prime Minister, good evening.
The members of our panel Mr. John Gibbs, who
is financial editor of the tSunday Telegraph," l
Mr. Alan Reid, whom you well know from Canberra,
and Mr, King Watson, the Editor of the " Daily
Telegraph." Mr. Prime Minister are you satisfied
that we are spending enough money on defence?
I think so. I think that the programme announced
the other day by Mr. Townley is pretty good.
It represents some increase, and will represent
a little more as the next three years go on.
But the essence of it is a well-balanced programme
and, of course, it is a flexible programme, It
is not to be assumed that, because you have a
three years' programme that you are unable to
alter it in case some new circumstances blow up.
WJe are hoping we will not have new circumstances.
You are ignoring the motives that may have prompted
it. What do you think of Dr. Cairn's suggestion
that the two Parties should come together on the
volume of taxation that should be devoted to
de fence spending?
Wll, 1 it is very interesting to me to gather
that Dr, Oairns thinks we ought to spend more
money on defence, because I have been under the
exactly opposite impression for years. But I
think the Government will take its own responsibility
on that matter, Certainly, until recently,
we were spending far more money on de-fence than
our opponents wanted to spend. They appear to
have had a change of heart recently.
Would increased spending at this stage on defence,
in view of the expanding economy, retard the
development of that economy?
Well, I think it would. But, of course, there
are times when you have to prefer defence to
development, but there is no occasion, at this
time, to sacrifice one for the other. The truth
is that to spend substantially more on defence,
and I don't mean a few millions, but a very large
sum more, would mean more manpower devoted to
defence, more resources devoted to defence, and
therefore less manpower and less resources
available for other matters and what we have had to
do, and it has been a very aifficult task, is
to balance the urgent need for increasing the
population and resources of the nation against
the undoubted need to have an effective defence
force. oeseeece. e/ 2 
-2
Qo Some people talk about our defence in terms of an
anrms race witL Indco sia9 Is this the way the Government
sees the problem?
P. M2 It never occurred to us. We have had a three years
programme operating, and we are now having another
three years programme. It has no relations to some
arms race with Indonesia. It is all related by what
is regarded by our competent advisers, as the nature
of the th. re&amp; t, our strategic position, and emphasis
upon having forces which are available immediately and
can be made mobile and be made effective in a few days,
In the past we have had a capacity for producing soldiers,
but it has taken months to put them into the fi. eld
We, for the first time in time of peace, have permanent,
professional, ready, well-armed and highly-trained
mobile forces.
Q, Is our state of preparedness much better than it was
in 1913 and 1939?
P. M. When I look back on 1939, when I was Prime Minister
for the first time in April, 1939, I think it vas, our
defences today are much more powerful.
QC To what extent, Sir, could we rely upon America in
the event of a crisis in this part of the world?
P. M. If the crisis consists of an attack upon us, and that
includes Australian New Guinea and Papua then I would
have no doubt whatever thab America would instantly
come to our assistance, I am happy to say we stand
very well with the United States of America. They
regard us as their friends, and even though they are
a very great country, and we are a very small country
comparatively, history shows that great countries like
to have some friends, even small ones.
Q. One point is how the outside world views our safety,
Is the amount of capital investment coming in?
Has there been any diminution in the flow in recent
months? No, there has not. In fact right through the somewhat
controversial period in Australia, the capital has
kept flowing in. You are quite right when you suggest
that this exhibits confidence in our future which,
of course, must include confidence in our future
security,
Q. But, Sir, how is that capital made up? Is it capital
investment into factories, or is it investment money
going into, say buying shares in BHoP. Have you
any figures on that which would guide us?
PoM. Well, I can't give you a percentage, but as you know,
it is a bit of each. Portfolio investments I think,
rose in proportion some little time ago, but I would
have thought that, overall, looking back over a term
of eight or nine years, the bulk of this money has been
for investment in industryo 
.3
An'd do you thinlc that there is any . ot money, mcAcy
that may come Jin temporarily, an-Ld goes out again?
T,. M0 I donvt think there is very much hot money, There is
some, of course which is the product of credit buying at
a time of imporz restrictions, eana so on. But I think the
quantity of that has fallen away considerably. I am quite
certain that the great bulk of what we call new capital
money coming into Australia is not just for portfolio
not hot money, but is for direct Investment in Australian
industry.
Q. A. L. P. policy demands a nuclear-free Southern Hemisphere,
Is this in the rea2! nof practical politics with you, Sir?
P. M. Well, quite frankly, from the * point of view of Australia,
it is the craziLest proposal that I have ever heard,
Why, Sir?
P. M. Beceause they say " We want a nuclear-free zone. No
nuclear weapons are to be installed or used in the
Southern Hemisphere, south of the Equator." Now, here
we are. America i~ s our friend and our ally under the
ANZUS Pact, and you have places like Manus, soutK of
the Equator, all included in the Labc-Ir resolution. Are
we to say to the United States of America " Look, we
want to tell you that under no circumstances, if you have
to fight alongside us and for us, under no circumstanices
can you use nuclear weapons, or fire one off from
Australian soil, or from any place south of~ the Equator."
What do you suppose the Americans would say? I know very
well what they would say., This is a suicidal policy.
We do not want to be a nuclear power ourselves if we can
avoid it, I personally believe that the fewder countries
that have nuclear weapons, the better. There is less
chance of an accident and, therefore, I stood out against
it and so has my Government in the case of Australia.
But the question of our defence arises in its crucial form
if we are attacked. If we are at war. And to say to the
most powerf'ul. ally we have in the world " Don't you come
here with guided nuclear missiles. Don't you come here to
defend us, You keep away with those things. We won't
have them" this is the policy of suicide,
Q. In -view of the Chinese-Indian instance, would you accept
an assurance from mainland China on nuclear weapons
without adequate supervis-ion?
P. M. Noi Noi I am getting old, I know, but have not become
so decrepit as to accept assurances from those sourcgs, 0
Q. Mr. Prime Minister, over the last week there has been the
greatest interest in Cuba. Do you regard it personally
as a great coup for Mr. Kennedy, the outcome of the Cuban
missile trouble?
P. M. I think, if I may sayr so, that we ought to avoid claiming
something as a coup. I do not think that our relations,
or hi s relations with tChe Soviet Union e by any means
conclusive, This is just his first move, and a very
successfuil one. But, I think we don't want to get into
the atmosphere of saying, " Ah. Khrushchev was compelled to
do this or that." And yet we know that when President
Kennedy made this dramatic announcement, there were quite
a few people around the world, maybe even some here, who
said " Oh this is a very dangerous thing. This is
brinkmanshIp" or whatever the word is. We in the Cabinet
0 0 0 a. 00/ 1+ 
-1
POMO
( Contd,) h~ appened to be sittiLng when this news arrived and I at
once afterwards in the House, as you know, made a statement
stanaing behind this statemen6 by ]) resident, Kennedy. It's
very interesting to realise that it was the first statement
of support he had from anywhere, and I think that we did
not lose marks by our promptness on that matter. The
second thing is that, ' uc. doubtedly, this display of firmness
was the thing that has been needed for a long time,
I have had a theory, based upon knowing something of
Khrushchev that the air would begin to clear the first
time he had sitting opposite to him, metaphorically or"
physically, a man of immense powEr, who must be the
President of the United States, who could say to him,
" This is not to happen. If it does then the consequences
will be yours,'" My theory is that the first time that
happened and he believed what the man said, we would begin
to see a little light in the gloom, and that is what
happened here.
In that case, following that through, do you think that
possibly, while it was terribly dangerous for a while,
and a very anxious time for everybody,, that the seare
the people have had, that the next time the big powers
make the next moves, especially America and the U. S. S. R.
and meet on the question of disarmament and nuclear testing
and so on that they may be more inclined to make some
progress towards the road to disarmament?
P. M. I am not without hopes that this may be so because, you
see, the Soviet resistance to the proposals about nuclear
testing has really been outrageous. Everybody else wants
to get rid of nuclear testing, to bring about this business
of fuirther development in this field to an end. Everybody
does, But, of course, naturally, the Western Powers want
to have a system of inspection bothi ways, But, as you
know, you cannot take some people's word very easily, and
as the Russians said " Noth1ing doing." They may perhaps
change their minds now.
Q. So you had the opportunity now to to meet and have
discussions with Mr. Kennedy on three or four occasions.
What is your opinion of him? Is it growing all the time?
P. M. I think so. I saw a considerable amount of him a year
ago 15 months ago and then this year I have twice had
considerable talks with him, and I think he grows in
statuire all the timo. It is impertinent of me to talk
about the President of the United States but, still, I
have met a lot of people in thae course of my life, and
I have some reason to wrork up an opinion about them.
I like Kennedy very mucht, and I respect his intelligence
very much and I think he is a man of courage and this
is a pretty good combination, intelligence and courage.
Q. Apparently he has a rather remarkable wife?
P. M. I have never had the pleasure of either seeing her or
meeting her,,
Q. Have you not?
P. OM. But our Ambassador tells mne she is charming.
Q&amp; Australia's balance oii payments in the September quarter
showed a deficit of œ C90 million or more, and this included
the invisible, of course, and imports rising, and most
people in the trade expect that, as the economic recovery
continues in Australia we may get more imports., Does this
suggest that we may have another balance of payments
crisis? 
1"
o, I don't th. in. so. We thought;, and am sure you
h thought in all relevant t; iomes in the past year,
as the econcmic position strengthened9 there would be
an increase in imports. It inevitably happens that way
particularly remembering that a good proportion of our
imports consist cf materials for local manufactures in
Australia, Therefore, it is no su.-prise to find that
imports have been rising. But the rise in the imports
has not reflected itself fully as you know in the
overseas reserves, because of this remarkable inflow of
capital to Australia, But there is no doubt about it
that the tendency for imports to rise is, I think, a
continuing one when the country is well and happy, and
therefore our great problem is to do what we can o
stimulate exports in order to cut down the difference.
Q. With this expansion, Sir, the banks have been a bi. t
confused lately over the Bank Act, There has been a
calling up of the extra depcsits into frozen funds.
Some banks have apparently seemed to feel that this is
a contradiction, and they adopt the attitude that if
we are going to expand, we need all the credit, so why
call up the funds?
P. M. I do not want to become involved in a tectLnical argument
with an expert, but the banks have been, and are,
extremely liquid. No bank would deny that. There is a
very fine state of liquidity. A very high percentage,
and therefore they have a very high capacity to make
advances. Porhaps some of the weakening of confidence
in the last twelve months has reflected itself in the
fact that people who could got finance from the banks
have not done so. This is a weakness of confidence on
the part of the customer, not on the part of the banks.
But, still, they are very liquidWell now, the Reserve
Bank it has the power to call up special reserve
deposits, and it is intended to exercise this power to
maintain a general control over the credit position.
That is what a Central Bank is for, as you will agree.
How, this time they have made a call. Not a big one.
Relatively speaking, a small one. We gave some thought
thi3, because we were informed as to what the Bank
proposed. I can tell you my own view, which was the view
of the Government on this occasion. We have been accused
in the past, I. n 1960, of delayi. ng, and then doing something
too big and too sudden. This time, let us learn from that
experience. Don't let us quarrel about giving the economy
a little nudge occa3ionally and this is a nudge, It is
better to do a little bit at a time and see the effect,
than to save it up until perhaps the autumn of next year,
and then come out with a call to S. R. D. ( Special Reserve
Deposits) three times as big as the one that has just
been made. I think the lesson I have learned from all
these things is that it is better to do things a little
at a time, at the right time, than to delay them for
reasons of the kind you have just mentioned, and then
find yourself compelled to take some much more severe
action if you are going to keep the economy on an even
keel, No, I would not quarrel with what the banks have
done at all.
From what you have said, Sir, some people may interpiet
the fact that your action is precautionarybut it also
indicates that the Government is very confident at the
moment that this recovery and expansion is going to move
along at a pretty fast rate perhaps, what in a few
months? o o. oo../ 6 
P. M. I thixn c that the recovery is going along very well0 I
know there are diffevences of opinions on this matter,
but all the industries that we have indicate that there
is a very considerable and marked recovery, and everybody
wants that to continue, but nobody with whom I have had
discussions business or otherwise, wants it to develop
into an inflationary boom. And that is why, instead of
waiting for some highly inflationary circumstances to
arise, it is a very good thing to do whatever little
dampening down has to be done at the right time. But
we want a high level of prosperitVr, a rising level of
prosperity, but we don't want the conditions that existed
in 1960 to recur nor does any panel of business or
financial men with whom I have had. discussions,
Q. If you were a doctor, Sir, and Australia was your patient,
and you were running the measure over your patient, would
you say that the patient internally was now in a healthy
condition?
P. MO I think so. Very healthy indeed, and if I were a dcctor
which, my dear boy, Heaven forfend, because the patient
would be dead the thing I would be afraid of about this
very healthy patient of mine would be that we must not let
him run into a high blood pressure,
Q. I am sorry to hark back on the question of funds, Mr.
Prime Minister, but there is one other point which I think
should be cleared up. In England, the Bank of England
recently reduced the amount called up into their equivalent
to our from two per cent to one per cent. and they
pay, I think, four per cent. interest on this money. Now,
this one per cent. rise of ours has increased our percentage
to 11 per cent. on which we pay, I think, three-quarters of
one per cent. Why the discrepancy?
P. M. Why draw an analogy between our condition and the condition
in Great Britain?
Q. I thirk the banks draw the analogy, I think they think they
tave been hardly done by.
P. M. This is permissible as a delating point, but the position
of the United Kingdom is affected by her own balance of
payments problem, h: 4 oni circumstances just as ours are
by our own circumstances, and you can't identify thiese
circ-amstanceso
Q. If, Sir, our circumstances improve, does that suggest that
the banking system might re. eive that overhaul, or flexibilit;
that was referred to early this year as far as fixed
deposits are concerned, and the call-up into the
Is there likely to be a more flexible attitude toward the
banks?
P. M. I think you can take it that the door is always open for
that. We had extremely useful discussions with the trading
banks, who were most helpful on this matter early this
year, or earlier this year, and we certainly will be very
happy at any time to discuss in the light of the circumstances
from time to time,
Q. Do you think they are capable of handling their own lending
operations? We have seen the release of funds to the banks.
We know that they have increased the limits and approved
new overdrafts, but the public has not taken them up. Do
you think they are competent to operate and supervise the
proper lending of funds? / 7 
-i
FP0M. T. u* O. I have thFa greatest respect for the capacity of the
trading banks to do these things', and We don't want -to
in~ terfere in tho exercise of their own discretion and
experience. They know far more about it than we do sitting
in a room at Canberra., We are concerned with what I would
call the wholesale aspect of credit. They are concerned
with the retail use of it. But, in that field, they are
the masters as far as I am concerned.
Q8 Is your slim majority in the House of Representatives giving
you much worry, Mr. Prime Ministe:-?
P. M, That is the only slim thing about me. No. You know, it
is very interesting. I am by way of being an expert on
this matter, because I once had a majority of half of one,
That is to say, an Independent, years and years ago. A
majority of one is not a bad majority, as long as everybody
is present and correct and your team is in good order
and enthusiastic, and i must say that the morale among my
own members has been superb. I really have not had any
worry about our Parliamentary position the whole of the
year. In fact, my opponent, my friend, Arthur Calwell
he is a friend of mine complained one day that I was
behaving as if I still had a majority of 32. Iasee
that that was just how I feel.
Q. I understand that Dame Pattie thinks that you have never
felt better in your life, and that it has added ten years
to your life having this slim majority. Is that right?
P. M. Well, sho knows me better thean I knaow myself, but I
would~ n't deny it, I always9 I think, if I may-say so,
do best in difficulties, and I have had them,
Q. Sir, reverting to the economic one, If your guided
optimism, and the optimism of your Labour Minister, Mr,
McMahon, over the placement of school leavers is
unjustified is the Government prepared to take measures
to get a raze of absorption that will ultimately, within
a discern-ible -oeriod, absorb them?
P. M. Now, that is an easy question to answer. After all,
as you know, tU'his is true under our predecessors, it is
true under us, and will be true under our suCcessors.
You m'rist ha-v. e some rise in the number of people applying
for work in Januaiy and February, because you are going to
have wliatever the number may be 50, 60 or 70 thousand
people leaving school, and the moment they register,
they appear on the nominal unemployment list and, therefore,
you will always have a little rise, perhaps a big one,
in January, the real test. Now, this is what happens a
couple of months thereafter when these have been absorebed.
My colleague Mr0McMahon, is justifiably proud of the
fact that quite shortly after the last January and February
flush, the bulk of those school-. leavers, the great bulk,
had been absorbed into employment, and he is very confident
that that problem can be handled more easily this year,
and I would share th~ at confidence, because I believe that
the morale of the manufacturing and business community
is rising. I know there are still a few people that have
some complaints, naturally, But the general improssion
I get and, indeed, I got it the other night at the
Chamber of Manufactures Dinner, is that -there is a good
state of optimism, a good disposition to look forward, and
a good disposition to realise that there is no occasion
to be gloomy about the future, Those things, of course,
wi.]. l translate themselves into productive activity, increased
business in the re-tail stores the whole line running back
to the manufacturors. All this affects the tertiary industries
transport and so on, I share the optimism of Mr.
McMah~ n, 
8'
Q, How about outside Australia, Sir? What about replacing
soe of these markets that we are likely to lose with the
Common Market discussions?
P. M. Well, I think that this is of the first importance. I
think that increasingly well, let us put it this way:
there are two tasks here. As far as the Government is
concerned, we have been trying to do it for years, to
provide certain financial means and so on, for assisting
the development of exports, particularly in manufactured
goods where there is such a fertile field for purchase in
South-East Asia. But the other th'ng relates to the other
responsibility, that of industry itself, because we are
always a little bit disposed in a conservative way, to say
that the things we make which can sell in our own country
must be the things that other people ought to buy if we
send them to another country. That is not necessarily
true, We want to diversify our production. I think
there is an immense amount of room for the application of
scientific research to manufacturing procedure and products
so that, if it turns out that Thailand wants a particular
type of thing which is readily saleable, we should put
ourselves in a position to make it. There is a great
challenge here for Australian industry which is eminently
capable of meeting it so long as it does not think too
constantly that the development of export markets is a
matter for the Government alone,
Q. Well that suggests what has been mentioned lately.
People have been thinking we may have an inferiority
complex, that we cannot match people in these overseas
markets,
P. M. Well, if we have, we ought to get rid of it, An inferiority
complex is, anyhow, a silly thing,
Q. Do you think that this present impasse in the Common
Market talks is put down to the fact that Britain is not
very happy about the insistence of the other countries on
her cutting out her subsidies to her farmers. Do you
think that there is any element of hope in it of Mr. Heath
pushing some of the things that we have asked him to push
for us, or is it purely his domestic matter?
P. M. Well, you know those have been rumours that have been
published. I am quite certain myself that some of his
greatest difficulties at present arise from his pushing
our vie: s on the temperate products that concern us and,
I am sure, he is doing this very well. But whether Great
Britain has improved her negotiating position by the events
of the last week or two, I do not know, because the Government
seems to have made it overwhelmingly clear that it is
going in. Well, I respect that view. I do not want t,
repeat what I have said about it. But it did not strike me
as being as strong in a negotiating position as some I
have seen occupied by the Government of the United Kingdom,
Q, Are any moves by the U. So likely to help us replace the
losses that could emerge from Britain's entry into the
E. C. M.?
PoM, The new trade law which President Kennedy has now got
through Congress, and which gives him a discretion to
deal with tariffs up and down within the broad limit, I
think and he thinks is going to give him a great opportunity
of intervening in trade discussions and so to speak
" offering a cutlet for a cutlet", if that phrase is not / 9 
( Contd.) Q. P. M.
Q. PoM. too cld-fashioned, " We, the United States. are prepared
to concede this as long as you concede a ]. owered rate of
du ty on certain commodities passing into irope11 Some
of those commodities, with which America will be concerned,
also concern us, Then we would be in a position to secure
the advantages of the reduced common external tariffs on,
sayr, canned fruits,
This is under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade?
Yes. It ought to be negotiated through as they
call it, But the capacity of the American administration
with this flexible instrument that it now has should not
be underestimated It is, I think, full of promise.
I don't say that this is going to solve all our problems
by a long, long chalk. But it is going to be helpfal,
May I ask you a personal question, Mr. Prime Minister?
Do you ever get depressed or dornhearted by the fact
that you never seem to be able to say or d anything right
in the eyes of the " Sydney Morning Herald?"
Never. I am not easily depressed anyhow, I assure you.
If I were I would not still be in office. I would be
dead, or f would be certified.
MR. McNICOLL
PRIME MINISTER Sir, I would like to thank you very much indeed
for coming along this evening to talk to us and
I know that I will be expressing the views of
those watching the programme tonight in saying
how pleased we are at the wonderful. accord that
you obviously came through with President
Kennedy, which I think is something very close
to Australia's heart at the present time.
: Thank you, Thank you very much. I have been
delighted to be here as perhaps the viewers
have gathered,
MR. McNICOLL Ladies and Gentlemen. Good evening from
0 " Meet the Press". 



FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATIONS
OF THE SMALL APMS FACTORY, LITHGOW,
N. S. 1' 1ø ON 5TH NOVEMBER, 1962
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzies
Sir, Ladies and Gentlemen
I was just making a little precautionary investigation,
and do you know, improbable as it may seem there
are cigars in it, ( Laughter) As a matter of fact, I don't
quite know what I am supposed to do this afternoon. I
haven't been given adequate instructions. Usually when I
attend something of this kind, I have to declare something
open. I won't get out of the habit and, therefore, I begin
by saying that I declare the Small Arms Factory to have been
well and truly opened fifty years ago. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
I suppose that on a day like this, a beautiful
day in a beautiful setting, one gets the best possible
impression of the place and the work and the people and I
would like to say a few words to you about each of those
matters whilst I have the floor,
First of all, the place, I suppose that the
people who live in Lithgow tend to take it fcr gr:: nted.
I don't know. Lithgow has a remarkable hibtor* r. a history
which in itself embodies the development of Austva-Lia from
one stage of activity to ano. e right dowth.. its
time. it was here in Lithgo½ I think I am rA-, u in saying
that the first iron and steel industry was est""". ished,
always to be associated with the great Lithgow name of Hoskins.
And I sometimes wonder whether it was the fact that this
existed and that there was coal here that induced the Government
of the day, fifty years ago, to establish this factory,
in its initial form, in this place. But the fact is that
ever since then, this factory, through all sorts of
vicissitudes it has had its ups and downs in the course
of its time has become increasingly famous for the quality
of its work. Today when I was walking around, I couldn't help
rubbing shoulders occasionally with a number of men prominent
in engineering and other activities in Australia, all of them
feeling pretty amiable, all of them quite prepared to have a
friendly word with me thatts not always the case ( Laughter)
but all of them taking the opportunity of commenting on the
excellence of' the work that is done here. I think myself,
Mr. Minister, that this not unassociated with the history
of Lithgow or the spirit and character of its people. This
town has tradition, this town has made a great contribution
in its own way, much bigger than its population, to Australian
life and Australian development, and they would be very poor
people of Lithgow who didn't feel a pride in the fact that
here is a place, known all over Australia, a place that has
been able to contribute to activities and skills all over
Australia. Now, I think that is a matter for great pride,
a matter for great celebration.
There are people, of course, in the world a great
number of them to be found in Australia who are ' knockers."
Wherever you go, you meet a " knocker". Nothing is any good.
Nothing is ever as good now as it used to be. They talk
about the " good old days". If they had to live in the good / 2 
old days, some of these " knockers", they woL,. dnrt talk about
them So rmuch. But they " knock" Other countries can do
better than we can at this or that, " Oh yes, this is all
right for an Australian enterprisc." Such people make me
tired. They have never done anything to forward. Australia.
The people who keep this country moving are not the " knockers",
but the doers, the people who get on with it the people who,
themselves, establish the standards and maintain them and
improve them, Anybody who went around here today, even in
an ignorant state of mind, couldn't cme out of it without
being proud of the demonstrated Australian capacity for
precision work of the highest possible kind. Nothing
slovenly, nothing second-rate you couldn't produce the
end result from this factory if anything in the end result
was second-rate. Everything in its own way has to achieve
pcrfection, so that in the end, the instrument is, in itself,
a perfect and accurate instrument. I think that we ought to
provide for some system of government grant to elect a dozen
prominent " knockers'" every week and make them come up here and
walk around. ( Applause)
Now, Sir, I have said a little about the place, not
enough; a little about the work, not enovgh; but you all
know about the place and you know about the work. I just want
to say a little about the people because, here again, there
is a considerable amount of mis-understanding in the world.
There are too many people in the world who try to create
differences when none exist, who try to pretend that everybody
lives at all times in a state of discontent, I don't believe
that's true0 I think, and I have noticed it, going around
here today, that th. s is a place in which the morale is high
and the work is good, because the spirits of the people who
are working here are goodo ( Applause) This strikes me as
outstandingly a happy place and it is in happy places that
the best work is done, Not in grumbling places, not in places
in which people live with a chronic sense of injustice, but
in a well-run, well-organised, well-managed place of this
kind and with people of the kind I am addressing this afternoon,
there is happiness. Therefore, we are celebrating the fiftieth anniversary
of a works whica began in a very small way and I gather,
looking around, in a very noisy way, fifty years ago. Today,
it is the last word in modernity, increasingly employs a great
number of pcople, makes its contribution to Australian history
and to the future security of Australia and does it all in
a community and a setting where cheerfulness is the keynote.
So it is a very good thing for a travelling
politician like myself to get away from the cut and thrust
of Canberra you may have heard of Canberra ( Laughter)
sometimes you Day have listened in to the exquisitely courteous
exchanges ( Laughter) that we engage in at Canberra. It's
a good thing to get away from that for a few minutes or for
half a day and come up here and see ycu all and be delighted
to be with you.
Now, before I sit down, I will just make one more
comment. How is it that if I were here to make a political
speech, I wouldn't see any of you chaps at all ( Laughter)
( Applause). Well I understand that but, anyhow, you get the
point. I am happy to tell you that political speech or no
political speech, I will be delighted to have this, made on
the premises, as a souvenir of this event and each time I look
at it and open it or have it ratted by one of my friends who
wants a cigar ( Laughter), I will look back to this day and
remember how many beautiful, magnificent electors there were,
to whom I couldn't address a solitary word on the policy of
the Government, 



THE COMMONWEALTH AND EDUCATION
Tabled in the House of Representatives
by the Right Honourable the Prime Minister
on 6th November, 1962.
Australia, in common with most other countries of the world, has
seen, since the Second World War, an increased interest in and demand for
formal education. Technical and economic progress depends upon highly trained
personnel. The values in which democracy places its faith require opportunities
for the balanced personal and social development of each citizen. The
character and quality of our educational institutions are of concern to us all.
The most obvious aspect of the educational expansion in Australia
has been the unprecedented increase since the War in educational enrolments.
In the decade from 1951 to 1960 enrolments in all schools at primary and
secondary level increased by 65% o. During the same period, university
enrolments increased by 76% o. Technical colleges and teachers' colleges
have shown similar expansion.
Along with this phenomenal increase in numbers has been a general
diversification of educational provision. Changes are occurring in the
structure of secondary education. Technical colleges and universities are
introducing new courses. The ground to be covered in scientific studies is
continually expanding. Awareness of Australia's place in the world at large
and in relation to South-East Asia is leading to new emphases in studies in
the humanities. Provision has now to be made to educate in our schools,
technical colleges and universities large numbers of students from overseas.
Higher standards are being attained, more children are going further in
secondary education, higher proportions are being educated at university
level, more post-graduate studies are being undertaken. All of these
trends are exerting considerable pressures on our education system.
Not surprisingly, these important developments are associated
with greater and greater demands on the resources of governments, although
private organisations, the churches, industry arid the individual citizen
are all making valuable contributions. It is on the State Governments
that the main burden falls since, under the Australian Constitution, the
prime responsibility for education rests with the States.
In 1960, 1,600,000 of the 2,100,000 children attending primary
and secondary schools in the six States of Australia were attending government
schools. This was 65%/ more children than were in these government schools
ten years earlier. Part of this increase has been due to the fact that a
greater percentage of children now stay at school longer but, in the main,
the increase has been due to population growth, chiefly by natural increase,
although the arrival of immigrants has contributed a significant share.
Clearly, to provide for these extra numbers, more classrooms have
been needed and more teachers have had to be engaged and trained. The States
have responded to this challenge. Their school building programmes have been
greatly accelerated, new teachers' colleges have been established and the
teaching force greatly augmented. The costs of this expansion have been
considerable and some figures comparing expenditure on various aspects of
education in 1950-51 and in 1960-61 illustrate the rate of increase. In
total, the States between them found it necessary to spend about œ 9184 million
on education in 1960-61 compared with about œ E46 million in 1950-51, a fourfold
increase. 
-2-
It is not the purpose of this document to detail the work done
in education by the States or by other bodies. The States themselves are
better able to do this. Its purpose is rather to draw attention to the
fact that the Commonwealth Government, too, is deeply interested in
education and contributes a great deal in one way or another towards its
financial support. It is recognised that education is a matter of great social
importance and that there can be no richer investment than the intellectual
and social development of our future citizens. It is also recognised that
our educational costs must continue to grow with the healthy growth in our
population and with the increasing demands for more highly trained personnel.
But the fact that a matter is important to the nation does not mean that it
should become primarily the responsibility of the Federal Government. Under
the Australian Constitution, some matters are the responsibility of the
Federal Government and some are the responsibility of the State Governments.
Education is a matter that falls in the States' sphere of responsibility,
not because of any lack of importance but because it is believed that State
Governments are in a better position to assess local needs and provide for
them. The proper role of the Commonwealth in this matter is to co-operate
with the States, but not to take over their functions. Where the Commonwealth's
responsibilities in other directions have involved it in some
educational or training programme, it has tended wherever possible to make
use of existing State facilities rather than establish institutions of its
own. This is. as it should be.
So far as financial support is concerned, the Commonwealth's
approach has been to build up the States' general financial resources. In
this way, funds that are provided federally are spent on education, no less
so than they would if they were given as direct grants for this purpose.
The difference is that, as things are, the States decide the purposes.
The year 1960-61 may be taken as an example. In that year
expenditure from the Consolidated Revenue Funds of the States ( excluding
expenditure on business undertakings) totalled almost œ 537 million. Of
this amount approximately œ E279 million ( or 52%) came from Commonwealth
general revenue grants previously known as tax reimbursement grants
and special grants made by the Commonwealth on the recommendation of the
Commonwealth Grants Commission. This means that for every œ E spent by the
States about 10/ 5d. came from general revenue grants. In 1960-61 the
combined State expenditure on education ( excluding expenditure on research,
art and cultural activities) was about œ E142 million. Thus, on the basis
of 10/ Sd. in the a total of about œ 74 million was money provided through
Commonwealth channels.
The other main component of the States' expenditure on education
is in respect of buildings. This expenditure is derived from the Loan
Funds available to the States for works and other purposes. In 1960-61
the States' gross expenditure from Loan Funds was about œ E215 million and
of this about œ E42 million ( or 20% o) was spent on buildings for education.
Again it needs to be remembered that the Commonwealth has directly assisted
the loan market to assure the States of a total works programme which might
be regarded as reasonable. The Commonwealth assistance to this programme in
1960-61 ( excluding amounts provided for expenditure under the Commonwealth
State Housing Agreement) amounted to about œ E57 million ( or 26% o of the total).
On this basis it might be said that the States' Loan Fund expenditure,
including that on education, was assisted by the Commonwealth to the extent
of 5/ 2d. in the This meant that the Commonwealth supported the States'
Loan Fund expenditure on education to the extent of some œ 11l million. 
-3-
What has been said above applies to State expenditure on
universities, just as to any other educational expenditure. But in the
case of universities it does not end there. The Commonwealth, in addition,
makes grants to the States specifically for university purposes. In 1950-
51 the Commonwealth began its present scheme of grants to the States for their
universities. In that year the total of these grants was œ E. 5 million; in
1960-61 the total was over œ. 11 million. Over the same ten-year period
State expenditure on universities has also greatly increased: from
million in 1950-51 to œ E17 million in 1960-61. If the Commonwealth had not
given special support, the maintenance of the present scale of operation of
universities would have involved the States in much greater expenditure on
universities, possibly at the expense of other fields of education.
Apart from assistance provided for State universities, the
Commonwealth maintains the Australian National University in Canberra.
Expenditure for running costs and for capital works for this institution
amounted in 1960-61 to over million. There are other ways in which
the Commonwealth assists universities. For example, the Commonwealth maintains
the School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine at the University
of Sydney and, in a number of other ways, supports university research and
teaching in particular fields.
Commonwealth commitments in the university field seem likely to
increase. The extent of Commonwealth assistance was greatly increased in
1958, arising out of the financial recommendations of the Committee on
Australian Universities ( the Murray Committee). For the years 1961 to 1963
the grants are in accordance with the financial recommendations of the
Australian Universities Commission, the body set up by the Commonwealth as
a result of the recommendations of the Murray Committee. A special committee
was established, in connection with the Australian Universities Commission,
to look into the needs of teaching hospitals, which are a fundamental part
of the training programme of medical students. As a result of the
recommendations of this committee, the Commonwealth has agreed to support,
on a œ E for 1 basis, certain capital expenditure at teaching hospitals
incurred because of their responsibility for training medical students.
The question of support for recurrent expenditure is still under consideration.
The Commonwealth has also set up a committee, again in association with the
Universities Commission, to inquire into the needs of tertiary education in
Australia. Its report is expected during 1963.
Support for universities is only part of the assistance given by
the Commonwealth to the training in Australia of able students at the tertiary
level. The other main segment of this assistance is the provision of
scholarships to enable these students to undertake their courses. In 1961
nearly 13,000 such students were receiving benefits as Commonwealth Scholarship
holders. Under the Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme, which is controlled
by the Commonwealth Scholarships Board, 4,000 new awards are given each year
entitling the holder to the payment of compulsory fees and, subject to a
means test, to a living allowance. That upwards of 17,000 young people have
completed higher training with the help of this Scheme is of great importance
for a community which has so many calls for highly trained men and women.
The need does not stop at first degree level and this fact is recognised by
giving strong encouragement to outstanding students to prepare themselves
for more specialised work. This is done by means of a scheme of postgraduate
awards which now enables more than 250 distinguished graduates to
undertake higher studies in our universities. The Commonwealth Scholarship
Scheme began in 1950-51 at a cost to the Budget of œ 9.4 million, whereas 
-4
expenditure in 1960-61 on Commonwealth Scholarships, including post-graduate
awards, exceeded œ E2.6 million. Other schemes are provided by the Commonwealth
to assist former members of the defence services, and the children of deceased
and permanently and totally incapacitated ex-members of the defence services.
There are Commonwealth grants to various professional organisations
which carry out training programmes in their own fields, such as the Colleges
of Nursing and Associations of Occupational Therapy. Some of these grants
are on a matching basis with those of the States.
All this, of course, is apart from the many institutions and
training programmes at the tertiary level which the Commonwealth maintains
for its own employees, such as the defence services educational establishments
and those of the Public Service.
The Commonwealth has a direct responsibility in the fields of
primary and secondary education insofar as its own territories are concerned.
In some of these the service is provided by State Departments of Education
on the basis of the Commonwealth paying the costs. There are school services,
parallel to those in Australian States, in operation in the Australian Capital
Territory and the Northern Territory; in the latter case there are, in
addition, Commonwealth schools for aboriginal children who have not yet
reached the standard for admission to the normal schools. In the Territory
of Papua and New Guinea, and in the Northern Territory too, where education
has the fundamental task of bridging the gap between a primitive and a
modern culture, the education programme depends partly on the help of the
Christian missions, who are given financial assistance towards the work they
undertake. In some of the external territories, especially Papua and New
Guinea, part of the educational cost is borne by the local revenues. In
all, however, primary, secondary and technical education in the various
Commonwealth Territories, internal and external, is costing the Commonwealth
almost œ E5 million a year.
An important contribution to primary and secondary education is
made by the Australian Broadcasting Commission which provides radio and
television programmes for schools. This is an example of the way in which
a Commonwealth authority is working in close relationship with State Education
Departments, and with advice of their officers, to supplement in an important
way what is being done in schools. These programmes, together with University
of the Air, are handled by a special department within the Commission.
Expenditure on these activities amounted to over œ E280,000 in 1960/ 61. Not
only the University of the Air but the general broadcasting activities of
the Commission undoubtedly contribute a great deal to the education of adults
in the community. Another way in which the Commonwealth has helped adult
education is by its continued financial support of " Current Affairs Bulletin"
by way of an annual grant for this purpose made to the University of Sydney.
Children who come to this country as migrants receive, as they
are entitled to do, appropriate education in the schools of the State in
which they live. However, an important aspect of the assimilation of
adult migrants in Australia an adequate grasp of the English language and
introduction to Australian ways of life is provided with the co-operation
of the States on the basis of the Commonwealth bearing the costs. These
migrants are encouraged to study on the voyage to Australia, and, after
arrival, in evening classes which are set up wherever there is a need for
them. Correspondence lessons and radio programmes are also provided.
Australia ' is vitally concerned with the Colombo Plan Technical
Co-operation Scheme. Since this Scheme began, some 4,000 overseas students 
have come to Australia for training and, in addition, Australia is furnishing
experts and equipment to other countries. At the 30th June, 1961, over 900
Colombo Plan students were studying here. In addition, over 1,800 students
were studying in their own countries under a correspondence scholarship
scheme. Several other schemes supplementary to the Colombo Plan are in
operation, including the Australian International Awards, the Asian Visits
Fund, the Korean Training Scheme, SEATO Aid, and, since 1961-62, the Special
Commonwealth African Assistance Plan.
A major recent development is the British Commonwealth Scheme for
Educational Co-operation, part of which is a Commonwealth Scholarship and
Fellowship Plan under which Australia offers 100 awards, mainly for postgraduate
study. There are also other awards offered to educationists from
the newer countries of the Commonwealth. As with the Colombo Plan, there
is provision -of experts in the educational field. This is not a one-way
traffic. Australia, herself, benefits substantially under this Scheme since
already no fewer than 82 Australians have been able to accept awards for
study in universities in other Commonwealth countries.
In connection with the United Nations Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance, Australia provides training programmes for some students
holding United Nations awards. In 1961, over 80 students studied in Australia
under this programme. An interesting recent development in connection with Australia's
international educational interests is the broadcasting by Radio Australia
of English lessons for Indonesians, using material prepared by the Commonwealth
Office of Education. By the end of 1961 more than 120,000 requests
for regular lesson booklets were being met.
Australia's membership of Unesco involves it not only in an annual
contribution to the organisation but also in associated activities in Australia
of educational and cultural importance. Many regional and national seminars
have been held, and valuable studies and publications have been sponsored.
These have been developed by the co-operation of a wide cross section of
interests in the Australian community and have stimulated developments in
important educational and related fields.
It is not easy to draw a hard and fast line between purely
educational activities and those such as the National Library of Australia
which, while having an educational role, have, at the same time, a more
broadly cultural significance. Grants are made to such organisations as
the Commonwealth Literary Fund and the Australian Elizabethan Theatre Trust.
This kind of assistance extends to learned societies, such as the various
historical societies and the Australian Academy of Science. Research
activities are also assisted, as, for example, those of the Social Science
Research Council. Cultural and community activities in Commonwealth
territories are extensively assisted. However, the costs associated with
this wide variety of activities have not here been included as educational
costs. It should not be forgotten that the Commonwealth encourages
education by granting certain taxation concessions. An example of this
is the deduction allowed for income tax purposes for expenses incurred
( to a maximum of œ 100O) in connection with the full-time education of children
under 21 years of age, estimated to cost the revenues of the Commonwealth
about œ E14 million a year. A further concession is the deduction allowed
for each dependent child between the ages of 16 and 21 years who is receiving
full-time education at a school, college or university. This is estimated
to cost revenue about œ 9750,000 a year. 
6
It could justly be claimed that the scope of Commonwealth
educational assistance is even wider. The expansion of knowledge is
one of the two main activities of the universities, and is carried on
co-extensively with teaching. However, there are some Commonwealth
instrumentalities which are sharing, with the universities, this
exploration of the fields of human knowledge, often in close association
with the universities. Amongst these are the Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation, the Atomic Energy Commission, the
Bureau of Mineral Resources, and the research establishments connected
with the defence services. Expenditure on these organisations by the
Commonwealth is almost œ 30 million a year.
The Table at the end of this statement sets out, for the
financial year 1960-61 and, where available at the present time, for the
financial year 1961-62, the expenditure of the Commonwealth Government
which is clearly educational. It does not include science and scientific
research, mentioned above, nor does it include cultural activities, general
broadcasting and television services, the provision of milk for school
children, or training activities carried out by the Commonwealth for its
own purposes. These activities between them would, if included, account
for more than an additional œ 46 million. Again, the cost to Commonwealth
revenue of taxation concessions in relation to education has not been
included. Leaving these aside, however, it will be seen that, in 1960-61,
apart from the œ B5 million which the Commonwealth may be said to have contributed
to the States' expenditure on education, the Commonwealth itself
in that year spent over œ 26 million directly on education. The amount
which the Commonwealth may be said to have contributed to the States'
expenditure on education in 1961-62 is not at present available, but, as
the attached Table shows, direct Commonwealth expenditure on education in
that year increased to approximately œ 33 million.
It will be seen, from what has been written above and from
the tabulation which follows, that, despite the fact that education is
primarily a State responsibility, the Commonwealth is making a very
substantial contribution to educational expenditure in this country. 
7
EXPENDITURE ON EDUCATION
Summary
A. Estimated Commonwealth Component of
States' Expenditure
Education proportion of General Revenue Grants
Education proportion of Commonwealth Assistance
to Loan Funds TOTAL
B. Commonwealth Expenditure
Direct Educational Expenditure
Grants Scholarships 1960/ 6:
œ. 000
9,453
11,274 3,648
International Educption TOTAL 26,634 1960161 œ 2000
74 ,000
85,000
1 1961/ 62.
11, 889 x
14,212 4, 058 x
32,772 x
Details of above Commonwealth Expenditure
1. Direct Educational Expenditure
Australian Capital Territory:
Current expendi ture
Capital expenditure
Northern Territory
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
External Territories ( Commonwealth
proportion only)
Commonwealth Office of Education
Australian Universities Commission
Australian National University
Current expenditure
Capital expenditure
School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine etc.
Australian Forestry School
Australian School of Pacific Administration
( Teacher training)
Australian Broadcasting Commission-
Education Department
Migrant Education
Lady Gowrie Child Centres
Total Direct Educational Expenditure 1960/ 61
œ. 000
914
1,501 KN
403 226
1,682 203 28
2,529 1,044 115 40
281
425 42
9,453
X Estimated
xN Includes capital expenditure on Canberra University College,
subsequently shown under Australian National University. 1961/ 62
œ 000O
1 ,069
1,103 550 K
363 x
2,280 217 29
3,200 2,020 121 x
40 xc
33 x
310 x
504
11,889 X 
-8-
2. Grants Grants to the States for University Purposes
Direct Grants to State Universities
Professional Training Organisations
( Nursing, Physiotherapy, etc.)
Australian Council for Education Research
Total Grants
3. Scholarships Austr~ 1ian Capital Territory Scholarships
Northern: Territory Scholarships
Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme
Ex-Service Training Schemes
Soldiers' Children Education Scheme etc.
Scholarships in Forestry, Agriculture, etc.
Assistance to other Scholarship Schemes
Total Scholarships
4. International Education
Colombo Plan Technical Assistance
United Nations Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance
SEATO Aid
Australian International Awards
Commonwealth Educational Co-operation Scheme
Asian Visits Fund
Korean Training Scheme
UNESCO Teaching Material for Short Wave Radio Lessons
in English
Special Commonwealth African Assistance Plan
Total International Education
X Estimated 1960/ 61
fœ 000 1961/ 62
2000
11,227 30 10 7
11,274 14,161 31 13 7
14,212
16
29
2,619 212 731 38 3
3,648 14
31x
2,996 154 824 37 2
4,058
1,572 287 165 29 50 21 8
115 12
2,259 1 ,767 371 100 X
134 23
133
2,613 x 



DRI Ck O ONTYDEVELOPME2 1N UEENAND
STAr. EYL NT BYr THE PRIMAE Wj7 IS TER
Thi. s afternno-i in Calnb! crra C&amp; I~ raiacvraltia a. j queeri-sla--ad
Ministero had a very laelpful and co-operative discussion relating
t. o the Queensland Govern-ment Is propcsals for the development of."
large areas of Bvigalow country in Central Queensland. The
Ccmmonwealth Ministers involved were Mr. HAc~ wen, Mrv. Holt,
Senator Spooner, Mr. Davidson, Mr. Adarmann and myself.
Queensland was represented by the Premier, Mr. Nicklin, a. nd the
Minister for Lands and Irrigation, Mr. Fletcher.
The Commonwealth Ministers made it clear thpt they were
attracted to tUhis venture as one which will, in substantial degree,
increase production for export from an area of Queensland not yet
developed but which very much lends itself to development.
The discussion revealod that the Queenslan~ d Government
had worked cut its development plans in detail.,
Coertain det'Uails of the-, iinanc. Jal * s: rangerants were
discussed and settlu2d, ai-d in theio iresult the Goveornments have,
agreed that the proposal illi now go ahead, the Commonwealth
a grcoing to find in the ciurrent financial yoar œ l, 65n. ( which is
theo amrount now sought by Queensland) and in the remainder of the
pla-ned. five year programme frhrannual contributions to take
the total-ever the five years to f-7.25' m. The finance will be
Drovided by way of special loans to the Queensland Government.
This decision by the Comonwal-thi to provide œ-7.25mn,
twr ds the doveJlop.-int o 7 th-Brigalow country follows earlier
decisioins to provide f~ m. for the construction of beeof roads in
Queenisland and a further.-œ C3, 31m requested by thea Queensland
Govornmeont for the sealing of the reads.
The Commonwalth is happy to be able to contribute
tcwe-rrds these. grcat' pr-oje-cts w~ lich ~ eka new phase in Queensl~ and
development arid promise greatly iiinereased returns to Austra" Lia
-through increased export output,
CAINBERRA,
6t'Uh November, 1962. 



PM, NxC. 3O/ C262
, ORTITl PRESS: DEATH OF IPS. 0 ELEANO_ ROOSEFVTT
Statement by t~ e Prin Min.* Lter, Rt. Ho, R. C. . lnlf: ees
Every Australian will be sorry to hear
of thie deat; h of a lady w. o was not only dI. stingii. slied
in hier own right anld who had a gxeat record of public
service but was also the widow of a very great'
American President0
CANBERRA, 8th November, 1962, 



HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
T HE D U KEO F EDI N BU R GH
P ROG R A MIIE
FOR
TUESDAY, 20TH AND WEDNESDAY, 21ST NOVEIO. ER
Prime Minister's Denpartrient,
8th November, 1962.
H I S R 0 Y A LH I G H N E S S 
7.35 a. m.
7.55 a. m.
8.50 a. m.
9.00 a. m.
9.15 a. m.
Remainder of
morning TUESDAY, 20TH NOVEVBER, 1962
SYDNEY
Arrives at SYDNEY AIRPORT by Qantas Flight QF531/ 587
Received by
His Excellency the Governor of
New South Wales
The Representative of the Government
of the Commonwealth of Australia
The Representative of the Government
of New South Vales
An Honorary A. D. C. to His Excellency
the Governor-General
Emplanes for Canberra Convair)
CANBERRA
Arrives R. A. A. F. BASE, FAIRBAIRN
Artillery Salute of 21 Guns
His Royal Highness' Standard is broken
Received by
His Excellency the Governor-General
The Right Honourable the Prime Minister
R. A. A. F. Guard of Honour and Royal IMilitary
College Band
Royal Salute
Inspection of Guard of Honour
Leaves for GOVERNENIT HOUSE
Arrives at GOVERNMENT HOUSE
No official engagements 
TUESDAY, 20TH NOVEMBER ( Cont'd.)
11.45 12.00 12.45 12.55 a. m.
noon p. m.
p. m.
Afternoon 5.30 p. m.
6.55 p. m.
7.00 p. m.
7.30 p. m.
p. m.
8.10 a. m.
8.25 a. m.
8.30 a. m. Leaves from GOVERNMENT HOUSE
Arrives at AUSTRALIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCE
Receives Fellowship
Leaves from AUSTRALIAN ACADE~ MY OF SCIENCE
Arrives at GOVERNMENT HOUSE
Luncheon NO OFFICIAL ENCAG MENTS
Receives iembers of the Executive Committee
of the OUTWARD BOUND MOVEMENT AT GOVERNMiENT HOUSE
Leaves from GOVERNMENT HOUSE
Arrives at PRIME MINISTER'S LODGE
Dinner Returns to GOVEcNMENT HOUSE
WEDNESDAY, 21ST NOVEMBER, 1962
CANBERRA
Leaves from GOVERNIMENT HOUSE
Arrives at P. A. A. F. BASE, FAIRBAIRN
Emplane for PERTH Convair) 



FOR PRESS PoMo No. 81/ 1962
VISIT BY H. R. H. THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH
Statement by the Prime Minister; Rt. Hon, Menzies
The Duke of Edinburgh has approved a programme
for his visit to Canberra on November 20 an his way to
Perth for the British Empire and Commonwealth Games.
The Minister for Labour and National Service,
Mr, Mc4ahon, will represent the Commonwealth Government
at the Sydney airport welcome to Prince Philip who will
arrive in Australia on a regalarly scheduled Qantas
Boeing at 7.35 aom. on November
After the brief Sydney welcome, Prince Philip
will transfer to an R. AA. F. Convair and leave Sydney
at 7.55 arriving at Canberra airport at 8,50 a. m.
While in Canberra, the Duke of Edinburgh will
visit the Australian Academy of Science for a brief
ceremony to admit him as a Royal Fellow of the Academy.
He will then sigi the Academy's Charter Book.
Prince Philip will leave Canberra by ROA. AoFo
Convair at 8,45 aom. on November 21, making a
refuelling stop at Edinburgh airfield before reaching
Perth at 5 p. m. WOS. T.
The next day, November 22, Prince Philip will
officially open the Games.
He will remain in Australia until December 2.
CANBERRA, 9th November, 1962. 
BA CKGROUND
TRAVEL The Duke of Edinburgh will travel to
and from Australia in a regularly-scheduled Qantas
Boeing. He will leave London on Monday November 12,
for San Francisco and leave there for Sydney on
Sunday, November 18. The return flight to London will
be from Perth via Singapore, Calcutta, Karachi and
Rome.
ACADEMY OF SCIENCE FUNCTION
The Australian Academy of Science has
provision in its charter for the election of a " Royal
Fellow." The by-law reads
" The council may from time to time by
resolution passed by a majority of at least
two-thirds of the members voting upon the
resolution elect as a Royal Fellow of the
Academy a Royal Prince who, in its opinion,
is eminent in respect of his interest in
Science." This is the first such election.
OUTWARD BOUND MOVEMENT The Duke of W. inburgh is patron of the
Australian movement, which is the same as the one
in England. The aim of the movement is to promote
team spirit truthftiness, perseverance, courage
loyalty, unselfishness and leadership and particularly
to develop the right qualities of character. At the
Australian Outward Bound Memorial Foundation school
at Fishermants Point, on the Hawkesbury River, near
Sydnrey, 28-day courses are held for boys from every
walk of lifeo The boys, aged from 16J to 19J7 receive
training in seamanship, athletics, cross country
expeditions, rock climbing and life-saving. Cadet
leadership courses, for boys aged from 19 to 25 are
also held,, The president of the Australian Outward
Bound Memorial Foundation is Rear Admiral Hø J. Buchanan.
CANBERRA, November 9, 1962. 



Keekn tFdexN%.
Week Ending 9th Feb01963
COMMONEALTH OF AU STPA LIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
Deputy Prime Minister and MirIster for Trade, The Rt, Hon. John
M c-wen
Beb. L. No. 89A
ti 5 No, 95
6 No. 105
i 8 No, 108 TARIFF CHANG-IS
OVERSEAS TlkDE
TOURI SM-SUBSTANTIAL EXPORT EARNER
TARIFF CHANGE3
The Treazurer., the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt. I. P.
Feb, 3 o, 87
5 No, 92 PETROLEUM1, SEAL",'-RCH SUBSIDY TAX3TION
COMMONWETVALTH LOAN BROADCA ST
The Minister for Ntional flese11.. oSneneant; o r the Hon. Sir
Iiif iiarn-. rpo onKJ, MMe
Feb. 5 Noc 94
It 6 Wo. 98 LA~ RGE OLL-S&amp; ARCH SURVEY IN GREAT WESTERN
LESERT, WA,-
7C'FORLOF OF STEADY AND SOUND EXPANSION IN
Ri3ILD~ IC INDUSTRY'
TheMinister -forTerritor-',, the Hon, Paul Hasluck, M. P0
Fob. 9 No. 1.3-COMMISSION ON TEPTI71Y EDUCATION IN PAUA
-AiD EDU: T*&amp; IO IN P: XU
The Minister for L-abour anl Na-5ion1 lLSerrvJce, The on, V1
M cM ahon
Feb, 6 No, 10:.
8 No. 111 F7-. 0i&gt; NP2 L ASSISTSNCE TO SUPPOPT NEW
A~ R RTICG~ m SCHFE
A" PPOINTBNT OF CHA1T. RAA'ixN OF THE AUSTlALIAY,
S'T VED'ING YNDU STRY AUTHORITY
The Postaster-Genel The Hc&gt; C Davidson
Feb. 5 No. 96
it 6 No097 TELEVISION RELA'. YS OER 00-AXIAL. CALE
NEW COCLO'U ED TELEPHONES
The Minister for _ Inigrrati. TheHlon, A. P. Downer, M. P.
Feb. 7 ' Lo, 1071 RC( OTrD ITTTTEREST I: N MIGUrATIO. N FROMA UNITED
KI N GDOM
The Minister for External Jiffairsl The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
Feb. 7 No. 107tD DECLR!, TION OF RUSSIALN DIPLCOMA'T PErSO-NA
NON 9111-iTA
The Minister for Pr. rirary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermarn
Feb, 6 No. 3.011AUSTRALIA'N ACRICULTURAL COUNC IL SCHOLARSHIPS
AWA* 1RDED
The Minister for the Ar , y the Hon, JO. Cramer
Feb. 6. No, 100 ARMY A1' fiOINTITMENTS
The Minister for Customs and Exciseq Sen. tor the Hon. Denharn
Feb., 7 No. 107 IMPROVED CUSTOMS FACTLITIES AT SYDNEY
AIR ORT INTERNAL'TIONAL TERMIAL''
L--
-2-
The Minister for the Interi orThe lion. Gordon Freeth
Feb. 4 No., 89NEW PlAV ILIONIJ TO BE NA. MED AFTER BIZAD% N
It 5 No., 91 VM1;, Tl71' Z ! UD' R EXa'j'. NSION
It 7 No 106 AUSTR *, LIAN FORESTRY COUNCIL TO BE FORMED
The Minister for the Navv. Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Feb. 5 No, 90
It 6 No. 1C2
7 No. 109
i 8 Nc. 110 MA-NY VOLUFTEETR2 FOR SUBM,-2INE SERVICE
NVY F02 CANB.. T7 CEREMONIES
OBSERVERS JOINT N1VY'S " SEEK AND KILL" SQUADRON
NA'VY FIGHTER PI110T NO'Z FLEET CHALAdIN
The Minister fur Supply, The H-on. AllenFairhall
Feb. 4 No. 88ESTABLISHMENT OF ROY', L VISIT 01.1? UNIT
The Minister for Reyatriation, Tbe Hon. R. 1I. 0. Swartz
Feb. 6 No. 103 MINISTER TO VSIT NEWC;, STLE
The Minister for A ir, The Hon. David Fairbairn
Feb. 3 No., 86
6 No. 99 AERIAL SALUTE FOR QUEENS ARRIVAL
RAA! F-RNZAF EXCH. NGE SCHEME TO DTE RE-INTRODUCED
The Department of the Treasury
Feb. 5 No., 93CONSOLIDATED 112 NUE FUND AT MORCH 31, 1963
The lcpartnent E rnal ffai-s
Feb, 6 No., .05A AUSTRAL1AN R L22EiNF' OR SIAR iAWK FLOODS
3 No, 86A CL. tLBI-JG P1R ASHORE ON HERD ISLND
X The Ministerf or Health, Senator ' the FIon. Harrie W. Wade
Feb. 8 No. 112PENGUINS FOR D-: NMLRK
With the Compliments of
The Government ? uifblic rlelations Office,
Parliament House,
CAINBERI-Vi. A C. T, 



0 0 0
PH
4-( 1) \~ 3Iy Lne N_
Week End inNv ; LO. r0 l6
COUMj-, &gt; Er. L7T. Hi OF A USTIZALTA
Irndex of Ministcrial S4taternrts Issua in Canberra
Tp jm. uy rnIt~ Mini: 3ter , ind I~ ir%~~ rfcPTpi'n 3 -the Hon,
John HMcEwei
Nov. 7 No. 1 0 PTIR[ PBENT OF (' W. T, jN!, ill OF ~ RP BOARD
j o. 266 Tt t'D E MI S0 T 7UCEjRT
The MlicJ ~ Ntoa ~ e~ e~_ eao'the Hon. W0H.,
.0 oonmer, M. M4
Nov0 5 ITo0 11( 87 UPVA. RD TIREND) T7\ lMrilF. L INDUSTRY
The 11iister f'or LaDjr an,"'_ National Sapryice, Thle Hon, William
M cViahon
7-No 9 INTlE-RNATIlONA,-L L. \ FOUR -0O1NF-CRECE INAUTAI
The M1Tin ist er for 01v1 A" viation, Senn., tor Sharte_ Palltrid~ we
Nov c. 6 Fo. 11391 ,, GRICUL~ TULJ " TCRS O O
Nov, 8 No, 1200 UCO1MaECIAL BRZO_,' AOSTTP* G STAI= ON NAMBOUR?
8 No. 1204! DISCONTINT. E 0O' POSTA'CB. E DU. E STtAMPS
The Ministeor _ for Incius-try Thc-, ( XF. A'dernann
ITov, 5 110, 1189 " KNOV'J YOUTJL TolBACC-oI
e n t. o the . rmry-Llho Hon, 0. C' 2, arer
i,\ To'V0 7 ITo 1J CH IFF C ST; I'l FOR 1st DIVIlSION
it 7 -No0,, 119-3 A-2:, 0679, G00-RE-LUIT TIN( X A1ED Eh) P-TCON PLLN
F~ OR KY20 OKi_. ArM 7-qC~ A M?
The Miniciter fr Lintrdr-1" xcisc.
No vr 7 Noc 916 T14PORT1LD SC! 7kTl_* RlOoFr OYAL VIPTT, 19) 63.
The hlinistcr for' tim. lnt, rloli, The Hion. Gordlo-! n F-euth
N cv. 5 Fo. 1 8 FE" UETR' AN PARK 7~~~ CATRP
7 No. 119' c, 2 AO PJBLILC HOL! DA,' Y
21taheMl Pt er for Poara T~~ n 10Vl-wr t z
Nlov., 68
: t 7
II 7 No. 1190 iSe. Sl. DOCTORl TO RETIRE
N a1 23 1ECS DI S.*_ AV!, NTAGlE OVERCOME
N o, 1197 ' TIN D~ Al~ P TY COMMISSION17ER TO TRANSFER
No. 1191 N. S. VvA HJ 3) TBIQQEST PER-CENTJi. GE
The Minist cx for tho lravySena tor tho Hon. J. G. Gorton
Nov. 8 NT o. 1202 TOA PLMMETA? D FRIGATEi SCQUA'DRON
9 NTo, 1205 MIDSIIMEIT CI, TC THE RAS
9 No, 120_ 7A FXElRCISE LLiDSCCS
' i~ tr Navv-Senat r -helon. J. G. G-orton
9M
Nov. 41
71 No., 1186C DRITAN1f. ARATING LEAV FOP tTK.
No. n86: 3 ANT, R CTIC 1-2RCY MISSION C1OLE
No. 1186A NAVJY TO TlRAINl M011E IPFRFINTICES
he~ fToenH~ oor; n ptce n Theis-e Huibert Oppermay'
Nov. 9 No, 1207 Fi. PBEV, 7LL BY OPR~. TO ASS. SELlCTA,' RY
( A1PDMIN. OF' S ez T. DE~ jPARLTPlL. NT.
S7 No. 2199 LIGHiTIOTU&amp; 2 SUPL! Y VESSEL TO Dr L, LALTCHED
The Minister for AL, The Hon, 1avi Fair'bcirn
Nov0 8 N 1201. Bl'iiJEKR FO C PEJRYTNG IN TASMANIA,
The DCPnrtrnent cf F~ r~ fax&gt;
Nov. 7 So0 11-9AMCURI/ Si1' DRSU
It LL N o. 16 ANJTAR CTIO E. X: PLOFLATI OI'T
The Deonrtment of the,: T5 ir FUYD-A1 TOC.[., 192
N0ov5 102189. U CCt~ Slt J 



FOURTEENTH COLOMBO PLAN CONFERENCE HELD IN
MELBOURNE DURING OCTOBER NOVEMBER, 1962
Consultative Coimittee Meetingheld on
12th November 2
Inauiural address by the Prime Minister, RtiHon, R. G, Menzies
Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen
It gives me very great pleasure to welcome you
all to Australia and to this Meeting,
We played our own part at the time of the foundation
of the Colombo Plan and since then we have maintained a very,
very close interest in it, I don't think that anybody
would have thought ten years ago that it could have reached
such proportions as it now hasE or have been r. sponsible for
so much assi. stance to new coun; ries as it has in fact
provided over the last decadeo All this is very satisfactory,
but it is ro real reason for us becoming smug or selfsatisfied
because there is much to be done,
One of the things that strikes the observer in
recent times I'll say broadly in the period since the last
war is that many countries have emerged into political
independence, political independence being something very
dear to the heart of man. but they have not necessarily at
the same time emerged in6o economic independence. There
are many politically independent countries in what is called
the New World which still have great economic problems and
one of the basic ideas of the Colombo Plan was, of course,
to try to attack that problem by giving effective aid for
the raising of economic standards and of living standards,
but great difficulties have presented themselves.
We have quite a few illustrations in these times
of great financial aid being given to nations financial
aid designed to help them to develop their own production
and to export the products of their labours only to find
that when they are ready to export them they are confronted
by high tariff barriers or by fluctuating prices or by some
other uncertainty in the world market which tends to defeat
the effect of the aid that they have been given. This to
me is one of the very great problems of our time. We discussed
it in London at a Prime Ministers' Conference, It has been
discussed elsewhere from time to time. I believe myself that
there is a growing consciousness of this problem right round
the world. For indeed it is quite clear, quite elementary
indeed, that a nation which is, as I have described it, coming
into the direction of economic independence striving to
back its political independence with a genuine strength in its
own country it is quite clear that that is a country that
needs to be able to import capita] l goods.
Even we in Australia who are, relatively speaking,
a highly developed country and a highly industrialized one,
still need capital beyond the amount that we can generate
ourselves out of our own savings. Fortunately for us no
doubt as the result of the resounding virtues of the Government
we still receive year by year very large sums of capital inflow
from other countries. If that is true of us it is doubly
true about a great number of the countries represented here.
They can't hope to produce all their capital from their
internal efforts and therefore they must be able to get from
overseas, capital, capital goods, capital equipment, of the
* o / 2 
kind that they will need for developing the resources of their
own country. And if they are to do that and not get these
things merely as a donation forever then they must be able to
earn these things by the export of their goods to the rest of
the world, This is the final state of national dignity when
each nation pays its way by selling to the world what it
produces and getting from the world what it needs, and that's
a tremendously important thing, not only economically but
humanly and we have, as I am sure you have, time after time
pointed out to some of the great industrial nations of the
world how self-defeating it is to provide money even on the
most lavish scale without contributing to a stability of
world markets, an assurance of world markets, some guarantee
that prices will be profitable prices, payable prices,
This is of the essence, I believe, of any new
economic world order and we must all work towards it. If we
do, the Colombo Plan will increasingly find itself coming in
aid of national development, a development soundly and hopefully
to be engaged in because of the knowledge that what is
produced will find a market in the world at a price which is
adequate to the labour expended on it.
I am a little optimistic about modern developments
on this. In the London conference of Prime Ministers, a
great deal of headway w'as made in relation to it. There has,
I believe been a considerable amount of headway, though it is
as yet a little indefinite, in discussions among the European
powers. But increasingly we, and for that matter, most of
the Prime Ministers who were at that conference, were convinced
that the problem I have just been discussing is at the very
heart of the developments of the next fifty years and, unless
the problem is solved, such frustrations will be developed,
such hostilities will be developed, that all the generosityinthe
world will meet a poor response. The real generosity in the world,
great as it has been in this Plan, onderful as it has been, the
ultimate generosity will be the helping to establish new nations
with proper markets'for wiihat they produce and steadily rising
living standards. This will be the ultimate proof of what's done.
Before I conclude Sir, I'd just like to say that
there is another aspect of this matter, it's really another
aspect of the same point, and it's this, There has boon for
a long time in the world a tendency to classify nations as
those who have and those who have not, and undoubtedly there
has been a big gap between the standards of living of the
heavily industrialized, capital-rich countries and those who
are in a more nrimary state of development. The trouble is
that that is a gap which tends to widen because the rate of
advancement in countries of great technological skill is mo:: e
rapid than the rate of advancement in countries engaged in
primary industy. Therefore unless we watch it we will find that
with all the goodwill in the world this is a gap which widens
and if that gap widens too much then the tensions in the world,
the hostilities, the misunderstandings will grow deeper and
more serious, And the way in which to avoid that, of course,
is again as I say, to take every conceivable step to add to the
rate of economic growth in the nations which I have described
as the newly-emerging nations of the modern world.
Sir, I know you have all these things in mind3 in
fact I rather gathered from one paper I saw that this is going
/ 3 
3
be among the thneom es that you consider on this occasion, and
so I content myself having taken up your time to that extent
by saying for myself and for the Government how delighted we
are to see you here. Nobody would have expected ten years
ago to see so many nations represented here, such a diversity
of interest and of talent, and if, bet-woeeon all those things,
you can't produce some results which will add to humanity,
add to civilization, add to growth and brotherliness, then I
shall be grievously disappointed.
I welcome you very much, 



' TT i!? ET! NG OFYT'ii' -HEDERAL C KRqCI Li? p
L_ 13BLP.! I P'" f~ i Qi? ThLD ~ T CABEW
ON 13tLh NO19R 1S20
Spe.; ch by the Pr ,; ne M, in ister, the 21. Honft, G. M enzies
Mr0 President, -adies and Gcntlemen;
I nk I ou ghhtt o b eg i nn by m!, king ra persona. cxplna11tion.
I am not really 2osponsiblc for these tw; ins. ( Laug hter) The reason
YI asn1 her1 this moriing tha, st I v. as soim( ewhare els3. Tha" t's
a vry sensible reason, I was opening the Colo bo Plcan Conference
in felbourne, I viornt domw. n yes t erday. Just before I left tho news
was broken to me about thse t;: ins, so vihen I . rrived in ~ Jlboune
I drove straight dow., n to havo a look nt tlhm. I didn't r-cognise
them in the picture in the ' ISun" this hiornizig or -lh. tevc-r paper you
rcad. ( L= ughter) One of them in th-. t picture looks singularly like
Jiinston Chuchill ( Laughter) The other one'Is features were not
visible because he was bellolw; ing, but mj son assure-s me that he
bears a striking resemblanc to Lindsay Haissett the cricketer
( Laughter) So life is like -this and h-ving got over this shock, 1
ocened the(' olem--bo Plan Confernc fnd here T jr
I think I ought to begin by rnking one or two personal
references, The-first I an sure you woulci a11 wish mc to make is to
B3ob illoughby, Bob Tiilloughby is emost a-bloe aind devoted servant
of this Party, ( hear, hoar) There's no doubt about tha,' t. Bu t in
spite of the uncomfortable positicn he is in, he will go down. in
historiy as the only dievoted and a-bl se-rvnt of the Liberal POnriy
who ever wiont fishing on horseback. ( L-'-aghtcr) And I must say thiat
I scize the opoortunity of speaking abou-t him in a friendly way because
110,! s really been a very remark! able man for us ever since he wis a boy.
The second thi. ng I ould like31 to say is a-bout the President
one of my very oldest a1nd closest and stoutest political associatesa
wondrrful man who lways pre-tends that he's not. That's Phil
McBride. ( i_ pplusc) He vijas kind enough to send me an indication of
what he was going to say, this morning and I cast my eye over it and
I saw that with his swxl we. ll, 111 say no more7 than that he said
that I VIoulcl say something to you about far-reaching events shaping tin
history of the i.. orld at the mo-omnt. rfhaI;' a good assignment0
( Lau. vghter) But I can say so-mething about some of them and perhaps in
a chee-rful zay, because if' there's one * thing that stands out in this
calndar year so far, it is that though our majority has been ; kctchy,
our moralo hlas been good. ( Hear, hr) And I, mysl1f, fel that we,
have made distinct progress in the politicl field in the last nine
or ten months. Only the future can prcve whether that's true or fallse,
but I feel i. t and I think ost of us at Canberra ;, ould feel that that
Wa-s so, Our opposition hasn't been trmendously effective. It's been
aanddd eda s tof orin onuurm boewrns pbeuotp leI , ctnh y' t htvhei n kb aededne din tog oodre mfiiagrhktaibnlgy sihn aptae-. lent9
Thcrcefre, I can report to you most hopfully about our Federal
political position,
 dl noi, Hr. Pre sident, you sai. t sometAhing about farreaching
events shaping history, I won't endcavour to cover that
ground but I -, would ] ike to say soofthing or or purhaps three of
them, The first relates to recent cvcnt-t. s in relation to Cuba, w* hi ch
are not events confining theminsulve s to Ce ba! but I rbec, i ieve eve
of most tremendous histoi. c significanc F ma7y vrvy well be in due 
-2
croiitrse that -people vic look ' Lack -" nd wri. tc . aut these things and.
in that Pre sident K. rjric dy' ac tion in rla t ion. to Cuba, was one of
,. bre tarn-iLng points in moderin pclit . co 1 history, in mcoern internationol
history0. . App]. ause) T hA-ae no apologies whtvrto ma,, ke when 1
tell you that when his was coming through, ve were about to
be~ gkn Cabiincet meeting, and we dliscussed Jt, ( and we agrced that I
should go in at half p~ ast tw,, o when theC House,, mot and maku a c]. ear-01out
s9tat( ement on this matt er. There are al. l sorts of peopl~ e who want you
to hcs-itate andC Say9" 701 lot's Sec w--hat somecbody else suys0 " a
wvill b-the rcactions her-or there," The fact is that the Statemcint
e.~ odn . behalf ct Iiustra li-wls the firs: t ett~ c; in su6po! ort -that
Presi-dent Konnedyv had from Lny 1C-ou-ntr. y. f he_: ar) ( Aplase Ad
as I am sure tha-t, likc nyseif, youo attach onomous J. sportance to
AUs rji-* a bein-g en rapport wi-th the United Statos of A'mrica ii-thfle
defence of ourti soemrity and the scurity of the freUe world. youa will
un1derst-and, 1 Iho w J. imr. portant thi as fro-m oiur point Of vi. cw.
I su-0-oss that * L. i-Je aLre i-eocle in Tnhta T knoi-w that there
arc-.~ pe hr tha L h g. iO.( Tfr Plmtrratina i s to be
s~ lightLv isoitationi . st, pr4s nx; e; nuf. OtOr to u'se
tb( e: 1mrqe ite -:; roinI1 ic on-liod. 1thl-ink peculepl of-J
this kind, and there are oi~ c 1. lo on t1he lf-wing of our op~ onents
w# ho think-that pCOrpic of A -' tninmda st ha. ve IALd ! a trem endous
aw,. akeningr in thr-li-st termL or fou~-ocnr rhv, hey ha~ ve senthe
prodding, the pushing, the th: s~ nrgof the SvicA Union halte d i~ n
Cuba and indced,, retrceat in Cub, beaue ne( ri-,, in r~ iep-srntIn!" ' an
~ mmenpoYoe fu. cunr rid beimry, h4Iimsclf, o-f .' tr ng miinc. a ndl
oviros ~ saic4 ' This i~ s yo stop., I haeboon 3 ookirip foxr this,
bdoi ng for thi4-s for two or throC yar. I 1hi1ve ha,_ d teo orInt
of di;_ seu. ssi_' ng thirj,-s with Prcs i. dent ,.,', iush, 3hc-v tis) mmr is 11o A. o
He'Vs an earthy,. robust crc o btf'orL those tom or--three yeIar , s
ha; 1ve been. syn to oro of my friet-n ds, and indecd t many of my
friendls, is jncued-e," ic. th. tU a e1 " ilumense3 powier, with i'nmerise
T-Owo-' 1behind him -ai. ther-efoe he must be o~ hcr t ' Ii P.. rlsident of
the TUnit-ed S-tatoe oDr the PrILmc ii a of Grecat Britain the timeinast.
come ahen that man vzwill si~ t Jrwn, physica lly or mecta-ph or ica 1] y
opposite6 KhrusD1. hcv-and -ie. ll himd 1" 1-iis is vwh1, orc youA stop" ( and make
Khrujshchev baoli ev Thirtt' s theC esseatial point, Bcausa old K9
you know, r,_ gardq most1 of the Jstr talk as bluff, Ile smiles a-nd
shrugs, hi s shoulders am.' seys., ll the-y won' t do anything,"
Now$ on -this oeoasion~ acti. on hI occurrd, strength has been
maifsta nd in the.. result, this is the first good thinry that has
happened fra the point o:_ L v'o h free vcrld since -the d wcr
bcgro+. n0( Hear, hear) are not to bstabout it e ": re ntt
pretend that this is uh end of the contest, Of course it isn't. But
i~ t Ls 0. measure, a step, aa exhibitionT of ultriainta h ol
has nu-' d-' ed fo , long tlime , Land * iat tb1Le world now has.
Trhese. left-wingerS t h i rowL\ s ri 1 to stand aloof. Well
T sup1~ cse there is something rathier comfortable bout Au.-strali-a
standIng a-loof f1ro. m. her fr.( Is,, lout iul. we be hbape y if' our friends
stood LsIlof from Aucstrali-a.: a Tlite-v ne-ver thin. k Of ti; they never
thirl. of rnatual agreemenclts as haviipg fl -tw--way operat ion, Itner
to these lotwnoewio ( fter Zal1, no doubt, esr the
ComImunist success in -the l. ong Imm, it nerOccurs t1-o them to thinkc
that all those things go twor, 1. ays, " Jo arc, a smal. l country, a
relat)_-ively wieak country and Great Britain is a rol. ively large
coun-try a-nd the United S3tatos of c aL AVvo ra tl lag conr with
enormnous strength. B~ t all thebl,( co-antriJes nced friends.. It's
very importanlt to lbe among them.. 
Irre m bo Soe c1sao ing a. spcech n the ' aerican
Conqress, taking thais as my, text., 1 said, " You ko9righ1t through
the l1iu_ 1-t0en* th century and inlto. the tx-irntieth century, Great Br. itain
waS the greates) t pow% cr in the; wold. 1 many fri. ends did she have?
,, ot Not nary. in Europe there was resentment there is
resentiment of gr At power, there i~ s alw.-ays jealousy of gr et
) w e. i Th. e whole skill of Br. itishi dip]. omacy in thl-e nine-teenth centujr
, was ce -r-cised in ordar to prevent unmity, resentime; nt, in this
LEdropea-n eoiuntry7 or that fremn blecoming too c. 1o-ar,. If the French
raferrkcd to Grela Br. itain as " oefiiol bion", it wlas a m-, x. e
manifestation of this fact thart in thei history of nations enormous,
power will always produce, or, the re-bound a. s it might be, honstiliti" es,
jea]. oas-Jes, re3sentUMents0 And so., T said " You, th initce tts
now the greatust power in the w orld, have -pl. ty of-, critics, Plenty
of' opponents. Some of those whfom-you ha~ ve helped most resent the
holp nest. You re ltike Great Britain in the nin-e-teenth century, you
nfereu nd an Iam ha-ppy to say, s can say about Great Britin
itself that wo, in Autaiare yo-ur frio-nds," 1Mid they uonderstood
this cc-fnileteiy, And it's true,. Vic arc not to blow out our bags and
think t'Uha-t we ara -the iptatpeo-ple w-vho detonTAine the cuirent of
events. That's not right. But we are al. ways to realise tha~ t a
W counrtry like-our owin which inifest-s i1ts fredhpand associati on
always has, in the Long riu. ng a-p:;-opor Lndvanta. ge frcnm it. An d
the-ef ore I re ject thuSe 1( 1deas of isoilatilonisi: i, But f or those-,
Swho like to suggest, -to hint~ aitl that we oughi-t to be neutralist,
W keep out of troublo., they muist hc_ ve le-ar. ned a lot i~ n the la-st tort.-
n~ ight. Aftor the, grc--t oxporntent of non. n)--lig-r. ment in the whole
of Asia has been Inidia and ndia f inds horse-lif, ha., ving kept L_ her
bridge., ys with Coriunist China9having int3erpreted the 7.. Iest to
Comm,-tunist1 Chi-na and having so_, ujht' ! 3id very properly too to
inteorpret Coirziunist China to t* lh kJest, now finds hers-. 1f, in breach
of every -u-e of deconey, iltwaded by Corn-nnist China, fighting, and
in a sense. fighi--ing for, her life. I thl. in'k -this will. have scrile effect
on neutralist ideas in the world. ?' edorri h-istory contalins no record
Sof any neutral ation hich9 by its neuitrality, 0 chieoved JL1mmu1-nity from
Wattack1 ( and wihen it is attacked, it needs friends, and when i~ t needs
friends, it -nust, tthat extent, forget about non-alighment and say,
" iConte and help Jell, we've no;-ver been non-aligred, vie' ye never
Sbeen neutrcal0 have all our lin-s cut and-' ha-ve h. ad tLhcr, out for
V many year-. S I. r 0 don't need to make " any specilal n-ppeals, Nowi I want
to say no mnore about that. I imerely say that I -think that this
episode the e-pisode in Cu ba and the episode in India will
have a marked. effc. t on contemporary history and. the effect wi-lL be
one which ought to be entirely favoura-bie to our owni ideas and oLU own
nationa---l sccurity, Ntohwr~. -sascodmte ht I wauld like to mention,
M1r. President and that is the declaration made by thue A. L. P. in
fa-vour of a nuc'-ear-fre-e S-outhern Hemiphe, his a at li..
emerged0 This is the.-! Labour I'Par ty's policy0This is a by-prod uclt
of what I've chosen to call is! ola1_ ticenism or hooing-to -be---lef t-al one.
And they say, l'Well, now, let's start b-y saying that So-uth of' the
Equator be. ause that, Ilieei the So:)' uthern Hemisphere
ev-ything that v; e can do wi'll be dune to see that there i~ s no
niicle~ ar establishmecnt, no use, of nuo. lear weal-pons, no storing or
application of nuclear wea-pons. This is . a cordon sa-nitnire around
the wold the equ-_. tor, w-. ith 1Aanus Isla-nd south of it and our
Territories souLth of it of coi-rse, o'jrsc]. e south of it. " ell,
this to rde, as I said thie otherL' nig.-ht in Sydn! ey is the very definition
of suicide,, Beca,. use if i41t is su-m:.-osecd noean anything, it means thnat 
wc mutlsay to ou~ r nular-pwer associctcs to Grant Britain, to the
United States of ATmrica -" ILook, sorry, we are delighted -to be with
youi. il') SEA'XTO, we are delight'ed. t: be w, i th you in INZUS, but if -there
is anly attack, you must unaerstan..-tha-. t unacr no circumstances do you
deploy nuclear w. e apons south of thc-. equator0 1Do you suppose that
the United States of Amrica wfcuid to! leraie such nonsense for half
a minuate? I jelly well kow~ v they wouldn't, you Supp'), ose they are_
going to enter into obliga_ 1tions with us as they have in bot)-L-h S" EATO
and ANZUS and then ble told byr us that if nuclear eaosare used
from the north of' thec equator and come down, they must Stand
munchance; they can t use any retaliatory w., ea-pons frorm our territory
or, indeed, if we hav ou afa n onry south of the equotor.
This is noDnsense0 It exhibits a comLIe te confusion of mnind. I don't
be'lieve myself that n,. c. 1car weapons ought to be spread iniiscriminate.-
ly around the wourld. I h( ave more than once indicated' that f or oursr-
l yes i-we do-n' t desire tf-ha-. ve nuclear weapons because, there Pre a
lo fcun-tries who don' t desire-to-have( _ nuclear weapc'_ ns0long
as the-y are-in th.-hanrds of' two,_ or threc great powers~, withL some
feeling of responsibilit1y, then the:-cha. nce of an accidental nuclear
war will be subs-tantiali. y dimiinishied c'nd) therefore we have never
saild, " Sprinkle them aroundJ." But suppose there is a grent war.
Do w~ e need to be w~ armonggex~ s suppoSe such a thing? Suppose there
is a, great cconf. Lict in the, wcrld, fand Suppose nuclc.-r wieCaOons are
being used., are woa so bent on scoIf-destructi on th,-t wie wo uld say
that iunder those cir; umstancos our groa-tt allies are to keep clear of
us and to) av,' id usingl our terr ito_-ry -to . laun) ch wcapons, althoutgh thAt
ight be the -olace from-, whi~ h to laciuh thnfor aL determining
strategic blo. hen I said ribmotuht. this in , Sydn ey, I noticed
my distinguished frien-1, the Leader of' the Opposition, said he
nppears make a statement eac'h weckend, Arthur doe-s " This is
sill1. y0 It, alrecady applias in Artaroti-ca," Did you notice that? As
so) me newsopapar sa-id, " Dow cuorq thle peniguins, to! re ds, no ta lk of
nuclear wr. I i'c na ' alking -about ,. ian beinig. s i g grat c utry
like ou-rs wh-ich will sni. ieday be much, greater an ab: t the ultimate
euity that-,-we must ha-, ve in the face of nuclea-r Cc mmu-anist attack0
119 there it iS0 I don't know. I get al] ittle virried a-bout the
Labor Party in my Pa-r., iamont, 1 know).-. nothing ib-out * tcone in
vo1.' k-r Heyv, b', vt I gt ' w rtr d about th one imy
Parliaiment,, becausc they Icwyits lbte , known, soecf thom, that
tbey have no ckcrnnecticn with the ( Comuists, yet they seem -to ha,, ve a
remoxkable coninity of id+ eas wi,_ th thei n o: Is-ie of these nmatters.
The other day s milebcdy took the ti+ reuble tc; send mei a copy of t-e
Comunist Rnvieow, awell printcud pa-per it ought to be, the
Coimmui . s t IParty ha--s more moneny to spendl tLha-n; I think, the Liberal
Pa,) rty. But there it is the Coimnujst Review. And there is apowerful
a-rtic'le by ' Mr. Ral. ph Gibso-n; who I th-ink once did no -the
honlour of stainding for K.. ooong bjut,, anyhow, he's a! very promi.-nent
intel]. cctu2. am,-ng -the Cor~ xmu-ists. Iaj I read You just two Passages
fromitan-' they are not without value?
" The newi stage oi the arprepara~ tions of' the McI~ nziez
Government was dictatod by tijo Aerican im-pria_-li; sts
who want to maike A triaamornuclear w, a r base
directed rvgainst 1 eh ris ing peo) plce o-f South Ficst Asia.
in the light of this wc ca-n seeo the tremendo~ us im-. portance
ofthe A. L. 111 dcclara,, ticn in fLv(; ur o f nuclear-free
A ustra. lia aid La rKea-reSo) ut hern Hemisphere. That
decla-ration outs . Fz cos h p. icy ol' the United
States Governmient , nd , o 
Vell, that's a gccd, forthright obsorvation. Th-n he goes on to say
to himslf, " Now how did such wisdom emerge œ ron the L. L. P. at long
last?" And he urvides the answer. " The A declaration is the
result of years of action by the forces w:-rking for peace." ( You know
who they aro) " Years of growing mass revulsion against the horror of
nuclear war." Then he goes on to make a glancing reference, as we
say in Parliament, to the r. massing and arching of hundreds in
Canberr, and that's had a big effect on Federal politicions. And
thereforc, he ends up saying, " These ideas are a part of Labor
Party trodition as reflected in the Hobart decisi: ns cf 1955, in
several suceches of Chifley and in the declaration against the use of
Australian military fores in Malaya. It is an urgent question for
the whole Labor movement that the AL. P. should ta. ke up the sanc stand
on Viet Nam and the other South Eastern countries as it has traken up
on Malaya0Now, here's a remarkable brotherhood of mind, dcn't you
think, with tho Communist boys taking croedit for this glittering
result. This well, this declaration and quite frankly, I am not
going to use its extravagant language, I wi: uld regard as preliminary
notice by the '. bar Party if it wins the ne1xt election, that it wi. ll
cancel the NZzU S pact. It must me-an that if it means anything,
unless scm. ey is f oolish enough to think that a great power like the
United Stats, suppcsing it becomes involved in a great struggle, is
going to allow its allies in the AZUS pact to retreat and say,
" Nothing doing. You must not launch any of your powerful attacks
from our soil." Ncw this is i serious natter, It is a iatter that
I have, myself, had the opportunity of discussing in ,' ashingtcn It
is not to be laughed off. Le. t the La. bor Party go into office and
let them apply this policy and I venture to say that the relations
that we have with the United States, so zealously built up over the
last ten or twelve years, will suffer an irremediable blow.
Now, Sir, * he next ma. tter th. t I thought I might say a word
to you about is, end I sup ose it can't be avoided, the Common
Market. Ian not going to encdeavour-say anything very fresh on
this matter because there is nothing very fresh to be said. I think
the outstannding dovelopment in the Common 1Market negotiations since
the Prime Miinisters' Conference has becn that the Givernment of the
United Kingdon has had an overwhelming vote in the Conservative Party
in favour -f g: oing in and only the other dlay, had an overwhelming
vcte in the House of Commons to support the stops that had been taken.
Now you may, as I sometimes do mysclf, 1wVrhne-teh er that is a very
good negotinting positin to be in. You nmay wonder whether it is a
very strong positi, n t; be sa. ying t' the Six when you are negotiating
with them, '" ell, look, we nust go in anyhow." I would have thought
it was not, but still, they kniw their business better than I do.
But I think we have now got a point when, in all probability not
certain, of course; nothing is certain but in all probability, Great
Britain is going in. Therefore, we will have to think of this matter
increasingly as one of the facts of life. In all probability, within
twelve months, Great Britain will be a meiber of the European
o-munity. hat effect that xill have on the Comamnealth structure
I have spoken about at grma-t length with c-nsiderable empha. sis and I
don't want to argue about it. Personally, as you kno, I think that
loose confederati. ons either bre-k up or they get closer. They end
up by a dissolution of the idea or they end up as federations. That
has been the history in the United States; it has been the history
in the . e1st Indies where they began to think they had a federation
but because the pulling-apart forces were too great, it broke up and
now we h-ve a series of separate Conmonealth countries in thu ' West
Indies. In the Federation of RLhoLesi-. and Nysaland, where Sir Roy 
6-
WplarnskXy Is struggling hard to pro-serve the Federation. though the
odds appeav to be sli-ghtly, at any rate9 against him,, the pullingapart
mrovement is on_-l Thersfore, .1 have rJesolved 01l th is
cons titutional thning in my owrn mind by saying, 11' W'el1 yoru go into
Euro-oe, you to" Ll us, and I believe you, tha t Iroi; don u want to go
in-, to a federation, you don't want tGo become a-state-in a federation
of Europe9 but you do want to got the advantages th-at can be got
out of aon economic union, Out of an increased home market, oto
-all t~ he prospect of grec er efficieoncy and lower costs and rruore
things to sell -around the world. We]. oi I understand tGhat, but if
you go in like that, you must want it to succeed, you mtust want
to get the highest possible measure ofl economic unity and the more
of that you get, the nearor you are to a political federation."'
W~ ell 91 I hop-I will be wrcong on tha matr out as nobody would
engage in the nonsense of going into the . nirope-on ComrmunitGy with
the i-. dea of breaking it up but Only with the idea of building into
it and holping it to b,-ai d itself to more and more unity and more
and more strength, then it seems t'Uo mo to be practically inevitable
tha-t feder-al ioolitical pri nciples will come to be applied9 that
theire w-i11i be a considerable concerting of political policies of
Lill sorts and that In the rosults, Groat BRxitain will tend to become
a State inaLrpenfdrain hat is not a vi( ew that is
universally hold., I heold i t myself very st( rongly and have expressed
it in the Con-ference in London as clearly as 1 could. The British
Governrnent Cdoesn't agree with it, 9 but the1y Will be akn thie
decision, and if they mrake theo decisi'on and. if their-m-ovemtent into
Europe becomes a ; rofound success %, rA if thiis str2ength1-ens the
econom.-y of Great Britain, * Uhn we w1. all be ha, bu-ewl
have to revilse some of otir idoas of whaIt the Comlinwealti. mer-ns.
Still, 9 I have had to revise so ma-l'ny myself in my own time that
porhiaps 1 can. r accormodate myself to ancthor revision,
But one thing doe; emerge from it, that the old
days of the patter-n of tria0de in * Lhe Co-rm-i: cnoalth11 based on free
ent:. Ie-and ornpreferen-es all thcse m-utual arran-gemrent4S that
have1 ben gon nfr: o marny years -are comifng to an end and
we willJ ther-efore increasingly havc, to stand on our own fee u and
pursue our own trcding poJlioics ar. d, try -to persuade countries all
round the world to agalrzee witii thir&gt; That means tL-wo things for usone
that cuir alrod great act-ivity of Promot~ ing overseas -trade
wigL-. 1. have to be increase; od more and riore. We are suacceeding, I think,
raLhor rakbyf-rm whait conversatis I've had, in getting more
and Yrore ranfcue~ in Australia to Lndorst-and that they must
nanuffa cture for export a s well as for1 the local mi-arket. because until1
we have roaeh. ed a stage in wwuetrnla exports Of manufactures
ass2Jine a subscantial place i: i oiur export income, we will be subject
to recurring t.:: oublas aboat onlJances o" payments because our Dsto
iw. ill depend almocst entirsly on whLetire-r wool goes up ox-wool goes
down or' whether-there hias been a droughtl in wh-eat Or whether sonething
1happens aroun. th-e wo-fld
EXPOrt" s Of' manuf( actures a". e ever the next ten to
twnyyears, ' vita], to( a heanthiy state of Australia's bale,_ nces, anid
. L think that more wvad mnore manufacturers 3re roalising thnat0
have not quite a few,. whio havo told mc that they ha,-ve . oome to realise
t. hat in order to get trni-E extra b1usi~ nes-s i~ t would pay them t11o 3ell
w. ithout pro-FJJt or to sel]. at a loss in order to ' Lind their way into
an overseas market and this'. of courso, is true bec~ ause their
turnover is goLig to have a grreat re,, lation to their ultimate costs
in Australia and we oan~ t have these -thYings done by pushing up the
cost) of the prima-wa'y industries, They are now, and they will be for
many, many years' to corie, t~ qe vryc: Koart o-f' ou. r international
economic existence. The second aspect of thnat matter is one that I made
somae reference to this mo-. ning in Melbourne at the Colombo Plan
Conference0It was greatly Cdiscussed in Ljondon at the Prime 
7
Ministers1 Conference, One of the ironies of the post-war world
has been that great nations like the Unitod States of America
and small nations like our own have, in varying degrees, found
very large suns of money for the economic assistance of new nations
in the world, particularly in Africa and Asia, particularly, in
our case, in South East -sia, These great sums of money have been
found and they are designed to help these countries someday to
meet their political independence with a measure of economic
independence, enable them to produce more things on their farms,
in their fields and in such factories as they develop. But when
all thatts done, what happens? Some of the great donor countries
will then say " Sorry, we can't take your commodity, We have a
tariff against it or we have some protection against it, and it's
just too bad," The result is that, particularly the more undeveloped
countries, but it also applies to us, have been living for
ten or fifteen years on adverse terms of , rade in which they find
the average price of their exported commodity falling and the
average cost of the things they buy from the rest of the world
rising, This is true of Australia, There has been a tremendous
fall in the terms of trade so far as we are concerned it goes
for a lot of these other countries that I have in mind and,
therefore we have been advocating that rather than think of it as
a mere master of money-in-aid the great industrial powers of the
world ought to sit down with the rest of us and work out commodity
agreements which will maintain a reasonable and. payable price and
an adequate market for the things that are produced in the
countries that get the aid,
The old slogan not so very old now was
" trade not aid" and for once it happens to mean something. If
you could raise the prico and maintain the markets of the primary
commodities produced in Colombc Plan countries by five per cent.,
it would do more good than all the millions and hundreds of millions
that have been paid to them. This is a very great problen in the
world and we propose to continue to devote our efforts to it.
Indeed, we have a selfish, a properly selfish interest in this
matter in Australia because if the old traditional preferred
market is to go, then we have a lively interest in having world
commodity agreements which will enable the things we produce to
pass into adequate markets particularly in the Old World, but to
a large extent in the New,
Now the last thing, Sir, that I want to say is
this, We have been in office now for twelve years or more
it's getting near thirteen years it's been a very remarkable
period. In fact, the whole post-war opriod in Australia hs been
very remarkable because so mrch effort has been directed and I
don't say improperly to what I will call the redistribution of
wealth, the whole social service structure, the whole taxation
structur e These things have been designed, consciously,
unconsciously, both in the direction of redistributing, of gebting
rid of the acute chasms between great wealth and great poverty,
and a remarkable job has been done in that field, But we are now
reaching a point of time when ou:. great task is not just to think
about redistribution as if the thing to be redistributed could be
taken for granted; we are beginning a period in Australia in which
our major task is to create to create wealth, to create more
resources, to create trade, because to redistribute a static
quantity with a growing population is, of course, the very
definition of despair. It is a creative task, and this is the
Party to engage in the creative task, Not a party that has old
shibboleths of socialism hanging around it, but a party that really
believes in its bones that the task of governmont, when it sets out
to create, is to encourage the private citizen to create, to
encourage him to have confidence, optimism, a conception of the
I 
-8
f'u -t Ur 0,0 I'liis coraative ts:-rising pop ulation, new resources,
raarlia s td-is I t-h-ini:, the Prea tes t challen go thiat we have
had a: nd a!-1 I can say, Mr,, President, is th. at if tlhu, Liberal Party
of' Australia can't Meet tLatl. challengo, nobody can. We wouLd be
denying the verNF reason f'or ou: r ex. Jtstenc--: if wel rocoile-d from such
achallenge, It is ouro task todU o h hU tig eas
the Comonwealth. p-owers a,, re limited., but to g" Lve effective loadersi-
ip, encou: L-v Yell; nt., ex~ r. n. ple, Jn the task of" louildlng up the
resourceS, 7 the we-. lt'a of Astralia, logwith. its population, the
trade of Aut~~ aalong with its population so tiraL at the end of
th'-e next twelve ;' as-and that is not impossible at the end
0of the next twelvje years do' be fri* Lghcene-d, I won~ t be here then
at the end of the next twelve years of Liberal administration. we
will be able to look back over a pe. riocd -in which Austr_-alia has
accepted thne challenge and has done great things0
Ithlik it was thc othe: r_ day in Lithgow that I
ventured to offer an observation obout " knockers" and " knockers"
who are anxious to teoll you at a. ll timues that Autralians wonvt
work, that thney d. o -this or the-y don't do that all this miserable,
wretched attitude0Well, of Ccourse, there are some loafers in
Australia, 7 but there are far-more acti-, ve and energetic people. You
have only to look1-. around you in this country to see the things that
have boen dono in -this country and thLat hiave been clone in the last
dozen vears in this country and you have -to feel proud of the
people who did thaem0 Of course triero's plenty of energy. ] plenty
of ingenuity, plenty of uinderstanding of these things, but wVe have
to give up being " lknockers" l about our ow,, n cour. try,,
And if I may oancludo by saying it, what t'Llo Liberal.
Party wnts, in its organisation right thiroughout its structure,
is a little p-ri* vatc-slc " onwt h kokr Plenty
of " knockers", about. Pl-ent'. y of people whfo know wcell they can
do it. Bu~ t the people whlo vot tha.. gs dono in th-_ is world are not
the " knocken-s but the CTreAtcrs, and wherever you find a crea to r,
you will find a " knocl-c-" to ma tcahmedw r o ihu hm
Not without 0~ ouY hmhavcel h2ad ,.-: pericnco of this your
Ba n ches, in your Divisions, going around " Oh, Well, T dont
know0And whaen a follJow -says) " I don't know" in that fashion,
it' quitc7 oblio0u hat ho-. dr; nt-t know,-J and he oughit to ho told,
ALne. so 1 say " Doi-mr withL thei Clknockers' up with the people who
want to get-things done" 0heoau~ so flr'om wherever I may be at the
end of* * thtpor'-iod and _ L , Jouldn' t like to k[ now xwhoro would
like to-be ab ' Le to look--up or down or back or around and fool that
th-is gr: eat Party already a great P'irty ftad played its great
part in creating thel next sootIon of anew and great !. ustrQ ia. 



No, 8.3/ 1962
FOR PRESS MEETING OF SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LIBERAL
SENATORS AND MEMBERS
Statement by the Prime Minister_, Rt.._ Hgn. RG. Menzies
I have this afternoon beei interviewed by
South Australian Liberal Senators and Members.. Those
present were Mr. Downer, Senators Buttfield, Hannaford and Laught
Sir John McLeay, Messrs. Kelly, Forbes and WJilson,
Meetings of this kind are by no means infrequent. My South
Australian colleagues have at all times actively presented
the problems affecting their own State.
I have informed them that on Monday next I will
be attending a Conference with the representatives of New
South Wales, Victoria and South Australia in relation to
the proposed Chowilla Damø. It will be remembered that the
economic value of the proposed dam having been established,
I undertook on behalf of the Commonwealth Government that
we would find a quarter of tho cost, following the pattern
previously established in relation to other River Murray
works. There have been some delays, but I am hoping very
much that we will be able to achieve finality on Monday.
It is indeed important that we should, since this additional
water storage is of vital importance to South Australia,
A deficiency of water is South Australia's greatest natural
disability, and my Government has for a long time been ready
and anxious to help to repair that deficiency.
While Sir Thomas Playford is here for the Conference,
I will of course take the opportunity of discussing with him
other outstanding South Australian requests in order that I
may not only more fully inform myself on the facts, but also
that I may learn of the order of priority that attaches to
these various proposals.
CANBEREA, 13th November, 1962. 



62/ 145
ANNUAL CONFERZ; NCE OF
T L:
NATIONA! L FARMERS' UNION OF
AUST ALI, A HELD AT CANBERA
ON 15TH NOVEMivBER 1962.
.2. Lecn &amp; b the Primo Minister, te GMenzies
Mr. President and Gentlemen
I was thinking of the nrme of your body, the
National Farmers Union and that naturally rovoked in me
thoughts about the importance of a measure of unity among
organisations which represent primary producers and I know
that your own body represents a very substantial move in
that field. It has always been important, it has always
been difficult, because if I m! ay say so, having been born
among them and seen a few of them since the man on the
land is essentially an individualist, t hasn't been an
easy task to develop organisations of yciiur kind, but it is
tremendously important that that kind of work should go on,
I believe that we are, increasingly, in a period in Australia
when the highest possible degree of concerted opinion and
concerted advocacy on the part of men on the land will be
needed. I dontt say that in a gloomy way, hut I say it
because I think we are entering a period of very great
challenge. ! e have this challenge confronting us, as a
matter of fct, in several ways.
First of all, we hiiave all been exorcising our
minds about the Common Market and I dontt propose to make
a long talk to you about that becaus, really, there is yet
very little fresh to be said on it as a result of whlat has
or hasn't happened in the last six wee* ks. But I do think
that we all reaise that unless these negotiations by Great
Britain break down compl. etely, which is in the highest
degroe improbable I would havs thought, then the terms on
whichl Great Britain wi. ll ultimately enter the E. E. C. must
have an impact on what has bean our traditional pattern of
trade. We can't expect in the next six months or twelve
months or whatever it may be to find that we are going
along the old aths and existing in the middle of the same
pattern of Comonwalth trade. Those things are going to
be changed, And because they are going to be changed and
because the markets that we must look for and explore wil. l,
themselvces, tend to chsngeo tLhen it becomes infiniteJ. y more
important that the views or primary producers as a wholo in
Austiralia, in the defence and promotion of their owvn interests,
should be, as far as possible, fully concerted ones,
There is another aspect of the matter, One
of the great problems that has confronted Australia andt
we are not the only one to be confronted by it in the last
ton years has been the remarka1le decline in our terms of
trade. Our export earnings, in terms of value per unit,
price per unit, have tended to decline, Our import prices
have tended to rise and in the result, the termis of trade
have moved steadily against the primary-produacing and exporting
countries and, of course, steadily in favour of the highly--
industrialised countries of the Old ' 1orld TLhis is a
reciprocal process in whiiich Great Britain derives a benefit
we are not complaining about that but from which we derive
a marked disodvantago And it's because of this decline in
the terms of trade that a lot of the best minds in the world
have been concentrating themselves on the prpbj. ems of producing
a healthier international position in relation particularly to 
primary products, to r eot some stability of price, to get some
payable element in the price, to get sone stability of market
and of opportunity of increasing access to whatever the market
may be, This is tremendously important and a good deal of
discussion occurred in London and indeed has been cccurring in
the last week at Brussels in relation to international commodity
agreements and as you know, Australia has been one of the
pioneers in this agitation. It's tremendously important,
I was down the other morning opening the Conference
of the Colombo Plan ard there you had represented a great number
of countries, new countries, some of which we had never heard of
probably five years ago. The Colombo Plan provides money, and
we have found substantial quantit. ies the United States of
America immense quantities of money, but every now and then it
is necessary to remind the donors particularly the donors of
the great, powerful countries of % he dest, that an increase
of a few per cent, in the prices of the articles or goods that
these people produce would be worth more than all the direct
cash aid put together, I think this truth is beginning to
be realised, We found increasing realisation of it in London.
I am certain that the President of the United States is
intensely conscious of it Ilnow that and that he hopes
that his new Trade Expansion legislation will enable him to
make a contribution to this kind of thing by exercising his
tariff powers to encourage a freer flow of international trade.
But there it is the terms of trade the urgent
importance, if the world is not to get completely out of balance,
to have primary production in relatively unadvanced countries
like some of those of South East Asia, in relatively advanced
countries like Australia, but, in any case, in any country in
which exports of primary products are of the essence of national
solvency, able to develop or create expanding markets. There
is the urgently important matter of international agreements
which give effect to that desire, which provide for payable
prices and which give some stability, without which you will
have all the up and down and all the uncertainties and with
those uncertainties of income, the periodical balance of
payments crisis in Australia with drastic measures having to
be taken, There is only one way in which we can get rid of
these occasional emergency actions and that is to get a greater
stability in our export earnings and if we can, then I believe
that we can stabilize our costs and everything else in Australia
much more satisfactorily, Now the Government, of course, will do what it
can on this. I assure you this is a problem very close to
our hearts, but it is essential if I may say so, that you
should never let us forget about it and the right way for you
not to let us forget about it is for you increasingly to
concert among yourselves and with other organisations, united
policies, because after all, though you will in a sense be
pursuing your selfish interests, you will in a much truer
sense be pursuing the best interests of the Australian nation.
The other thing that I want to say to you which
has a bearing on this point the reasons for these challenges
that we have is that Australia is going through a period of
most dynamic growth, and when a country is growing in population,
growing in resources, it encounters all sorts of internal
strains. I suppose they might be described as growing pains,
Here we are with a large immigration programme. I've not met
anybody who would abolish it. I think it is held all round / 3 
Australia to be of great value to this countryo We've all
adhered, to a policy of full employment and I don't hear
anybody today challenge the desirability of that, e adhere
to a g: reat number of these broad national policies because
we believe that these are the conditions of Australian growth
and yet they are all fighting each other in a sense You
can build up your cost structure by a migration movement
which is not quickly absorbed into productive activity in
the country; you can build up your cost structure and full
employment becomes over-full employment with bidding up for
scarce labour and a high rise in the costs of production in
the metropolitan industries, You can have all these tensions,
these difficulties. All I want to say to you is that this
again presents a challenge. This is particularly perhaps a
challenge to government the challenge to keep all of these
great national objectives in balance so that you have your
development of secondary industries and of tertiary industries
without floating up the costs of the primary industries.
Then you may have a full development of primary industries
at effective prices without interfering rith some other
aspect in the overall national programme. It isn't easy,
but then nothing is easy that matters. The real task is to
keep these things in balance.
There are quite a lot of people in Australia
who seo one oroblom and see no others, It's our job to see
the lot and to keep all of these considerations in mind,
But, living as we do in great cities like Canberra, we
perhaps hear a little more of some aspects of this great
naional problem than we do of others. And, therofore I
come back, Sir, to what I said to you never be afraid to
maintain pressure on the political mind, It's an age of
pressure and I don't mind, I am an expert at receiving it.
( Laught But 1 have9 from the very beginning, taken a
groat interest in the National Farmers: Union and I hope
that you will continue to realise, Sir, that my door is
always open when you have views: that you want to put to me.
I hope that your Conference will be very
successful, I now declare it open. 



FOP, PERS' P. M No._ 851S2
DOMESTIC JET -EUIPMNT AND AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT
PRO GRAIE
Statement by the Prine Minister, the E on._ R. G Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today
a programme of airport development throughout Australia which
will allow the introduction of jet aircraft to Australia's
internal air routes after July, 1964.
The airport programe involves construction of a
new Melbourne airport at Tullamarino, a new international
passenger terminal building and other major development works
at Sydney airport in addition to runway extensions already
approved, and important airport works elsewhere throughout
Australia requiring a total expenditure of about œ 30 million
in the next five years.
Mr, Monzios said the Government had approved the
purchase of two heavy jet airliners each by Trans-Australia
Airlines and Ansett/ A. N. A. and expected to be advised of the
airlines' positive aircraft selections after November 18th,
Both airlines had indicated to the Government that
they preferred to introduce heavy rather than light jet airliners.
The airport programme will bring the all-time total
Commonwealth airport expenditure at Sydney to about œ 20 million
and at Melbourne to about œ 17 million.
Mr. Menzies said the now Melbourne airport at
Tullamarine would be doevloped for international and domestic
jet traffic by 1967 on the , O0O-acre site already acquired by
the Government for approximately œ 2.3 million.
The new airport would have two runways, 8,000 feet
and 7,000 feet long, with high-speed turnouts from runways to
increase traffic capacity, taxiways, aprons and a modern
terminal building to accommodate both international and domestic
traffic. The project would include the usual engineering and
other scr. ices and the airport would be equipped with the most
modern air navigational facilities, including high intensity
lighting and instrument landing systems.
Runways and aprons would be designed to handle the
heaviest aircraft types contemplated for civil airline operations
throughout the world.
Mr. Menzios said that the Government had acquired
a large area of land at Tullamarine and overseas airport experts
who had seen the site were unanimous that it was ideal to serve
a developing city.
The runways planned for the airport could be adapted
if necessary to meet future traffic demands. While Essendon
Airport remained in operation, the new runways could be used
in co-ordination with the existing runways at Essendon and the
Tullamarine-Essendpn Airport complex would in fact provide a
multiple runway system which would be operated under a single
Air Traffic Control unit. o o o a ./ 2 
0
Mr. Menzies said the Government had approved the use
of Essendon by domestic jot aircraft as an intorim measure until
Tullar arine was completed. Jet aircraft operations would have to
meet any meessary restrictions at the airporto
He said that with the œ 5 million already spent at
Essendon and the acquisition of the Tullamarine site for mcre
than œ 2 million, the works now approved would bring Commonwealth
expenditure on Melbourne's airport facilities to more than
œ 17 million. Mr. Menzies said the new international terminal area
at Sydney Airport would be designed to handle not only the
existing large international jet airliners, but also more advanced
airliners which might be expected to use the airport later.
The now terminal area roquired the construction of
a new international terminal with the necessary aprons, taxiways,
and other facilities, It was planned to be in operation by
1968. The new Sydney terninal area would cost about œ 4
nillion and this was additional to the cost of extending the
airport s north-south runway into Botany Bay which would bring
the Commonwealth expenditure on Sydney airport to approximately
million. Mr. Menzies said the major domestic operators had
recently modernised their Sydney Airport terminal buildings.
These would remain in operation for some years.
Ho said the new internati. onal building would have
every modern amenity and be a world-class international air
terminal. Sydney was served by nine international airlines and
the now terminal would be designed to meet the foreseeable demands
of air traffic growth.
The Sydney Airport programne meant that Sydney would
have runways of 8,300 feet and 7,500 feet.
Mr. Menzios said that the benefits of the introduction
of heavy jet airliners by the domestic airlines would not be
confined to air travellers on the trans-continental and other
blue-ribbon trunk routes. As the jets went into service on major
air routes some Electra and Viscount airliners would be available
for introduction on other domestic services and this would result
in a genera], improvement in airline services throughout the
entire domestic network. This would involve considerable airport
works that would be carried out over the next three years,
These included runway and apron developments at
Adelaide, Hobart, Mount Isa Kalgoorlie, Townsville, Lae and
Coolangatta, as well as at aunceston where the Government had
already approved an airport runway and building development
programme which would cost more than œ 1 million. These works
would be in addition to the normal airport development programme
which cost the Commonwealth between œ 1.5 million and œ 2 million
a year, and included a very substantial amount granted to Local
Authorities under the Aerodrome Local Ownership Plano
This plan, introduced by the Government in 1957 and
already accepted Ly more than one hundred Local Authorities
throughout Australia, provided for grants by the Commonwealth of
per cent, towards the cost of the development and maintenance
of airports owned and operated by local authorities, 0 0o */ 3 
~' rMenzies s,: id t -e nt-oi-t~ ioIIf. e irrf
AuI'tL aian internal air r outes wvould be " ne r'ot imf-portant
post. wa: aCdvance in Australian do-: stic ai21r ser-viceL-S0
Af ter-Novembe-r 13, bo iUh a irlines would 1' e free-to
apply to tho Minister for Civ--il Aviation, Senator Shane ? altridge,
for periission to or'-Ier the heoavy joIt &amp; Jircraft of thci~ r individual
c 1-o CO The Gover-nment, as yet, had no Positive indication
f r oi either airline ol' -ojrofer: Dnce for any one of the three
av,-ai'lable-aircr1aft in this class.
The aircraft , iere tthe Britisha-built de Havilland
Trident, thae American Boeing 737 and tiie Frenchn Carave-lle iQA.
It was roco5: nisad that reg-ardless of the typo, or
typos, selected, the new j. e-ts would be introduced by two
experienced air. lines each with a fine record for, thei efficient
introducti1on to service of new airliners,
Mr. Menzics said both airlines had indicated that
thecy would wish to purchase smallor je arinrsa alae
stage of their re-equipment progranme. 1s. These jets would be
a Viscount roplacor~ ant and, on presont indi1cations, bothi airlines
showed a preference for thle British, twin-Jet airiir, th
BAC One-Eleven0 However, they hnad made it clear that they would
also Consider the French Caravelle 6R9 the DucIF8an h
American Douglas 2086.
Mr. Manzios3 sai. d the Goverornent decision on domaestic
jot ro-equipment and thie Yiajor aiL-rpor-t programme it mado necessary
war--an indicat -ion of the immor-tan'u role of officient air
tiransport in a developing conitinernt,, Aviation has mado an
ussential contribution to Alustralian lieand the introduction
of rnodor-n jot aircraft to o-Lr dcnc.-stic, as well. as international,
air routes was in character withi Australias i ole as one of
theo major avlation countries of tae world.
CANBEBFLA November, 1962. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No, 861 62
DEATH OF LADY DE LTISLE
Statement b the Prime Minister. Rt. Hon R. G. Menzies
We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Governor-General and his family, Lady De L'Isle
was a woman of quiet but remarkable courage and
devotion to duty. She had an appealing charm of
character and manner which those who knew her will
not forget. This is a sad day for one of the most
closely-knit families I have ever known.
CANBERRA, 16th November, 1962. 



MESSAGE TO BE INCLUDED IN ADELAIDE " ADVERTISER"
S3' O'IL SUPPLEEN TO M TH OCCASION OF
SOUTH A LIA'S REACHING A P01' UTION OF
ONE MILLION
This is a most significant moment in the
history of a great State. It is not often that a simple
statistic can be exciting but the achievement by South
Australia of a population of one million evokes mental
images that can be a matter of pride for those of us
who are growing old, and of stimulus for the young.
When 126 years ago your first settlers under
Captain Hindmarsh stepped ashore at Holdfast Bay, they
brought little but faith and courage. To them and to
their successors, native-born or immigrant, we owe
thanks for the works and development we have inherited.
Against the competition of sister communities
in more richly-entdowed parts of our nation, South Australia,
under wise guidance, and with strength and spirit, has
built well-a flourishing economy with a growing balance
between the fruits of the soil and the products of the
factory. It is indeed a time when South Australians may
congratulate themselves. To those congratulations I would
like sincerely to add my own, R. G. MENZIES
CANBERRA, 17th November, 1962. 



Wi ! lklyTd. ex-No. 1 6
COOY~ AT'HOF 3T-RhL'
Index, of 1-iiistoe'ia1 Statements Issued in Canbe-rra
TDi). ty Primec~ inho -nd œ inictcx' fo. r Tr'ade. The P. Hr
TJohn ~ cw-,
Nov. 15 No. 1226 INTERNAPT IONATJ-COTT1 0N TEXTI 1) 0 APPR ATGEl M: EN,\ T
If 15 No. 1228 JAPAJL. DTRAD TAPL-KS
r'Che Minister for Defancc, The Hon, Athol Towney,
Nov. 15 No. : 1216 TiNDSTRIAL AllI'jl'JO COTJSE E-NI). S
The Postma-ter-Genercl1. Tqhq Hon. Da-vi. cJson
14 No, 122) 4
14 No. 12,25
15 No. 1229
15 No. 1250 CHANKNELS FICR COUTRI'Y TELEVI SI. ON STAT IONS
R,', DTOTFLFEPHONE SERli" VICE TO PERLU
E X T L; NSTIN OP COMMOWEATi CA'BLErl TO S. E. ASIA
OPENINCGIiJ EIT TOTi. AT L TELEVV ISZI'O N STJ. T IO-N
The Minister forIminungatcon, The Hlon0 o'e~ iP
Nov. 11 123-2 O7NE THIRD OF MIGPAITTS MA. RRIED AUbTRAu LIANS
The Min otr-aru~ r Thie 1H,. n. C. P. .: 1( 9ernmann
N ov. 12 Eo. 12,141 BIG CONTRAC" T SIUTED T' oP SUPPLY OF A1US TR~ L1.1AN
D JhY PRODUCE TO iIIPPINES
The M-. inister the_:. t-ej~ Jocrre
Nov. 12 No. J. 23_ 7 iAORRM Y ENGINEIUP FOR MAlA: j-YA
If 15 No,, 12 2 7 C. V F ISCCTSS ONS
The hl r s t i -focr zhe Nav, Senat or the lion. J. G. Gorton
N ov. 12 No. 121-3 . AP FPI32= kTE VISc-IT IDA
15 No, 12 19 NE'. W" SEAMANSHIP YA" CHT FOR PA. NCO
NN1o , 1222 NEV; FiNAL A'PP0OINTfvMmNTS
1-6 No. 1231 NAVYALETED FPOR ROYA,' L FLIGHT
The Miister fr Helh eaor the Hon., Harrie VV,' Wade
Nov, 11 No.
If 12 No.
The Minister
Nov. 14 No, 1211 COM'lPULi-SORY TUBERCULOSIS X-RAY SURVEY IN
CANB14ERRA'*
1220 PROPOS11l. TO CONTINUE SIREX WAPCAM,',' PAIGN
for cluppnLj The Iloi ,* Allen. Fairhall
1225 SKYLAR', K EXPERIIET FOR R. OYA" L SOCIETY
SUCCESSFUL.
The Minister for Rot'At ion, The Hion. R. W. C. Sw~ art--
Nov. 11 No,
1! 11 No0.
It 15 No,, 1208 ED-l" UCATI'ON-SCHEME GROW-' N
1209 NEVl,! REPAT'RIA; TION) FOR TSAI
121 THESE MEN STIL L c,-* b'VE
Thc l ,1. nio--ter for A ir., The! Hecn. Da,-vid Fairlairn
Nov. Il No,, 1210 " NIGHT EYTI" FOR ITEIPTUNF
-3 No. 1218 OIPICER TO COP-MAN D RAABMER VJING
.16 No. 1232 CR.! EW. TO 1FLY DUKE OFl EDINBURGH
The regartment of Ex-ternoj il fhis
Nov, 12No, 1215 * XUSILLL't N3 AjN* D,% P1W," --' qALI-NDFRS STRANJDED IN
With the Compliments of
The G-overn-aent Pulbli; c oton Ofie
Parlianant Houae9c, Bip A . T
Nov. It it it 



62/ 1 6
OPENING OF TRAINING CENTRE FOR " GUIDE DOGS FOR
THE BLIND" AT KEW9 MELBOURNE, ON 17TH NOVEMBER,
1962.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. R. G Menzies
Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen g
I was very glad to be reminded not only when I got
here but on the way here that this is in my electorate,
and all of you who have the misfortune to be my constituents
had better have a good look at me because the way in which I
neglect my electorate is well known and, you never know, you
might not see me again for six months. ( Laughter)
I'm not going to detain you for very long. It seems
to me to be a rather hot day and it is going to be just as
hot in Canberra, I don't mind telling you, because it was
pretty hot when we left there this morning. All I wanted to
say to you, in declaring this centre open, was that I believe
that the process of civilisation is beginning to get on.
Civilisation was supposed to make enormous strides in the
nineteenth century, I sometimes doubt it. Civilisation is
in the heart and in the mind, and is not always to be assessed
by looking at material things.
This century has seen, I think, two very remarkable
developments, One has been the vast assumption by communities
of legal obligation to people who are less fortunately placed
than the average. The extension of social services in the
modern world has been phenomenal All this is good. All
this is a splendid element in getting rid of extremes in
social life, and in fixing in most of our minds a sense of
obligation, But it is not enough. It is not enough that we
should think that all our obligations are discharged by writing
out a cheque for our taxes, accompanied by a suitable volley
of unprintable, and indeed unprincipled, language. ( Laughter)
Tha's not good enough. We have and I am happy to say
that Melbourne is a splendid example of it managed to
preserve, over and above our sense of legal obligation, our
human sense of obligation, our understanding of the fact that
no great body or institute or group or centre which is designed
to give human assistance to human beings can succeed unless
it has human assistance from human beings not just doing
their legal duty but going the second mile. ( Applause)
Those of us who have the great good fortune to enjoy
our sight think of those who don't, always with a feeling of
sympathy, but perhaps not always with a feeling of understanding,
There was a time in our history, not in our generation but in
past times, when people who suffered from infirmities which
set them apart from the normal run of human beings in normal
activities, were regarded as odd people. God had laid his
hand on them and there was nothing that man could do about it.
This was an uncivilised idea.
We have, in recent years in Australia, thanks to the
devoted activities of people, many of whom are here this
afternoon, brought about great changes in this matter. Human
ingenuity has been exercised. A compassionate interest, not
a condescending interest, but a compassionate and understanding
interest has been brought to bear on these matters. And in
the result, in our time, many of us have seen brought to the 
service of people who are without their sight first of all
the superb faculty of being able to read. The invention of
Braille all the things that have gone with it reopened to
many a world they thought they had lost, and opened to some a
world that they had never gained. This was I think one of the
great events in modern history, not always remembered, not
frequently remembered, but we all have it in our minds this
afternoon. And then along came broadcasting. Very interesting
that the name of Jack Davey should be associated with this
memorial, because broadcasting brought into the lives of
people not able to read, not able to see but well able to
hear and to understand, a new source of entertainment and of
instruction. Why some of them here today have even enjoyed
the ineffable pleasure thanks to broadcasting of hearing
me being insulted in Parliament House ( Laughter) and returning
the compliment with great spirit and decency. ( Laughter)
( Applause) But broadcasting it was really, when you come
to think of it, the next great step braille for reading,
broadcasting for hearingø
But that left untouched the auestion of what the
Chairman, Dr. Prior, has called nobility. It is not always
easy for a sightless man or woman to be taken by the arm
through the traffic to the shops, around on the daily chores,
by another member of the family, and the discovery that you
could train highly intelligent dogs to be their friends,
. uides and companions is, I venture to say one of the great
social discoveries of our timeo ( Applause)
Whatever disabilities we nay suffer from, not one of
us would wish to be unduly dependent on other people, We have
a healthy feeling of independence, a healthy pride, a healthy
self-respect, and to be given the means of mobility, of moving
about, this is a great thing and I like many of you, am looking
forward to seeing a little bit of this work this afternoon.
I confess, with shsme, I have known little of it, but this
afternoon I have already begun to learn a great deal about it.
I little wonder that some of the generous, splendid citizens
I see around here this afternoon have devoted so much attention
to ito This in short, Sir, is a further exercise in the
development of civilisationo It's taken a long time to come,
but I believe that in our tine it is beginning to come and to
come fast, because let me ropeat, this is scmething in the
heart and in the mind. It does. n't douend on what you pay, but
on how you feel and how you think, because they will determine
what you do, And today we have a splendid modern example of
what can be done.
I venture to say, Sir, that thanks to the work that you
and your colleagues and other people have done, you are
initiating a new era for many, many people and an increasing
number in days to como, and that as a whole community we can be
very thankful that these differences, though they are technical
differences, yet have a profound influence on human conduct
and human outlook, are being elim. inated, not only by the march
of science and skill but by the warmth of the heart and
understanding of our citizens,
Sir, I have very great pleasure indeed it is a very
great honour to declare this Centre open. 



62/ 137
JOR PmS ~ I P. M. No. 87/ 1962.
Flags on public buildings in Canberra
vill be flown 6t half i= t on Monday out of respect
for the late dWy Do L* Ise. Other oranisations
in Canberra flying flags are invited to fbflov
this example.
CANERhA, 17th rovmber, 1962. 



DINNER IN HONOUR OF RABBI DR. H. Mo SANGER
ON THE OCCASION OF THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY
OF HIS MINISTRY IN AUSTRALIA
Held at Melbourne on 12th November_ 19621
Speech by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. RG. Menzies
Sir, Rabbi Sanger and Ladies and Gentlemen
I wonder if I might begin by paying a small
tribute to Mrs. Phillips, ( Applause) I have been informed
by reputable people at this table that she is now 100 years
old. Looking at her, I don't believe it, ( Laughter) If
it turns out to be true, then I think the one error made
tonight was that you should have compromised all your ideas
and had a Scottish pipe band to play " A Hundred Pipers and
a and a ( Applause) o
Sir when I agreed to come here, that wasn't a
matter of great difficulty because at least twice I have been
to Alma Road and I have made a speech and then I have sat
down and then I have listened to Rabbi Sanger without
discourtesy explaining to me by his own speech how a speech
ought to be made. ( Laughter) And I have become his very
warm admirer and I needed very little persuasion none in
fact to come here tonight,
But having agreed that I would come, I of course
had to do my homeworko They sent me printed material
yes, I read my brief ( Laughter) I read a panegyric about
Rabbi Sanger which explained that he was sometimes impatient
this this oo. o and this and this and up to that point,
I said, " Dear me, how like me e is." ( Laughter) ( Applause)
But among other things that I was introduced to
was the fact that just as there is regrettable distinction
between the Church of England and the Church of Scotland and
the Congregationalists and the Methodists a conflict in
which the Presbyterians are invariably and inevitably right
( Laughter) so there are distinctions of a somewhat theological
kind between the Orthodox and the Liberal congregations of
your faith. Having read that, I realised, as my friend Mr.
Calwell who is here tonight would at once agree, that I am
the perfect nominee for this position because I am both
orthodox and liber,: al. ( Applau-se)
So it is not just a chance medley that brings
together, on this occasion to celebrate twentyfive years of
magnificent religious and commu. nity service, representatives
of a great variety of churches, representatives of utterly
conflicting political ideas this i! not a chance, not at
allo This is one of the occasions which demonstrates that
there are certain qualities of the heart and the mind and the
spirit that override all boundaries, ( Applause) In fact,
without detaining you overlong, I vouild just like to put three
questions about Rabbi Sanger. Three questions, and I would
like to answer them myself You Irow there is a great
advantage in life in putting th, questions yourself and
answering them yourselfo It was one chat I invariably denied
the witnesses when I was Mtaurice Ashkanasy's tutor at the Bar,
but I would like to concede it to myself tonight.
Has Dr, Sanger added to our civil. isation?
Civilisation being in our hearts and our minds has very little
EoB00 ooo. / 2 
to do with aircraft or television sets or all the mechanical
-triumphis of our century, Civilisation is in thie heart and the
mind. Has he added to it? And the answer must be
For twontyfive years he) h. as made, a contribution to it as great
as that4 of any other man in this city., ( Applause)
And my second question is: " Has hemade us understand
each oth'-er better?" At this point, I wou: ld like to say this:
Here I ami, a singularly unbigoted man of Seats descent, a
singularly unbigoted Presbyterian ( Laugb. ter),, a singularly
unbigoted Liberal ( Laugiter), a singulirly iinbi~ go-ted supporter
of Carlton in the football ( Lau liter), a singularly unbigoted
whatever you may care to say,, ( LaugLiter) But, Sir, I hiave
been -troubled not for a year, but for a fe-w years by the
feeling that there are still people -vwhIo think that there is
so0me bigotry in Australia about people oUteJws faith.
Now I bag of' everybody to foAa t Frget it,, All chips
. must come of~ f all shoculders on tGhis Ymatte--r0 This is too
foolish0i Too foolish This country ha, s been too enrichaed by
the contribution of people of theo Jew-ish faith to be living
in a dead age on those matters, country is -too conscious
of the hideous consoquences in th-e Old 1Tkrld of such bigotries
and hatreds and prejudiCes, I b.-eg of you and I s0y this for
oery man in; every pa: rliament in the Com~ monwealth of Austra lia:
forget about it,, Forget about % L-ot us understand each other
better, There is no reason wiiTv we should not, We arc all. the
same people, 14e live in a lovely country. We all have friends
from here a-, d he_-re and heira and I 1wiant -to say about ocir guest
of honour tonight -that no mran hias done more then he has to get
,) eoplo to shrug o--, ff theo abSu.-. ditics. these antiquated
absurdities and to make us ,, ll re&amp;' ce tht We have one task
itwh-atever may ! e to understand cachi ot~ her better and to
become greater and gpe-a ter contributors to a civilised life in
our own country, And Si. thrl t'i-t~ s a ge,( od word. ex-Moderator-
General thirdly -tiiatis an eXp-ression -well known i~ n the
PR esbyterian kir-k ( LraUghter) " Has ' De deepsnasd religious
foel-ingr in wheit ha's thi cntente3d to be a iuaterial and almiost
cynical age?" This is the most iminportant qluesti.-on oi' th'-
lot becauce tchis is a mateial age. This is an age in whiich
people are ' Goo, much disposed to oons-ider all problems in terms
of prof-it and loss; a cymical age because whoever oxhibits a
high-min'ded att-itucae to-wards a pl-oblein is as likely as not t
be asked " r1T, at is i~ n it for ' you' 1 Thais happens too much, too
frequently too del, And this Is or~ e of thie great problems.~
great spiri-. u. Ll prob-Lems of nur ago , ind I believe that our
distinguisheod guest has mam. Je a remarkable contribut-j. o-k tote
deepening of relig-ious feeling w-tth all its own standards of
values in a period of time inwhich w'e can become much too
easily hard2 eyni4cal, z.;, teriel, I was,: astonished to
find that be has been do. 4ng hlls workq1 b.-I s great work~ fox'
twentyfive years ten years longer2as ray distinrguis~ hed fiiend,
Arthur Calwell , zill tell you ' Lan P-vu been Prime Minister
of Australia ,3_ a ugat er U SElvir. veygaoht distinction
between Dr. Sanger and myself people will, for some
obscure reason. still argu abu" wehe ts been a good
thaing for Australia ' that I siiould have been Prime ' Minister.
Nobody argues about hterit Is a good thing -thIat heo sh. ould
have been doing hiis work JI h. C. Tplm. ae and in his commuiity for
twentyftive years. ( ALp plIase)
I~ mce ii. te CAt o be heaI've tal!, ed in one sense
-too long in anothor sense ha', ro tal': ed too little to say on
behalf of all ofE you ho; 10; goatefLul wec are -to him and to h-is wife
and to all of tbose who work witL-h hiim for whiat they have done
in thais great COUnt41, r ( Applause) 



FOR PRESS P. M. NO. e 88/ 1962
COMMITTEE ON TERTIARY EDUCATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. Menzies
Professor C. R. McRae, who has been Deputy
Chairman of the Committee on the Future of Tertiary
Education, has been forced to resign because of illhealth.
In announcing this today the Prime Minister
paid tribute to the work done by rofessor McRae since
the establishment of the Committee in August last year.
Mr. Menzies also announced that arrangements
have been made for Professor J. W. Roderick Professor
of Civil Engirneering at the University of 9, ydney, to
join the Committee. The Committee's task is a complex one and it
is not expected to complete its report until toward the
end of next year,
CANBERBA., 19th November, 1962, 


P. M. No. 89/1962
In Canberra today, it was agreed between the Governments of the Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia that the construction of the Chowilla Dam on the River Murray in South Australia would be undertaken forthwith as a work under the River Murray Waters Agreement.
The estimated cost of the work is approximately œ 14 million pounds and this will be shared equally between the Commonwealths and the three States.
The Chowilla storage will be of benefit to all three States but is regarded as having quite vital importance to South Australia, which necessarily has to rely on the River Murray for a significant part of its water requirements.
Legislation to amend the River Murray Waters Agreement will be necessary but, pending this, the River Murray Commission will be requested to proceed with plans for the dam construction.
Because Now South Wales regards construction of Chowilla as having a lower priority than a number of other projects in its water conservation and irrigation programme and therefore is not in a position to provide funds during the next few years when tile Chowilla works will be under construction, the Commonwealth has agreed to provide temporary finance to New South Wales to cover its share of the capital cost of Chowilla. Advances will be made by the Commonwealth to New South Wales as the work proceeds and these will carry interest at the long-term bond rate. Repayment of each advance will begin ten years from the date on which it is made and will be spread over a further period of ten years.
The Commonwealth and State representatives also agreed on an arrangement for the use of part of the water available in the Menindee storage on the Darling over a period of seven years to commence on 1st January, 1963. The object of this is to provide additional protection against drought to users of water from the River Murray system during the period in which Chowilla is under construction and until it has been filled.
A basic amount of the water available in the Menindee storage will be reserved by New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia will acquire rights to a share in the remainder of the Menindee water.
During the seven-year period of the arrangement, debt charges on an amount equal to three-quarters of the net capital cost of Menindee will be shared equally between the Commonwealth and the three States.
I regard the outcome of the discussions as having first-rate importance. It marks a great step forward in the effective utilisation of the waters of the River Murray system and in providing safeguards against drought for irrigation farming and other industries along the River Murray and especially along its lower reaches.
Senator W. H. Spooner who as Commonwealth Minister for National Development, has he role of President of the River Murray Commission and who has conducted preliminary negotiations in the matter, and I represented the Commonwealth. The New South Wales Government was represented by Mr. J. B. Renshaw and Mr. A. G. Enticknap, Victoria by the Premier, Mr. Henry Bolte and South Australia by Sir Thomas Playford.
CANBERRA19th November, 1962.


P. M. No. 90/ 1962
The Prime&nbsp;Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced this&nbsp;evening that His Excellency General Sir Dallas Brooks,&nbsp;Governor of Victoria, who holds a dormant Commission from&nbsp;Her Majesty The Queen, will be sworn in as Administrator&nbsp;of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia at&nbsp;Government House, Melbourne, tomorrow, Wednesday, 21st&nbsp;November, 1962 at 12.30 pm. The prescribed oaths will be&nbsp;administered by the Chief Justice of the High Court of&nbsp;Australia, the Rt. Hon. Sir Owen Dixon, in the presence of&nbsp;the Rt. Hon. John McEwen, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister&nbsp;for Trade, The Leader of the Opposition, the Hon. Arthur&nbsp;Calwell, and Commonwealth Ministers will also attend.
Sir Dallas Brooks will act as Administrator&nbsp;during the short period that His Excellency the Governor-General is absent from Australia.
CANBERRA,20 November, 1962.


P.M&nbsp;No. &nbsp;91/1962&nbsp;
The first meeting-of the Australian Water Resources Council is expected. to be held early in the New &nbsp;Year.
As I announced.in the Policy Speech last November, the Government considers that machinery should be set up to ensure that the highest level of basic information on Australian water resources is secured and made available .Discussions have since taken place between Commonwealth and State Ministers directly concerned with water resources and all Governments have now agreed to the formation of' a Council for this purpose.
This decision is to be welcomed. Water is a vital factor in development and we need to know a great deal more in detail about our water resources The Council should provide the means for this to be done in a comprehensive and systematic way. While the Council cannot be expected to achieve spectacular or quick results in such a field, the results of its work should be invaluable.
The Council will comprise the Minister for National Development as Chairman, the Minister for Territories and the Minister-in-charge of water supplies from each state. Provision has been made for Ministers responsible for closely related activities to be co-opted when problems of particular concern to them are under discussion. The Council will be assisted by a Standing Committee of Commonwealth and State officers
Canberra&nbsp;28th November, 1962


P. M. No. 92/ 1962 
The great mass of work requiring my attention as the Session draws to a close makes it impossible for me to make another visit to Perth.
Mr. Hasluck will represent me at the departure of His Royal Highness, and is bearing with him a letter from me explaining the reasons for my inability officially to say farewell to His Royal Highness.
CANBERRA,29th November, 1962,


The Commonwealth Government&nbsp;and the Goverrment of New South Wales jointly will accord a State Funeral to the late Dame Mary Gilmore.
Arrangements for the funeral have not yet been completed but details will be released as soon as they are available.&nbsp;
The&nbsp;funeral is a recogition by both Governts&nbsp;of Dame&nbsp;Mary Gilmore's notable contibution to Australian life and literature.&nbsp;
Canberra3 December, 1962.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



SECOND READING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES, M. P.)
Tllyo 4lli DD e mber 1962
STATES GRANTS ( UNIVERSITIES) BILL ( NO. 2) 1962
The purpose of the Bill before the House is
to authorise the Commonwealth to offer to the States of New
South Wales, Victoria and South Australia grants for the
University of New South Wales, Monash University and Adelaide
University respectively, which are supplementary to those
already offered for the years 1961, 1962 and 1963 by the
existing State Grants ( Universities) Act 1960-62.
Honourable Members are aware that since the
Government's acceptance of the Murray Report of 1957
Commonwealth grants to the States for their universities have
been on a triennial basis. The grants for the years 1958-
1960 were those recommended by the Murray Committee, and those
for the current triennium, 1961-1963 are those recommended
in the first report to the Government by the Australian
Universities Commission established in 1959.
Grants for a period three years ahead have
advantages both for the universities receiving them and for
the Governments responsible for providing them. The former
have an assured income for the period, and so can plan with
a large measure of certainty while the latter know, broadly,
the level of finance required of them by the universities.
My Government's policy is to offer, for a period of tnree
years in advance, specified sums of money for the university
purposes which have been recommended to us by the Commission.
In general, our view is that if a State university requires
additional money during that period it mast obtain it from
other than Commonwealth sourceso In fact, this usually means
State Government grants and private benefactions. The State
Governments recognise that they have a special responsibility
for their own universities. On the other hand, we know that the judgments
on which the Commission's recomrurendations for the years 1961
to 1963 were based had to be made on evidence presented by the
universities as long ago as 1959. Accurate forecasting of
needs and costs for such a long period ahead is difficult and
we recognise that in certain circumstances exceptions to the
principle of fixed offers by the Commonwealth for a triennium
are justified. For this reason, in 1960 we agreed to increase
our grant to Victoria for the early stages of the planning and
development of Monash University Again, in May this year,
we amended the Act to permit increased Commonmwealth grants so
that the Commonwealth and States would share the cost of
providing higher salaries to university academic staffs.
In recent months, the Commission has received
many requests that it should recolmmend to the Government
increased grants for the present trienniuma After close and
painstaking examination of the various proposals, the Commission
recommended to me that the special problems involved in establishing
two rapidly growing new universities the University of
New South Wales and Monash University and in planning a new
constituent part of the University of Adelaide on a new site
at Bedford Park justified suoplementary grants of the amounts
indicated in Sections 3 and 4 of the Bill for the purposes
mentioned there. These are
r 
2-
University of New South Wales
Building for Medical and Biological Sciences: œ 242,500
Monash University
Recurrent expenditure œ iI4 + 000
University of Adelaide
Bedford Park College Capital Expenditure œ 37,500
Re current expenditure œ 26,000
These amounts mean a total Commonwealth grant of œ 4207000
The Commission had discussions with the
appropriate State Government authorities and was able to
assure me that the State Governments concerned would match
the recommended Commonwealth grants on the customary basis,
that is to say for for capital expenditure and œ 1.85 to
œ 1 for recurrent costs. In these circumstances, my colleagues
and I, kncwing how thoroughly the Commission had considered
the claims put to them. were prepared to accept the recommendation.
The result is the present Bill, which I commend to the
House. 


PM&nbsp;No. 94/1962
Sketches of the Memorial Stone which will be placed over the grave of the late Lord Dunrossil in St. John's Churchyard, Canberra, are released to the Press today.
The Memorial Stone was designed by Mr. Derek Wrigley, University Designer, Australian National University, and was approved recently by the late Lord Dunrossil's widow. The design is for a simple base stone and headstone in green Bowral trachyte with white Wombeyan marble facings. The inscription plaque will be in bronze, The stone masonry will be carried out by D. B, Acton Pty. Ltd. of Sydney and the inscription plaque will be cast by Wm,, Bedford Ltd. of Melbourne.
Preliminary work on the grave surrounds has been carried out by Parks and Gardens Section of the Department of the Interior and it is expected that the Memorial Stone will be placed in position early next year.
CANBERRA,6th December, 1962.



62/ 153
INAUGURAL
JOHN STOREY MEMORIAL LECTURE
PROBLEMS OF MANAGEMENT IN A FEDERATION
ADDRESS by
The Prime Minister ( The Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies, C. Hr, M. P.)
The Wilson Hall, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Saturday, 8th December, 1962. 
THE JOHN STOREY MEMORIAL LECTURE
PROBLEMS OF MANAGEMENT IN A FEDERATION
It was my great privilege to see a great deal of John Storey.
Every time I saw and had discussions with him, I became more and more
fascinated by a complex but arresting and lovable personality. As this
is the first Memorial Lecture to be associated with his name, I think it
proper that I should devote a little time to saying something about him,
I am doubly privileged to be able to do so in the presence of Lady Storey
and members of her family. They indeed have proud memories.
John Storey was the son of a celebrated Labour Premier of New
South Wales. This, no doubt, helps to explain his deep underlying instinct
for public service, though John himself was, as he used to say to me somewhat
proudly, no politician. I understood this. It would have been
difficult to imagine him wooing the electors with attractive generalisations
or submitting himself to the necessary but chafing disciplines of Party
organisation. He was too much of an individual for that. The things he
believed in, he believed in most deeply; he was not willing to see them
watered down by that process of compromise which is, whether we like it or
not, of the essence of practical politics.
After all, the art of politics is that of achieving the attainable,
not of seeking vainly to achieve perfection in one stroke. To take
a few steps forward in what they believe to be the right direction is all
that most political leaders may hope for. Before a Prime Minister goes
into his Cabinet room, he must do his best by thought and study to establish
in his own mind what he thinks to be the right course to follow on some
matter put forward in a Cabinet Submission. He must then, if it becomes
necessary, set out to persuade his colleagues, not to dragoon them. For
men of talent and experience have their own ideas and will not be content
to be rubber stamps for the ideas of others. In the long run, there
emerges from the Cabinet discussion a joint view which is, not infrequently,
a modified and adjusted view. If this is to find legislative expression,
it must be presented to, and accepted by the Government Parliamentary Party
or Parties. It then runs the gamut of Parliamentary debate, with public
opinion expressing itself through the newspapers and otherwise and with
the next election casting its perpetual shadow from ahead. In the working
world of Parliamentary democracy, there can be no perfectionism if things
are to be done. But my friend John Storey was, in essence, a perfectionist.
He honoured me with his warm and sympathetic friendship; but I must have
disappointed him many times. He had a natural capacity for aggression in
what he saw to be a good cause. I shall never forget that in December, 
2
1940, and early in 1941 he then, as a very distinguished production
engineer, being at the Beaufort Aircraft production venture he travelled
with me through the Middle East and to England. He was determined about
the things that we needed for our war effort and was the last person to
take " No" too easily for an answer. I will give you two illustrations.
We went together one day to see Lord Beaverbrook, who was then
at the Ministry of Aircraft Production, and whose dominating personality
some of you may have encountered. We wanted to secure, on the aircraft
side, certain provision for Australia. Beaverbrook was disposed to brush
us off. In the course of the brushing off, he would suddenly seize one
of the various telephones on his table and bark some orders to one or other
of his subordinates. At a certain stage, he sent for one of them and put
to him a question which related to our business. The subordinate, taken
on the hop, made a rather obscure and unsatisfying reply. Beaverbrook
told him what he thought of him in what might be called measured or
unmeasured terms, according to the point of view. John Storey, sitting
next to me, had been a little dejected up to this point, but when he listened
to the flow of language he brightened up at once and said, " Ah, Lord Beaverbrook.
Now I see that I can talk to you in good, plain terms, including a
few good Australian terms, and I want to tell you exactly what I think about
your attitude on this matter." From that time on, it was a superb exchange
so superbly managed by John Storey himself, that we ultimately got what we
asked for. The other incident was when we were visiting the works of an
electrical firm which was making revolving turrets for the Beaufort. There
had been some considerable hold-up and John was, very naturally, irritated
by it. He was therefore relieved to be shown a series of these turrets,
complete or almost complete, shortly to be shipped to Australia. You can
imagine the fun when the Managing Director, not knowing John Storey as I
did, said to him towards the end, " You know, I would be very grateful to
you if you would allow us to divert these turrets to another project. We
will, of course, when we can, make another series for you." Well, John
hit the roof. His eloquence on that occasion I shall never forget. The
turrets almost revolved involuntarily under the blast. But it paid off.
We got the turrets and John achieved, as he did in many places and on many
occasions during that memorable journey, the profound respect of the people
with whom he was dealing.
The point about these reminiscences of mine is that John Storey
was a patriot in the highest sense of the word. He didn't regard patriotism
as a mild sentiment. He was engaged on responsible duties for his country
at the time of which I am speaking. He had no instinct for high-falutin'
or for mealy-mouthed sentiment. Patriotism required that you got the very
best thing that you could for your country and got it as quickly as you could. 
: 3
When somebody sits down to the historical task of examining
the contributions made by various men to the Australian war effort in the
Second World War, the name of John Storey will be a very great and honoured
one. Now, I said at the beginning that the political problems
frequently escaped him. This, of course, merely exhibited, in the old
phrase, a defect of his great quality. He wanted to get things done.
He saw quite clearly in a practical sense how they ought to be done. He
chafed at the intervention of any technical or constitutional consideration
which might interfere with the project. This is something that I have not
uncommonly found among men of great eminence in the business world. In
running their own business, they find that once they have arrived at a
decision, little will stand in the way of carrying out that decision, provided
they are firm and clear and decisive. At least, so I am given to
understand. But the politician has an entirely different task. Because
of its very nature, it is not frequently understood outside the arena of
politics. Let me explain to you something of what I mean. In Australia
we live and work under a Federal system. We have a written Constitution.
There is a Commonwealth Parliament with particular and specified powers.
There are State Parliaments, exercising the residue of power. There are
some constitutional restrictions applying to both. Where there is any
question of conflict between Commonwealth authority and State authority,
where there is any question of the validity of a Commonwealth law or of
some Commonwealth action, we have a High Court to determine the matter.
It was once said by a brilliant nineteenth-century constitutional commentator
that Federalism is legalism and that there is no escape from that
fact. On one occasion, not so long ago, in the Basic Wage Inquiry of
1949-. 50, one Judge, in supporting an Award which advocates had opposed as
in its nature inflationary, took the opportunity of saying, " I shall be
concerned with the fact that an increase in the basic wage which will
inevitably permeate the whole wage structure will increase prices and so
add its modicum of inflationary pressure, but inflation and its control
are matters for the Government...."
Now this last remark was quite wrong. It is a common error
to suppose that the Commonwealth Parliament has complete power to do what
needs to be done to build up the economy of the nation, to avoid inflationary
pressures, to regulate life so that everybody may have a job and so that
everybody's standard of living may steadily and inevitably rise. These are
great ideals. The Commonwealth Parliament has certain very considerable
powers in the direction of achieving them, but it has by no meons complete
power, as I will shortly demonstrate. You may say, " Well, it ought to have 
4
complete powers". Unfortunately, or fortunately, as the case may be, the
people of Australia when put to the test, do not agree with you. The most
difficult thing in the world is to pass a Constitutional referendum in
Australia which would result in adding to the powers of the Commonwealth
Parliament. We know this from long experience. I am not saying that the
instinct as such is an unhealthy one. I am, myself, a Federalist. I
don't wish to see unification in Australia. I don't wish to see all powers
concentrated in Canberra. I think that the functions of the States are
of great importance and that the division of power under a Federal syptem
has a considerable relevance to the preservation of individual liberties
in the community. At the same time, as a Prime Minister of long standing,
I can assure you that not infrequently I have been tempted to wish that I
could put my Federal principles on one side and by a stroke of the pen arm
the central government with power to deal with a number of matters falling
within the overall economic picture. But I have resisted the temptation.
Tonight, it is not my object to promote an argument about
Constitutional alteration. What I want to do is to state and explain
the position as it is.
What are the economic powers of the Commonwealth Parliament
and Government? If I run quickly through Section 51 and some later sections
of the Commonwealth Constitution you will begin to appreciate the answer.
I will begin with the sub-sections of Section 51, giving
specific powers to the Commonwealth; the residue of powers, of course,
remaining with the States.
" Trade and commerce with other countries, and among the States".
This power, limited in itself because it does not include
intra-state trade, or domestic trade within the boundaries
of a State, is further limited by Section 92, and by Section
99, to which I will refer later. Section 92 contains the
famous provision, which has produced an enormous quantity of
litigation, that " on the imposition of uniform duties of
customs, trade, commerce, and intercourse among the States....
shall be absolutely free". It would be idle, in anything
other than a legal treatise, to follow the various streams of
judicial decision on these words. At one stage the then High
Court held that these words did not control the Commonwealth,
but imposed limitdtions solely upon State powers. That
decision has long since been authoritatively overruled.
Section 92 controls the Commonwealth. 
Various counsel, including myself, vainly argued at one
stage that Section 92 merely prohibited customs barriers;
the object of the draftsmen of the Constitution being to
get rid of the " border barbarisms" which it was one of
the objects of federation to remove. But, over the years,
Section 92 has been given a much wider interpretation, an
interpretation which put at risk stabilisation and orderly
marketing schemes which have become such a significant
element in the handling of the products of some great
export primary industries.
In 1937, during the term of the Lyons Government, I was, as
Commonwealth Attorney-General, in charge of a referendum campaign to secure
approval for a Constitutional change to meet this position. The proposed
amendment was " 92A. The provisions of the last preceding section shall
not apply to laws with respect to marketing made by, or under
the authority of, the Parliament in the exercise of any Powers
vested in the Parliament by this Constitution."
It was roundly defeated. At the subsequent election in 1937 I went nearer
to defeat in Kooyong than I have ever been.
In the result, such orderly marketing schemes as we have had
have been worked out by a combination of Federal and State action, which,
for practical political reasons, is not always easy to achieve. All sorts
of technical difficulties have to be guarded against as well as possible.
No broad policy in relation to the primary industries can ever be worked
out or declared on purely economic grounds; the complexities of constitutional
power must always be investigated, and a compromise solution
is generally the result.
Subsection ( ii) of Section 51 creates Commonwealth power over
" Taxation; but so as not to discriminate between States or parts of States."
This has to be read in conjunction with Section 99 which provides that
" The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or regulation of trade, commerce,
or revenue, give preference to one State or any part thereof over another
State or any part thereof."
These provisions, which sharply limit the flexibility of
Commonwealth economic policy and place difficulties in the way of applying
special measures designed to aid the development of some of the potentially
rich but relatively under-developed areas of Australia, were of course the
result of the inevitable compromises that had to be made in the nineties
in order to convert six self-governing colonies into a federated nation.
State sentiment is even today still so strong that amendments to these 
6
constitutional provisions would ( I think!), be unlikely to succeed. Nor,
indeed would it be easy for a Federalist like myself to devise or support
them. I repeat that it is not my present purpose to promote any argument
about Constitutional amendment. All I want to do is to note the effect
of the present constitutional division of powers on the Commonwealth's
economic authority and responsibility.
Whenever most people ( including, I imagine, most of my listeners
tonight) say of any problem of importance, " Why doesn't the Government do
something about they usually mean the Commonwealth Government. Most
of them, when they are in this mood, passing the responsibility to the
Commonwealth, appear to believe that the Commonwealth has full power to
discharge the responsibility.
It is my purpose tonight to explain that this is something of
an illusion. The two limiting provisions I have just mentioned have rendered
necessary a series of devices, which I will briefly mention. But meanwhile
I return to Section 51.
Subsection ( iii) creates Commonwealth power over " Bounties on
the production or export of goods. but so that such bounties shall be
uniform throughout the Commonwealth."
This bounties power, like the power over customs and excise,
is made exclusive to the Commonwealth by Section 90 of the Constitution,
but in each case Commonwealth legislation is subject to the condition of
uniformity. I would only add to what I have already said on this aspect
of the matter that there is, to my mind, a strange passion in our country
for uniformity; strange, because we are in our own nature, strongly
individualist. Under Sub-section the Commonwealth has power over
" borrowing money on the public credit of the Commonwealth."
The importance of this provision has been increased by a later
Constitutional Amendment. Section 105A of the Constitution, agreed to by
the electors in 1929, authorised and validated the famous Financial Agreement
and the creation of the Loan Council. Under these arrangements, the
Commonwealth borrows for the States as well as for itself.
But it must be remembered that the terms and conditions,
including interest rates of such Commonwealth loans are subject to the
approval of the Loan Council, in which the States have between them
formidable voting powers. I do not quarrel with this; but it does mean
that, in a matter of so vital importance as interest policy, the Commonwealth 
7
is not the complete master though some people think that it is.
Sub-section ( xii) gives power over
" 1currency, coinage, and legal tender."
This is essentially a mechanical provision, not very significant
for my present purpose.
Sub-section ( xiii) gives power over
" Banking, other than State banking: also State banking
extending beyond the limits of the State concerned, the
incorporation of banks, and the issue of paper money."
This is, of course, a famous and much discussed provision. it
is a wide power. It clearly includes, with the exclusion of State banking,
autho ' rity in respect of bank credit and advance policies, the creation of
a Reserve Bank and the equipping of it with reserve-banking powers. it
includes control of interest rates on bank deposits and advances.
But it does not confer power over interest rates generally.
Thus, the Commonwealth cannot, except possibly by some special and discriminatory
form of taxation, deal with hire-purchase rates of interest
or the rates charged or offered by what have been colloquially referred
to as " fringe banking" institutions unless the transactions of these
institutions themselves are held to be part of banking business, and so
fall within the Commonwealth's banking power. The definition of " banking"
is uncertain, but is probably fairly restrictive. To put it briefly,
though banking involves money-lending, it does not follow that all moneylending
is banking. It seems that regulation of what we call capital
issues is certainly not included. I gather that the weight of legal
opinion is that hire-purchase and the like transactions, which today have
a great significance in the economy, do not ordinarily fall within the
Banking power. As interest rates are of great importance in overall monetary
and credit management, there is here a deficiency in Commonwealth power.
One not uncommonly hears generalised phrases about, for example, " scheap
money" or " low interest rates policies." They tend to ignore the constitutional
facts of life. A power to control bank deposit interest rates
by keeping them relatively low could be defeated by a bidding up for deposits
at fancy rates of interest by the non-banking bodies I have referred to.
I next come to sub-section ( xiv)
" Insurance, other than State insurance: also State
insurance extendina beyond the limits of the State concerned." 
-8-
As a source of national economic control, this is of course
limited; though recent legislation has had the effect of stimulating life
assurance societies to investment in public loans.
Sub-section ( xx) reads " Foreign corporations, and tradingl or
financial corp~ orations formed within the limits of the Commonwealth." The
meaning and e. lfect of this__ provision has never been determined with any
precision. It was unsuccessfully relied upon in support of Bank
nationalisation. It is genetally accepted that it does not authorise
the Commonwealth Parliament to pass a Uniform Companies Act. Uniformity
in Company Law therefore remains a matter for agreement with and separate
enactments by, the States. The sub-section cannot be relied upon as an
effective instrument of national economic policy.
What I may call the Social Services powers in sub-sections
( Xxiii) and ( xxiii) A, have, by their exercise, very great economic consequences.
" Invalid and old-age pensions. The provision of maternity
allowances, widows' pensions, child endowment, unemployment, pharmaceutical..
sickness and hospital benefits, medical and dental services ( but not so as
to authorise any form of civil conscription) i benefits to students and family
aloacs are indeed far reaching. The powers have been exercised on
w~ de scale. But, though the hundreds of millions now laid out on such
matters are providing a wide measure of social justice, and a distinctive
element in the national economy, they can never be regarded as a flexible
means of economic adjustment in face of conditions of boom or depression.
True, at the time of the great depression and the " Premiers' Plan", pensions
were temporarily reduced; but this is not a precedent which any government
would wish to follow. It is always politically easy to increase social
services; from time to time it is financially feasible to do so; but it
is not practical to think that social services can be adjusted, as taxation
or bank interest rates can be raised or lowered, as a means of giving effect
to monetary policies. The fact is that our social services policies and
outgoings. socially essential as they are, limit the Government's economic
room for manoeuvre in dealing with the ups and downs of national economic
life. The power can be used for expansion; it clearly cannot be readily
resorted to for purposes of contraction or of adjustment over a limited
period of time. Sub-section ( xxvii) gives power over " Immigration and
emigration." o The exercise of this power is a matter of great social and
national security significance. But it also has great economic significance,
bringing with it both assets ( particularly in the iqng run) and liabilities
( particularly in the short run). But considered a?'-an economic instrument,
there are clear limits to its flexibility. You cannot increase or reduce
the stream of migration from year to year, as if you were turning a tap on 
-9
or off. The nation needs a stream of immigration while it can secure it.
Indeed, if I may interpolate the remark, the anticipation that the stream
will continue is no small factor in the forward planning and spirit of
confidence of industrial and business managers.
Now I turn to what I will call, compendiously, the Commonwealth's
industrial power. This is both limited and peculiar, if not actually unique.
The words of sub-section ( xxxv) are:-
" Conciliation and arbitration for the prevention and
settlement of industrial disputes extending beyond the
limits of one State".
Almost every word of this provision has been the subject of
repeated litigation and interpretation. Tonight I do not propose to stray
into pastures from which, in my days at the Bar, I derived some nourishment.
For my present purpose, all I want to say is that a few things have to be
borne in mind. The first is that the Commonwealth, except in its territories,
and in respect of its own employeeg, has of itself no power to fix wages
and conditions of employment.
This may well have saved us from many electoral auction sales.
The second is that when the Commonwealth exercises the
legislative power I have just quoted, by setting up conciliation and
arbitration tribunals or functionaries, it cannot direct them as to what
they may award or decide. The creature of Parliament is, in the field
indicated, more powerful than its creator. True, the Parliament has power
to abolish the tribunal. This was attempted by one of my distinguished
predecessors thirty-three years ago., with politically fatal results. The
experiment is not likely to be repeated.
Commonwealth Governments have on occasion submitted facts and
argument to the tribunal when broad economic policies seemed to be involved;
but those arguments have not been, and could not have been, commands or
instructions. The decisions are those of the adjudicators, to be respected
and obeyed. I value this system very much. On the whole, it has worked
well, and I would wish to preserve it. But it obviously puts beyond the
authority of the Commonwealth Parliament and Government matters which,
from a purely economic stand-point, are at all times important and may,
on occasions become supremely so. The capacity of the Commonwealth to 
give some discriminating help to individual States. ( and this takes me back
to what I was saying earlier), has come largely to depend upon Section 96
of the Constitution-It reads-
" During a period of ten years after the establishment of
the Commonwealth and thereafter until the Parliament
otherwise provides, the Parliament may grant financial
assistance to any State on such terms and conditions as
the Parliament thinks fit.,"
This section has been given a wide interpretation and application.
So far from having a ten years life, it has increased in importance, and its
use in frequency, so that it has become a permanent and important feature of
Commonwealth-States financial relations. Apart from its special use for
the purpose ( after the recommendations of the State Grants Commission) of
grants to the " claimant States" for years South Australia, Western
Australia, Tasmania, and more recently, Western Australia and Tasmania
it has been frequently used as a means of providing Commonwealth assistance
to States for State works possessing special national significance, e. g.
for the promotion of export earnings, and to the States for Universities
and the like. It is now a received view that the Commonwealth is
unrestricted as to the terms and conditions it imposes, and that one
condition that may be attached is that of repayment. Section 96 has
therefore proved the source of special loans as well as special grants.
Indeed, it is the constitutional foundation of the Financial
Assistance Grants which replace the Tax Reimbursement Grants, and are by
far the greatest single element in Commonwealth aid to the States.
State grants, whether absolute or repayable come out of Commonwealth
funds. While, therefore, they have proved to be an adaptable means
of overcoming some of the asperities of uniformity, they are, as an
instrument of Commonwealth economic policy, rather one-way in their
operation. There are, no doubt, many constitutional provisions which bear
indirectly upon that economic policy, but to which I have not made reference.
My reason is that, addressing a primarily lay audience and being, by
effluxion of time since I last donned a wig and gown, something of a layman
myself ( or at least suffering from intellectual obsolescence), I have
desired to concentrate upon the points of significance to my theme.
I will therefore conclude my most imperfect constitutional
survey by going back to the Customs Tariff power. I do this the more
willingly because the problems of the Tariff have been a good deal in the
headlines in recent weeks. 
11
There has been a fairly common tendency to assume that a Commonwealth
Government and Parliament is handicapped by being compelled to sail in
treacherous and narrow waters between the Scylla of the Arbitration Commission
and the Charybdis of the Tariff Board; the assumption being that
each commands and controls the channel. That this is true in the case of
the Arbitration Commission with, for all practical purposes, an entrenched
constitutional position, cannot hopefully or practically be denied! I
have already said something about it. But the Tariff Board is in quite a
different position. It is a purely statutory body, created by the discretion
of Parliament, and, indeed, subject to the control of Parliament.
In this sense, it is an instrument of policy, and in no sense its master.
It has, however, been recognised by successive governments
that, though what I have said is constitutionally true, it is important
that, for international as well as domestic purposes, the Tariff Board
should possess a high measure of independence, that the integrity of its
advice should be preserved, and that it should not be subject to any form
of day-to-day political instruction. I accept and maintain these
propositions. Yet the Tariff Board, our principal adviser on import
duties, cannot sensibly be expected to operate in a completely detached
intellectual vacuum. It must have in its mind some standards or policies
by which to test the cases presented to it.
For a long time it has acted on the principle that it should
recommend Tariff protection only to " economic and efficient industries".
But that principle was, and is, itself an expression of government policy.
Of late, indications have been given on behalf of my own Government that
the principle needs extension, and that the Tariff Board should have in
its mind the national economic policy, meaning by that the national economic
objectives, as a whole. There have been sharp criticisms of this by
representative, thoughtful, and responsible people. As I think that they
have misunderstood these proposals, I will endeavour, without, I hope,
wearying you, to make the point clear.
Nobody suggests that an independent but advisory body like
the Tariff Board should, in its recommendations, seek to follow every
government or legislative application of economic policy in its determination
of the case before it. This would be quite impracticable and could
lead to strange, anomalous and fluctuating results.
But there are certain features of national economic policy,
which I do not regard as the subject of party controversy, which cannot
be ignored by any statutory body if the nation is to achieve a dynamic
progress, growing in resources, population, employment, industry, and
international solvency. For a Tariff Board to ignore their existence
would be to detach its work from the great stream of Australian development.
This, I am sure, it would not wish to do. 
12
Let me explain what I mean by natignal economic policy. It
includes the encouragement of population growth by substantial immigration.
It recognises that such encouragement is an important factor in the future
planning of industry and commerce. It calls for a strong development of
old and new natural resources, so that a growing population will be fully
and usefully employed, and the resources themselves put to full use. It
perceives that the achievement of these things will require, in a relatively
new country like ours, the fullest possible generation and investment of
capital at home, and the attraction of productive capital from abroad. And
on top of, and conditioning all these things, it requires that there should
be a constant and steady eye upon the costs of production, so that our great
export primary industries will not be discouraged by ever-rising costs from
attempting that still further enlargement of production on which our export
future must continue to depend, and so that our secondary industries may
increasingly be able to export to the world's markets in competition with
other industrial powers.
These are the great national objectives of economic policy.
I am sure that they are accepted by most Australians, and that they have
a settled place in our national life.
Who can seriously suggest that they should be ignored by the
Tariff Board, or by any other group of people serving the national interest?
I would be surprised to learn that the members of the Board wished to ignore
these matters, or resented the fact that a clear statement of them was made
by any Australian Government.
How these accepted objectives are to be achieved is another and
more controversial matter. Particular application of policy may, and does,
change from time to time. One government may go out on some particular
measure, and another government may come in with an entirely different
notion. It would, as I have said, be hopeless to require a Tariff Board
to behave like a weather-cock under such circumstances. Nobody suggests
that it should do so. What is suggested is that it should do its important
work independently, not controlled by sectional pressures, with complete
integrity of mind, but with the settled economic objectives of the nation
constantly in mind.
Before I conclude, I would wish to bring my consideration of
this fascinating and important problem into focus.
Federalism suits most Australians. It connotes a division
of powers. It divides sovereignty among central and local organs of
government. This means limitations upon the power of any Government,
limitations which it is neither practical nor sensible to ignore. 
13
Yet, while there is much room for clear statement and objective
understanding, and there are many real difficulties, I would not want to
leave you with the idea that the Federal system is in substance gravely
frustrating or damaging.
The truth is that the forces which operate upon Constitutions
apart altogether from formal amendments to the printed text, have been clear
and powerful in our own country. The Commonwealth has certain capacities
for effective action, not all of which are apparent on the surface of the
Constitution. I will content myself with mentioning four of them.
1. Though the Commonwealth can be out-voted in the Loan
Council, it undoubtedly possesses a measure of ascendancy
because of its voting rights ( two votes plus a casting vote),
its de facto exclusive responsibility for borrowings, and
its wide financial authority resulting from Uniform Taxation.
2. The Commonwealth can exercise a large influence ( though by
no means, as I have said, a comprehensive one) on the Money
Market both through the Reserve Bank and through its own
operations.
3. In the field of revenue raising the Commonwealth has
advantages which no State can possess; the fields of
Customs and Excise being exclusively Commonwealth by the
Constitution, and those of Income Tax being Commonwealth
by Statute.
4. Section 96 has, contrary perhaps to the expectations of
the founders of the Constitution, proved an apt means
of assisting States and State projects by grant or advance.
These are very real powers. They are constantly being developed
and used to meet new situations as political and economic conditions change.
True, they are sometimes cumbersome, and not infrequently produce political
problems which, in my experience, do not diminish with the years.
Indeed, one must be careful about the exercise of such farreaching
powers of persuasion or control.
For example, in my own time as Prime Minister, the Commonwealth
has evolved a fairly constant practice of supporting State Loan programmes
out of Commonwealth revenue and other funds. This form of what I will
loosely call " underwriting" is quite voluntary on the part of the Commonwealth,
but, in an average year when the loan market will not fully supply 
14
the States loan programme, it has proved vital for the maintenance of
adequate State works. Had it felt so disposed the Commonwealth could,
in most of these years, have imposed its will on the States in respect
of the nature of the proposed State works, as a condition of Commonwealth
financial support. There are, no doubt, those who think we should have
done so. But our view has been that State governments should not be
over-ridden or controlled in this fashion; and this for two reasons.
One is that we would wish to respect not only the form but the substance
of federalism. The other, a good practical reason, is that the works
authorities of the States cannot, in my experience, be accused of
incompetence or a failure to understand the needs of their own areas and
people. A notable Victorian judge once said to a somewhat prolix
barrister that " he had circumnavigated the whole globe of irrelevancy".
Looking back on what I have said to you, I hope, even if faintly, to
escape this condemnation. It is enough for me to conclude by saying
once more that I am deeply honoured at your invitation to speak to you
on an occasion which invokes the memory of one for whom I had, and have,
such a deep affection. 



SPRINGYALK HIGH SCHOOL SPEECH NIM
NKLD AT SPRIIGTAZZ9 VICT( RIA9 an
12MH DZc1; RR, 1962.
auoh We the nifsvea E the It. IlcA.. E-2. ASMzi
It Seams to me that I have to make apersonal
expanation about what we say in Parliament vtmn we pretend
tht samebedy boa si miprosemtW. as. I ought to explain how
I cW to be here because this IS qUit. 8t017#
Last week at four o'cock In the morning,, on Friday
( I reebrit will becausie as I was gping hm to the Lodges
the birds we" e twittering In the trees ( Laughter) and the dawn
was uomng In from the east, eddly enough ( Laughter) and I
Very seida we the dawn break) but the reason for it was that
at four o'clock In the morning on Tridar we wee. just finishing
tvhWer PHaarplipaym Cenhtrairsytm aSse s( sLioanu gahntde r) I awnads whoisphiningg a evlietrytbleod yf or ovneery,
myself* You now, Members or Parliament,, let it be admitted,
have a lot in comn with schoolboys, I say nothing about
schoolgirls. I hae neve dared to pretend that I understood
what vent an In their minds, buit I knov something about schoolboys
( Lausbtor) and you follows know perfectly veil, don't you how
there Is a temptation to leave It and leave It and leaive It until
the * zmuinetIons are looming up and then work like mad to catch
up the aneic o, that is exactlvr what we do in Parliament,
( Laughter) W go along fairly lelswely, week after week,
week after wok, and in the last week, the Minister in Char of
the Hiouse says, mellp If ye are going to got through by Fia
mornngbays we'd better have a few late mns.' 0 And we then7
P ro to sit up until all sort* of absurd hours And so an
Fiday morning, at four o' clock In the morning, the Session ended
and I went Rome.
And yesterday, vs had the last Cabinet Meeting I
hope ( Laughter) before Christmas and vs finished at something
after * I&amp; ve o'clock last night, and when vs had all wished each
ether a Merry Christmes and hoped that vs wouldn't se each other
again in the Cabinet room flor quite a time, two or three of my
ealloagues said to me, '* Well I suppose you'll take a few days
off now.' 0411 I said, Oa ping to Springwlo tomorrow
night to a school speech night' and I don ' t mind admitting to
you that they looked at so an 111 neded Some medical attention
( Laughter). * But why?' they said " IWby must you Vs what have
you got to do with Sprifgwale? M fo which I replied, ' Well,
nothing yet but '( Laughter) I said, 01 so going to Springvale,
to the High Schools for a variety of reasons, but perhaps the
mst oampeliag one is that I happen to be an old friend of the
W-eaL-atr,, and the Headmaster Is, In m7 opinion, not only a
talented and devoted tea cher but be's a rim Moind and a
&amp; reat citisen.'" ( Applauise) Led. I said III think that's not a
bad reasen fiw going out,' 94n as he a&amp; S been Speaking tonight,
I've thought of ao or two additional matters.
After Ibhd lefta State schoolIn Ballarat, I went to
a little Secondary school which disappeared many years ago, but
was then Just struggling tewa6s Its close. I don't supposev
had more tban 32 or 35 boy at the school at tkwt stage. There
were six doing Inteomed" a or what wae then ealled Junior Public.
I notice, Siro that you have got through 112 In Intermediate. 
2
What a comanty of scholars you are -1121 and fifty
something in Leaving. We had six. You might say, * W* ll
that's prettyr poor,. That must have been a miserable, little
school. But I want to reind you that the quality of a
school depends an the quality of the people who V through it,
and the suceess of a school, in the long ran, vont depend
just an maberss, it will depen upon you -a few dozen of you
Iii this room tonight; and the kind of things you do in the
world fug' the benefit of mankind let's boye fes out of the
six who were in that Junior Public os, four we" e Final
Honours scholars in their oouwses at the Univrsity. Four out
of ixI know that beeause I hap r to be one of them.
by numbers, I am talking to the boys and girls tonight. Being
a parents and a grandparent, myself, 1I no that most of us
in that rank are beyond redemption. Youa knows ye have settled
into our hawbits of mind, whatever they my be.&amp; I an talking
to the bcs and girls. Never allow yourselves to think that
something madrM~ that has happened to someb( 4y else can't
happen to yea, Dever got Into th rame of mind of thinkcing
that therie are some, people In the world who are ludW enoigh
to do things and tha t this is puely a matter of ludc.
Here is a school of 1 000. This is a very bill
school and It will be bi gjrin hiture, I fear, because all
schools tend to get a little bigger. &amp; 1e ttaou. I want
you to realise, tboit In this very thousand thre are boys and
girls who some day as men and women will e celebrated people
people of great sigraifioanos, people of great influence,
people of great quality; an that apart altogether from the
ones vtbo may get their names, In the nespapers -which, I assure
you, is not very hard to do apart altogether from thdse,
there will be hundreds who will never get their names into the
newsppers,, but who will be helping to keep the world moving
and tokeep it a good place to live in. Therefore, don't
underestimate yoarselvou; don't underestimate your chances.
Now having said that I just mant to offer a few
homely observatons about the th! ngs that we all disliked when
I was at school and that for all I kn many of you dislike
today. For example I alway; s wanted to Le a lawyer a Very
docent ambItion, 1 thnk I wanted to be a lawyer. I wasn't
Interested In antig else. And I hated having mathematics
drinmd Into M. I suppose som o f you chaps do. I don't km
you might all be scientific geniusesG0, but I hated having
mathematics &amp; qmmed Into mo and I might have been-heard to
say, " Oh vbt's the use of this. I want to be a Ilawyer.
Lawyers U; 1 t ha is to work out so" s. Lawyers don't ha a to
engge In all the trids of a matemtical trade. Why should
I v@ 71? u A9 of eourse, it wasn't long after 1 beeame a
lawyer that I realised hay indebteod I should fleel to people
who had made me stady wtatmtios because there is no war
~ 11&amp; ag about nattemtics* You are right Oi' You are wrong.,
you gent ride off tby sayings mell, you km-what 1 man,
of 41ou knaw you get the general, iwoa to te exm~ inr.
you 43ault do that with maths. You are right or you are wrong.
your mirA is working with precision or it isn' t. And, believe
not If you ae poing to be a lawyers, for example, YOU Will neeOd
to have a considerable amount Of precision In YOW mind.
The world Is full Of insCMuwete thi= r. The world Is full
Of peOPle Who have slovenl minds, who say * It'srsod enough.
It's near SUOUSgu TMMtYak tIP. The day wilcm,
whatevetr you do, when yom will be very thankful that you were
required = der sme foVRe Of ONWpuSIOft to do same study which
was in Its natiwe exaeto 0* 00**./ 3 
And then I have heard people -I have oewn them in
my own bwand elsevher* who took great exception to having
to learn poetry bF heart. Any of you like that? I dar* We.
In my days at school in Melbo--e0 hey had an exaination of
th h-1-m-e-re Society* Perbas, 9eamster it still goes on$
does It? bat the play the Shakspeare play 1; the yaw, was
the set Piecee" so to spaadIf you wanted to enter for tb.
Shabesperfs Boaiety exmntoyou bad to learn and be
prepared to writ* on demand'from the exiners, 3 000
lines of the -lay. n I had a pretty g" memory so Icould
learn AW 3, oO lim; es. Do you know I am r. gpr&amp; it, looking
beck an It, as a difftcalt'thing, an unpleeant thn. I don't
undostWAn the point of viem or people Amo says d. l why
should I have to learn poetx7 b~ y heart. I an not ping to be
an actor. I as not going to be a pet. Let me, tell you that
when you are as old as I an you 9va vhite-hairod old
doddering tlallov like me you wilbe eyM pate fal that you
learnt a lot of thing b~ y heart. You will fiad them coming
back iito your mind. You will find that they a" e tremendous
ompany. X= u knousir Archibald Wavell -later Lard Wvel,
the great soldier in the Middle S. st in the last lwr to pubi shed
an antholog or pootrys, a fairly considerable one, a beautiful
selection of kAglish verse, and he included In It nothing that
be didn' t know 1W heart. iHere' a a greet soldier, heavily
concerned with matters of wars going through many dark perlefs
In the Middle igast, well before d4 Alamein In ths-last war and
yet that man refreshed his mind and aheered up his spirit
the recollection in quietness of the poetry he had learnt bw
heart. And I repeat 0the only ones In the book are the ons
that be could set out b heart. Therefore doatt regret what
you do in that field*
And then thirdly might I say so thing about this,
Good speech is unuyneglede I think: today. There are too
many people who think it Is onoug to talk out of the
corner of their xmths and to offer up something that sounds
like Nottentot and who, an being questioned will a " Well
you kno what I mean" out of the corner or their mouth. Tis
is no good. Our languaage Is I believe, omawbet dopnatically,
the greatest and most flexible languads in the world. It is a
marvellous language and whatever you do In life, you will find
that you can do it better and achieve better results In the
doing of It If you can explain yourself to other people, If you
WOnVeYr ideas to other people. And if you are ping~ to do
that, of o must have same respect for the language. Don't
be on o those silly fellove PI-a till talking to the boys
who thinks that if he speaks eoureat diglishs he'll b* re~ orded
as a bit odd, because correct Bnglisb is the smllest debt that
e, owe to the longuaa that has been baqueathed to us by our
forefathers, I oedr, Sir, if I ould Just Illustrate that a
little without taking too long, Over here there Is a University
IMomesh University named after Sir Zohn Nonasb. Sir John H o1nash
was a magmifiont engineer. Be was a groat authority on patent
Iwo, He was a very great soldier, many would say one of the
greatest soldiers in the Unglis-speaking world in this century.
A very remarkable man. I was among the perhaps limited ninber of
people who know that on top of all tbase things he was a magnifIC
advoate. Hie cold put a case, he could explain himself with
such clarity, with such poesasivenss that If you went Into a
little audience and listen" d to 11, ab., doubting him, you always 
M 4
omue out completely convinced that he knor what he was talking
about and that he was right* This Is an aspect of his life that
Is not very aosmly known. I would venture to say,# speaking
without authority, that Monash ' a exiormous achievements In war
vwld not have been possible unless he had developed his capacity
for speech ad expmession to the point tha~ t hie ultimately reacbed.
Worth remembering that because theres a" e other things about him
that are better known.
I mentioned Lord Wavefl just now bkvel was a
wo: nderful example of a stranip mixture beasuse by word of mouth
he couldn't explain himself at all. To have a conversation with
him, as I had many times early In 1941t was a trying experience
because yavou md say sametbingg eanwaotly invoking a reply and
Wavoll would just look at you and saiys Oh* or * Nam or something
like that, But when esaton in front of apieeof paper
to write a despak or to write anything, he wrote like an anpe
He" e apin, a man who imderstood the eniamotas imporhsnce of ou
And then, or course boys and girls, the greatest
ezample of the let Winston. Muraille There my have been
many moa wbe kne w as mobh about zmul ir a war as Winston Churchill.*
The" re yave been many non who knew as much as he did or no" e
about imming a Parlimnt. Yet there vas nobody ort earth who,
when It caeto the point of erisis, who could stand up in
Parliament or behind a L4. oropb---and talk to the entire world
with rsh moving and yet simple eloquence. If Winston Churchill
had not, when ha was your aip set out to make himself a master
of his own language and a moro of the literary resources of
his own langwage, I don't think be could have doete what be did
im. the last war and It he couldn't have dn what ha did in the
last war, than b; e whole history of the world today might have
boon gievouasly changed.
News Sir, I won't labour that matter, I will just
end up where I boosa kV saying to you, " Don't make up your minds
that you are just going to be the sam as everybody else.' There
a" e plenty of people In the world who are just the same as
everybody else Make UDyour mind down inside your heart that
you are going to be a b fr , ta ate Voing to do
something different and when people says, h9e's different',
forget about it* I will be a very pod thing to be* What we
want i&amp; this country what the world wants Is a lot of people
who, are different, Uw are Individual himan, beings, w~ have
their own oharaoter and their own quality and their own ambition.
You will have a let of older people who will say, to you about
yourself or about some friend of yours, ' Oh, he's very ambitious,.'
as If that word was somethin disreptable. Believe me, ambition,
Is a peaot thing In the vold., Not cnetnot Silly vanity,
but ambition a belief 6ow inside Your" fI that there are some
things that you can do anid you are letomained to do them; these
are the things that make the world move on, and In duo course, A= e
this sol Is seventy years old and not seven or eight or whatever
it may beg there will ha another ftedhoster addressing another
soiweieth ether sets of parents. I believe that If you do
what I have been rather prosily advising you to dog that Hedmster
will be able to say in his report that in the last seventy years
of Its history, this school has produced A H16C# D-9i lImne
achievements, peat contribution to sociall' 1 aget contribution
to Political ' Lire but above all a pesat -on Cation to rn
life!* the piwilsof justice whisk can only be preserved if
, you all get out ao be individuals, 9 to be yourselves and niot to be
afraid. 


FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 95/1962,
The Prime Minister announced today that Mr. P. J. Lawler, First Assistant Secretary, Prime Minister's Department, had been appointed to the Council of the Australian National University to fill the vacancy caused by the death of Mr. E, J. B&nbsp;Foxcroft on 24th May last.
Mr. Lawler's present term will expire on 29th September, 1963.
CANBERRA,13th December, 1962
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


Well, I would like to say to my Parliamentary colleagues and to you who are looking at us and listening to us that I regard this as a very, very happy occasion, Man and boy, as you might say, I have been coming up here to Canberra on Parliamentary affairs since 1934 and in 1934, if I remember correctly, we had about 6,000 people in Canberra. It was a village. You could walk around it comfortably in an afternoon. Today it has the better part of 60,000 people and the wise men who understand these things and advise Governments and Oppositions tell us there will be 100,000 in 1970 and. getting bolder and bolder, they -6ell us there will be a quarter of a million by the turn of the century.
Now that means that Canberra is not only the capital of Australia but increasingly becomes more like a capital, with a weight of population and a quality of citizenship that will make it a very, very important place, And therefore it's a very happy event that we should be celebrating the opening of a national television station here, We have a commercial one at present, which has been seen by many people in this city. We will now have two. Now, I am very pleased about that and perhaps for two reasons.
First of all, it gives you a nice, pleasant feeling of mastery, doesn't it. if you are sitting in front of a television screen and you can turn it off and get on to another station. This is the highest exercise of citizenship and indeed they make it easy for you now because you can do it by remote control, by pressing a button.
And the other thing, of course, is that a national television station operating to the standards that we expect from the Australian Broadcasting Commission and what it does in this country, will, I think, make a powerful contribution to our amusement and also to our intellectual life and that is a very important thing in the capital city of Australia a university city, a diplomatic city, a Parliamentary city, a seat of Government
It's tremendously important that we should have those things that we regard as almost the special responsibility of a Government station accurate reporting objective interpretation and comment, music, drama of the highest quality, a general presentation which in the broad sense, in a human sense, represents a contribution to the educational standards of the country and will, I believe, strive more and more, year by year to achieve that ideal. This7 after all is the great object of a national television station. I don’t mean by that that it is to be dull. Its quite possible to be amusing, they tell me, without being dull. It's quite possible to be instructive without being dull. The record of the A. B. C. already, right round Australia, indicates a high level of capacity for providing what the people want. And so, from tonight on, we will have in this city and in this territory indeed in the whole area that is covered by the Station, the opportunity of a choice the opportunity of following our own-fancy, of pursuing our own mood, according to the kind of thing that we want to look at and listen to.
This, I think, is a notable day in the history of Canberra. I declare this Station open and I wish it great success.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


P. M. No.&nbsp;&nbsp;98/ 1962
I am delighted to learn that Her Majesty&nbsp;The Queen has conferred Privy Councillorships on the Judges&nbsp;of the High Court of Australia.
The practice in Great Britain is to confer&nbsp;Privy Councillorships on Judges on their appointment to the&nbsp;Court of Appeal. I have long thought, having regard to the&nbsp;very high standing of the High Court in Australia, that thesame rules should apply here. I had the opportunity of&nbsp;discussing this possibility during the Prime Ministers'&nbsp;Conference in London in September and I was very pleased&nbsp;to give it my wholehearted support.
It has not been decided to what extent the&nbsp;Judges will assist the Judicial. Committee. This is a&nbsp;matter for arrangement be&nbsp;tween the Lord Chancellor and the&nbsp;Chief Justice.
CANBERRA,21st December, 1962o



63/ 002
3EVg~ a I( MS4( 3 TICK ! HK PIE KINIBEIa
I believe we can look fbvord to a
Yer of oautiuaig povtot and prsprity. All the
siOU poat to a frther iprovment in our internal
eonmic onditions and I hop, as we all do, for a
similar Imprvement in International relations sa
that we may pursue the &amp; Vel9pagct of our coltmt7 in
I with all my follow astrallans a ppy
NOw Year*
1st Jamry, 1963. 



EMBARGO: NOT FOR PUBLICATION OR BROADCAST BEFORE
6.30p. m. SUNDAY, 6th. JANUARY, 1963.
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 1/ 1963
CONFERENCES WITH INDUSTRY.
STATEMENT BY iHE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. R. G. MENZIES
CoH,. . Co. M. P.
In a statement issued from his office in Canberra,
the Prime Minister said that on two occasions in 1962.
senior members of the Cabinet met in conference with rep.
resentatives of primary and secondary industry and other
economic interests in Australia in order to hear at
first hand their views on current and prospective developments
in the economy. These consultations have been most
valuable to the Government and, as previously announced9
the Government intends that further conferences should
be held from time to time for this purpose.
The Government has therefore invited representatives
of the bodies concerned in the previous consultations
to meet Ministers in Canberra on two days in the week
beginning Monday 11thø February, The object of these
conferences would bo to enable the Government to be fully
informed on the up-to-date views on economic matters of
those directly and intimately concerned with the conduct
of practical business affairs,
The first conference is proposed for 10.30 a. om
on Monday, 11th, February, and the following organisations
have boon invited to attend:-
Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Australian Council of Rotailers
Australian Council of Trade Unions
Australian Primary Producers2 Union
Australian Wool . nd Moat Producers' Federation
Australian Woolgrowors' and Graziers' Council
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
National Farmers' Union of Australia
On the following day, Tuesday, 12th February,
further conferences are proposed with representatives
of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the
Export Development Council.
CANBERRAI 6th January, 1963. 



' 63/ 003
FOR PRESS P. M. No. jZ~ 196-3
CORAL SEA CELEBRATIONS
The Prime Minister said today that Admiral
John H, Sides, Commander-in-Chief of the United States
Pacific Fleet, would be the official guest for this year's
Coral Sea Celebrations which are being arranged by the
Australian-American Association. The visit will take place
from Monday, 29th April to Saturday, 11th May, 1963.
Admiral Sides will be accompanied by his
wife, and the proposed itinerary throughout Australia is as
follows Monday Tuesday Wednesday
Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday Monday Tuesday
W4edne sday
Thursday Friday Saturday 29th April
30th April
1st May
2nd May
3rd May
4th May
5thi May
6th May
7th May
8th May
9th May
10th May
11th May Canberra
P. M. Canberra-Brisbane
Brisbane
A. M. Brisbane -Newca stle-
Sydney
Sydney
Sydney Sydney-Perth
Perth Perth-Adela ide
Adelaide
Melbourne Melbourne
A. M. Depart Melbourne
for overseas
CANBERRA, 14th January, 1963. 



6 3/ 004
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 4/ 1963
DEATH OF MR. HUGH GAITSKEFLL
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
Hugh Gaitskell's death is a great blow to his
party which he was leading with remarkable authority and
skill. It is even more than that a. great loss to
Great Britain wihich had come to regard him as one 0o' her
ablest sons. Personally, i knew him well and admired
his capabilities. He added to a fine and well-furnished
mind a sense of dedication to his own ideals, a true
patriotism, high character and a singular personal charm.
death, I am indeed sad to learn of his most untimely
CANBERRA, 19th January, 1963, 



FOR PUBLICATION: 26th January, 1963.
J. USTPRALIA DAY
Message from the Prime Ivinister, the Rt. Hon. R. G.
enzies_
" We mark today the 175th Anniversary of the
foundation of our nation. In those years our forbears
and ourselves have done much in which we can take a just
pride. Even so, the tasks ahead of us will demand great
efforts and a spirit of enterprise and co-operation from
all sections of the community. We of the cities must know
and appreciate the labour which draws wealth from the farms.
In the country there can be thought for those who work in
factories producing vast and varied goods for home -nd
overseas. we have much to be thankful for our law, our
justice, our freedom, If we remember these things today
we will find encouragement and stimulus to set out hands to
the job before us, for we are on the threshold of a great
future".
CANTBERRA, January, 1963. 



63/ 005
P. M. No. 8/ 1963
FOR PRESS EUROPEAN CO'GiON MARKET
Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. R. G, Menzies
" I am expecting to receive a message from Mr.
Macmillan which will, no doubt, convey some assessment of
the present position and of the future possibilities.
I will have this matter discussed when Cabinet meets on
0 Tuesday next. Meanwhile, it should not be overlooked that
the result of the breaking-off of the negotiations is that
the existing Commonwealth trading arrangements continue.
Whether any move should be made, however, to
alter these arrangements or to strengthen them in any way
or to make any fresh departure will be matters that will
need to be discussed by the Cabinet itself."
On the question of an early meeting of Prime
Ministers, Mr. Menzies said he would not offer any views
until he had discussed it with the Cabinet. " It must be
remembered," he said, " that any meeting of Prime Ministers
required some preparatory work and some clear idea of the
nature and content of the matters to be discussed."
CANBEPRA, January, 1963. 



6 3/ 006
FOR PRESS-: P. M. No. 11/ 1963
EUROPEAN COMMON MARKET
Statement by the Prime Minister,( t, Ho. R. G. Menzies)
Cabinet today gave consideration to the latest
dramatic developments in relation to the United Kingdom's
application to join the 4. iropean Common Market.
Throughout the long negotiations, we have
ministerially, officially, and publicly presented our interests
and views in a constructive and co-operative way, based upon
two major propositions. The first was that the ultimate decision to
join or not to join would be made by the United Kingdom and
not by us, since we are not direct parties to either the
application or the negotiations.
The second was that we wished to see terms
secured by the United Kingdom which recognised the continuing
importance of protecting our own long-established and vital
trading interests. Those interests remain and, of course,
our anxiety to see them protected remains.
At the same time, we have a sincere feeling of
sympathy for the Government of Great Britain in the manner in
which the negotiations were terminated. It certainly comes as
a great shock that one of the negotiating parties, France~
should have terminated the talks for published reasons which,
if they had been stated originally, would probably have rendered
the whole process of negotiation unnecessary0
We recognise that the British Government will
itself need to sort out the present position. It-may' well take
some wreeks to discover what the effect of France* Lt's a. ctl~ on is
upon the other Member-countries of the Common Market and, for'
that matter, upon the policies of Great Britain herselfi
Our position, which I am communicating to Mr.
Macmillan, is that if the British Government, when it has made
its own assessment of the present position, desires to have
direct discussions with Australia, we will be immediately willing
to engage in such discussions on both the ministerial and
official level. Whatever the immediate European outcome, the
trade relationships between Great Britain and Australia remain
of the liveliest importance though they are of course at present
dealt with by the 1956 Trade Agreement which is still current
and by other existing commodity arrangements. We are not
attracted by the idea of an early Prime Ministerst Conference,
which we think would be in the present relatively confused state
of affairs premature. But as I have said, we will be quite
willing to engage in bi-latere-l discussions whenever they are
sought. Meanwhile, our drive for new and diversified
markets, which has boen vigorously and most successfully pursued
for years, goes on. We have great hopes of better and better
results, particularly having regard to the remarkable degree
of stability in the cost level which has been achieved in
Australia in recent years.
CANBERRA, February, 1963. 



6 3/ 00 7
FOR PRESS: SNo,. 1-3/ 1963
PRIVY COUNCIL MEETING IN CANBERRkA
Statement by thle R1ine -Miniser Rt. Hon. R,, T Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced
today that Hei-Majesty The Queen had indicated that she
will be pleased to suion a Meeting of' the Privy Council
to be held at Government House, Canberra, on the morning
of' Tuesday, 19th February, 1962.,
Australian Members of' the Privy Council
resident in Australia have been invited to attend the
Privy Council and the opportuni ty will be -taken to swear
as Members of the Council. the six justices of the High
Court of' Australia whom Her Majesty recently appointed to
-bie Council.
CANB~ ERRA.~
7tth February, 1963. 


COBB CO. COACH JOURNEY SYDNEY/ CANBERRA
The following is text of a letter from the Premier of New South Wales, sent by Cobb. Co. coach to the Prime Minister and received on Mr. Menzies' behalf by the Minister for Immigration, Mr. Downer :-
24th January, 1963
Dear Mr. Prime Minister,
In this historic year, during which we celebrate the 175th anniversary of the foundation cf our nation, it is a fortuitous coincidence that 1963 also marks the anniversary of the foundation of Canberra, the Australian Capital.
May I extend to you Sir, as Prime Minister, congratulations and felicitations from the citizens of New South Wales, on this auspicious anniversary.
Since Captain Arthur Phillip founded the first white settlement on the shores of Sydney Cove in 1788, the people of this great country have shared in a development which has been spectacular in the rapidity and magnitude of its growth &nbsp;- a development which was accelerated with the forging of the colonies &nbsp;into a single nation and the establishment of Canberra as its capital.
It is significant historically that, as Premier of New South Wales, I have the opportunity of sending you these greetings on an original Cobb &amp; Co. Coach which was one of the many which played such an outstanding role in opening up the country.
It is the fervent hope of all the people of New South Wales that the future of this country as a federation will be blessed with as great a prosperity as it has been in the past.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,R. J. HEFFRON.
The following is an airmail reply from the Prime Minister :-
7th February, 1963.My dear Premier,I send sincere good wishes to you and to the citizens of New South Wales, the foundation State, as you celebrate the 175th anniversary of our nation.
I am in complete accord with the sentiments which you have expressed on the great development of our country and of the impetus which Federation has given&nbsp;to that development.
Equally do I share your hope for the future of our people and our nation.
Your letter has come to me by road over, a period of days by Cobb Co. coach. It will give point, I think to your gracious gesture and to the great changes 175 years have witnessed, if this, my reply to you, returns to the capital of New South Wales&nbsp;by airmail.
With kind regards,&nbsp;
Yours sincerely,R. G. MENZIES.CANBERRA,
7th February, 1963
&nbsp;



63/ 0" i0
FOR PRESS: INDUSTRY Cc4GJNUTTIOT
Statement by the Prn e Mlinister, t . e Rt, TJon R. Man4, L
The Prime Minister and senior Cabinet Ministers
today met leading ropresentcatives of A-astralian manufacturing,
commercial, banking and primary piroducers: organIsa tions to
obtain a first-iind account of current and prcspective develoipments
in the differen. t sectors of the economy.
The idstry representatives present were
Mr. TM, Ramsy, President
Mr. C. C. Vorco, President
Mr. W0T. Kelly, Presiddnt
Mr. C0R. Darivall, Chairman
Mr. A. F. HavrrJ, President
Mr. T. L, 0 Tall, Prosidcnt
Mr. L. H. Heaslip, President
Mr, J. P, efforrr
Federal President Associated Chambers of Manufacturc
of Australia
Associated Ciiaybers of Commerce
of Australia
Aus trali ii Council o: 5 Retailers
Australian Bankers' Association
Nat-'. onol Farmers' Union of
Australia
Australian LJoolgrowcrsl and
Grazio. rsl Ccunci.
Aus-1t5ralian Wool and Meat
Prcc. ucers' Federation
Australian Primary Producers'
Union
Mr, 5oiras, President-Master Bulders' Fedration of
Aus tr a3-i a
14r,, Bruce Burton, President Federal Chamber of Automotive
Indu. iIstries
The A'stralI. an Council of Trade Unions had also
been invited to send a rmjreso-ntrtivo but todaygs date was
unacceptable. Re-rcrertntivoes of the A. C. T. U. wi11 meet
Ministers in Canberra next week.
Affter t)" aIo 11cetng, the Prime Minister, Mr,
Menzies, said that the atmaosphere had ben most friendly and
co-operative and thc, discussion had been most vaTluable
The opportunit-y had been taken for a full exchange of views on
present and possible fiture trends -In activity. Wh1iat the
visiting representatives Lad to say would be carefully
considered by himself and his Cabiniet colloagues.
CANBERhRP-, 11th February, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No, ! 6/ 1Q, 6
REBUTTAL TO PAPUA/ NETW GUINEA STORY
Statement by teh1 Prime niiseet er, the Rt Hon, R. G. 4enzies
My attention has been directed to a story published
in the Melbourne Herald on February 5, and also, I believe, in the
Brisbane Courier Mail. I had not seen this article until today0
It states categorically that Australia will try to
give Papua/ New Guinea representative self-government by 1968
and complete its political independence by 1972 at the latest.
The story purports to be based upon inside knowledge
of Government policy, Mr. Hasluck made a statement in Rabaul on
Saturday, February 9, categorically denying this story and setting
out in completely accurate terms the real policy of the Australian
S Government which is " that we will stay in Papua/ New Guinea as long
as the people of the Territory need our help, No-one other than
the residents of the Territory can tell us when to go."
Mr. Hasluck's full statement deserves to be read,
It is entirely in accord with Government policy. The story about
1968 and 1972 is one which I had never heard of until I read it
today. It is a misohievous story because it may well create
confusion, not only among the indigenous inhabitants, but also
among the Australians who live and work in this Territory. I am
quite unaware of any differences of opinion in the Government on
this matter,
SCANBERRA, 11th February, 1963
* 4 



63/ 0o
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 15/ 1963
COUNCIL OF THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF
AUSTRALIA.
The Prime Minister announced today that Mr.
A. L. Moore, Assistant Secretary, Prime Minister's
Department, had been appointed to the Council of the
National Library of Australia to fill the vacancy caused
by the death of Mr. E. J. B. Foxcroft on 24th May last.
Mr. Moore's present term will expire on
23rd March, 1964.
CANBERRA, 11th February, 1963. 



63/ 011
FOR PRESS P. m. No. 1&amp; Lt9L
ECONOMIC ENQU~ IRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
I have already anniounced the Government's decision
to institute an Enquiry into a range of matters that bear directly
on the objoctives of economic policy as the Government sees them.
These objectives, which together constitute the mainspring of our
economic policies, are explicitly set out in the Terms of Reference
of the Committee of Enquiry now to be established. Their
paramount importance is not, I think, to be denied, but a problem
of increasing difficulty is to command a comprehensive view of all
the complex and interlocking factors that must enter into their
a, ch ie-vement. This problem confronts Governmeonts and their advisers
Wat every t-. urn and we have had constantly before our minds the
nature of the questions that the proposed Committee of Ehquiry
might be called upon to answer. We have now decided that the
Terms of Reference of the Committee as previously announced should
be given in somewhat greater detail and that certain particular
Wmatters that seemed of special importance should be specifically
included. In addition, we have decided to make it clear that we
expect the Committee, as far as may be possible, to draw together
the results of its studies in the form, of conclusions as to
the bear-in. g of those results cri the achievement of our overall
economic objectives. The Term-s of Reference for the ] ff-nquiry that we have
now decided upon are therefore the followving
" Having in mind that the objectives of the
Government's economic policy are a high rate of economic
and population growth with full employment, increasing
productivity, rising standards of living, external
viability, and stability of costs and prices, to enquire
into and report its findings on the following matters
The trends in population as a whole, in the work
force, and in the distribution o-f the latter
amongst various sectors.
The economic availability of knownm basic physical
resources,
The growth of domestic savings and investment.
Wd Overseas investment in Australia ( including likely
sources and trends and. an assessment of its
significance to the Australian economy).
The availability of credit.
Trends in costs, prices and wages.
Trends in productivity.
( W The pattern of growth and geographical distribution
of industry primary, secondary and tertiary
( including Lhe governmental sector). 0a 0a 9 a .00/ 2 
2-
The consequences of this for the occupations].
pattern of the work force
Trends in the standard of living
The situation with respect to the external
balance of payments.
Questions involved in the production in Australia
of goods that would otherwise be imported.
Production for export and the securing of
adequate export outlets.
The effect of customs tariffs and other forms,
direct or indirect, of protection on the
disposition of resources and on the broad
economic objectives stated above.
The Committee will report the conclusions
reached by it as to the bearing which all or any of
the matters so ascertained have upon the achievement
of the economic policy objectives above stated."
The Committee, which will commence its work in the
near future, will comprise
Dr. James Vernon, C. BoE. ( Chairman)
Professor Sir John Crawford, C. BoE. ( Vice
Chairman)
Professor PH. Karmel
D. Ge Molesworth, Esq., C oBE.
K. B. Myer, Esq,, D. S. C.
Dr. Vernon is Managing Director of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Co. Ltd., which has extensive interests in
aspects of primary and secondary industry. He is well known
as a man of exceptional ability and judgment, with a fine record
of public service. Cabinet decided that the Chairmanship should
go to one who would properly be regarded as detached from any
present or past formulation or execution of government economic
policies. Sir John Crawfordts capacity to take a prominent
part in this investigation is universally acknowledged by every
section of productive industry and business generally, as well as
in high academic circles. When I told Sir John ( who was, of
course, for years the Permanent Head of the Trade Department)
that we desired to have a completely outside Chairman but that
we greatly desired his own services, he at once, with great
generosity, expressed his complete willingness to serve as Vice-
Chairman. Having regard to the burden of responsible work which
Sir John has recently assumed, we are most grateful to him. I
think that everybody will agree that an economic enquiry without
his influential participation would be seriously handicapped,
Professor Karmol, of Adelaide, is a distinguished
academic economist, of high repute in his own field. 
8' 3-
Mr. Molesworth is Chairman of rP4. Walker Ltd., a
large meat packing organisation which controls abattoirs, cold
stores, and has interests in sheep and cattle. The company
at one time or another has been associated with virtually
every Australian primary product. It owns butter facteries
and has grown wheat as well as distributing fruit and
vegetables throughout Australia including Tasmania.
Mr. Molesworth has himself for 5' 0 years been
closely associated with primary industries both in marketing
at home and abroad, and in property management, He has been
a member of the Australian Egg Board since 194+ 8. He has most
valuably represented export interests in the negotiation of
freight rates on Australian exports. As a Chartered Accountant,
he was a member of the Commonwealth Committee on Taxation in
1960-61. He will contribute a knowledge of trading and
marketing problems of important sections of primary industry
and a wealth of experience in the problems of distribution,
management and finance.
Mr. Kenneth Myer is, of course, well knmown as
Deputy Chairman and Managing Director of Myer Emporium Ltd.
of Melbourne. The Governmont is grateful to these busy and able
men who have agreed to accept this additional burden, and is
confident that a great purpose will be served by the Enquiry
on whichi they are embarking.
CANBERRA 13th February, 1963. 



63/ 0! 2
FOR PRESS NORTHERN TERRITORY DEVELOPMENT OF GOVE
BAUXITE DEPOSITS
Statement by the Prime Minister
Tne Prime Minister announced today that, following
negotiations conducted by the Minister for National Development,
Senator Sir William Spooner, and the Minister for Territories,
Mr. Hasluck, the Government had approved the issuing of special
mineral leases to the Gove Bauxite Corporation over bauxite
deposits in the Gove Peninsula of Arnham Land, Northern
Territory, The leases would be subject to conditions requiring
the construction of an alumina plant with an annual capacity of
not less than 500,000 tons. The plant, when completed, would
cost in the vicinity of œ L45m., provide direct employment for
about 800 operatives, support a population of about 3,000 and
yield export income at the rate of œ 1241mo per anm-ajmo
In this venture Gove Bauxite Corporation would be
associated with the Pechiney Company of France, the largest
producer of aluminium in E. arope and the fifth largest in the
wcrldo In due course, on application, the leases would be
transferred to an Australian subsidiary of Pechineyo
The conditions of the leases, which cover an area of
about 57 square miles and are for a period of 42 years, with
a right of renewal, require the lesee to make an immediate
stor;, on the mining and export of 10m, tons of bauxite and
to carry it out within a period of 18 years. This operation,
which will include the construction of a port, will involve
an immediate expenditure of about œ 2-nm,
The lessee will be required within three years after the
granting of the leases to incur expenditure of not less than
œ 300,000 in carrying out further exploration of the leased
area and otherwise assessing the economic feasibility of
the construction of an alumina plant of not less than 500,000
tons annual capacity. The lessee will also be required to
submit within three years after the granting of the leases a
plan acceptable to the Government for the development of the
leased areas, including the erection of the alumina plant and
to complete such plant by the end of 1970o
Failure to comply with these conditions render the
leases liable to forfeiture.
The Minister for Territories will accord the lessee
ancillary rights to enable it to establish the facilities
needed on its project such as harbour works and loading
facilities, roads, railways, town site and to obtain its
requirements of water, building materials, etc0 / 2 
S2
Gove Bauxite Corporation Ltd. was granted a proOpecting
right over the area in July, 1961, with the right to apply
for leases if it proved the exsitence of sufficient bauxite
to enable 10m. tons of bauxite to be mined for export and
the existence of further deposits sufficient to justify
consideration of the establishment of an alumina plant
for treatment of the bauxite on the spot,
The Corporation fulfilled its obligations under the
permit within the stipulated time.
The Prime Minister said that this project represented
a further major step forward in the Government's efforts
to develop the Northern Territoryo In addition to the
direct employment providod by it,. its influence will
extend to other sections of the Northern Territory economy.
As the area over which mineral leases are to be
granted falls within the Arnham Land aboriginal reserve,
the bauxite mined will attract double the normal rate of
royalty, the proceeds of which are to be paid into a trust
fund for the general benefit of aborigines in the Torritory.
The deposits covered by the leases referred to in
this ctatement are in what is known as the " Gove Perimeter".
An adjacent lease, Special Minerals Lease \ Nol, is at present
held by British Aluminium
SCANBERRA February 1.7, 1963 PM. 


RECEPTION AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA, IN HONOUR OF HER MAJESTY, THE QUEEN, ON 18TH FEBRUARY, 1963

Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. R.G.Menzies
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highness:
It's my very great privilege as Prime Minister - your Prime Minister, Ma’am - f Australia to offer you and His Royal Highness a very, very warm welcome once more to this&nbsp;country. 
I know that we had a little arrangement that speeches should be reduced to the minimum, a matter of which I think I might safely say Your Majesty warmly approved, but you can't expect, really, in this place of Parliament which is the house of speeches, and with myself and then the Deputy Prime Minister and then the Leader of your opposition in this country, to let the occasion pass without saying something. But I assure you, Ma'am, we will reduce it to a minimum.
The first thing that I want to say is to remind everybody of something you said when you were here last, when you referred to the fact that in the constitutional structure of Australia - Parliamentary, executive, judicial - you are there. You are, indeed the Head of this House. "Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty" - and, therefore Ma’am, you are among your friends, and in one sense, among your colleagues. 
We, of course, are also delighted to see His Royal Highness, Prince Philip, who has been here a few times – not enough - but a few times and who has a standing among us which I don't need to describe because he has been conscious of it so many times.
Ma’am, there are a lot of interesting people in the world who like to discuss the Monarchy. There are clever people in the world - at least so I understand - who have discovered that all sorts of things ought to be done to the Monarchy to democratize the Monarchy, to do something to it, to do something to what we all are proud to say is the most democratic Monarchy in the whole wide world. (Applause) We pay no attention to&nbsp;that; when we see you, we see you as our Queen, we see you as our Sovereign Lady, we see you as the successor of monarchs who, in this very century, have by their own conduct and their own standards and their own genius, helped to preserve our Monarchy in a world in which crowns have been tumbling and disasters have beset mankind. And we are proud to think that so far from abrogating any of our liberty because we are your subjects, we know that we add to our liberty because we are your subjects as are scores and scores of millions of people around the world, and out of all our joint allegiance to you comes an addition to our freedom, not a subtraction from it.
Your Majesty, it is a proud thought for us to have you here, to remind ourselves that in this great structure of Government which has evolved and of which this Parliament is one of the fruits, you - if I may use the expression - are the living and lovely centre of our enduring allegiance. (Applause) 
Ma'am, I say one thing more and one thing only. You today begin your journey around Australia. It is a journey you have made before. You will be seen in the next few weeks by hundreds and thousands and, I hope, by millions of your Australian subjects. Mothers will hold their children up to look at you as you go by, and they themselves, and their&nbsp;husbands will have a look at you as you go by. This must be to you now something that is almost a task. All I ask you to remember, in this country of yours, is that every man,&nbsp;woman and child who even sees you with a passing glimpse as you go by, will remember it - remember it with joy, remember it in the words of the old seventeenth-century poet who wrote those famous words – 
"I did but see her passing by 
And yet I love her till I die"



63/ 014
TEXT OF H. M. THE QUEEN'S SPEECH TC BE GIVEN
AT RECEPTION TO DE H-ELD AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE
ON MONIDAY, 18/ 2/ 63
TO BE CHECKED AGAINSTDELIVERY
NOT TO BE PUBLISHED BEFORE DELIVERY
Mr, Prime Minister, I am delighted to forgive you and your two
Parliamentary colleagues for your charming speeches this
evening. I am also very happy to note that on this occasion
you are all of one mind.
My husband and I are deeply touched by the
warmth and kindness of your welcome. Let me say at once that
we are both delighted to be back in Australia for the
Jubilee celebrations of the Capital City.
As we flew over Canberra this afternoon,
I found it difficult to roalise that all this has grown up in
short years. It is a wonderful achievement and an inspiring
sight to see a great and gracious city taking shape almost
before one's eyes. Even more remarkable and more important is
that the plant of our ancient, free and democratic institutions
has taken root here so firmly and is showing such vigorous
independent growth. The first time I came to Australia everything
w-as new, although not necessarily strange. This time I am
looking forward to an even more interesting visit as I shall
be able to see many familiar places and old friends, I shall
also be able to make comparisons with what I remember of our
last visit and I am quite sure that I shall be greatly impressed
by the many developments and the progress of the last nine
years. In many cases I know what to expect because I follow
events in Australia with much interest and admiration. Most
impressive has been the rapid growth of a distinctive and
independent Australian thought and culture and I am very proud
that this has led Australia to play an increasingly important
part on the world stage.
Perhaps even more significant for Australians
has been the modern pioneering in the far North and North-West.
The partnership of science and engineering with man and nature
is harnessing precious water, coaxing the land into useful
production and building new towns in remote areas. These are
the foundations for what I hope will be thriving and prosperous
communities in the future and I am looking forward to visiting
some of those areas with great interest,
I do not intend that this should be my last
visit to Australia and next time I hope I shall see different
places and many communities that could not be included this
time. Tonight, on my arrival, I want to send greetings to all
Australians and particularly to those we shall not be able to
see on this occasion. Thank you again Mr. Prime Minister, Mr.
McEwen and Mr. Calwell for your kind words this evening.
I pray that Australia will continue to prosper in a happy and
peaceful future, 



63/ 016
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 20/ 1963
MEETING WITH A. C. T. U. REPRESENTATIVES
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Menzies
The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, and senior
Commonwealth Ministers today met representatives of the
A. C. T. U. in order to obtain the point of view of the trades
unions on recent and prospective developments in the
Australian economy. The A. C. T. U. was represented by Mr. Albert
Monk,( President), Mr. J. D. Kenny ( Senior Vice-President) and
Mr. H. J. Souter, ( Secretary).
Mr. Menzies said that the representatives of
the A. C. T. U. had submitted various proposals and that he
welcomed hearing their views on specific aspects of the
economic situation with which they wore in close touch.
What the representatives had to say would be considered
carefully by the Government.
CANBERRA, February 21, 1963o 



6 3/ 0
FOR PRESS: ECONOMIC TALKS
Statement by the Prime Minister_,_ h Rt Hon. R. G. Menzies
During the talks we had recently with representatives
of business, a good many suggestions were put forward. as to ways
in which expansion could be promoted, business confidence
sustained and unemployment further reduced. A numaber of these
suggestions related to matters on which the Government already
had action in view.
As to employment, for example, we had just ahead
of us the Loan Council-meeting at which the works and housing
programmes for this year were to be reviewed. Uhile we wished
to have our discussions with the Premiers before deciding what
the Commonwealth should offer to do, we had already made a very
thorough study of the whole employment situation.
In the event we found that the view put to us by
industry representatives did not differ greatly from our own
assessment nor from the account of things given by most of the
Premiers. In the main, the opinion was that some increase in
expenditure on works and housing could have useful results; it
was generally emphasised, however, that any such expenditure
ought to be channelled as far as possible into localities and
occupations where, for various reasons, employment opportunities
were not coming forward very readily,
That, of course, had been the aim of two of the
chief measures we took last year0 The grant of œ-10 million we
made to the States last February for employment-giving activities
and the subsequent grant of œ C12.5 million in our 1962/ 63 Budget
had just that purpose. Furthermore, the Commonwealth last June
took the initiative in removing any Loan Council limit on the
overall amount that might be borrowed by local authorities
seeking V100,000 or less in any financial year. The grocat value
of this step is that it gives relatively small bodies all over
the country a better chance of obtaining money to spend on works
in their own towns and districts.
It is encouraging now to find that authorities of
that type had been able to borrow, up to the end of January last,
some œ 16.7 million. This is substantially more than they
borrowed in the comparable period of 1961/' 62 and it is, in fact,
al~ most as much as they used to 1b able to borrow in a full twelve
months up to a couple of years ago.
As was announced last week, the Commonwealth agreed
at the Loan Council to an increase of : C5 million in the 1962/ 63
borrowing programmes for Commonwealth/ State works and housing
aind to an increase of œ C6 million in the programmes of semigovernmental
authorities those seeking to borrow more than
œ-100,000 in 1962/ 63.
The Commaonwc2althi also increased the grant for
emioloyment-giving activities by œ C5 million, bringing the total
grant for 1962/ 63 to fœ 17,5~ million. It stipulated thatc expenditures
from the grant should be over and above those from the
State works and housing programmes and should be distributed o. o 9/ 2 
2
to areas, like those of the New South Wales coalfields and the
Northern coastal areas of Queensland, where more general
measures are not so likely as elsewhere to give rise to employment.
On housing, the majority of those who took part in
the consultations thought that rather more finance should be
available both for the erection of new homes and the purchase
of existing homes. A good deal was also said about the problem
of the gap between the amount of loan finance people can obtain
and the deposits they are in a position to make when acquiring
a home. These are problems the Government ha3 very much in
mind. They are highly complex matters, It is far from being
a simple question of making more money available for housing
at large; rather, as with unemployment the problem is to ensure
that action is directed to the real centres of difficulty.
We have, in fact, undertaken to make some additional
finance available for housing through established channels. The
decision to increase Loan Council borrowing programmes for works
and housing this year means that the Commonwealth will add œ 2.4
million to the funds available during the next few months u-ider
the Commonwealth/ Stato housing agreement.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth Baxiking Corporation
has now decided to increase the lending limit for the credit
foncier loans of the Comnonwoalth Savings Bank from œ 3Q, 000 to
œ 3900. The Commonwealth Savings Bank being a large-scale
lender for housing this is, of course, an important step.
War Service Homes When the maximum loan under the War Service Homes
Act was increased from œ 2,750 to œ 3,500 in May, 1962, the
objective was to stimulate the home-building industry as well
as to provide more favourable conditions under which eligible
ex-servicemen could obtain homes or carry out essential additions
to their homes. These objectives have been achieved. It is expected
that the number of new homes which will be financed during
1962/ 63 will be some 800 more than was expected at the beginning
of the year. The increase in the maximum loan has greatly
reduced the number of ox-servicemen who have found it necessary
to obtain finance for their homes under a second mortgage.
There has been a heavy demand for loans to provide additional,
essential a cconodation. In order that this increased demand nay continue to
be dealt with under existing arrangements the Government has
decided to provide an additional œ 2,500,060 to be expended this
financial year. The Government's decision will result in an increase
in the appropriation for Xar Service Homes for the year from
œ 3,000,000 to œ 37,500,000.
More generally, and apart from particular matters
like unemploynent and works expenditure and housing finance, / 3 
-3-
it was put to us that there is a need to give the business
community more guidance as to future economic policy so that
forward planning and investment can proceed with all reasonable
confidence. On this view, it may not always be enough to
demonstrate that the economy is currently well situated,
balanced internally and externally and moving forward at a
good rate as it now is, Businessmen hold that if they are
to plan forward securely they need to know, amongst other
things, what the broad trend and content of future economic
policy is likely to be.
The Government understands this viewpoint and is
disposed to meet it as far as it can. Perhaps, at this point
of time, the first thing is to clear away a certain nisapprehension,
There has been comment lately to the effect that
the expansionary measures the Government took last year have
spent themselves and are now having no effect on the economy.
But this is utterly wrong. The Budget for this year continued
all the measures taken earlier the big tax reductions, the
social service increases, the special grants to the States and
it added to then in the shape of large developmental works.
notably in Queensland and Western Australia. Meanwhile, credit
policy has continued to be highly liberal. Nothing of all
that stimulatory action has been withdrawn. It all goes on in
full force. In fact, it is likely that some of the measures
the investment allowance on manufacturing plant for example
are only now starting to exert their full influence. Also,
some of the larger developmental projects have hardly got
properly into their stride as yet,
The chief objectives of Government policy are,
of course, firm and clear full employment, strong and
continuous industrial growth, stable costs and prices, a
balanced external situation and so on. These aims have been
stated again and again and we have spared no effort to make
them really mean something.
But we realise perhaps better than most the need
to keep up the underlying momentum of the economy. As a
dynamic element, probably nothing counts for more than the
migration programme and here again there seems to be a
misapprehension. It is still being said that migration is
lagging. The truth is that immigration is strongly on the
way up and its prospects have rarely looked better than they
do today. Certainly the 1962/ 63 target of 125,000 arrivals
will be exceeded, There has been a tremendous flood of
applications in Great Britain for assisted passages to
Australia. Many of the applicants are skilled people the
key workers upon whom the expansion of our industries depends
so heavily. These skilled workers are being given the highest
priority. Additional shipping and a substantial airlift
have been arranged and it is already clear that the intake
of British migrants in the twelve months ending 30th June
next will be the best for the past ten years. Nothing could
be more likely to impart a renewed drive to the economy or
give assurance of basic expansion in the years ahead of us.
More specifically, the Government has been asked
to give the firmest indications it can as to policy on the
Budget for next year. This, of course, is difficult. We
do not have, and cannot have for some time yet, any precise / 4 
idea as to the probable levels of receipts and expenditures in
1963/ 64+ and, in any case, the Budget is not a thing on which
forward undertakings can readily be given,,
It is, of course, certain that expenditure will
rise substantially neXt year, as it has done in all recent
years if only because of existing commitments which must be
carried on. It is likely also that taxation revenues will
benefit from the strong rise in industrial activity and earnings
that have occurred through 1962/ 63 and we have great confidence
that trends like these will carry on into 1963/ 64+. But there
are, and always will be, elements in the Budget whirch defy
precise or dependable forecasting even at short range. it
would certainly be cut of the question for us to indicate here
and now what particular measures the Budget for next year may
or may not contain, It can be said, however, that we do intend to renew
the legislation which provides for certain export incentives
which would otherwise expire in 1964+. It can be taken for
certain too that the investment allowance on manufacturing plant
will continue to be available, It is of the essence of measures
like these0 undertaken to provide special incentives, that
once established they ought to be carried on long enou-L
produce t heir in~ ended results.
CANBERRA,
February 21, 19630 



WUiSY COLLNCINTAR WfILDINO FM~ l
APfLAL DIIIRNEID AT XMBOURNE
ON1 22ND * EUMAUB, 1963
IRMA h hePrz Kinisar. the Ut ba. 1. G. fieae
Bir, and ladies and Gentlemen*
It is very seldom that me. enecunters a Chairman
who, is a Professor in Thoo. g in one of Its branches and who
pos mesgs ayour gay sense of humur, Be turn~ s to so, after
really loading me with undserved praise and then he says
* New, you are he" e as an old boy. I want you to " elax. fs
get up and make a speeah.' ( laughter)
Wll Sir, I don't proeto make a very long on*
becauset In the frat place I a whet you have been
say" Iveythi ou sail about rils'wt right. Most of
tg ousi about me were olrih. It was very
deeent of you to sympathise with people like myself for idering
vilaiomas and violent attacks from time to time. I want
to mkte qiteclear that this represents novirtue on my
part. I like them, ( Laughter) The great secret of politics
is to bae a somewhat low blood prelires CA aTtka It
and the result Is that when ;; me. yd vrsa tac n
boome V&amp; y &amp; Az~ yed my blood pressure, becomes normal, ( Laughter)
I find this a singular Odfantage.
Sirs, the great thin that always oases into m
mind en Gag of the" e oeaions is thisl that back In 47
ist af ter the war, at a tim beore Nenxtes and Hiolt and when
hew income tax was very, very high in Austvalia ( Laughter) I
remember saying to myself, ' w will these ret public ; os
survive?' It seemed to se a fair question toput to oneself...
High taxes inevitably ' Nw will these schools which are, bound
to becme moeand more -Iveaasv no" e and more justice Is
dene to teachers and no" e sads are made upon the ptets of
children how can they survival Will we fMn ourselves losing,
will we find ourselves practising that dreadful civic vie of
mifoiity for which we have suck a passion in Australia?'
1 late maiformity. We must have individuliem in our sabools,
in evrthn in our lives if we are to go on, and how are we
going thocontinue. And the great thing that has struck so
year after year, has been that in spite of all the diffiuties
every school I know of has gone on and an and has got biggeran
stronger-, year after year, with waiting lists with parents
nxious to accept the financial burdens in ; orr to get the
advantages for their children. of what awes on In these schOols.
This, I think, is a moderm revolution and I confess to you that
fifteen years ago I did not expect It for one mment, brat I an
delighted to have been wrong.
I remember when I was at Wesley, as obscure a child
as ever went through it5 we had A total poUlation. of about
250 a few fellw like 0ordon Hattam and LmS elleek, they
can correct no but I think I an right about 250, And I remember
that the then eadmstmr, to whom I " efor respectfuy as Dicky
Adeason, saying in that gwrmbling voice of his, not always 60.8
to mW~ rstand, except whe n it was saing something unpleasant,
( laugIrherm) embr h'm " Itrust the school will
never rise beyond 300. That's enough.' And now, what am I told 
ths way and that way 960 And of aours. the pric, that you
tfyA developing a school within a limited area or pround
those enormous proportions is that you mast divido, you
must develop the junior school, you mast develop various astect
of the school you must move out and got nov its you u
ereet now buildings and Sir all this, as no doubt we will be
told toni ght, will repr~ esent a challenge in particular to every
old bay of Wesay. A groat chall1enge.
In fact, when I ease In here tonight and looked
around and my wife said to as OHave you ever had to speak at
as big a Dinner as this . in 144zo; or somewhere?' I said, ' Well,
I would doubt It. Maybe ones, I don't know, but I would doubt it. N
But I do may nov that the remarkable thing about this Dinner Is
that you have, 1,000 people he" e who all eawe along quite willingly,
no pressed men all volunteers -you didn't gam along to hear
so you cam ln to have it taken out of you. ( Laughter)
This I think is agnifiest Wb. ver Is the Chairman of the
Appeal financially, I say, " Look at them willing aid anxious."
I thnk tisVi a peat spectacle I can unestanid It in the
case of the Pres= 1era like Myselfg but as for the rest of
you ( Laughter4 It will remain a big mystery. A deep mstery.
Sir I an not ping to keep you, but I want to
say this* Iniid; Zity I referred to It a little wile ap
is of the essene of orideals of public schools and In
particular for our own school. This business of during to be
viseo this business of setting out to achieveo utter intelleal
Integrity and the development of haman character and the Individual
character, this is not just a form of wrds* This is *=* ething
that ean be achieved bF a preat school and lost Or a bad aw
and we &amp; arev ery proud to say 1 k: bak am the record of our
sebsolo that It Sa ay, I us~ 1y that it has sent out
into the vorld in Matralia and a dj W many men vhs have
really achieved intelleetual Integpity, who have really folled
out the motto of the sehool, not in a priggish iny nothing
could be no" s boring; met In a pompous ways nothing could be
no" detestable, but in a simple straightforwrd, manly fashion,
And that is why Wesley is a great school and that really is
why 1,000 people have Oue be tonight to think about it, to
talk about It,, to be talked to about It and I an delighted to
have had the oppeatunty of being one of them. o
I woaqLar what Harold Stewart thought wa he was
sitting in his Reemaster's study ma the lieholas brothers
walked in. This mat be an experienoe that somes to few
boadma sters. Fanq two mo% simle splni people, owing in
and saying, ' Good morning. FWsmater my wetaeast?
And theni sayin " ejut a little trifling matter . we would
like to do someth a the geaftster pricaks up his ears
even Harold 0Stewrt, that wonderful man Who taught 100 threequarters
of what I know even Harold Stewa)' t must have thOUghkt
to himslf, ' Ah. wells perhaps YOU know We Might be able to
build a wing." 1 And out it games. This was a marvelloas thing.
And every old Wesley ellegiaxi was delighted to hear about it*
Bat if I my say so we have perhaps lived too long
am the menwry of it. They were to men we a" e numeered in our
thosns and if we Ow anything to this great schDol, as we
then perhps the tine has come to disob~ r g ame part of the debts
That's how I feel about it. I haven't = eue my emotions into
pem~, sillings and pemee, hwever,, but not doubt with you aid
I will, ( Laughter) in due course. Bat that's the real question
* What are we going to do about It?" and this is not just a matter
of raising money for future developmet, it is a continuing matter
of what I will Gall o" actical pride" in the school . that we handed
on* And, Sir, in that mood and with those words, I would
like everybody to rise anid drink the toast of the school. 


Mr Chairman, Moderator and Ladies and Gentlemen - and for that matter - boys and a few girls:
I have two tasks this afternoon. One is to declare this school open and the other is to unveil a plaque which will commemorate the celebrated and generous name of Weatherly.
I have been reminded this afternoon that I turned up in 1939, when I didn't have a grandchild to be seen, to open a new building at the South Road school. This is a long time ago, and on that occasion, I was able to mention the names of two great friends of mine, each of them most celebrated old boys of Haileybury - the late Sir Alan Newton, one of the great surgeons of the world and the late Sir Wilfred Fullagar, one of the great lawyers of the world. And I mentioned them then because I am a great believer in tradition, I am a great believer in the history of the school being studded with names of people who have contributed something to the world. And therefore, Sir, it was with very great pleasure that I agreed on a date which I hoped was not too inconvenient to you to come here and to take some part in the opening of this new school.
And the occasion is all the more significant because we have here today the Moderator of the Church of Scotland. You know, I have sometimes thought, Sir, in my idle moments that it is not a bad thing to be Prime Minister of Australia, so long as you don't stay there too long (laughter) but it is an even better thing to be a Moderator of the Church of Scotland, and we are delighted to have you here; because whenever I think about these matters, I think of the great fact in Scottish history that education has been the great achievement and the great objective in Scotland.
I have had some interesting experiences in that country. I remember one which I recalled on a former occasion in another place and that was when I was staying with a man in Scotland - my wife and I were both there - and I walked out one morning into a field and I spoke with a man who was looking after the cows - he was the cowman on this property. And you don't expect a cowman to discuss philosophy with you, do you? He is usually a somewhat more earthy character than that. This man walked across, leaned against a fence with me. Did he discuss the weather? Did he discuss the cricket? Did he discuss any of these things? Not at all. Within ten minutes, he was deep into philosophical discourse. At the end of half an hour, Sir, I blush to say, he had almost left me for dead. (laughter) And I thought where could this happen, except in Scotland and within the Scottish tradition and this school stands in the Scottish tradition. The church and the school. The fine tradition which makes parents feel that their children must have an even better chance than they had, that their children must go to a good school, that their children must go to a school in an atmosphere in which the human is not so absorbing as to obscure the divine. This is a magnificent tradition and that's why Haileybury has, particularly in recent years, grown so much and become so increasingly important among the schools of Victoria.
Now I just want, in addition to that, to say that I would like to get off my chest a little thing that is always there about schools and about learning in the broad. Our great temptation today, and this is a temptation that comes to many, many parents, is to say, "Let the boy or let the girl receive enough education to hold down a decent job." And you know, that's not good enough. That's not good enough. I am an unmitigated believer in what people call useless learning. How many times I have heard people say, "Oh, well, my son isn't going to be an engineer, so why should he worry about mathematics?" Now, I am the last man to say that mathematics represents an agreeable study. I didn't ever find it such, but I am sure it was good for me to have to do it. "My son is not going to go onto the stage, why should he have to learn a lot of poetry by heart? How much better an accountant will this make him?" Or "My son, he's not going into Parliament or into any of those occupations which require people to make speeches, why should he worry about speech? Why shouldn't he just get along with the gobbledygook that you hear so frequently from people? Why be different from others? Why speak properly when it's fashionable not to?" Now, I just want to answer these questions very, very briefly for the benefit of my fellow students who are here and also for the benefit of the parents.
A very great British soldier in the last war named Wavell - Wavell was the Commander-In-Chief in the Middle East, Wavell was a soldier of immense repute and of long experience and of great courage - his conversational powers were practically zero. This is a very remarkable thing. I am talking of a man I knew. To have a conversation with the great Wavell was the most difficult thing in the world but when he put pen to paper, then you got the whole wealth of his mind from the splendid prose of his "Life of Allenby" to the very colloquial cables that he used to send to Winston from time to time and which you won't find in Winston's memoirs. (laughter) And yet, in the course of the war, in the course of a period of time in which Wavell, outnumbered in the Middle East, had to resort to infinite stratagem in order to hold the position of the Allies in the Middle East, he wrote out an anthology of poetry and it contained only those he knew by heart - "Other Men's Flowers". I hope some of you, many of you, have seen it. A good octavo volume. Now, what do you think of that? Had poetry been useless to him? I'll undertake to say that in the many periods of anguish that must have come to him at that time, the recollection in tranquillity of the verse he knew must have given him great comfort and great strength. Never ignore this kind of thing.
And the other matter I want to mention is the matter of speech. I don't mean just pouring out a lot of words because, between you and me, anybody can do that. I mean good speech, the best speech you can attain. Don't neglect it. In this modern period of time, the capacity to communicate ideas is only less important than the capacity to evolve them. All the great scientists, all the great men of ideas would lose half their function in the world if they hadn't learnt to express themselves clearly and persuasively.
Not very far away from here is a new University carrying the name of Sir John Monash. Now, Sir John Monash was, by common consent, a very great soldier and a very great engineer and, incidentally, a very distinguished expert witness on scientific matters, so expert that a celebrated judge in Victoria once said that any solicitor who failed to retain Monash as an expert witness was liable to be cast in damages for negligence. Now there you are. But he had a faculty not so well-known to most people - one that I happened to be familiar with myself - the faculty of putting a case so simply, so persuasively, that even though you began by thinking he might be wrong, you ended up by being perfectly certain that he was right. And one of the reasons why he was a great soldier was that he had this power of exposition which took him almost to the ultimate top in the First World War. He knew what he wanted, he knew how to explain it. There's speech for you. Don't ignore these things. Don't go through life saying something a little incoherent and lazy and then say, "Well, you know what I mean." It is not really good enough. And don't go through life, looking at other people and saying, "Poetry! Huh! I never read it," as if that were something to be proud of. Because you won't express yourselves in anything when you grow up and take on some task in life unless you have enriched your vocabulary and you enrich it by reading, by reading and by remembering.
Now, Sir, I am sorry to have got this little homily off my chest, as you might say, but really, this is perhaps an occasion for it, because I am not anticipating that this school is going to be just another school. I am anticipating that this school is going to be more and more a great school and a famous school, in which a generation of boys in fifty years' time - a hundred years' time - will be able to say honestly, "Let us now praise famous men and our fathers which begat us"; our fathers in this school, our grandfathers in this school remembered and remembered with honour and praise.
Sir, it is a very great honour and privilege for me to declare this school open.



THE AUS TRAL IAN ASSOCIATION OF BRITISH MAI\ 7[ TFCTERSI,
LTffHTFON HE7. LDfA T MEL1O~ TH FFBR1ARY%-
Speech by the PrIme Ministre th e Rt. Hon, R. G. Menzie s
I usually begin a speech by saying " Sir", but
today I am going right back to the grass-roots and therefore
I say, Mr. Chairman, my Lords we have a couple of them here
today Mr. High Commissioner, Mr. Ferguson and the rest of you
I was delighted to hear from my old friend, Mr. Hawker, about the
exhibit at the International Fair and to listen to his trailer
is that the expression? of those things that are to come.
And as a matter of fact, if I live so long and endure so long
and there is enough time available, I am going with my Lord
Simon afterwards to have a quick look at the British exhibit.
I think you will all agree that as an honest broker
I am placed in a somewhat difficult position today. I walked in
and the first man I met was an arrant free-trader. i refrain
from mentioning his name. And the next man I walked into was Tom
Ramsay the President of the Australian Chamber of Manufacturers.
And all my instincts, all my political instincts, said to me,
" Laddie, this is the time to got out". But I was blocked in my
retreat by two waiters, each of them oddly enough offering me a
drink. And so I remained,
But then I got a little comfort out of remembering
that I had been provided by somebody with a little piece of
paper about this Assotuiation and it recalled to my mind that one
of your objectives is " to encourage reciprocal trade." Now, this
is something frequently overlooked. i am sure that there were a
lot of people who, looking on at Tariff Board proceedings and
seeing over a long term of years the devoted and talented work of
Mr. Ferguson, would regard him superficially as the enemy of
Australian manufacturing. And of course that is quite wrong.
There may be a lot of people who think that Australian manufacturers,
who have so great and increasing a part to play in
national development are to be regarded as the opponents of all
imports of any kind Ircm other counmtries. Both of those conceptions
are grievously wrong. And it is all summed up in the
expression in your own objectives about encouragement of
reciprocal trade. Now Sir,~ you concern us when I say " you" I am
referring to the Issociation, bigoted fellows like yourself and
others somewhat mere broadminded whom I see around me but you
concern us I do not mean you alarm us, but you interest us
you are our concern in at last two ways. And perhaps I might
just state them almost categorically. First of all, without
growing exports of British manufacturers from Great Britain and
a correspondingly sound balance of trade and payments for Great
Britain, Great Britain, either in or out of the Common Market,
will have great difficulty in sustaining her economic and
financial strength and with them her enormolus significance in
the whole modern world. We all realise this, We rather thrive
on differences in Australia. I remember one time when Winston
Churchill said about us in a speech of his,," Ah, in Australia
they conduct their politics with a fine 18h century vigour." 1
And that is quite true; we thrive on differences. I do not
thinik I would have lived as long as I have without them.
But let us not so much enjoy our differences as to
forget all the things that we have in common. And one of the
things we all have in coramon hero today is that Great Britain
must be and remain and increasingly be a powerful community in
this world. / 2 
-2-
I know that some clever fellow in some English newspaper
will once more accuse me of being sentimental. All right,
I an, I an. But this is more than sentiment. Every consideration,
not only of sentiment, but of self-interest, requires
that we in Australia, the old Dominion, should believe, and
believe in our hearts and in our minds that is even more
important that Great Britain must continue to be strong for
the good of the world. And therefore Great Britain must manufacture
and she must export. We realise that. Indeed, we know
that in this modern and highly complex world, with challenges
around every corner, a new challenge almost every month, trade
with Groat Britain for us in Australia remains essential.
There aru a few people in Great Britain some of them highly
placed who have yet to learn the massive extent of the trade
between this country and Great Britain. Some of then, indeed,
have yet to remember or to be told that over a considerable
time of years now, when our own secondary industry had been
developing apace, Great Britain has had. in terms of commodities,
a highly favourable balance of trade with this country. And
we have found in Great Britain our greatest single market.
These things are not to be overlooked. New markets
yes, we need. Groat Britain is searching for themn The whole
strategic approach, as far as I understand it, of the Common
Market negotiations was to develop new and enlarged markets for
the products of British industry. And we ourselves cannot live
on old markets. Wo may improve then, we may nurse them with
jealous care, but we must develop new markets. Because this
is a challenging world, The one thing that I want to say
about that is that I hope that none of us will fail to remember
that new markets are best when they are added to old markets and
not when they are subtracted from them,
Now, Sir, there is another thing that I would like to
say to you. Is there as some people have thought, a necessary
conflict between the British manufacturer and the Australian
manufacturer? ( I apologies for my terminology because most
of my life I have been explaining to people that we are British,
but still these modern terms become very difficult. I remember
a very distinguished British Minister once in Australia saying,
" Would you think it wrong if we referred to ourselves as the
British Government? It is so tiresome to say we are the U. K,
Government, We will have to be calling ourselves the U. oK-ites
like the Hittites and the Malachites, and this really will not
do." I concede the point, this is purely for purposes of
argument that I refer to the Fritish and to the Australian.)
But is there a necessary conflict? And of course the answer
is obviously " no" o
Perhaps the answer needs a little elaboration. And
the first piece of elaboration is one at which I have already
hinted, All the history of modern times in Australia has shown
that the more we have become industrialised, the greater has
been our appetite for import; that the more we produce ourselves
and the more we raise our own standards of living in Australia,
the greater is our capacity for buying the products of other
countries. And, indeed, as I have said to you we have bought
more from Great Britain, talking in terms of commodities than
Groat Britain has found it possible to buy from us. But this
is not to be judged on a merely bilateral basis. This is to
be judged on a multilateral basis, when you consider the state
of affairs in the world. And whenever we feel a little
disturbed, if we do, about this kind of thing, the more we
have to remember that over the last decade, for example, when
S0000... 0/ 3
L 
-3
our manufactures have developed, when our imports have
increased, when we have had some imbalance in commodity
trade with Great Britain, wie have at the same time been
enjoying an enormous national growth. which is vital to us;
we have had massive immigration, much of it from the Old
Country; we have had growing employment and we have had an
investment of overseas capital in Australia which some people
appear to believe comes almost entirely from the United
States, but which in fact has come mostly from Great Britain.
I was looking over the figures which some industrious
member of my staff produced about our trade, because you know
at a solemn gathering like this they do not think much of you
unle-ss you quote a few figures and I am not, as a rule, very
much in favour of doing that. But I did notice that although
there has boen large importation into Australia, inevitably
because, among others, our own manufacturers need them of
commodities of metals, metal manufactures, machines and
machinery, I regretted to observe that over the last ten
years the percentage of these things coming to us from Great
Britain has fallen. Not our total imports of such mattersthey
have risen but the percentage from British sources
has fallen. And I found myself asking, impertinently you
may say, whether this argued some lack of enterprise in the
Old Country, because believe me we noed an awful lot of
enterprise here and Great Britain nee; ds an awful lot of
enterprise if, in this complex world, with all sorts of
doubtful things and uncertain factors, never more uncertain
than they are at present on the fringes of Europe, you need
and we need a tremendous development of enterprise and of
ingenuity. I suppose that we are all, except on polling day,
a little conservative. 1-can remember a time, not so very
long ago when, if I encountered a British motorcar mianufacturer
in England, ha took me on one side and lectured me' in
an almost fatherly mannor on the wickedness of the very idea
of Australia manufacturing a motor car. -tVhy don't you take
what we give you, they are the best in the world." This is
splendid, but it is no wray to conquer a world market. And,
of course, as the cvents have shown, thuy were wrong.
We are all a little disposed, are we not, to think
that what we have made in the past an~ d sold in the past ought
to be good enough for the future. We in Australia leok out
on the enormous potential of the Asian market, the market of
South West Pacific; but I suppose we are always tempted to
sa-y, " Well, what vio make is so and so; why cannot we sell
that?" Whereas the truth may be, and I am sure it is, that
in all tthe business of manufacturing, whether it is here or
in Great Britain, the constant search rm. ust be to see whether
we can't produce something that these people who are so odd
that they do not belong to our race or community would like to
buy. And this is not just market research, this is actual
research in productive techniques and in determining the
matters to be produced.
Look, we havo the job in front of us, a heavy job,
a marvellous job if we can achieve it, a productive job, a
job that will assure the powerful future of the Mother Country
and support Ia rate of national growth in Australia that will
be the wonder of our grandchildren. This is of tremendous
importance. We miust do what we can to develop our trade by
developing our idea-s and developing and diversifying our
products. 006000060/ 
1+
The day has gone by for saying, " Well, we stand for
this or this or this, come and get it and if you do not like
it well, all the worse luck for you," I am sure that this is
well in the minds of the members of this Association. I am
sure that it is well in the minds of the manufacturers of
Australia. Because if there are two things that are completely
obvious to anybody, they are these, that it would be quite
idle for British manufacturers to resist or resent the development
of efficient Australian manufacturing, because that is
essential to Australian growth. We can have no migration
program without ito We can have no developmental program for
the future without it. We cannot have full employment without
it. It is essential to Australian growth that we should
develop efficient Australian manufacturing. And I am sure
that every man who represents Great Britain realises that to
the full. Because of course unless Australia can grow and
become stronger an more populous and more powerful then our
contribution to the Commonwealth of which Great Britain is
the centre, will be correspondingly diminished. It is therefore
essential that we should grow and be strong.
But equally, it would be a great mistake for
Australian manufacturers to think in terms of a closed economy.
I have struck a few troglcdytes here and there who really
seem to me to believe in a closed economy, but not too many.
They are not represented here today, Because in reality, so
far from having ideas of a closed economy, or a mere prohibition
against the introduction into this country of the products of
others, the real vision of our industrial future must be one
in which our own manufacturers find their market, not only hore,
but abroad, and find their markets expanding, Because unless
Australia, strategically as she is placed in the world's
economy, can become a powerful supplier to other nations,
then her future is cribbed, cabined and confined.
And therefore we have a mutuality, do we not, of
interest here the British manufacturers saying, " Te recognise
the tremendous importance of the development of sound manufacturing
enterprise in Australia," and Australian manufacturing
on its side saying, " Yes, we recognise that but we also
rocognise that our ultimate responsibility to Australia is to
cater, not only for a protected market at home, but for a
highly competitive market abroad." , When all these things work
themselves out, we will find that, having begun by having
differences, we have ended by finding a magnificent unity,
I am, of course, as any of my critics could tell you,
getting a bit long in the tooth; I have been in office too
long; I quite agree with that, I do not want it to be used
against me, but I agree with anything you care to say on those
matters. But one thing I am quite sure about and that is that
I shall ultimately come to the end of my course much happier
if I feel that we have evolved relationships between us which
have assured, not only the growth and power of the greatest
country in the world, but the growth and power of what to most
of us here today is the dearest country in the world,
I I 



63/ 018
FOR PRESS P. M. No, 23,/ j 3
HOSPITAL SUBSIDY PAYMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, tte Rt HHon, B. G. Menzies
The following is the text of a telegram sent
today to the Premier of New South Wales, Mr. Heffron, in reply to
his telegram to me arising from a statement by the Conmmonwealth
Minister for Health, Senator Wade, on Sunday night, My telegram
reads " I refer to your telegram of 25th February
regarding the statement made by Seantor Wade on the reduction
from 1st February this year in the rate of subsidy payments
to public hospitals in New South Wales. I have had the
advantage of discussions with Senator Wade, before his
statement and since, about the material at his disposal
concernin:, some of the largest public hospitals in your
State0 Tam satisfied that the Government of New South
Wales has reduced the rate of hospital subsidy payments
not only by the amount formerly paid by the Commonwealth
to the State Treasury, but also by the additional 24/-
per day now being paid by the Commonwealth direct to
public hospitals in respect of uninsured pensioners in
public wards, Indeed it would appear that this action was
foreshadowed by your Minister for Health, Mr. Sheahan, in
a statement for public information which he addressed on
8th January this year to hospital boards. May I draw
your attention to the following quotation from this
statement Tne increased benefit payment in
respect of P. M, S. pensioners and the payment
direct to hospitals by the Commonwealth of
benefits previously paid through the State as
part of maintenance subsidy will necessitate
a material don-ward adjustment of the subsidy
paid by the Hospitals Commission to each
hospital.'
I therefore fail to see how there has been any misrepresentation
of the facts by the Commonwealth.
It is of course for your Government to decide
the size of the subsidies it pays to public hospitals in
New South Wales, but I and my Ministerial colleagues wish
it to be abundantly clear that the decision to reduce the
rate of hospital subsidy payments in your State by the
additional 24/-per day now being paid by the Commonwealth
direct to public hospitals in respect of uninsured
pensioners as well as by the amount formerly paid by the
Commonwealth to the State Treasury, is entirely the
responsibility of your Government and that the Commonwealth
is in no way to blame for any financial difficulties
being experienced by New South Wales hospitals."
CANBERRA, 28th February, 1963. 


The Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, announced today that the National Capital Development Commission had begun the preparation of working drawings for the new NationalLibrary of Australia which is to stand in the Parliamentary Triangle, Canberra. 
The Commission had completed the outline design of the building. A model had been prepared and would be placed on public display next month, The model, together withillustrations of other major National Capital projects, would be shown to the Queen and Prince Philip on March 11. After this the exhibition containing the model would be open to the public. 
The Prime Minister said the Development Commission would complete the working drawings towards the end of the year.
Mr, Menzies said that the National Library of Australia had already grown into an institution of major national importance in the period since Federation. Under the National Library Act of 1960, it had been given wide functions on behalf of the Commonwealth in assembling and organising a national collection of library material of all kinds and making it available to persons and institutions in ways which would best further the national interest. Ho said that the National Library had special responsibilities for services to the Parliament, the Departments of the Commonwealth Government and to the Commonwealth Territories, and played an important part, as the National Bibliographical Centre, in the closest co-operation with the State Libraries and other major libraries and institutions both in Australia and overseas.
Mr. Menzies said the outline design for the first stage of the library was for a building of five storeys above a two-level basement. The facade featured a grouping of light slender columns The whole concept was one of extreme simplicity and flexibility to allow for future growth.
The building was being designed to hold 1,250,000 books. It would house the present National Library collection and expected acquisitions until the 1970' s. Consultant architects to the Commission for the project were Bunning and Madden in association with Mr, T. E.0 Mahoney. 
Mr. Menzies said the outline design for the Library had been approved by the National Library Council, the National Capital Planning Committee and finally by Cabinet. He said the Library site was on the southern foreshore of Lake Burley Griffin. The whole project was one of the most important National Capital features yet undertaken in Canberra.
CANBERRA,28th February, 1963.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



63/ 020
FOR PRESS HOWAIRD FLOREY LABORATORIES
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
The Prime Minister announced today that the
Commonwealth had decided to contribute œ F100,000 towards
the cost of the new Howard Florey Laboratories just
completed for the Department of Physiology at the
University of Melbourne.
The Prime Minister explained that this contribution
was additional to the amount already allocated to the
University by the Commonwealth for the triennium 1961-63.
A pleasing feature of the establishment of the new
Laboratories was the part played by United States aid.
This was at once a further instance of enlightened
philanthropy from United States research foundations
and a heartening tribute to the quality of Australian
medical science.
Ba ckground Note
Sir George Paton Vice-Chancellor of the
University of Melbourne is expected to make a statement
today on the Howard Florey Laboratories. 



63/ 022
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 26/ 1963
CABINET REVIEW
Statement by the Pr ster, the Rt. Hon. R. G. Menzies
At the conclusion of todayts Cabinet meeting,
the Prime Minister, Mr. Menzies, said that he and his
colleagues had undertaken a general review of political
developments in South East Asia and of Communist activity
in the area. The Cabinet also closely examined aspects of
Australian security in relation to the developing situation,
and has called for further reports on the progress of
security and defence measures, As soon as this further
information is to hand it will be promptly considered by the
Government. The Cabinet took advantage of the presence in
Canberra of Lord Selkirk, British Commissioner-General in
South-East Asiato invite him to attend part of its meeting
in order that Ministers might hear his views on the proposal
for the establishment of a Federation of Malaysia.
Mr. Menzies said that he was very grateful to
Lord Selkirk for the information given to the Cabinet.
CANBERRA, March, 1963. 



63/ 021
FOR PRESS COMMITTEE OF ECONOMIC ENQUIR
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. RG. Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that he
would meet members of the Committee of Economic Enquiry,
established under the chairmanship of Dr. J. Vernon, in
Canberra on Thursday this week.
Mr. Menzies also announced that Dr. FB.
Horner, First Assistant Statistician of the Bureau of
Census and Statistics, will be the Secretary of the
Committee and its Senior Officer, and that Mr. A. Wo
McCasker of the Prime Minister's Department has also been
appointed Executive Officer to assist the Committee.
CANBERRA, March, 1963. 


Sir, Your Excellencies and Ladies and Gentlemen
This is a marvellous place, but the. acoustics are contemptible, ( Laughter) I have been sitting behind Mr, Dusseldorp this morning and I have heard very little of what he said. I have had to judge its character by looking at the eager faces in front of me but I did hear one thing Sir, very, very clearly and that was that profound observation of&nbsp;yours that every minute we talked, business was being lost ( Laughter) and therefore I won't talk very long. I must say that the next time that I have a political meeting, I won't have it in a building where they have escalators and strange noises to be heard all around you. (Laughter)
Sir, it is a long time since I came to Canberra. Many of you won't recall it, I was a very very respectable Attorney-General. Since then I have declined in grace and in favour. But at that time, twenty-nine years ago, the population of Canberra was about 6,000. Only thirteen or fourteen years ago, although the population had grown, I think&nbsp;I am right in saying that there had not been a new shop built in Canberra for a long time. Since then the development has been quite fantastic. People have realised more and more that we can't have a city of 60,000 - which is going to be, so the pundits tell me, 100,000 in a few years' time, and a quarter of a million before very long after that - &nbsp;growing at this pace without establishing tremendous demands for shopping facilities,&nbsp;for schools, for a host of matters required for a full civic life. And in a city like Canberra, the people are entitled to have the last word in shopping facilities,, And believe me, in this place, I think they have them. In fact, I regard the whole purpose of the displays I've seen here today as practically immoral, Your wife goes along innocently thinking&nbsp;that she is just a spectator, and everything is so engagingly displayed that she comes home, having spent a lot more money than her husband can afford. This is what I call wonderful, immoral, tempting and very satisfactory. ( Laughter)
I congratulate everybody concerned in evolving this place. I have driven around it two or three times in the making of it. I am most impressed. I had no idea of the enormous&nbsp;space inside this building. When somebody said, "Well, there will be sixty shops apart from these big ones," I found it difficult to believe but I find they are all quite roomy airy, adequate shops. This is in a marvellous position and this is a marvellous community service.
Now the only other thing I want to take up with you seriously is what this place is to be called, because I looked in at television the other night and it was called the Monaro Mall (mawl). I didn't believe it. I said, " Everybody knows it is a “mal”" but then I looked it up in the Oxford Dictionary, and it turned out I was wrong. (Laughter) But I want to make it clear that there are three ways of pronouncing this word " mall' and, of course the other famous street in London which is always referred to by fine old Anglo-Indians retired as " Pell Mell". Take your choice -" mawl", “mal” or “mell”. &nbsp;In fact, another dictionary I looked up quite recently gave it a fourth pronunciation "moll" ( Laughter)
Well, I have elected in favour of " mal'. But it is a free country and as far as I am concerned, you may call it what you like. All I know is that it is a jolly good place and it is going to be of great advantage to the citizens of Canberra. It represents a wonderful piece of co-operative enterprise and is one more contribution made to this city by Mr. Dusseldorp who, after all, in 1951 was arriving in Australia for the first time &nbsp;This is an astonishing record and I congratulate you on it and thank you for it. ( Applause)
And now, time marches on, You are all requested as the doors are opened to observe the queue not to knock over the fittings and not to remove any small portable articles.&nbsp;( Laughter)
I have the greatest pleasure in the world in declaring the Mall open.



FOR PRESS P, M. No, 2Z1_ 963
ECONOMIC COMMITTEE OF ENQUIRY
Statement bthe Prime Minister, the Rt Hon. R, G. Menzies
The Prime Minister conferred this morning
with the Members of the Committee of Sconomic Enquiry
Dr, James Vernon, C. B. E. ( Chairman)
Professor Sir John Crawford, C. B. E.
( Vice Chairman)
Professor P. H. Karmel
D. G, Molesworth, Esq., C. B. E.
K. B. Myer, Esq., D. S. C.
There were also present Dr. F. B. Horner, the Secretary of
the Committee; Mr. A. Wo McCasker, the Executive Officer;
and Mr. J. F. Nimmo of the Prime Minister's Department.
The purpose of the Conference was to discuss
the arrangements that must be made to provide the necessary
research staff for the Committee, and effective liaison
between the Committee and those Commonwealth Departments
from which a good deal of factual information will need to
be obtained. The Prime Minister indicated to the Committee
that it was to regard itself as the master of its own
procedure; that it should feel at liberty to accumulate such
facts as it needed in its own way, being guided by its own
judgment. He said that the Government's decision had been
in favour of a committee rather than a royal commission,
because of the greater informality of procedure which the
former made possible. The Prime Minister said, after the meeting
" Although the Commit-ee will of course determine its own
procedures, I am hoping for its sa: e that as much information
as possible will be put before it in writing and not by
oral evidence. Expericnce has shown that much time can be
lost by the hearing of oral non-controversial evidence on
some matter on which a written document would be more concise
and valuable and more easily recorded and studied. In other
words, it seems to me to be undesirable that the Committoe
should have to conduct its investigations in an atmosphere
of public debate; it should rather be regarded as conducting
a piece of highly important research with the best technical
assistance it can get from any source that it desires,"
CANBERRA, 7th March, 1963. 


CEREMONY TO COMMAEMORATE THE JUBILELE OF THE FOUNDING AND
NAM4ING OF CANBERRA.
" THE DA. Y WYE CELEBRATE"
Speech by the Prime Minister,, the Rt. Hon. R. G, Menzies
Your Majesty7, Your Royal Highness, Your Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen
This is, of course, a great occasion for us. This is
a new city. Your Majesty, you come from an old city, a city
old in history, a city in which the modern builder may still,
when excavating for foundations, come across remains of Roman
or Anglo-Saxon civilisation. This is a new city and its
history is in the making. ' Ve wontt be able to attract the
archaeologists and the historians for a long time yet, but
our history is in the making and we are the people who are to
play our part in making it.
It isnyt so very long ago that on this very spot
the Parliament House was opened. It was a year after you were
born, Your Majesty, and your distinguished parents were here
to open it. At that time, the population of Canberra was
a few thousand. At the time of the ceremony we have just heard
so vividly described, fifty years ago, the population was
probably to be counted in hundreds. It is very interesting
for all of us to know that of the pioneer settlers of that
time, there are some well represented by their descendants
in this gathering. When I first came to Canberra myself, and it seems
a long time ago, the population was six thousand. The population
at present is something over 607000. I am told that by 1970
it will be 100,000. Statisticians, Ma'am always understana
these things to perfection. And on top ol' that, the calculators
of the Commission have, I believe, satisfied themselves and,
indeed satisfied me that by the turn of the century in the
year 1000, the population will be a quarter of a million.
Now I refer to these interesting facts, Your Majesty,
because 2000 is a little way ofLf a little after my own time,
if I may confess it, but not after yours. I look forward, with
the eye of prophesy, to the notion of my own descendants in
2000 standing up and drinking your, health your health
still the Queen. Z Older, but richer than ever in the love of
your people. ( Applause)
This for you, Ma'am, must, possess a certain family
significance. Fifty years ago, when Canberra was named, as
we have just been reminded, your Grandfather, the great King
George V, sat on the throne. It was his lot to encounter the
blasts of war and to be called upon to confront great constitutional
problems which the changes wrought by the war brought
into existence. And he met them with a mixture of high
intelligence and genius; met them so successf'ully that the
new Constitutional Monarchy emerged. I shall always think
of him myself as the first great Constitutional Monarch in the
modern sense. And then, your Father also had to encounter similar
trials with characteristic courage and skill and he carried on
aeoece pooo/ 2 
2
these great traditions and built on them. He was the second
great Constitutional Monarch in the modern sense. And you,
Ma'am, have succeeded him and you are the third.
The line runs strongly. This genius for monarchy
has not disappeared. Indeed, the more I think about it, the
more I believe that in our oim time, our own Boyal Family has
managed magnificently to combine the place and dignity of the
Throne with the ordinary life, the ordinary desires and needs
of ordinary human beings. ( Applause)
Now, of course, these great rulers over this period
of time in which Canberra has been established, were not alone.
There are many people here today who remember with great
affection the late Queen Mary who became a tradition among
her people. We all remember with a singular warmth of
affection your Mother who sat on the Throne with your Father,
George VI. ( Applause) And if I may say so, we have seen,
fortunately for us, so much of His Royal Highness, Prince
Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, that we have really taken him
to our hearts and have come to regard him as, for all good
purposes, an Australian. ( Applause)
I mention these matters in the presence of our
Queen because I think it is right that she should know how
deeply those ideas are embedded in our omw hearts and minds.
We are her faithful people. We will continue to be her
faithful people. On a visit of this kind, it occurred to the Government
that it might be agreeable to Her Majesty if we commemorated
her visit in some way that would be of interest to her and of
interest to His Royal Highness. Knowing Her Majesty's great
interest in education, knowing in particular His Royal Highnoss'
keen interest in scientific matters and in scientific research,
the Government has decided to commemorate this occasion by
establishing ten post-graduate fellowships a year, to be taken
up by people after the degree of Doctor and to be held in
physical and biological science. And with the very kind
consent of Her Majesty, these will be known, in perpetuity as
they go on and go on, as the Queen Elizabeth II Fellowships.
( Applause) I am also happy to tell you that Her Majesty's
Government in the United Kingdom has taken a keen interest in
this day and in this event. It has been considering what
contribution it might make to Canberra to mark this occasion,
and I think in the most imaginative fashion, the Government
has, through the Prime Minister, communicated with me and has
indicated that it is going to find a very substantial sum of
money which will be spent at our choice, on something that will
commemorate the union, the connection between the two Parliaments,
going back to the old days of Westminster Hall, either by a
series of fountains in front of the new Parliament House, when
we get it ( I notice the President of the Senate nodded approvingly
that time), or alternativoly, by establishing a tower with a
chine of bells in it something, I confess, I have always
wanted to see in this place. But whatever way it goes, this
will be a contribution by the Government in the Old Country
to the Government and Parliament and City in the New and,
therefore, that again nakes it a memorable occasion. ( Applause)
But, Your Majesty, having said all that, at perhaps
too great length, I want to come back to my own constant theme
and that is that what marks this day as the nost outstanding
day, a day that we will always remember, is the fact that you
are here. 
[Date confirmed]   



Week" 17 Ind ex. No, 11.
Week Endinw March 1.6. _. 963
COMWMONVTT. ikLTH OF AUSTRPTLIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The flputy Prime Minister andMinister for Trade The Rt. Hon,
John Mciiwen
March 14 No. 248A
No, 251
No, 25 4
No. 254-A MR. GODFREY ALFRED WATTI-AN TO BE CHAIRIAN
OF TAiRIFF BO12DO
CO1EVEYOR OR ELEVA TOR BELTS OR BELTING
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER TO VISIT NEW ZEALaNiID
OIL SARPCH BOOST IN NEW SOUTH WALES
The Postrnaster-General, The Hon, C. W. Davidson
March 16 No. 255BIDAiULT T. V. FILM
The Minister for Immigration, The Hon. i. R. Downer
March 11 No, 243NATURALIZATION CEREMOINY IN ; AL1B ERT HALL
ON WEDNESDAY MARCH .3
The Minister for External Affairs The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
March 10 No, 234A
.3 No. 245A AUSTRPALIAN ASSISTiNCE FOR INDIA
ML;, YSIA4
TheMinister for Social Services Hon, Hugh S. Roberton MA P.
March 10 No, 233A. RECORD IY SOCIAL SERVICES
The Minister for Customs and Excise, Senator the Hon, Denham
IXr! Jty
March 15 No, 249ST'ITUTORY RULES 1963 No021 AAJ,', END THE
COMMURCE ( IMPORTS) R GULATTIONS
The Minister for orks, The Hon. Gordon Freetb
March. No, 237NE71 A030C, STUDIOS FOR CANERR. A*
TheMinater for Defence and. Acting Mi. nister for the Navy,
The Hmn,) Althol ToMvrnh0aNaov2.
March 10 No, 234
It 10 1" 1, to 3
No0 236
14 NN oo,, 22' 4376
it 15 No. 252 NEW SCHOOL TO COPE WITH ' I'A7Y RECRUITS
1qAV-kfY FRIGATE TO VI; 31T GLADSTOI
BRITISH ADMIPRAL TO DISCUTSS CHARTING
NEW MINEGSW EEPFRS AtT WORK
U. S8. ADMIRAL FOR ANTAR CTIC TALKS
The Minister for Health, Senator thd Hon. Harrie W, Wade
March 11 No. 242SUPERVISION OF DRUGS
The Minister for Su h__ 1 The Hon. 1, len Fairhall
March 11 No, 244SKYLiRKS MASTJRE UPPER TMOSPHERE ELECTRON
DENSITIES
The Minister for Repatriation, The. Hon. R. W. C. Swartz
March 9.
S 1.1 12
" 1 13 No. 238
o, 24.
No, 245
No0 246
No. 253 THEY HA! VE CROWT ULP TOGETIrEP.
BIG PAY) MLEI ' T TO CHM. 1ISTS
WHIE T!, PPING STICK FOR WAR BLINDED
SECOND VISIT TO PAPUA AND -NEW GJINEA%
REP'iTRIA1TION MEDICAL SERVICES HAVE GROWN
The Minister for Air, The Hion. David Fairbairn
March 10 No, 232
15 No. 250 TWPO HA, JT OR FLY-PASTS FOR ( CANDERRA DAY
CELE1, RA ION S
IIELICOPTERS FOR NEW GUINEA e o a/ 2 
The Department of External Affairs
March 14No. 248A iNTAPI'CTIO HMARD IS. AI\ lTD PA* RTY ETURNiS
The De artment of the Navy,,
March 11No, 240NAVY PREPIRES FOR " CHOPPER" FLYPAST
With t he Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CAINBERIA, C. T 



OPENING OF TH; VASiX HOUSING AJXILIARX
HOMES AT MANiINTJTRE ROAD, HAdTHORN,
VICTORIA, ON 17TH MARCHi, 1963.
Skeech by the Prime Minister,. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mrs. Vasey and Ladies and Gentlemen t
I don't really have to make a spLeech to you this
afternoon because I have a variety of very good reasons for
being delighted to be here. After all, this is in Manningtree
Road and aboat two doors along many years ago, I used to be
Lound hanging around with a rather sheepish look you know
because my wife lived there. ( Laughter) Between her charms
and the smell of the pittosporua hedge, I was a " goner".
( Laughter) Well, that I think, is a very interesting thing
to remember. And then I have been fascinated to feel that I was
coming here this afternoon because something was going to be
done on behalf of war widows, strongly promoted by a very
famous war widow, Mrs. Yasey herself. ( Applause) I had the
singular good fortune to be a friend of her late husband, one
of the most famous fighting soldiers in the history of
Australia. ( Applause) I always remember with some satisfaction,
when I first went out of office I know you are all looking
forward to the second occasion ( Laughter) but when i first
went out of office I met George Vasey who was known as " Air"
when we were at school together " Air" Vasey Allan. He
addressed me in a public place in language that would have
done credit to Mr. Rose at Alice Sprinks. ( laughter) And he
wanted to know why I wasn't still Prime Minister. I remember
this vividly because he was the only man who thought that way
at that time. But Mrs. Vasoy, I would hate this occasion to go by
without me saying on behalf of everybody here and hundreds
and thousands of people who are not here, that your spirited
and splendid work for war widows is one of the great things
in the contemporary history of Australia. ( Applause) I am
sure that you very frequently disagree with me, but I rwer
disagree with you. ( Laughter)
Now the third thing I want to say is that the pretty
girl I was what's the old-fashioned expression? courting
is that out of date now? in Manningtree Road made the grat
error of marrying me and then in due course I became a politician
and she survived that and so it went on. And one morning, years
and years ago, sho said to me, " Xou know, you talk about social
services but the one thin" that really matters is housing for
old people. This is, I think, a great social problem." And for
once in my life I listened to my wife husbands don't always,
you know and so I gave it a little thought, and I finally
went to my Cabinet and said, " Let's have some scheme under
which housing can be provided not institutional housing, not
these great barracks of places in which people feel they are
numbers and not human beings but let's have some system under
which houses can be built or flats or whatever it may be, so that
people live as individuals and mingle socially as they would in
their ordinary private days." 0 0 
2-
And so we began this scheme and whatever ugly
things may be stated in my obituary ( and 1 can well imagine
them), I am hoping that even in some of the obituaries this
great scheme may find a place; because we began by saying,
with that almost mechanised reaction that governments have
" pound for pound". It is like saying, " one man une vote."
You know " pound for pound" and " we'll find a pound for a
pound" and since then, as you know, we've improve3d on it.
It is very interesting to realise that although this was a
highly experimental matter when? 5t 6 7 years ago,
somewhere around there, we have at present, commitments
ourselves as a Government of œ 1614. And that means, if I am
rightly informed by the learned clerks in my office, that
when the present approved grants have been expended, there
will have been accommodation provided for 1 5,000 people.
( Applause). Well, of course, I can hardly refer lightly to
the Vasey Housing Incorporated because to tell you the
truth I was always more frightened of Mrs. Vasey than I
was o1George ( Laughter) and she has a habit of getting
her own way, and quite rightly. She is a charming pirate
when it comes to dealing with governments. But the best
proof of this is that when the current project is completed,
Commonwealth grants in favour of this auxiliary will have
totalled just on a quarter of a million pounds. Now this,
I think, does some trifling credit to the Commonwealth,
which usually gets so little that it might as well claim
some, but above all things, it demonstrates the enormous
energy and enthusiasm and imagination that has been put
into this scheme. And this, of course, is quite right.
I am getting along in years myself. I read
in one of the Melbourne papers the other day when I was
honoured by Her Majesty that perhaps this would be a good
opportunity to make way for a younger man. ( Laughter)
I think it is. Bring him along, please. Lt3ut, anyhow,
we are all not any younger than we were, btI have felt for
years now that I would hate, towards the end of my own
life, whatever my circumstances might be, to be regarded
as one of a regiment of people.
I wonder if I might say something to you that
I have said before, but not to you. ' When I was a schoolboy
in Ballarat, I lived with an old 3cots grandmother who had
restricted views, being a good Scots grandmother about life
and about what I ought to do and all this kind ol' t*; ing,
but over the road from the cottage in which she lived 3was
the benevolent asylum, curtly known in those days as AThe
Benev." Corrugated iron fence, horrible-looking old building
everything rather musty, horrible as I now know, institutionalised
all that has gone and nothing has done more to dispose
of it than this great scheme and the work that people have
done, Nobody in this pl~ ace will feel obliged or
institutional in any way. This is the answer to it, that
people should live in their own homes, whether those homes
are houses or fiats or whatever they may be that they should
live, as Mrs. Vasey beautifuilly put it, in li gnity and not
oee * 9 e. e / 3 
3
in dependence living their own lives,, living among their
own friends, f'eeling that this is something which continues
their citizenship of the country and which doesn't bring
it to an end. Nov this to soe, is a marvellous thing. It
has every human appeal In the world. And it is for that
reason, above all things, that I am delighted to be here.
Of course, I would be here if I were not delighted even,
because I an a little nervous about Mrs. Vasey and so if
she had said, " Nov come on my boy," I would have " come on,
my boy," you see. % aughter
But putting all that on one side, I am delighted
to be here, because the great social problem of our times,
the great social problem of the last ten years, fifteen
years, has been to create in our social services an abiding
and warm sense of humanity not of charity, but of loving
kindness in the true sense, of friendliness. So that everybody,
whether he's living or she's living in a great mansion
on inherited riches or living here or living somewhere else,
will feel that there is an atmosphere of humuan kindness and
that we, the people of Australia, are not being charitable or
condescending, but that we are friends together. Now this,
to Me, is the great secret of this matter and it stands to
the credit of Mrs. Vasey and all those who have worked with
her that instead of regarding themselves as people who
exercise pressure on governments which they do occasionally
very courteously they have primarily regarded themselves
as concerned with the continuing good life and good living
of the women for whom they speak.
The last thing I vant to say to you is wery now
and then I hear arguments about widows and trying to classify
widows I am not going into this business of classifying
widows but for myself there is a very special place in my
heart for women who are widows because their husbands served
this country to the last extremity of death. This is something
not to be forgotten. And it is because in my own imperfect
way I have been remembering it that I was proud and honoured
to come here today to declare this new group of buildings
open and to observe the command of my old friend, Mrs. Vasey. 



7F 6 3 027
FOR PRESS BIDATTLT TV. 1 111
Statement by the Prime a R2tr. hYt. Hofln i Robert Menzies
I hav3-today dis( C aIjed with~ Eenior collea gues
and with Mr. Davidson the qluesl*-. zr:) of' tie showing c' the
Bidault television intevview3
It transpire--t, y r) rastrictiosexs uo
newspaper publicatic.-a whic! 2 " t_ s : yond the 3ontrol of thie
Commonwealth or upon the ohovirj1:: of" -tiie fiir in picture
theatres. Under-these crci; roa we liave all agreed
that the continuance of' thL. t. elevision ban wo-uld amount to
discriminat-ion against th e t-1, n sJt atI-. o ns It has
therefore been agreed,. that the P-c:-;-itastr-G eal il
withdraw the diz-ecticns to theP l: ciision s ations. T he
Postmaster-Genera.]. had anipile sttioypower to give his
directions, and in fact he gav:-e thE'rni after consultations
with some senior coliag,_ Q4o and ns. TrcJlf We all f elt that
the television interview was, f:' cin the.-beginning, a great
mistake. It undoubtoly* gave :' riso to strong ffeelings in
France. France is a f~ ieiidly natl;. on' and is in fact our own
ally in SEATO. HOWVl) aLng . cat e3. our own crit ical
view a vi ew t o which we n6. he r it would be useless
to pursue a prohib: Lt-. on which ex-cr omely l3initLed in its
operation. It has t5herefore, as I hav,, e stated, been decided
t'Uo cancel the e~ sigo d. s. Perhaps the whole incident
will serve to mnake it piain outii e Asti-al~ ia t-hat the ABC
is not an organ of the Au-itralian2 G enet, and that our
power to direct -it is oae that wrould not wish to exercise
except under e:: eeptiona'L. cJ; 7inmrat: er~ ces. To exercise it in
relation to television alcne o. 2. i as the ev1. ents in th! e
present case hiave showvn, sorame m turn out to be ineffective.
CANBERRA, 17th March, 1963-



FOR PRESS P. Mg. N~ o. 29/ 1963
MESSAGE OF THANKS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the RtHn Sir Robert
Menzis
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, has
sent the following message to the Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom " MAY I CONVEY TO YOU OUR DEEP THANKS
FOR YOUR MESSAGE OF 6TH MARCH CONCERNING THE
JUBILEE OF THE FOUNDING OF CANBERRA, AND OUR
DELIGHTED ACCEPTANCE OF YOUR OFFER OF A GIFT
FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF CANBERRA TO REFLECT OUR
COMMON PARLIAMENTARY HERITAGE. THE GIFT UILL
PLACE BEFORE THE EYES OF AUSTRALIANS A SYMBOL
OF THAT TRADITION W~~ HICH IS THE ESSENCE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC 14AY OF LIFE IN BOTH OUR COUNTRIES.
IN DUE COURSE I HOPE TO BE IN TOUCH ON
THE DETAILS OF THE FORM THA,) T TIM GIFT MIGHT TAKE."
CANBERA March, 1963, 



OPENINUl OF THL T, G. 3ILAItiG, UO0SA1M
PIMCE, CANJOWBAs ON~ 20TH KARCJI9 1963.
Sneech by tMM kELMe = istar. the B1. lion j~ Bober&amp; denzielt
M~ r,. 3rain and Gentlement
For a lone time nov I have regarded Hugh Brain
an a good friend. Whether I can still put him In that
category will depend entirely on the close study that I will
give to the fall text of his speech ( Laughter) when It Is
available to se. Anyhow, I am free to admit that this Is a good
&amp; y for him; it's a good day for Canberra; It's a good day
for life asn ce; it's a jaod day all round. obviously,
has been ctramming ippart of the history of Cnberfra. 1. came
here myself a relatIvely new boy, In 19k* so that you can
realise that having been here$ engiaged very actively in
national political affairs for tventynine years, you will
understand pe-fiectly why so many people refer to me in the
venerable sense. ( Laughter)
At that time, there were a few thousand people
here. There were a few shops. The residential areas were
quite sall; the great development in Canberra. has In fact
occurred since the war. And what a marvellous development
It Is, I know that only twelve years aaio I think I am
right in saying -there hadn't been a new shop, for example,
a new place of business built in Canberra for a long, long
time for obvious reasons. Mow, I find that If I go away
for the wekend, which I do occasionally to visit one of
the miore depnerate capitals like Melbourne or Sydney when
I came back there Is another incipient skyscraper beginnng
to show up on the landscape. The development in this place
has been phenomenal. That is to a very large measure due
to the wisdm of the Government in appointing John Overall
to conduct a Commission and its equal wisdom in giving him
what I might describe, with apologies to the frasurer, as
adequate financial backing. ( Laughter)
And one thing leads to another,, and the result
is we have these peat office buiLdings, we have these groat
establisunents rising up in Canberra, so that more and more
People are begin 4ng to understand that this Is not just
same ftmn little village, tucked away in the country rather
to be resented b7 the existing, States but that It is
Increasingly a national capital arnd viii take Its place In
the life of the nation so that as soon as -we becoame accustomed
to thinking nationally rather than parochiall which Is
very important, it will take its place In the iire of
lustralia just as dashington. does in the Inited States and,
jWeedt just an [ London does in the life of the United
^ Ingdo** And I think that It Is a marvellous thing that
this treat movement in Canberra should have been poWrfully
assisted by Imaginative men of affairs conducting preat
existing institutions. And the T. a, Is one of them,
The T, 0. not only makes its own mark in Canberra, 9 but It
helps to make a mark for Canberra. This is a real contribution
to the history of the capital city of what will be In
due course one of the gmet nations of the world. ( Hear, heAr)
And so this is,, in that sense, an histuric event* 
am2
It is also, I imagine, quite historic In the
individual history of the T, G., 9 bemause whenever I have to
perform one of these rather agreeable tasks, somebody is bound
to Send me what they call sm documentation on the matter,
beginning in this ease with the list or the Directors. I read
that list and I recoiled a little because I knew most, if not
all, of them. ( Latighter) I said to myself, W~ elnt eIS Pot
on, Yost that's right." ( Laughter) &amp; t In particular I was
fascinated to get, for the first time, a clear explanation of
how this became t6 be known as the " Temperance and General"
the T. 0, andI found to myintense satisfaction that at the
time i was &amp; oru" the totnl funds vw" roughly a quarter of a
million and that membership was confined to total abstainers,
Well of course, at that time, let me see I iouild be
couple of years old I was a total abstainer; ( Laughter)
therefore well qalified for membershi.. at thena I looked back
at the list of the Board of Directors ( iaughter) and I thought,
" Ha, ha. Changes have cnme about in the world." And so quite
tre at a certain staje In the history of the Society, tAose
who drink fermented mlt or spirituous liquors were admitted
to the benefits of the T. G. Whether that is the cause or
not, I would bae to say, because I don't want to become involved
In more ar uents then I an already involved in but I do notice
that whereas the fumds were a quarter of a million, they are now
to be counted in hundreds of millions. The growth of this Society
has been phenomenal. That I think Is a matter for great satisfao.
tion. The third thing that pleases me is that this is not
the only Society of its ind In Australia, There are others,
same of the great ones exhibiting similar growth in modern times.
That makes one say to oneself, " WJhat is the great advantage of
this?" And, of course, you are quite right 61ir. The great
advantage of this is that as the practice o! l assurance of this
kind grows, so does the stability of the coanity grow, and
I an old.-fashioned enough to believe that the foundation for
future tremendous. national growth Is a good stable foundation,
and the stability of this country, the stability of families,
the stability of Individuals, the stability of governments is
Intimately wrapped up with the widespread a"* e tanoe in Australia
of the practice of life assurance. i don't t nk it exists in
other countries. I don't know, I have no statistics. I have
always had a feeling~ it doesn't exist In amn other countries to
the extent that it does here; because I know,, to take myself as
an exuple, most of us of my generation In the twenties were
taking out some life assurance, as much as we could afford to
take, knowing in the back of our minds that some day that would
give us a feeling of Security and stability that might set us
free for other more enterprising activities in o= m own lives.
Thereftre, I think that this country, this society
of people owes a tremendous debt to the iMa4A~ tiVe people
who, in the last century, set about creating life assurance
practices in Australia. Thei must have been regarded as rather
odd fellows in a Sense adventurers " Well how are you going
to get people to pay you premiums?" " How do you know you will
ever be able to meet the sun assured?" " Until you have developed
a large volume of business how do you suppose you are going to
get the confidence of individuals? w I know this is true,
looking back over the history of life assurance societies. Bat
the people who began them, they had some Imagination, they had
courage and their courage hasa been rewarded in the hands of
their descendants and In the pockets and lives of the people
of Australia* *&amp; ee9/ 3 
kiThe. a The thaw thing want to say is this*
kin ofthme that I have beai talking about. I a
great believer 1n oontizmdty. Sam * eapsla N
went, be's a preat traditionlist." " Ms I a$ 11 YU
1i1m. It doesn't mean to say that I don'i r" Sgise Cliango.
I havo besa respesIble for quite a Stw Woself in my own
time. ht I O-a tVWfttIOnmliSt lJA this Sense that 1 believe0
that a son" e of eostluI1 In the xinds of men and women
Is oe. of the peat assets of life. We didn't suddenly
pop up and Wini disappear tomerov. We a" e not be" e today
and Saws temo. We are in a oontinms procession of
people and we asi leak beak an fathers and panmbtheta
and mo~ m w ad grn at-o Is aid laok fwm'vad to what am
own ghandebil1* U or pea tga-iu~ de may be doing a" d
like to feel that they are lllasommething that tbimy are
determined to eamr ms. This, I thinkI hof the esseaft
of * ani~ ty. I hava said befbre today that azwbody wbaesares
to read the great speehes of Vinstoa CuImwll, In 191,0 and
191i 1942 and sayes to lp back and reed the great speeches
of tUm J= m Pitt at the time of tbe go 10ome threat of
the lATaS oflm O weat Britain will find Msoft t hins in
them, differnt ezrsse eachb umishlg It with Ii
oneloqeet sam rai lOS the some thlaq the
ff$ La t0e0s2 Mt h&amp; n this oawm oO* fs@ a nILdJ I~ IInta t iwuy historyh. th eAd It Is
=! tratod in an IiVid" 1 " A" e Ie eae Owof the
vWr first direaetow of this SoetV vas a Stewart and he
was mAceddb his am who was a great frin of am I
am happV to saand he his Ismwh Is bare tda. " a~
mamy yea" s eSm= Ts I Mae t want to raise questiams
abouat the ' 15 or Vila " 45 now that I an mixed up with the
Thistle ( Lau~ ktou) but a fair open of desades of em family,
and that's a Jolly mead thing. It's a spleoldid thing to
thin that a SoetyV of this kind now so teodotasly strongp
so able to be vifrously enterpwri~ nf has been the result
of aonkd deU= a " ad P on ho part of sameration
a fter esmeratiaam. aijr I am delighkted to be be" e. I pimc
the ouiety an tUs imarabLe ackiemument and I wisOU0
the greatest possible smoess. 



63/ 029
FOR PRESS:. LABOR CONFERENCE DECISION
Statement by, te Priame Minister_ bt he RLl, Hon, Sir Robert Menzies
The resolution carried by a very narrow majority
in the Labor Party Conference deserves very close examination.
It is, in fact, made up of the most dangerous ambiguities.
Approval of the American radio-communications
station in the North-West has been secured only by acceptance
of conditions which threaten the establishment of the station
by our friends and allies the United States of lAmerica.
As has been repeatedly stated, the purpose of the station
is to provide means of radio-communication with naval vessels
in the Indian Ocean and in the North-' Wst Pacifico
It must be clear to anybody that the existence
of these facilities for the United States will become of
crucial importance if they become involved in hostilities
in this part of the world.
What the outside Parliament of the Labor Party
has now decided is that if such an event should occur, the
Americans cannot use these facilities except with the concurrence
of whatever Government ray then be in power in Australia.
It will be clearly seen that this is a most dangerous and
frustrating condition. Wh1at it moans is that if the United
States whictl is, I repeat, our ally and a most powerful
friend, becomes involved in hostilities with some common
enemy, and the Australian Government is disposed to isolate
itself under the clock of neutrality, a direct blow will be
struck against the United States and against its effective
conduct of naval warfare.
I wonder if the Labor Party believes that we
would establish at groat expense such facilities for ourselves
in an allied country on the condition that they could be
rendered useless by the decision of that country. In matters
of life and death for Australia, surely we know who our
friends are and what side we are on in relation to them,
I can only hope that this miserable compromise will not
inflict serious damage on the security of our own country.
There are, of course, other aspects of this
matter. The people of Australia have had a sharp reminder
that an Australian Labor Government would not be responsible
to the people or even to its own judgment, but that it would
be bound hand and foot by the decisions of 36 people forming
the A. L. P. Conference, not elected by the people of Australia
and in no sense responsible to them
I syr. pathiso with my friend, Mr. Calwell.
For the leader of a Party and an aspiring Primo Minister of
Australia to be compelled to hang around in hotel corridors
until his masters inside have given him his instructions is
a complete denial of leadership. 00..* 0 o. o/ 2 
2
I notice that already Mr. Calwell is being
consoled by the assertion that he has had a notable
victory. He is expected to derive comfort from the
fact that a fraction less than half of his governing
body wanted to adopt a policy which would throw the
United States and its communications station out of
Australia and that an equally narrow majority has been
persuaded to accept the station only on conditions which
are both dangerous and contradictory.
The people of Australia will not have failed
to observe that the whole incident thro,., s light upon
how Labor policy is created and upon the purely nominal
and subservient role which a Labor leader is expected
to play.
CANBERRA, 21st March, 1963. 



OPENING OF DOMINICAN SISTERS TRAINING COLLEGE
AT WATSON, CANBERRA, A. C. T. ON SUNDAY,
24+ TH MARCH, 1963.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Chairman, Your Grace, My Lord Bishops, Mother Philomena,
Your Excellencies and Ladies and Gentlemen
The other day I was opening something in Canberra
and I forgot to open it. ( Lau ghter' The following day my wife
went down to a country town in Victoria in which she was born;
she took advantage of this by saying, " I won't follow the evil
example of my husband. I declare this whatever it was) open,"
and so till be prudent. I have great pleasure in declaring this
Training College open. ( Applause)
It is indeed a very happy event. There have been
references in the world of late to various ecumenical movements.
What could be more ecumenical than to have a Presbyterian Prime
Minister opening this Teachers' Training College ( Laughter) and
feeling very honoured to be allowed to do it.
The Archbishop who began life by being a scholar, and
has ended up by being a considerable builder, occasionally comes
to sec me. He is always charming; we are on the best of terms
and when he has left, I find myself almost invariably conducting
a violent alterca!, ion with the Treasury ( Laughter) ( Applause).
But it wouldn't be for me to say to him he being a great scholar
and profoundly interested in the problems of education in Australiathat
there are perhaps three aspects of this matter, two of which
are very well known and are considerably well understood and the
third of which is occasionally overlooked,
First of all, if you are going to have a great
expansion of educational facilities in the country you must have
buildings. We are in a splendid one today. Buildings bricks
and mortar, as they used to say. And then you must have equipmentnot
easy to come by, increasingly more expensive particularly on
the scientific side. And, of course, to have both of those you
must have money. Qu~ ite a few people, when they have covere. those
three items, think they have dealt with the problem and yet they
are not the most difficult of the problems, though they are not
easy. They are not easy because none of these things is in
illimitable supply; but with a struggle with some sacrifice,
with some enthusiasm1 with some joint eflort yes, money can be
found, but the remaining constituent is not so easily found:
trained and devoted and competent teachers. You may have all the
money and all the bricks and mortar in the world and provide, as
you think facilities for more and more thousands of people but
all you will do will be to conduct education on a declining level
of standards unless you meet this paramount requirement of people
who are teachers and I use that word in the broadest sense.
And what is a good teacher?
A good teacher must have, of course, skill and
skill will be acquired by study. " Jo have long since got past the
time I hope, when a university professor or a university lecturer
might be found using the notes he prepared twenty yoars before;
and yet I'va known that in my own time. There is to be a constant
study, a constant improvement of knowledge if skill is to be
equal to the task. There must also be and this is sometimes 9 as ./ 2 
2
overlooked a groat capacity to expound, to impart, the
teaching faculty sometimes denied to the greatest of scholars;
the capacity for conveying to students, to pupils, what it is
the teacher desires them to understand and to remember. But
above all these things again, there must be a sense of vocation.
Teaching is not just a job. Any teacher who said, " Well, this
is a job and V1ll do it; I'll observe the rules and no more,"
would be a poor teacher. The sense of vocation and this,
Your Grace, is so admirably illustrated by so many I see here
today this sense of vocation is, I believe, of supreme
importance. I can hardly imagine any civil occupation, if
I may use a vory rough division, so important as the work of
teaching. This is a tremendous responsibility, a great
challenge, a wonderful chance to make a powerful contribution
to the fuure of the country; and when, as in the case of
so many of you, the civil merges with the religious so that
it gets the background of profound religious belief and you
pursue the vocation of teaching, thon I believe we have
something very remarkable which I, for one, hope will never
disappear from Australia. ( Applause)
Another thing I should perhaps say to you is
this. This college is being opened in the national capital;
the national capital of a nation in which the national feeling
has yet to reach its complete flowering; of a nation in
which even now too much we are inclined to be parochial, local
in our views and in our attitudes. One of the proofs to the
world of the fall national growth of Australia is being now
built around us a national capital which is, in physical
terms, going ahead by leaps and bounds. I never cease to be
astonished, day by day, at the signs of growth all around
me, But not a national capital destined, as so many are,
to be a centre of commerce, a centre of activities of the
ordinary mercantile sort, although they will come more and
more, but a capital increasingly designed to be a centre of
education, a centre of theaffairs of the spirit, a place in
which great authorities in the various churches will be found,
in which a great university will become greater and greater,
a capital in which, as time goes on schools will grow in
a setting of beauty and although ther e is not much at the
moment in the vicinity of the Lnke, it is going to be an
enormous centre of beauty by the time we are a few years older.
In a setting of beauty, this capital will develop
as something quite unlike any other city of its kind in
Australia and will therefore draw men's minds and eyes to it;
it will increasingly remind the people of Australia that they
are a nation first and foremost and that this capital, the
centre of government, a centre of religion, a centre of
education, a centre of all kinds of things that cater for
the higher reaches of the human mind, is to be looked at and
admired and regarded as setting an example to the whole of the
people of Australia, Now, it is because I believe that that
it has been my pleasure to lend considerable support to the
National Capital Development Commission under the brilliant
leadership of Mr. Overall ( Applause). It is for that reason
that my colleagues and I have for years past, realised that
a rapidly-growing capital proauces uncommon problems and that
just as they have produced unconrion problems for the State
so they have produced uncommon problems for the Church, as
the Archbishop knows he has already indicated that he hasn't 
3-
finished with mc ( Laughter) and I have never believed for one
moment that he had. But it is for that roason setting aside
the unhappy controversies that occur here and 1here, that we,
in this place, have a responsibility in such a rapidly-growing
community to help the work of education in all its fields in
this Territory ( Applause) and it has been a groat privilege
to do it, Now I want to say no more~ thnn that, Sir. I have
given you, in a very imperfect way, some of my reaso) ns for
having a genuine pleasure in being here this afternoon. It
is a really great occasion, a splendid occasion and whatever
branchi of the Christian Church we may belong to, we must all
thank God that the work of the Church goes on and that it will
provide what to me is the essential and inevitable background
of a civilised instructional and educational course. So I
say I am glad lobe here. I have declared this College open
with great satisfaction. I wish you all well. I thank you
for all the work you have done in the past and in anticipation,
I thank you for all the work you are going to do in the
future. 



UiITTETD STATES iJ L COMRULTNI CATIONS STATION IN
AUS TRAL IA
Statements in the House of Representatives on Tuesday,
26th March, 1963 by the Prime Minister, the
Right Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
IN REPLY TO A QUESTION BY MR. WAPD THE PRIME MINISTER SAID
The honourable member appears not to have kept
himself abreast of statements made both inside this Parliament
and out of it over a long period. It was as long ago as
September, 1960 that the Minister for Defence told the House
that discussions had begun in an informal way with the U. S. A.
in relation to a naval radio communications station in
Australia not a military base. There has been at no time
any proposal for a military base and there is none now.
My colleague told the House about the proposal at the very
beginning and, strangely enough, no comment at all emerged
from the Opposition. Later, in January 1961, my colleague
made a further statement in which he announced that the
results of the earlier studies pursued in relation to this
subject had proved satisfactory from the technical viewpoint
of the UoS. Navy and that further discussions would take
place Mr. J. R. Fraser Is this a Dorothy Dix-er?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES: Obviously. I know the honourable member
for East Sydney so well that I was sure it was bound to come.
On 17th May, 1962, I made a lengthy statement in this House
about the same matter, I pointed out a number of things which
apparently have conveniently been forgotten by many people.
I shall not read all the stateent because it is in " Hansard''
but I said then, amongst other things, that the purpose of the
station was to provide radio communications for U S. and allied
ships over a wide area of the Indian Ocean and the Western
Pacific, Mr. Cairns Does that include submarines?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES s Of course it does, Naval forces happen
to include submarines, Then I pointed out the area of land
to be affected by the project. I said that it would be about
28 square miles. I also pointed out that this was to be leased
to the American authorities, the Commonwealth Government
acquiring the land and being the landlord, if I may put it in
that way, and therefore retaining its own sovereignty.
I said, at the same time, that the maximum
practicable use would be made of Australian contractors, labour
and materials, It is a pity that one should have to repeat
the statement now, but I went on to say that arrangements
would be made for consultation between the two Governments on
matters relating to the station and its use. I said that the
facilities of the station would be available to the Australian
forces. Finally, I pointed out and this again is sometimes
forgotten that the establishment of the station was within
the spirit of co-operation envisaged in the ANZUS Treaty,
under which the parties agreed to co-ordinate their efforts
for collective defence for the preservation of peace and
security. o0@ 0 ,/ 2 
On 6th Mirch of this year my colle:' gu,. the Minister
for Dofenco, made a furtheir quite elaborate scTatei, ento
I shall not'read it all, but after pointing out a number
of the features of this communications station, he said
" Following consultation with the Western
Australian Government, the land required for the
project will be acquired by the Commonwealth
Government,"
He set out the area and said once more that sovereignty would
remain with Australia, He then said
" o.. o.. the technical facilities of ttie station will
be available to the Australian Armed Forces, This
will contribute significantly to Australia's defence
capability, particularly in the light of the Government's
recent decision to establish an R. A. N.
submarine service,"
He added " oo o... the establishment of this station will provide
improved communications for allied surface ships
and submarines over a wide area of the Indian
Ocean and the Western Paci. fic, and will make a
highly significant contribution to general allied
military capability in the areao"
Then for good measure, two, days later he made a further
statement to a similar effoct,
I have mentioned these matters because there has been
a disposition in some qunrters to say that the House has not
been told about themo " ihe House has boon toldo It has been
told all that was available to be toldo A num. ber of the
details of the agreement are as yet unconcluded, They are
not matters of mnassivo importance, There are certain details
of the transaction which are still under discussion, In
fact, only this morning my colleague, the Attorney-General,
has been debating two or t-rcee outstanding points, Whon
these details have been worked out and this matter, which
is most important from the point of view of the United
States of America, the Allied point of view and our own
point of view, can be put in han! d, we propose so that
there may be no doubt outside about the validity of what
we are doing, to annexe the agreement in its full and final
terms to a bill and to invite the Parliament to ratify it.
That bill wi. ll be introduced as soon as possible, I do not
mean within the next day or two,
Mr, Calwell Within a couple of months?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES: I should hope it would be before then,
I shall be very disappointed if the bill cannot be introduced
within the next two or three weeks. That will give every
member of the House an opportunity to re-read the statements
already made and to arm himself with various arguments about
the matter. 3000 00/ 3 
3
IN REPLY TO A QUESTION BY r NhH! RT. L AM, THE PRIME MINISTER
SAID Certainly Australia. This is not something that
will displace the ANZUS Pact. It is, on the contrary,
something that rather tends to grow out of it, and when
the agreement is presented to the Parliament
Mr. Haylen Ohl
SIR ROBERT MENZIES: I know that honourable members opposite
have never quite cared for the ANZUS Pact. We on this side
and the Australian people care for it. Uhen the agreement
is presented to the Parliament, honourable members will find
that it refers back specifically to the ANZUS greement and
derives from that a very fine reason for stepping forward
into this act which will give to the United States of America
our allies for all those purposes the right to establish
a communications centre. Honourable members opposite hte
been so beguiling themselves with ideas of a radio station
surrounded by nuclear weapons, and a naval base in the
vicinity, that they have simply forgotten to read what has
been said about the proposed station oi to understand what
the real nature of the proposal is. 



il3JA L -1 ' 014 ELMJA. IA W ID6 AJ AI
I an siell gted at being affordd the OP14rtunitr
to weme the 600 ip. tes to the Fifth AU Aistellan
Timber Conpwss. Espcially do I wlom the specilists
from Cana4eg Snlarndq the nIted Stat@) and SW Zealand.
With ouAr ownl Mixtrlian 4. l~ djt I an sure that the ans' 4a
dismusiona vili prove of benefit to our own young nation,
The a pn4. which I. have perused appears to
omitin such stImala. lg nattur and I oonp'stilate the
oonvenors of the Con~ ess ani their efforts to isprow the
grovingg mereata turing and maiketing of wood pr'oIdts in~
AustralUae jod, of ootraeg Is aecureli established Ini
manyr of its traditional. useu, Ibut In others It fase:
determined % opjetitioc from alternative vatoriaU. o I k-othat
the Con~ ress will. face tis challai.. squiarely ar the
theme it has adopted for Its diseassions, Ollew Ilorios
tot Timber' ia a " ost appropriate one,
The timber Industry in Australia plays a valtiabl~ e
part ini mat oobasy. a4 the latest figas available to
mg~ the wholesale w~ l-w of wood produae, s anuaactUrd In
Australia in 196"-1 wa~ s ,203 million, haport of wod
prodtt, howvwr, omat an additional M9 million from owr
rOaOUrss Of tawigi ehsu.. w
The Fift All Australian '. Imber Congress has a
big task ahead of it and I wish I' m" ri success on this
P'RIML H. L1LM--OF 3W-ThA. A* A
26th Marsh, 1963. 



BDAUL, TTTV IS IQNjINTERVI EW
Statement in the House of Representatives on Thursday,
28th. March, 1963, by -the Rt. Hon. the Prime Minister,
Sir Robert Menzies.
I must say that the speech that we have just
listened to represents such a muddled-up indictment that it is
very hard to know what the point of it is. In one breath, the
honourable member for Eiden Monarc ( Mr. Allan Fraser) waving an
arm at the Postmaster-~ General ( Mr. Davidson) said that he
believed that this interview should never have been made.
But the honourable member for E3den Monaro has stated exactly
the same thing. He also believes that it should not have been
made, So his whole argument becomes so self-contradictory that
one wonders why this matter has so suddenly been thrown upon us
for discussion. There was no sign of it at the beginning of the weeknot
a hint not any question at question time from a fighting
Opposition stimulated, as some of them are by corridor
exercises In recent times. Not a hint of i~ j But when they
found that a matter had beon suggested for discussion today
which they would have found highly embarrassing, to wit, the
giving of instructions to members by outside bodies, they at
once said, " We cannot have that. 1. e do not want to have that
debated. That would be very Qwkward, e are going to move a
no confidence motion next week. Wle must not fire off any of our
stuff in advance. We must at all costs avoid discussing the
matter suggested by the honourable member for Barker."
So they trotted out this matter. What is the substance
of it? I will go writh the hoaourable member for Eden Monaro to
the first and most powerful part of his speecha. He said and
I agree that this television interview should never have been
made. This int( erview was made by n body which is, after all, if
0 not the servant of the Britisli Government, tho creature of the
British Government, I do net agree that the man with whom the interview
was made is a poor, broken down old follow. I saw this man
myself, full of self -sat-, sfas3tion and leering at his au&amp; nce.
The interview was made with a man who is at this time wanted for
a capital offence against the Government of France. He is
wanted for treason. He is being pursued, in effect, or is
pursuing himself around the world, He is wanted as the head of
an organization which has already made unsuccessful but violent
attempts to assassinate the President of Fr-ince. This is the
man that we are hearing about.
Of course this interview should never have been
made! It could do nothing else but give this man and his views
publicity. It would serve to give him a certain amount of
prestige as a person worth interviewing and presenting over the
principal television service in the U,.
It is l~ ittle wondcr to me that there wore violent
protests in France, It is little wonder to me that there were
protests in the House of Commons. As an unfriendly act towards
a friendly power, I can scarcely think of anything more stupid
and more offensive. I imagine that we all would agree with
that. Certainly the honourable member for Eden Monaro agrees
with it, but having said all those things that the film should
never have been made by the BBC and so on he went on to say
that it should have been put on by the Australian Broadcasting
Commission in Australia, or at any rate, that a Minister should
aeo/ 2 
2
not have dared to prevent it. That, Si'r, is a form of
reasoning which completely escapes me,.
11iei n Australia are not only friendly with France;
we are associated with France in the South-East Asia Treaty.
Through our allies in the old world, we are indirectly
associated with France in NATO. lie are not a member of
NATO, but Great Britain is, and France is in a key position
in the western European structure. Are we supposed to be
quite indifferent to the fact that a body commonly regarded
as the agent or the mouthpiece of the AustraJ, 4an Government
not here; we know better, but commonly so regarded outside
should put on an interview which, by concession, we say should
never have been recorded? Of course, the reason that is put
forward is a very high and mighty one ' W~ ell, this involves
censorship," It is one thing to prevent a programme from
being put on; it is another thing to close up a few newspapers
completely, Honourable members opposite had better
search their own record. How fortunate it is that the
Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell) is not here today.
When this direction was given to the it was,
I repeat, in my opinion a proper direction on a matter which
concerns the relations of this country with a friendly power.
11r, Allan Fraser In fact, you would do it again?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES: As a matter of fact, if it would be
effective, I would do it again, certainly. I am not making
any apologies. I havo publicly conceded that we then found
ouz~ selves in a position in which the pro~ bition against the
A. B. C. would be rendiered completely futile and discaiiinatory.
Therefore, we withdi-ow it.
Mr. Peters Did not you know that before you issued
it? SIR ROBERT MENZIES: I did not think of it, I suppose. I
do not know. When you find that a position has developed
which is untenable, it is good sonsc to go away from it.
I have no apologies to make for that,. All I want to say
is that Opposition members had better make up their minds
as to whether they agree with their spokesman about the
nature, quality and propriety of this particular interview,
If there were power in cne stroke to prevent the presentation
of a matter offensive to an allied poweor not merely
offensive, but a matter which involved putting forward and
giving publicity to a man wanted for treason then I hope
I would have enough firmness, whenever it cropped up, to
do everything I could to prevent it,, 



FQUW. iRAD TO THE~ 1963 ANNUAL i. 4ION OIF " THE~
b" atvarions times oohm o n W the honow of witing
a short wtlea) d* And no In 19639 this-prvilegp has once
spin 00m 1W way* it is With Plea-s r I ae" mPt the
invitation and o= UWjmS Wwatet reiprds to all. manuboaturers
and subsarlbes of thi petigp Publiwstlane
Sine I Penned aw first tbwovor4 tbt the * A= stvma.
laa Xsnuftetmme In the early 19 0) s I have watched with,
Smjw.. Incmauing pbeamw. the rapid Z4 baanoed powth of
A~ traliao In the Intervuning years, the manafteturers have
pammd asouseof w1goaw and enterprise. This has hmed
tpoo moe sonomis stabiltr and adiiev for uas th Im
liftan standards which mmW notions of the world, with
hmdreds of years of tradition and miltwe behind this,
have not yet aeomplisad.
Todoy In Astalm w have 58948 factories
mploring 1912091430 men and " me and me It oust be obvious
toll ustbow vital a part tiem aftetualng inusta7
plays in a eeorw
In thm y~ as 1954. m559 mnateti represented
eight W0 eatu of oips't In the last fiftncial. year$
the figm had risen toth= t* per ento This Is Indeed
a remarkable achievement but I have no doubt that In the
years ahead, equally Wa~ A progress will be made to the
mtuml ad ' mae of all AustwsJiars who are proud of their
hawl tsgo. R. G. MENZIES
28th March, 1963 



I an-M W ash aIKod -to 57 e i andaSas
U1 for,~. howlag twisted, the trfth a Mithe 1w fto
ess there me Ilnv# tr pepl wh wil, quit*
duftivg tis hit to-s9~ vrwe WwIa
gstem~~ dt to s -w qivwv. how with his
ato tto tat m vt and X t both rather, IV drImetlan
psiltiml P000100 CoinI I just veo to that bsume, John Jedd
vas this Nesbe tor kinhew ( 1Aw u tha he we the
Nobr f' loft, ( a " eat With 1011h You hae sam a&amp;--latma)
( JasI I) and them, Somtew And or Albo wthe Mmo
tW ZSViIS thi Btat. ft311&amp; MSat and then, f SCM8 I
drifted into this n, both JZat and wmmistaolh
Xafsi' W iv it Wef InasU h eO" to mits W aet
or son uutbs of It WORM tell yes that I UseA to Ie** at
her scroft the alsle ; Ithe am Nooua awro in &amp; ast
Melbun won I me a mid hll of about 15 and she we a
Junio boarder at the PresWtortan ladies Col I ( Lautew)
at the wipe aw of lit MAO I asre you, qpits Lovely*
TOWw et an and ow tml wanit to livw at
~ bewmad * sbe went to Fintows and ones neve we wet unde
te sis of the Resemd Potriak Rudie&amp; at the Trinity
~ cha combewoel Um I was MUl stwiiina in yes I
this ; 6m ( LaUOAsW) at tk* aw * I about 17 or' 16 and she was
a boarder at ? Inone In dme eres, believe It or not yeas
arbooeinweet I met herw-mbov at a Partv am I aaidt of mt
take you how and I teakh er hem ( La. 4 a) and se aiweys,
rauinds me that as I deliwerod hrat the eutran" e to bar hoose,
wethe". INS a pittesporm heip whch malt most glarlowaly,
( Limisw) I sald# of oudt to kno 400h ether because yw
ftst -Is a MNobam' of Itlaetand so was xlnee. Ando
ko this created, a bn bto u a bond frm. wbh h
has Len mfhrln , poor deawr, ( LaB4htaw) 00*
Yy4e9 s Mehr eminded we that whe I ma-
What Is the el6-bs is SXeusl an. evating? hew tthe
wto ws the sot octal of " at, cm57o esdoddi t ies and sald
to so the first tim I avvd 0j. UU you lawe a ei 1WLL
knowMWpoplehae sell tht to we bot vw us
QWm. ( LUngter) We prowsed aJe
bez of eipws whic had bown given to him I thtal e
arueaee, s ' s( J mel1e0s4ttaevr) e tew edaw iJnoghn hLise cahbioeO wMMe 16 &amp; s taafttsesrpm mS IaLhej
athnadw I owafg re$ e0 tfolw st-AhstsI n Raedno * s ecllopagm-, ._ Wthwwa pra Cs ias--Ier)
I snkd&amp; the loI" aa) n at tNo and of that tins, that's
ins awr 4-tkiag loft to L a so I married his 42a84M
( Lav41ht9er, appa.) Andw to say that I hoe, never
reguetted &amp; atagwapoj bus).
adI have bees dw tonight to be the gost speaker
andvb swagt down., I at the place eard and I saw the
finest portrait of no* a I tbuic I oUSKh to sa" a OW of
a Drawing of a werne ooo* o/ 2
WWL VF-dWA6
UMIM 
this to Bill Dsell. IZttWe' ~ ll( In rahe T. am me'
1kyou mo tlee that the1= 00 lein~ a11ts " adalt
I as toll yea Is that last night, In that state of exuitammat
that anlws When OW has to 1P to W&amp; UP Mtta the emt dw
( Lmjdghb), 0 1 at luto the bbahamle OW.' the we vlas
usvmi, theftr a sample, of tas and stvaauo WO
to Man or twosoh I tamno tape It is oe-io f" uhi
Whae there is a &amp; van bit a a red bit OWd tW som to a
inert of 0" 4. iu* Wi to am a Into the 60MO eof
th1lIeo~ I~ ~ ata* Nt o har hae bow
aa of cm inbom a to or tinUmtw
bUW of L gh) sd hit so an the as" aghtotri) aM th"
ftll am to the flea I dolt Nlut tellng VM mesno is
st4-it. VOW ( wm* m.' Al) I ad of I Itukenw tt to
r smaw that-of all PeleU I sothe mt lemp1 A
SIR tViame of pIMNbA, Uaughter) so I galled out Isobar
Wro ifes Whom Ia a&amp; kxW wtale tap to town mf .( taught')
Am4se aet hare with o. are out ( Laogter), I em
3" t hive with 0 9= r so" 00190a hunet * iot elo ts
as Ym vMILOWI a mmas little gsimAm i Clinm
( LsAkheu) " aId to me 01 tht ye a ed a bit
~~~ Wsi I loedthat M A his the sto.'. Ahev9
thates a jai; pad perWait. ( lahtr) Aind In mv -MWL
I tim that it It were just slAv hl de. ILY6veloped, : it wild osiif
win the Arehmhald Prim* Latbew
TOMSKh I tWO pehw Ns this is the
( W0O ~ o ~ ld 600* 00 1 sn brttmomand what this ims
b21aIkn Ue MWI M11A " oona0s : i'
Kiss Sanders OUsqemzses ha. tonigbt as " is ( aUNK&amp; ter)
Wat Whe to" ra out to he a O~ g Me of a powerful speek am
teld yo all amt : it.
I et Wat to kmp Y" m up heora ligt W&amp; t I
vould Ilk* to OW perhap a ftpi. of about the emeasiem
of amw aeI" S I Sa, amA 1 hastem to abut this, so that
mitaoy iadaatePstopdu~ tta Vy a this
SI g of a aanMtsirmeel~ hs CLu ) a rther
eLoolds chap, he amut 1= thWiso oA ve Oftv
an&amp; we Wet lut., Me a shat15t" at he oesaPies,( eg~)
I thought to . rei ' dell I this " alny amof
examslem smtests IrtguuI.. Umfit Vs. aw vocl Forma
I ou&amp; ht to vearns &amp; Mddae~ csid e wbther I vould Mll
the elala and the esa. ech partyV paying his son
0s2ts2 IN( Iaatw or what dhIl do, ntil I zeumed that
emo it the pest thimsp that we haes bees bwa learula Is
Astal eat thait I hap. we viii V an learning Is thet there
Is great Uerit in the emapetiim idea* I ka that this is
met almays pepmUla beew there s inay people vho bolel. Im
osmpttivfetamitm who don't iaSawl belle" in
eim~ t1m. a* gtw( pl e And thesrefore I sai&amp; to
upseor-dent, am* this is a VN7 isteresting state of afftiwn.
solei a euosldeablo sitq In the MW't~ s of 1tioaa whiak,
In itselfv, rooemts two fham of o. eeottl suwpwls amak
ofr them pet, . ek of thest Ppw,? erly atmbt&amp; sd
the einpetitie of the ether.
I oculd barnh 01 I Ws a hq in the husb in
the th w e of 1ietala lift I" e exIt adivaluy OsWIuled. o
lam~ either had a drm&amp; Ug or a pod hezvt. Won't you kno thates
a apretty kiAee thoe tWOO hap and the flint
yeaotsf plilmW ht v -~ Intom y' Inneast ear stil
-; hOo 1 pmptiv, Wer the vetos that
the romentbotem fte trade and PretetM amd
em Whom I amr solo woelw 1I1v, e mwez quite 0 up
**** 0004.3 
fttl* wer stiLU aridg about what theyr ropy&amp; as the
tGWable and t1 eanfllt between P1max iniuatry~
and mnifttUIMS lambstryo ZOI Wsed emmwgohk to
that In this wmt1 &amp; ad SROvla&amp; COtU7 ws e o
beth. We a" e not put to a WIN aoise, we to no to ay
we vat an1 this sadno of that, heme leOp Pipa
the me We eaillse that e MA a pmod dal of boh ! heu~ ftee
we WAn selvm li In a eomta La vbisk WP M
1afstwiesand, abmow things, thvool, isdtu'tY, and
amsadary lmsay, dmpetluve as It my be* ist se-exist to
mabo us a elaei qits. psrWWl ft at ( Applause)
Ad Me 11 I m hiot in Saigthat the old Ides of the
imovitable eoJflet betveePMa and B have disppeare*
iadsstutm juwt let a* develop that a little,* The pwImawy
as fWs mem-2. 71 M tl
aw hepstveszs Of . p IMASm for' Austa. 1 ( bewi, beer)
adAsettalls Is me of the tea t" uedia tte. Lah
world ffbr that Sole WAn SIMple rs se We are ! u'inos
i oe of the pweftets of the soil pastoral avimltil
=' 0te0; wit MW be. mhs mpt us ins poiLes; In the
voild whish bans iven us a sp&amp; famas thatMu: slat uew
otheiviss hawe askieved. ftis Is 0tweseno~ inpotante
A vW u'Y7 VMst twading mation. o After al, we are not a
big mtai" x'S * ept POpspbiG&amp; lly.* We ame 11 mlliron Peoples
atnad~ AW as* * aaIitne the World the. tims
that population fbur Weor ton t mbIe An yet if anybwv
Wswhed out the list of the inatnmtll " 6ieDi intiaa In the
world, be would flad that Astrslia va in the h= s tea, peihaps
l b# Me-AA&amp; 0 IS IRwiaIe te" s, not : e ga " I
mifthMmt p o o f in 8p09t Qm! a tas ame ofeaus
16bi ut4Ia suoe t p15e at ra o o
= MM r, ofas anof as hese ImMe6ik -haw* aid, dell
we 0" It v a tewm SMA67 mg experts to wool sad
wheet At and anmiprp and meet ed the rest of it we mt
Weell taY to hlmee . sm~ o of mest onewrmp b; exports
of nmftetutd Ltams
Believe it or met, thle has had a emmid e
inoeee It Will he inw, mw yea". bte the eqWUt of
afastured or Prcessed pods ashlov aaqthlag lime the
APA6%-Mof usof weol and wheat and meot and battei
psupatio It Beat all tUb Is a sovamat In the
TI~ h 4iestui. f v talk a pnd del shodt It# ytpty
MY= ma" t to Wil e" that boomme y bowt On tlag
abm these thmwg we have lost oum= sosada of the ital
~ neof the primalIfnmIe t3-SM Of * tat % W
yeaz aftor I have tSmd Wrselft you
believetism I6 hvs A~ wselfI ed Is iwts
about thW . e. 0 mmmjm of the eo A" t ( Lsa-e . PT-MOMS
M AgNo tu i -t time ad I d= n t mind . t anl being
Immaved these things but I o51ws7 ease bask to ths~ that
It is a vey . e tbbq to ,, es., ve the Stability of our amots
at us have, st" rnl m A, boess for " he last Off" e Years*
the". has beem i v~ mtmth soo60t leV* 1l-me Mteial
mmt or La thwe tuoe of LAstralia m the hasis
yalp level. on v ememer polee Im, hbav e m
Tightly or wgly ( I thi* k tightl) to amme a hid" pe
* tstabul~ ty. u this, t emawse is sewvlr tow famdtia
for the 4vest of oat ooty
I hRPPes to We OW Of these ispl viSO tik
that if e have a stable bass ymea asbul a vast stwutm
as it. n I happen to be a of theee peop e i believa that
oft Of the th Lapa~ gus Australian ANIhhs hem that in
tbmw= e1t0s " W1 haV8 atURSeted tiM* outside twe li 
iW~ AN~ S" of SLUJAMe Of~ w or In'" Siat In NW am
skLl ( hear, be" r) f~ to d* l. PM. t~ O f OWONOAtw
we mild be tooliea People to " ouit this. * 0 mid be
inuet~ fui. people if we war* not to roLise that this nspewt
of the fI~ to itv smtw hid, after My tiime9
but not aiiisi4 the time or some of tte yewarp ~ eopla hwet.
wll se Astralia with tmty~ uS112a DOOVUje . rich
~ p Gum * amy* q with a Vowing InternsabI r , With
an Lisaz daseeetj to maintaiR 1t081f and to s" Pt
ltmd* 1: bhter tUfa ve tti or sqy about thoee
08tters, We MR aMr to lao sIgbat of the tt that the
mour twies and I VIii no for this ~ PeeO smbw#
: 4tV ~ oaftIn the form of wool that we ain't P on
weso" Wool M $ 41lling w" ol, oo~ t i f oIow
cets have rises epimat us all the ti00 At Is why It Is
so apte tept ~ oro emesi* stoulatift you are Aping
to gtewe" t1 suprb strength of out Mcw~ ozeto am
of Our priMSX7idstis and I boe xodoubt about that at
t theme toa eemod aspst that i vould lub
tosSyWatyitoo abut r we etop NP UoMas
wheat einfg VhatV' it In and sellng
M= the of the Mwld, and " rVidIng the
iSMON047 pomwzfis basis of ow $ 6no M e4doti
that maxess We wejowd the prblmms of ia-1 m: l ianw in
thee, nuatrios as Vital to their mturer
Twe are two ws of abeoking osts of
OA is an artiftlsi anid atimabl things
astfin rising, to " Meaet ests froM rising.
vmio1" ave battldwthrsoeotl to 40 that for 6
few Years but em't P eaLse.~ then awe youa to
injw0 ~ Un -ettim Psi intas wild of wool and of
whoat amd of mt and or all own other Sawwudtie? Ia
Is am Stvridifram" w ammer " ad that is w tuarmosiag the
* filemqor the ie o tbhmselves, IV ineaai their
C ouvltr so that tliunit meets teed to tall Sod not
eqt tittI, ; a sotSsw todo Its an
let Ime toa u thot me have this antwyt 69~ fthem
eolbeetd Mmtfi. lavestiptes's In the vwA* Is the
I in the t. etIivostie the reswaroh meek that
is being 46" t = pertIa I the pui1Mewy IMt C101A Is
41012000 ftt a" we m hing as" or IT? no" the Wakt of
tawel. ts reaek the I* w am the taem?
New this to MIie of Via armat PfbLo
Of myr time anid It I a hlp to solve I itIl@ Istl. rmi
Prime Ministe wIbo, s ~, Is to a * 46LO queticm
CVss" itr) -if I amn help to so It In. the rest of my timet
I vouad be as p" RaM as Leeiw. amease really, we do have
the most 46lmesel ww being do in Mtrella. We are a
little bit Inelined to kn* emonP eople aren't me? A
little bit lioe Vtat Mae" adidt that? We are* AMd yetq
at the National U" iwMitry, J C0a6z1iIR. o at the Vartaus
Va Msitis at the V" el reseerek Imitat" i 4111
Australia, 1L mee" t to mend 0s meek it being doun MA mo time
I Seakto a* a of the big oen In thase ields, I 016M#
tamI? n ' tew Tahde taonfsw yeer wlo , w ee" kN owt vweeohir e noout t totoo tehaer tsuta the it i. h
in * wwrmt daw the great Ptebi of the awt ftv rs is to
ow~ at. me reseawsk wek a Oreeefax atmnsion seerisos
to the ma an the land. o ( leer, heaz) r) tugi is da, the 
g.. t vitail lm mis a toftight I speak In Putemur
oef tevawoI rn be adfimBau it otw r assbi s4t SJwiall t aIia I peeWekb iinneasL able to in
to w law" Mo efiSMq1 a-4 . gaii. todst to pwoame
n wbly bettow elS
I wae if I UL&amp; t fw m ment, be Just a
little awtboavpmoml an thiS maltt., Awn I ws a bar of
tweves thwtea a totu In the ' wrth.. wt of Vitoii in
0 sArM VU4a sAB thema1 thw malu it umi to be rem
to 110 the XebWM pepePM MA the hiblft 01s the bI22AM
wut V~ lar ( I* Ar) I told yo It Was V~ a ha* betn
the tlof Set of ; nm Wet at that Woes, I r= ste0iag
ev~ at the baok of a bum of tmews whim an apimnltm3,
sint Ma IV tfsu p bowu'm to Wak about the use
Of NJ PM~ Dhp tea NOW Of SCOV6 thiS is tOdAq n pae
aMm taeszl iai sa bhatr I a seWt aabt t0h0e1 bako of f athpeew rionagaan L &amp; 7wh ea odf wthhiesaPt
tIhit e. thaet aPwalwgloA. i aWasta m wSM sSt i~ I4 " eTaIm ue rbtea" iwn thneIlmO SS" tWSo " SW toi
esk other. 0014 1 4sst knW MUh old MaR 4ift t e thim.
Watts he Mumkiagbout, AUTO And aheui thee M04blw
fe inmt6hwe; ewestble this a b bat p~ a
tbq wulftot usesa z t I&amp; use hel
a w eapen wth thir ll" S" ats owyb. 4 Vebe up am~ in
about, fiv roews they mo all uiag sever ftt it took all
that Use ad that ws a perf~ et oximple of what 1 ne emil
Tm wham the great nom -P the fiwat of ow
wheat xeAWs Vt to iwks wt far out of Camberm as
it happens at Tku W% to vest stelylg In pmalsim the
wobs of rest In mt ad PROONW6 fimall a auteithut
wMhe at DSW 8o Df eyWou1 awi ilal nrde m? eOmufMt teImt, aInf dy os a4" M )# Uapld Iw ets thle
wbmt yield IF 9* am or five bh* el to the aff, 1 beease rest
us oltl" si, 4 isa these 4ropa.
2% usbusinss. of at-nis eruviee is not just
a beasises for tbe sebmti~ t, at JUst a4 eIaSO for the
w1 Jut a b" i a the Gwuama wt ftw
the me. an the lad bhimUIf b e wwts to moom Uhe advontgs,
all fres, of the vat that Is bein g dons In the hag rm
a" I kse " 1% y m4et Is the sheet no the Weon of the satt
will be tnsted ito prstial teams as the fthm ad the e
station and It it is we willi owe then ~ e be ab] Le to leokth
wwrld In the Wo sAd btoa mptiticm.
Use ly other'thn I moat to saY to y" u In
this. we have J" I be6s mtblsig a Coatromm wM them
a Wool Amew4. I h ebevdWWy ealisee What has hapmed an
theme mtts's. What ml wquives, and e hem told thi
in the mostdeal mt term tamit Is woseewet, Veseaeeb,
woeswk inskidu to Oelve the ; U270in of the use of veal.
It VoquIres Ovst~ NO th weld, it wqair" s samt , lsg
to ha 0ie" UwLi on Ite RAW* = fetV. j With the
awtitiial fihe.. Vub a, ha], t whiC1 loe a ago" of
ye tint of he p;; ttIos of maumde fihee beeme thaw
00000*/ 
bet am they a" bws Wo &amp; Wa mA tWe all haw a pet
feticn to Owform.. What WWIoo . sIs a system of wmt
an top of resea'eb which VILL in a basiseamlke wW ak
it 00nstality In do"" do It Shuold he all aimed the
vwl&amp; A. It you 411 allow me to make peisoal tefevw
I t ULU* Satum bette has happemed to the wal : Lmsu
thus the apglatummmt a year or two ar of W6 Z. lime to be
the ma VW In in Atr a ameam w of thums ttws*
This bas beow a t--m # I&amp; l pmod thing fbr tba woo l fse7
ass 11 the, paat wool Im reual"* it.
SM9 this -v aft4, . sMtf'tig Its minid
as~ amusotsWIUilnl4 e 40 ummt tt WWol than all the
6 that umt and I
mtsIla will xeum In oth" IMF" s 4OUt 1. Ptus
voro om as nthtnS * ish MWW# In the has of oneLtc;
oo~ fp etit4sA whon orak a a 1
teeOthew smama tiii exash 6Its * sen qulit' as
thei amtf In~ o the vmrZ ( hear hear) andu90m" iag -Mb-a
aM strumOp iinst eULeL fat orf@ XtdsVtVt~ vBiiqi ua, a
sint8aL altr as the flamt th Usth vwl4 ( hes, hoaw)
aM mti: hgtfat % bis amUp' imW ebettor than am'
ather smtyIn the wstld
0fls't vw absut Waptiis ~ miisi
LalInthe kiM of moiety i Avwbee mat live# % at
whet I obj* 4 to Is peMPol. e ay, ' well, ymg are . itm A or
3' the I*~ alb e a1lonle . in Sz~~ witso, vhe thizik
iFA= ir to be tisw or~ that % Wo tikt Spsd~ sa
am pliti. Sweet 8) v I vat to M YOO thatIs
a-est agINpur~ mmr of eompeatii boon" as if I oni&amp; awlw6 in a
empott and I Uose thm I doga4 War yas, I blew
swu" It 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 31/ 1963.
MINISTERIAL APRRANGEMENTS
Statement by the Prime Ministerj, jn Sir R obert Menzies
Today the Prime Minister, Sir Robert
Menzies announced acting arrangements for Ministers
during Lie absence overseas of the Minister for Trade
and the Minister for External. Affairs.
Sir Garfield Barwick, the Minister for
External Affairs and Attorney-General, has left
Australia to lead the Australian delegation to a meeting
of the SEATO Council in Paris. During his absence,
Sir Robert Menzies is acting as Minister for Excternal
Affairs and Mr. Gordon Frrjeth, the Minister for
the Interior and the Minister for ' 4orks, is acting as
Attorney-General. The Minister for Trade, Mr. Mlhc~ ven, will
lecave Australia on 7th April. to attend important trade
conferences overseas. Mr. McE ~ ren will be away for some
weeks and during his absence Senator Henty, the Minister
for Customs and Excise, will. act as Minister for Trade.
CANBERRA, 2nd April, 19630, 



" NO CONFIDENCE" MOTION
Statement in the House of Representatives by the Rt, Hon,
the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies on fednesday, 3rd
April, 1963.
Mr. Speaker, the honourable member for Batman
( Mr. Benson) is a very experienced pilot but he will forgive
me when I say that during his speech I was very much struck
by the fact that he was steering a course that gave the
impression that he was shifting about in a five-knot ebb tide
in the rip of Point Lonsdale. He will understand exactly what
that means. I think he has fallen into the common error of
thinking that referring a matter to the United Nations is in
itself a constructive policy. Time after time it has become
necessary to say that it is not. To go to the United Nations
with a policy is one thing but to fall into the habit of saying
that Cuba, for example, should have gone to the United Nations
or that something else should hcve gone to the United Nations
is not a policy at all. It is a more evasion of national
responsibility and of national decision.
The honourable member permitted himself to comment
adversely he is not the only one to do so on the Opposition
side about President Kennedy's handling of the Cuba incident
and about this Government's instant declaration that we agreed
with what President Kennedy had done. what do honourable members
opposite want us to do? want to witness one of the really
significant events in postwar history, a critical event which,
if it had not been dealt with promptly and strongly by the
President of the U. So, night have altered the whole balance of
power in the worldo When the President of the USo. took in
splendid terms a strong and definite attitude on these matters
honcurable members opposite say, " Oh, it should have gone to the
United Nations." I wonder whether honourable members know what
they mean, Do they mean that the matter should have gone to
the Security Council so that it could have boon neatly vetoed
by the Soviet Union? That would have occupied a certain amount
of time. In the meantime, the Soviet Union would have continued
to put its weapons its missiles into Cuba, building a base
close to the U. S. which could alter the entire balance of power
in the world. Is that what honourable members opposite mean?
No doubt it is. Then they would say: " Now that you come to
mention it, of course the Soviet Union would veto it and so it
would come to nothing. But then you can go to the Assembly and
have a fortnight's debate. You can have all of the Communist
satellites lined up and speech after speech made. All the time
the Communist position in Cuba is being built up until ultimately
the balance of power in the world is upset.
Mr. Speaker these are very serious matters and if
the Opposition's attitude is that the President of the U. S. was
wrong and that we were wrong to be the first people to give our
approval to the U. S, action, then the people of Australia might
know about this. I think they will, and I think they might think
about it. They might v.; onder whether they should entrust not
only their economic affairs but also their security and their
entire future to the people on the other side of this Parliament.
S.. o o / 2 
2-
Noiw., Sir, I speak as some sort of an expert on
this matter. There are two objectives in the " no confidence"
motion I know; I have been at the giving end and at the
receiving end. There are two objectives and one is to put the
Government out. That is an admirable attitude for an Opposition
to have and it has taken an awful long time for this Opposition
to decide on that attitude. But there it is to put the
Government out. The other, of course, is, immediately or
otherwise, to put the Opposition in. This would not be an
unfair analysis to put us out and to put you in.
For the purposes of simplicity I therefore propose
to provide my ovam contribution tonighit into these twro aspects.
I will say something about the first of them. I do not need
to say as much as I otherwise would because later on in this
debate my colleagues the Minister for Trade ( Mr. McEwen) and
the Treasurer ( Mr. Harold Holt) will have admirable opportunities
of dealing in detail with some of these matters. But I will
not entirely let them go by.
I therefore start by saying something about putting
the Government out and the reasons for it. My distinguished
friend the Leader of the Opposition ( 1r. Calwoll) has, of
course, a professional gloom about the Australian econo. y. It
is his duty to be depressed and, if possible, to depress other
people. He therefore gave us a professionally gloomy account
of Australia's present economic condition which was so much
at variance with the facts as to be almost too ludicrous.
I hope it was read overseas by people in other countries.
They would, of course, burst into hilarious laughter, on looking
at their own countries, to be told about this one which is in
a state of economic disaster and depression.
Mr. O'Brien That is not true.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Of course that is not true. After all,
the Leader of the Opposition was careful to admit from his
attack I will call it an attack all the material factors
in the economic position. I do not recall him saying anything
about the remarkable success of the Government's policy against
inflation. There is laughter on both sides of the Chamber.
I am familiar with all those chaps. They laugh on both sides
of their faces. In one sense, members opposite laugh because
they have always said inflation is silly talk and that it is
a bogey and on the other side they laugh because they are not
very pleased to have to admit in their hearts that the consumer
price index has been stable now for years.
Mr. Ward How does it compare with 1949?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES I always know that I am scoring when
some of you yell. But I do not worry myself about that. I
am not addressing myself to the honourable member for East
Sydney. Whenever I have addressed myself to East Sydney I
have had to have police protection.
We have a stable consumer price index. In other
words, the inflationary processes in this country which were
desperately dangerous a few years ago have been brought under
control. Not a word about that. Not a word about the
remarkable increase in the employment in Australia; not a word
about the remarkable increase in production in Australia. / 3 
-3-
It is all right. Some of the new boys will learn in due course
that a few facts are much more important than some of the
arguments that they present and even they cannot deny that
there has been a most remarkable increase in production in
this country in the last few years and a most remarkable
increase in savings in this country, I go back a little while
and I can remember Mr. Pollard Back to the eighteenth century.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES And it was a very good century. Do you
know why, Sir? Because it was a century of good sense.
Mr. Allan Fraser You are an eighteenth century
Prime Minister.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES " Indeod", says the honourable member,
" an eighteenth century Prime Minister." All I can say is that
at the tail end of the eighteenth century they had some very
good Prime Ministers and he might have been proud to be one
of them. But he has forgotten his history. As I was saying,
there have been increased savings. I can remember the time
when my distinguished opponent, the Leader of the Opposition,
used to say " Look at the way savings have fallen away. This
is a sign that the Government is ineffective." Now, when he
looks and sees that there are record savings, with another
œ 2,000,000 in the savings banks he says " That is no good.
This is a sign that people have no confidence in the future."
You cannot satisfy some of these people. He does not say a
word about the development works programme, except in one
respect that I will come to in a minuteo He does not say
a word about the record home building in Australia, an undoubted
undeniable fact. He does not say a word about the record
activity in building construction business construction
in the cities not a word, Ho does not say a word about the
public credit being high both here and overseas. He does not
say a word about interest rates falling. He does not say a
word except a hostile word about investment in this country
from overseas. He does not say a word about the remarkable
and increasing growth in the export of manufactures from
Australia nothing about these. Yet the fact is and
wherever you go you can encounter it that there is an
increasing feeling in this country, oven among those who were
critical, that the Government's policy has been right and
that confidence in this country is building up every week and
every month. Now, Sir having said that because I do not want to
take up too much of my time on it and there will be other people
who can deal with the details of this matter
Mr. Cope You have gone a bit flat.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES I have always noticed that when you are
afriad to listen you make a noiseo Nowr, Sir, in the course of
his speech the Leader of the Opposition was kind enough to
make a glancing reference or two to me. At one stage he said
that I was reported to have told my Federal executive something.
All I can say is that I had never heard of the report until he
mentioned it last night and it was quite untrue. I am sorry
that he should read things from the gossip columns. He also
referred to mo, and this fascinated me because I do not know
whether it was a compliment or a subdued attack, as " the sole
triton of post-war Liberalism". o 14 
4
Mr. OtBrien That was a compliment.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES I suppose he meant to con rey the
impression that I was a triton among the minnows. This, I
think, is overdoing it. Being a triton among the minnows is
supposed to be a compliment to me and an offence to those
who for so many years have been with me in the problems of
this country. All I want to say to the honourable member
he has exposed his flank a little on this is that to be
a triton among the minnows is not half so bad as being a
minnow among the 36 tritons who form the Labour Party and
that is what, by concession, he is. He is the minnow swimming
in and around among the tritons and coming up occasionally
if a fish can listen and listening and diving down again;
the minnow amont the 36 tritons.
Mr. Einfeld What do you
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Thank hoaven you were not one of them;
otherwise there would have beun 35 tritons.
I want to draw attention to just one point about
this devastating " no confidence" motion. There are a dozen
points I could deal with, but I have time to deal with only
one. In a remarkable exercise of reasoning, the Leade:-of
the Opposition conceded what had been done. In fact, he
rehearsed it. He referred to substantial increases in loan
money for State works, including of course housing; Federal
works; selected development projects; special non-repiyable
grants, most of which were in aid of employment; reduction
of income tax; reduced sales tax on motor vehicles, which
has produced the most extraordinary activity in the motor
veiicle industry: increased employment benefit and investment
allowances, le then disclosed the perfect, old-fashioned,
dead-as-the-dodo socialist mind by saying, " Not one of those
measures was designed to help the ordinary wage earners of
this country." I hope that everybody in Australia will read
that and ponder on it. Apparently, if we increase loan
moneys, increase State works, increase housing and increase
Federal works, this will be no good to the worker. That is his
proposition. Those activities have nothing to do with the
wage earner. Development projects such as Mt. Isa, the
lostern Australian Railway or coal loading equipment at
Gladstone and other ports, are no good to the wage earner.
How odd that is. I always thought these things ware done by
having people work on the job and being paid for it and by
buying materials and having people paid to produce hem.
But the Leader of the Opposition says, " No, they are no good."
He referred to the reduced sales tax on motor vehicles. I
ask you, Sir. Here we had an industry that had sustained a
considerable reduction of production as a result of the
policies we found neces3ary and the reduced sales tax together
with the general restoration of industrial help has enabled it
to employ thousands and thousands more people, not only
directly but indirectly. The leader of the socialist party
stands up and says 0000
Mr. O'Brien Not socialist.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Is it not that any longer? Ohft He
stands up and says that none of these things is any good to
tha wage earner. I leave it at that because I want to say
something about some other matters. So far I have said only
a little on the matter of putting the Government out. Now 
I would like to say something aboub the problem of putting
the Opposition in, which is the other object of the exercise.
If Labour is to go in, I think it is essential thatrot only
we but also the people of Australia should know where they
stand on the great issues confronting this countryo I have
already explained that they do not quite know where they stand
even on matters on which they attack us. But where do they
stand on the matters on which I propose to attack them? They
are putting themselves forward, as the alternative Government.
Apparently they do so very confidently more confident today
than they will be in a month's time; more confident in a
month's time than they will be in a year's time. They know.
They are not so silly as all that. However, they are putting
themselves forward as the new Government. Now, Sir, what
kind of a Government would this Labour Government be?
Mr. Costa A good one,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES If you are in it, I will be delighted.
But what kind of a government would it be? The government, of
course, would be the tired spokesman of 36 outsiders, none
of them elected by the Australian people and any nineteen of
them able to control the minds and the voices of a Labour
government. As the honourable member for Higinbotham ( Mr.
Chipp) said this afternoon, this is what is called democracy.
It may have been different in the days when Labour had strong
leaders, but it is not today when Labour has leaders who bow
in the corridors and who wait for their orders and who then
proceed as best they can to carry out their orders. In other
words, the country is not being offered by Labour a government
of people who will attack problems, exercise their own
judgments and stand by their judgment, but people who will
look around the corner and say to these obscure nonentities
who give them their orders, " Please, what is it we are allowed
to do. That is as clear as a pikestaff, and if it needed to
be made clear, my honourable friend with his deputy leader
made it clear at the last Federal Conference of the Australian
Labour Party. A more humiliating spectacle could hardly be
imaginedl Mro Pollard That is not what you said to Bry,
You said, " Do it or else" o
SIR ROBERT MENZIES: That was a Prime Minister; he was the
leader. He was not a Prime Minister who had to go away to
36 people and say, " Ploase oblige me by telling meo"
Mr. Allan Fraser You are a one-man government.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES The honourable member for Eden Monaro
keeps muttering about a one-man government. If I am the Prime
Minister of this country, I am the Prime Minister because the
people have elected my supporters, who have chosen me. There
is no parallel on my side of politics to this outside control
by a group of 36, or any other number you care to choose,
completely irresponsible people to whom the so-called leaders
of the country would have to make their obeisance.
The next comment I make about the Australian Labour
Party, which wants to come in, is: Where does it stand on
Malaya? After all, this country is a pretty remote country
in the world. This country, as the whole of experience has
shown, cannot in great emergencies be its own solo defender.
It must do its best, but it cannot be its own sole defender. / 6 
6
!: 1e have all found that time after time, and therefore we have
a lively interest in what goes on
Mr. Uren Who did you
SIR ROBERT MENZIES If you do not mind I know your views
are so far left of mine that I see them in a sunset haze.
I know the honourable member is a little touchy on this, because
it is he who has said it has been quoted that there is
nothing to fear from Communist China, it has no ambitions.
It is like Hitler; it has no territorial ambitions. It is
not pressing on South-East Asia. That is the view of the
honourable member for Reid, but who accepts it? Who, looking
at what goes on in South-East Asia, could believe such sorry
nonsense for half a minute. It is important, therefore, to
know where Labour stands on Malaya, which happens to be a
British country and a country of the Commonwealth of Nations
not so very far to our north, friendly and loyal.
The last decision they made and I cannot discover
that it has ever be-n altered is that the Australian
components of the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve in Malaya
should be withdrawn. Now, I will be delighted to know whether
that is still true. Apparently it is, A great silence falls
over the ranks of the Labour Party. So, let it be observed by
everybody concerned that by their silence they admit that that
is still their policy. They will be given an opportunity
overnight to find out from what is the chapts name?
Chamberlain. But after all, the last authentic remark on this
issue was made by the honourable member for Parkes ( Mr. Haylen)
and as a front-bencher and as a loyal observer of the Constitution
of the Labour Party what Lh said must be right. It must
be official. He said, " We on this side of the chamber are
assailed for saying that our troops ought to get out of Malaya.
What has Malaya to do with us?"
This is the Labour PartyJ What has Malaya to do with
usl In other words, we cannot, says the Labour Party care
less what happens in Malaya, Wo cannot care less if Malaya
is over-run by the Communists. And, indeed, they had the
non-aggressive Chinese Communists conducting activities of
insurgency in Malaya and it was one of the honours of our
battalion in Malaya from time to time to take part in resisting
these people and in tracking them down. But the Labour Party
says, " What has Malaya got to do with us?"
Take their attitude towards the creation of Malaysia,
This is very well described in that splendid newspaper, the
Melbourne " Age" cnly this morning in a leading article. I
will undertake to read a few lines from what the newspaper
said because it puts it to perfection. It said, speaking
about the Labour Party and its policy, now handed out in
writing in W. A. by the boss weeks afterwards
It believes in effective " decolonization"
It is extraordinary how loft-wingwrs love these long words.
Effective decolonization. The article continues
of the three northern Borneo territories, but
it passes no judgment on the proposal for incorporating
British Borneo in Malaysia."
And that is true Not a word about it. Silence. The Leader
0** e 0 / 7 
7-
of the Opposition incautiously said recently, when he was a
free man that he thought it was a good idea, But now now.
Nothing but silence now on that front. The " Age" article
continues " The Partyts attitude towards Malaysia appears to
the outsider to be mere double talk, and its
failure to recognize the importance of the Commonwealth
Strategic Reserve suggests a refusal to face
facts."
Then the " Age" goes on, charitably I think, to say
" Flexibility is a useful quality in strange ways but
it does not mean evading or postponing decisions.
What the conference failed to give was a clearly
formulated and presented foreign policy for a party
which is Australia's alternative government."
And then, with a superb but delicate touch of irony, the " Age"
article concludes " Its Parliamentary leaders were entitled to expect
more"
I think this is gorgeous. I really think this is the finest
journalistic sentence I have read this year
" Normally the people expect the Parliamentary leaders
of a great party to give a lead, to expound ideas in
the partyto take decisions on policy."
Then the " Age" with all its charity, says in the final paragraph
" What a pity because the Parliamentary leaders of
the Labour Party are not as other men. They have to
be given something by Chamberlain and company and
really it is very disappointing that they were not
given more."
This, Sir, I think. is not only a piece of delicate irony but in
its fashion quite superb.
Now, Sir, my time goes on and therefore I pass on to
the next thing on which I am curious about the Labour Party's
attitude. The Labour Party, this prospective government, the
one that wants to come into office
Mi. Einfeld Inevitably,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES I do not object, my dear fellow, to your
cheering yourself up in this fashion, I would in your position.
Personally I wish you well. I think you would make a very good
whatever-it-is. The Labour Party wants to have a nuclear-free
zone south of the equator. May I take it that that is still
Labour Party policy?
Mr. Einfeld Hear! Hear.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Thank you very much. I knew that if I
were nice to you, you would respond. This is still the Labour
Party's policy. Of course, this idea of having an area south
of the equator and round the world in which no nuclear weapons
can be deployed sounds very attractive and a lot of Labour .6.0./ 8 
8-
people think tkcA the people at l1argQ-e Wrill be deceived into
thinking that+ all th&amp; t ire;; n.: 1tF Austraiia will not hersel f
ave nuclear weapons, OfL course, that is just a patfietic
ouitlook on it, The fact; is thiat a nuclear-free zone south of
the equator if' you could get away with it. i~ f you could get
the other people of the southern hemisphecre to agree to it
would. mean that no nuclear weapons coul'id be deployed even in
our defence, southi of the equator,
Mr. Einfeld No.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Ohl This is fascinating0 So a. ll we say
to the United States Of Ameri ca,, for exampla a great nuclear
power or to Great Britain is: " We are not going to have you
south. of thne eq-uator except, of course, if we get iinto trouble.
There is a level -w
Mr. Elinfeld You are clcwning about this,'
SIR ROB7ERT TMENZIT2S 1 air notu cl. owning, I a7m talking about
a matter so serious thiat you ought to be as haimed of yourself
for treating it as a joke,
Mr. Knfeld -You 31' 13 oiown_~ r: Lng,
SIR ROMRT MENZIES C 1 o ng,~ I am te" ling thie Labour r'arty
in this place that if their nu-clear--free area southa of the
equa7tor evier came into operation and were sup-ported. by the
people of Australia, th--at would be natio-nal suicide. The trouble
witha the hotnourable memiber forL Phaiip ] Einfel.) ithte
will not face up to th1. e facts. He likes to avo-id thom,, The
fact is and do not run away fCrom . t tou fa -tat if are3
going to have as our al:. es the United States of Arerica and the
Unit,: d KIngdom thoso groat powecrs whaich hiave nucicar strength,
one of w,, hich, the rjnitc-d S ttes of Amrcpcssesse8 the
Polaris subma,-rines -wlnltch ir a rdo wor'd withi the Opposition
and will havre -them-4n the Indian Ocean, areo wO to say to
thiem "~ L. ook whatcvor Lpc., you undorstand that no n7-uclear
weapon i~ s to be disc1harged by you or controclo~ d by you fo
Ausraia trrto'y -bcauseth e Labour Party says it is not
to haPpenr. V TvIroo'e I th!-ose.--eacaful Comm: runist C.-. inese
t1De non-aggressors . In V4-ot 0a1n1d( m Ios 1
Mr. Pollard tu ec. g-
SIR RO. QBTRT MENZTES Listen for a while; it will do you no
harm,, If these people become involved La. war and thea United
States of ITmrica is alongsido of us, wostandI right in the
southwoa-td tr. ack of theose rno-Nemnts, are we to say to them that
althnoughi people north of the equator can use intercontinental
ballistic missiles and oernuclear wansno Austra-lian
government is going to all3ow the Un-Lted. States of fmrica to
use this as a base for countor attack? Does it not mean thiat?
If it does not mean th~ a;, perhaps tho honcur-: ablo member for
Phillip will be good enough some time to explain to us what
4, t does mean, Mr. Ein-feld I will give you instruct-ion in this
any timre, Mr. O'Brien T1 will be very simplpe, too, aCO* OS0/ 
-9-
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Yes, it will be very simple. I quite
agree. The truth of the matter is that the Labour Party has
to give up trying to have it both ways. You advocate a
nuclear-free zone south of the equator, because this pleases
your Communist supporters, and then, in the next breath, to
satisfy your right-wingers, who are sensible and decent people,
you say, " That does not mean what it says". What in the name
of fortune does it mean?
Perhaps the honourable member for the Australian
Capital Territory ( Mr. J, R. Fraser) who is interjecting, might
devote some of his attention to writing a powerful article for
the " Canberra Times", explaining that this does not mean that
nuclear weapons cannot be deployed from Australian territory,
even though Australia is under attack, Mr, Speaker, if you
can hear me over the gutter noises of East Sydney, I just want
to say that the attitude of the Labour Party's conference to
the North West Cape installation is of a piece with the
isolationism exhibited in that party's attitude cowards a
nuclear-free zone. It is a natural corollary. Opposition
members now say, I think, that by a vote of nineteen to seventeen
they got something through which disappointed us. I hope they
have all read what they got through.
You know, Sir, there is a very odd thing about this
last Labour Party conference. On the matter of North West
Cape a matter of immediate and vital importance to the
people of Australia no written document was handed out at
all, Did honourable members notice that? On the contrary, the
master naturally not the Leader of the Opposition came out
and read to the press, quite quickly, from a piece of paper.
That is all they have ever had. I thought at the time, " This
is pretty good, because this will always give them the
opportunity of saying that they ewre misreported and that that
was not what they decided." The other day, in the fastnesses
of Perth Mr. Harding What is wrong with Perth?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Nothing, It is one of the finest cities
in Australia. I have always had an ambition to live there. I
am thinking of that quite seriously. All I can say is that in
the fastnesses of Porth the master produced, in writing, the
decisions that the conference had made. There was nothing in
the document about North 1est Cape. Of course, Sir, the whole
basis of this thing is that the Labour Party has gone back,
after a much better interlude at one time to its isolationist
attitude towards the problems of the world. It wants to say
to the Unitea States, " Certainly we do not mind your spending
on a radio communications station. That is very nice.
Thank you very much, do not mind your using it for naval
communications in time of peace as long as we are the joint
owners and managers, although we will not pay for it. But if
the occasion occurs when you really need naval communications
more than at any other time, then, although you are our
associate in ANZUS and SEATO and we know, as people of common
sense, that you and your friendship are vital to us, we want
you to understand that you cannot use the station urdss the
Australian Government of the day happens to say that you can,"
I have heard a lot of people saying that the establishment
of this station is an invasion of our sovereignty. Our
sovereignty has been invaded before, as the Labour Government 0 00 0 0 
10
of the past well knows I suppose it was an invasion of
our sovereignty when all the forces in Australia were put
under a foreign command. Nobody complained about that,
It was a jolly good cause. Is it not a fact also that this
technical sovereignty of ours was so far invaded that members
of the American forces, although they were in Austlalia and
might commit crimes in Australia, were removed from the
jurisdiction of the Australian courts and placed under
American jurisdiction? I am not complaining about that.
I would have done exactly the same thing under the same
circumstances. But this, we are now told, is the kind of
thing that is an invasion of our sovereignty. The Labour
Party of those days understood pretty wel that to subtract
from your own sovereignty by exercising it in favour of a
friend is much more important than losing it all to an
enemy. Mr, McGuren Who criticised the Government?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES 1 do not know. I did not. If it is
any comfort, I say to you now that that was right. Why do
you now say it was wrong? have heard all this cackle
about sovereignty and we lhave heard it said that we must
not allow the AJericans to come in here and have rights,
Finally, Sir, with three minutes to go
Mr. Armitage Economic issues?
SIR ROBERT MENZIES No. I am dealing with issues which you
detest but which will determine in the minds of the Australian
people whether you will get an opportunity to ruin this
country. Apart from paying lip-service to the United Nations,
where does the Labour Party stand? Why, it was only in 195
that Dr. Evatt proposed to save 40M from the defence vote,
so he obviously thought that it was much too much. The
hcnourable member for Reid ( M r. Uren) pithily expressing
himself in 1960, said, "' DisarmS" In October, 1960, in the
same debate, the honourable member for Lalor ( Mr. o ollard)
said that a police force, pending the arrival of the United
Nations, was all that we needed. The honourable member for
Lao is a gallant and distinguished member of this Parliament,
Ho is an old friend of mine, But he was exhibiting a point
of view on this matter, In October, 1960, the honourable
member for Yarra ( Mr, Cairns) said that we should supply
troops to the United Nations and nowhere olseo
Now, Sir, how do you sum it all up? Here is a
party that wants to be put into office, It is dubious and,
indeed, isolationist in its attitude to defence. It has a
dangerous attitude towards a nuclear-free zone. It has an
unreal and evasive attitude on Malaya. It is divided on the
reality of our association with the United States, as
exemplified by the North-West Cape installation, Above all
things it has a dismal position as the humble but obedient
servanG as the lackey, I think that is the Communist
expression of the outside body now famous in history as
the 36o 



OMLUG OF TIM MKW SCZI WLIdDNG AT
œ ZNEM SAMU 6CBOJ., SM IU9, JWo
I dea't uind tUlag y" a I a aff" l th~ is aftsuin
mea dwqd~ tkut att night I le1t
MLU = nJ1 ( Apam) uAa to" I heam' to a~ x
0001tlama Oay with a teash of greweaw4 hamout ; W6 lah
SObe" s' I e n. iag ht say all present aut
sueret* 7* 41 M pi or Iew a AnUwarLS ad" tatlp-but
wwb It is from y~ rI ; vOinmt li to sp. Bit ta
Gia4wt~ are, 4' atIsast. am is toot I-6wa lil .1&amp; I
&amp; aV21i*' VGOr the m et or Whe looking a bit
9 dI usaM be tf unius, sa the USA is
um~ fficr thet iMI nm * w o at a" l ( Za61be0
Ue lp bue" s on mm A s that
Is a 410WAatafp. I abMyil0k0, * 0 60 M 4o0 O aMudem.
Ifea " tu&amp; Yew"" that yea have mse ityou can see It*
Aaotherp A aadvAMt to that Apsem this nost
fas urs. eumset as oWith this mwl
.7 hum baldeo
63O . s 1 o ofth " Ltbass am
seek tim 1 3as4 aem maidlp I W, bhaea9 W. Chales
Meh used to be an eld1A of sims) a" We KAR
andh SStw DOWNm do" thelkig thoe e
the a ) aamnddaa ltem I t aid heaving
rd= m Wift 1IMA to fotr1 4 los m
VOOM het I aJan" bwh fat aseasiss &amp; An % h~ ea
I Wii l do1 best to Omewoomm this bandIeap.
at, 0 rosily this IS a ll enn Ww t. I Et
eses~ as yew femastew k" t* Asta n " t
4100 amar" tOf bmsa aic logth
str~ ei~ t~ wswl a 9A to ' UM 4d. ou yamS &amp; U~
WOn Tis. Is wow tMO I hes I boe as" A it And I
st ll mok w but tb wre bum arA thatg. I thlxk,
0Vetf0 thing fte ft* W anda May pad thing 1W
New I gnat to Oabma to To* that W claim to
allt ; 240". are = enerly dwh* Wbo I was a
ho" I bad as inoasrdi 5 somery* I WOs the MMn
of UbeloP t tlu'oso we ti. rte silyo ya"
OXOpt I gse or mteUt. n woeasIi tsow U
brand" IsOtfft I WOW
I -' el to l.. A. VRth: d 1W ber9a as I o" said in the
II-of Nr'. Robou, I a1b0My Ipt fiffy as a reMit.
hil-half thesay * P0stie. fto TI rit WWWW" mt " a
g0* 00** 
. O2 g
X7 04tMfie qualiletea Sluem thm . my Instinetiw
bet not smltlmtud osimtifle Ideas haw beau roes MMM
I m a Dt~ of 3sm b* lim It or not of
US M21iOTsltY Of NOW 8outh Wales, and seeing a esupi.. of
pmwftl di al aem uhe are frionis of min Inl 91" st
row I wat t. tall the that I aln als 0; WA; of the JWMl
Crlte Of Oi. 5a. and. Obst-tilms ( Iauitea)( A las)
so you mee a soes M vat entiwly unqi1fin ( Letw
for the tas t asft e* Woo 1 a tboh tWO Codly thin4 dli
Is spsk.( wut., aplueI
* At tt~ ng all that an aw side, the truth of the
Satter is that w hewo heesm pertauAwly ija the last test
twar ea iwe inlj GaseoM of the mlg )) aee or
OcdenevIn aim In1 the whale emhot Of tile afftirs
of the World* ft" i is to aly time. it O beai
that Perhaps we are a little earrIed a*. y I! the ths42LI
or iMelear PWIOSis tv the SPOGUaMlw &amp; dAolWSMsat WhIeb &amp; M,
akIa place no doubt at this moment -iamu p * be" use
gottisIst to b nds to the fat at inaty b
it live* In soe le of some of these 1a
laimfi ted eiaouui bvthe smientift vsft= dameinthis
Oft"-the Woft of the xmio~ e1ogists, the antL -Utis
thed ewebloglem 0t 1MLao dwnl oGmIl, n8o179I n gmtIs WIhn vtWhQea psmotdaAm
i~ sty -all these thJing lFaw not 1 d . y
to ' a wealth and khepeI ness but thhave, in Yu
aeems w lated to a w arbte E= me of WORK liWe.
iir i smetbingr that we a" e not to forgt In vie * ell -IN! t
at the moment of awne tsh~ aehbl Man * tielating Ideas*
I emse took the eppoctunitr of saylingt mo
the univer Itles, at the tin, wham the first SpuLNwenku
and ws to be soon 4r earnet obevr in th * t nkt It
mes imith e while of a lot of the people is the worldA who
waeloekiag at It and mrvoliag at It to remember that MAt
for the vowk partimularly of the numedl selemntists in this
emtury almiios of then woal4 not hae been there to see it,
go, as always*, w wast pulise ftms men and ' ederstand vbat
we are talkint about wbon w are talki of sosee not
a avl ht In all its " seta*
Xo%&amp; io In Australia have I thi nk, two tvs~ no s
Isterests in na~ ssttere, In % 1W rzt Plaee thl o Is n
the maders world, as a proomu of 4. volommat We* an a
eawtazat presemon the mat lewi, a omnstaat inflationary
rd tow em all the tWags that enter Into the est
twLand theee of omsev avo or -v0m1s ifterest,
ow Amovi. t tw man em the land9 to tb fb-Mreur' to tNo
gpesew ad# of lqrnie., of tlvvnisa Interest to ME other
people. No" e and in., q we ae coming to realse that the
right angw to this is not a blind attempt to g!! h basek the
tdqbut the right amewar is to Inorease our orf eiaW of
prodetIoin al Its aspects aid that tho right myto 40 that
Isr lrUZ r devoti" ov a&amp; nMosv soientifla stWW and
to gtoaaPulAtiSSO to the problem In band.
WQ~ W all gem love seem It In my ow liftI
bov the pidelsof wimat Wa improvedo how MMW areas lawe
oe AWr profitable mIUtVOUM that mW tiut to be arid.
Mat an eoms 4evelpmit tber. has been Ina tbe wool iMnftW#
in the sheep Industa7 Ir 0 blt tv eendo--i eeit
ares oeinwrlug awry 6% qiUU% p'eat inlust" ellri" AM
if you Wbaft far snougkL, It Is ver seldom just a happq aemlest#
it is isany the " esuit 6f the earefAl weft of s&amp; me Scientist
In tUs labmtoy a&amp; W of same applied sclentist In the Sn~ g~
flelde 00** 000 
2brow. tbois I qeif an so aeloutist
tholu I i~ f an beod Is the tweditIon of the ainmaties
and hes that tradition will always wvive I si
utterly euMVIWimott wo mt" Par A ia4M. S. Ing attotion
to alientitie tsaa to senetiflo dia'sWWlWyt9 io
aPPlise0tion If we are~ I be wn in the msrdk d time, if o
00VU7IS to hae 30= 9 WAn 10020 a to bmkand
anik Rpoepe fiem that p~ oloe l . abth WWseo the,
fulles of taim am buildig will at sLap: yhdoIng
somthiag that my smmday qua24 hin to told a paitimlr
Job or to tamn a Par'ticular Inmo* m B3e wi la thets be eas
of tbouands aking a osat1Wihtie to the uitXuS' adaommet
of the tiyo A the 1 e-out of the country and the
oMvaammest of the pseople and thed he Inins a-ut
tban auq Individual a ta etma lfil* iv h
first reeu Tbe sooem resoni is perhaps ist iaojated with
It. We boe a soupIdly-p'eving Pepulatiem we hoea emn
it 11 10i11100 A l In Axistalia, mimy aosniea
I fit Immv vhs i6 uate of Ausi NOWk te
are other 0amtrigss th V4t0% 1M into e8f2.0010110010
asI~ 4 just 401ging late aust MsseiMAO spum. 0
tiie a a fateulag may th esi ~ tatOf lf-. sen mt
The pepsiai of ( biaa Itself will probably be a tamsd.
plla at the ta of the ewtwu. The peu ofIna
Ww illion. The popuafte of IA i Ipts VWY now
to 100 ailitm We mvhw b4s, b.. ealagiaplay ~ e~
of Million of people in the ; W no iai n La settlod,
somm~: L~ o tv uag the amnities of life that we enjq,
lapasIty ro at wating tbm useiag than tmatrglIac twvds
them, 9 and owt owmW sa Ist it fM-lmdIas
that : It vast piadne selatist not wItself butttete
emutresLathe world baemess we bae a taUs m souutribation
to make if this owvwtd La to deowlep ad mintain Its pride,
SOWO its lsuuja-6m and to ha able to held up its beat IS the
ftll proes of what we sell medaihs OListIon
An sov flor the IM14oal# tt Whs, mtin, for
other grast ations In the venld, the study of * clanoe, the
attaining of the higbost possible standards, bovw beesm of
vital lapoatmmee. One of the reasonsWw1 L Be sotly * adire the
liciatiwe vook of the inbastril fnd end of those publiospirited
. stoma ftsot its affairs, Is that when I was
a seolb4 adeatiftle equipment was of a highly lUeantaN
kind Tda it bosoms note and oompea s nt at Ganes
as In a research univeity oart Il a univorsIty or the swml.
Sstill eoaplx and expesive as eapareod to the
iv apparsas of the pest. It Is mash mstly to
establish a selam theamtp in a MIniwersi then it is to
iestablish a arts tbeslty. ? u ta tooo people rLUn, with
s~ difflty, I tako It* hat you am toek people [ atla witk
the nialoolf of eqUIput. NYv xpewies. was aom beaks and
a teache with a gimlet eje ( aUghte.) fTat was the equipmt
that eold set you ping an the rood.*
* la L os" a it is big nom that Is mw ovnded,
This Involves baso~ oe eawi amd La the 1pm00140
flelA, dealing as I do with Whe UNiVORsieS, ofrAstella I
an ia* SraeSily . s Oaof this fact bollus the outay, ewe0
WO 00 
S se the Vst Nwey Ropet we adod lw vas9 6m
Itself 13Vthrb. yews* LAd this nsot ivtsl
to%: e f equigAjmt. ! h MW mtli~
this as a of pwsreeel experismee hs onm
Its am emtuibatmsp amasiwv as tqare es.
l1aSotoi J 4tet to seeiNg that oa jist ' mt an
agmabg, Ith pOd Ught Sming tMMKOnl too
va tholt yft hae. the UMesu of IthLLhhag
timof the Stmwt œ guim pep up to the
at vhiohk they to wis = Lppsty,
fepeooins out of bosaie
Swip dir that is all I west to Saq. I boe
s too Issas hIs a Ofem thing abiautih offset
I wll have to opt air xweem sf~ to GiplAmw It to as
Smetis a swig" s thin shout L f'ot 40the optic
jme, but it you Is*~ at a akleme, o a sth daft* as
lesgs 1have beft1O~ higat yo$ y iito PLAout a
ftv faoas and tht's hAwt has bow happening to mo* Iat
Is perhaps * 7y I be" spdm teo lang.
size at I wa't ObRth~ its msom hae
ak my Post doinl of . mtisgtioua nde] awig this lmdlding
OPS1 



EMBARGO NOT TO BE BROADCAST, TELEVISED, OR PUBLISHED
BEFORE MIDNIGHT, MONDAY, 8TH APRIL0
P. M. No. 32/ 1963.
FOR PRESS VISIT OF MR. T. T. KRISHNAMACHARI
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. T. T. Krishnamachari, Indian Minister
for Economic and Defence Co-ordination, will pay a visit
to Australia, arriving on the morning of Tuesday, 23rd
April. This arises from an invitation issued to
Mr. Krishnamachari on behalf of the Australian Government
by the Australian High Commissioner to India, Sir James
Plimsoll. He will visit Canberra and Sydney, spending a
couple of days in each place. He will meet the Prime
Minister and some senior Cabinet Ministers.
The main purpose of the visit is to have
a friendly exchanpe of views on the general situation and
to discuss matters of common interest to both Governments.
CANBERRA,
8th April I163o 



63/ 035
CENSURE MOTION
Statement in the House of Representatives by
the Rt. Hon. the Prime Minister Sir Robert
Menzies, on Thursday, 18th April, 1963.
I must say Mr. Speaker, that I listened, as I always
do, with great interest to the words of my old friend the
honourable member for Bonython ( Mr. Makin), who became, I
thought at one moment quite impassioned on this subject.
I do want to point out to him with all friendliness that he
fell into a few errors. He made a demand for parliamentary
control in this matter. Everything that has been done and
which is now the subject of attack has been done under
statute of this Parliament and through an instrumentality
set up under a statute passed by this Parliament.
I would have suggested to my honourable friend that
he be a little cautious about invoking the authority of
Parliament when, in the case of his own party authority has
been handed over to the 36 men. Honourable members opposite
may moan and may groan, but the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr. Calwell) would not be allowed to move a censure motion
here today unless it came within the authority of the 36.
Just remember that fact. Then the honourable gentleman
attacked the Act of Parliament. This is a censure motion,
and presumably, like its happy predecessor last week or the
week before, is designed to defeat the Government and produce
an election. It is wonderful to realise how passionately
fond the Labour Party has suddenly become of an election
fought on the television law. Already two elections have
gone by since the law was passed, and I do not recall the
Labour Party making a point of it at either. Of course, the
reason why it did not make a point of it in either election
was that it was convenient on those occasions to play for the
support of some, at least, of the commercial television
stations. Well Sir, that prudence has now been abandoned.
The Labour Party with authority, I trust, from its outside
36 has nailed its colours to the mast. In this debate it
has said ", Je are for nationalization of television. If we
come into office we will take the earliest possible steps to
wipe out the existing commercial television licences and put
the whole thing into the hands of the Government." No longer
is there any mystery about that policy. I hope it will be well
remembered when the time comes. In due course some time off
yet we will be having an election.,
Then, my honourable friend got rather heated, I thought
if I could apply such a word to so mild a man about a licence
being given to a wealthy group. I hope he will forgive me if,
looking at this report, I point out and I am reading the
names of applicants that I never heard of until we got the
report that Community Television Limited it was a splendid
arrangement is comprised of 1,000,000 shareholders of
shares held by returned servicemen and returned servicemen's
clubs; members and affiliated branches of the Australian
Labour Party ( Victorian Branch); and then, to my joy and
surprise, members and affiliated branches of the Liberal and
Country Party. I did not know they had this money. Then
esooosoooo/ 2 
2
the next class is Electronic Industries Limited they are in
for 1,000,000 shares and Electronic Industries Limited and
holders of ordinary shares in Electronic Industries Limited.
They are practically the same people, and they are in for
1,000,000, Then consider the directorate. This is a povertystricken
affair. My friend talks about the Government giving
a licence to a wealthy group. Bless my soul, 1,000,000 shares
out of 5,000,000, so far as I can judge from this document,
are in the hands of the Warners. I thought from what I heard
from the Leader of the Opposition that the Warners were
anathema. They are rather comfortable people when the Labour
Party and my party and somebody else wants to get a licence.
This is not a bankrupt show, I venture to say on the face of
it. Then my honourable friend says, " Is not this dreadful
that a licence is to go to a wealthy group?" I venture to say
that none of us in this House would want to sit down and concoct
an application for a licence, and find ourselves called upon,
by the inevitable logic of circumstances to find œ 1 000,000
or œ 2,000,000 and to have to carry a loss of œ 500,00 or
perhaps œ 250,600, before we got into the profit bracket.
I would become so excited at that prospect that I would become
unfit for further work.
Because our time is limited I want to point out a few
distinctions that have been overlooked by honourable members
opposite. I do not mind them moving a want of confidence
motion about television policy, but they have directed very
little attention to that. They have concentrated their venom
on the recent applications and the recent decisions. I just
want to say this: It is one thing for any governmont to
establish a royal commission which is designed to make
recommendations on policy. W! e have had those. We had a
celebrated royal commission on banking of which the late Mr.
Chifloy was a member. That commission mado a valuable report.
It was not binding on any government on either side. As a
matter of fact, it was a long time before any one of the
recommendations was taken up and put into effect. A royal
commission which is designed to produce policy recommendations
does not exempt the government of the day from accepting its
own responsibility on policy. That goes for a Labour Government,
I am sure, as much as it goes for mine.
But where you have as in this case, an Act of Parliament
which provides for the setting up of a broadcasting control
board, for the calling of applications for a licence and the
reference of applications to that statutory board and then
requires that statutory board to make a report and recommendations,
it is an entirely different matter. This is not a
broad question of policy. I think honourable members forget
that. Lot me talk about Victoria in this instance. The
Government called applications for a licence. About seven or
eight I have forgotten the exact number of applications
were received. The applicants formed companies and established
boards of directors. They spent thousands and thousands of
pounds in completing their financial arrangements and schemes,
engaging solicitors and counsel and in producing evidence. I
suppose that in the case of the Victorian applications and
it goes for everywhere there must have been sores of thousands
of pounds, and many wooks, expended in the making, pursuit, and
the hearing and criticism of the various individual applications.
a a e 9 a / 3 
It would be a very strange thing for a government to say,
when all that is over, " Sorry; you have wasted your tjme and
your money; we propose to pay no attention to the report
of the boardo" I give it to my honourable friend that if he had his
way there would not be a board and there would not be
commerciallicences I understand that but let him accept
the proposition and let everybody accept the proposition
that there is a law, that there are commercial licences that
there is a board, that there are investigations and thaI
there are reports all made under the law of this land. In
these circumstances, a government, I venture to say, having
received a report would need to have overwhelming reasons
before it rejected the recommendation. I am putting this
as a cold, hard matter of fact; it would need to have
overwhelming reasons because, if it did not and it said,
" We do not like this recommendation", what does it do then?
Does it say, " He is out; we do not care for this; send
it back for another enquiry; let everybody cone along once
more and we will have another investigation, or perhaps open
it up for other people," This is not real life, Would the
Opposition I invite them to consider this very carefully,
and I invite the people to consider it if it did not like
the nomination, say, " Right; that is finished; we will now
pick our own." I wonder.
I repeat that apart from two casual observations that
were made to me a week or two before this report became
available, I did not know who the applicants were in Victoria.
Now I do. I have seen their names, I might say to myself
that some of the reasoning in the report is quite unsatisfying
to my mind I could well say that but didI therefore
say. " No, I reject your nomination; on looking over the
list I am goinj to pick so and so" I wonder what would be
said then, It is a very interesting thing for honourable members
to carry in their minds, that the successfu, applicant has a
board, the chairman and'dominating man in which is Mr, Reg,
Ansett, whom I perhaps meet once a year, who has no political
affiliations that ever I heard of. Indeed, my first association
with him was when I was the Victorian Minister of Railways
and put through a transport regulation bill which put him off
the roads. Such bosom friends are we that that is the simple
truth, That is a fact, Anyhow, this is a man of enterprise.
He is tough. he is a driver; and he has undoubtedly achieved
remarkable things9 When I first knew him he was very
favourably regarded by the Labour Party, indeed, but now he
has succeeded and of course, that is fatal. But he has a
company, the board of which embraces, as we have been reminded
by the honourable member for Indi ( Mr. Holten) this afternoon,
a couple of gentlemon who could not by any stretch of the
imagination be regarded as supporters or admirers of the
Government. They include, of course, a celebrated Labour
candidate, Sir George Jones.
But if honourable members look back at the other one
what is its name? United Telecasters, it has nine men on
the board, eight of whom are, and have been for years, my
very close personal friends, but they did not get the
recommendation. This is what all this favouritism charge
is worth. Here are men, literally eight out of nine, who
are close personal friends of myself, some of whom I strongly
000a* / IF 
suspect may be supporters of the party that I lead, and the
board does not recommend that group, It recommends Ansett
Transport Industries, with no political associations except
to the extent that there are known hostile ones. I gets the
nomination. Can we as a Government now reject the recommendation
and substitute for it some choice of our own? If we had
substituted our choice; if we had, for example, selected Universal
Telecastors, the one of which Sir Frank Selleck is chairman,
I could imagine honourable members opposite being in such a
passion of rage that they would have had seizures.
Sir, the essence of this matter is that when you
establish an independent board and that board conducts exhaustive
inquiries, very costly to the parties concerned, you are not
entitled to reject the recommendation of the board except for
overwhelmingly powerful reasons and none, of course, have been
put forward. Time runs on and, therefore, I just want to turn to
another aspect of this matter. The honourable the Leader of
the Opposition knowing, because he is not without intelligence,
the force of these arguments, and knowing them in advance,
thought fit to conveit this discussion into what I can only
describe as a villainous attack on a series of people
wicked and villainous. I was shocked by it. If it had come
from other sources in his party, I would have understood it,
but coming from him I must confess that I was shocked by it.
What has he said about the matter? First of all he has
accused Mr. Ansett and his company because you cannot
distinguish them for this purpose of being bankrupt. This
is a terrible thing for a man to say under the cover of
Parliamentary privilege, to make a remark so actionable if
spoken outside Parliament that the honourable gentleman would
find himself ending up in the bankruptcy court. Let me remind
the House and let me remind the people of what he said about
this man who has battled his own way and achieved a remarkable
success. He said
" Ansett Transport Industries Limited has œ 6,000000
worth of assets of dubious valueand liabilities
amounting to œ 32,000,000."
If he had only troubled to look at the balance sheet of Ansett
Transport Industries Ltd, he would have found that the assets
were not œ 6,000,000 but 5,000 000 but he did not bother
about that; he set out to creato a false impression. He
continued to all intents and purposes the man is broke."
That is a nice thing to say, is it not, about a man conducting
a great service industry in this country he is broke. He
would not dare to say this outside Parliament. Then
" Anybody who has seen his balance sheet wonders how
he carries on. He carries on only because he has
the backing and support of this Government,"
all his obligations to which will have been discharged completely
by the beginning of next year. Then he goes on rashly and
says " He is the only man who has borrowed money at 8 per
cent, and &amp; 8 per cent. around Australia and been
able to survive, Korman has crashed, Hooker has
crashed...."
When did L. J. Hookers crash? I suggest to the honourable 00000.15 
member that ho say that outside Parliament and see what this
firm has to do about it. But, they have all crashed, and
he continues *" Ansett is the only one so far who has escaped."
It is a great pity that the honourable gentleman is so unconcerned
about the facts before he makes these charges because I just
want to tell him, if he likes to be told, that on the stock
exchange during the past twelve months, unsecured notes at the
rate of 8 per cent, interest were registered on behalf of
Australian Consolidated Press. I did not hear that it was
bankrupt. Ampol Petroleum had unsecured notes listed at
72 per cent. I had not heard it was bankrupt. Clyde Securities
had them listed at 8-per cent. Felt and Textiles, one of the
great textile industries of this country, is borrowing at 8 per
cent. Then we have General Motors Acceptance how bankrupt
they are borrowing at 8 per cent. and Humos Limited borrowing
at 8 per cent. The Overseas Corporation has unsecured notes
listed at 8 per cent, I do not need to protract the list.
The fact is that this was a monstrous untruth. If the honourable
member really wants to escape the condemnation of decent people
in this country, he ought to take the first opportunity to
retract it. So much for his charge against the Ansett Company.
But he does not stop there. He makes a charge of
dishonesty and corruption against the Government. Let us be
quite clear about this. He says that the Government told the
board what recommendation to make. He produced no evidence of
such a monstrosity. I am the head of the Governmant and,
until a fortnight ago, I had heard of no applicants at all, and
thon I heard cf a couple by accident. He charges the Government
with having said to the board, " This is what you are to recommend.'-
That is corruption if over there was.
I cannot imagine anything more dishonest than for a
government to suborn a statutory committee to forego its duty
and to make a false report not carrying its own judgment. But
that is his charge against the Government. Of course, his third
charge is against the board itself. These are reputable men.
They cannot stand up in this House and answer, and they cannot
take proceedings in the courts of the land for statements made
here. And these people are accused of having so far foresworn
their duty as to take instructions from the Government and then
go through the arrant humbug of conducting hearings, listening
to evidence and making a reporti The honourable member for
Eden-Monaro ( Mr. Allan Fraser) yawns, because this is his cup
of tea, this is his form; but it is not normally the form of
the Leader of the Opposition,
These are the charges, and I want everybody in Australia
to understand that these charges have been made without a skerrick
of support for them. He talks about a royal commission. I
wonder what he would say. Does he want a royal commission on
his charges with no parliamentary privilege, with himself
available to be put into the box to disclose the alleged sources
of his information? Of course he does not! We have had
experience of that before today. And so he says, " Let us have
a royal commission, not about these foul, damaging charges that
I have rade, but on the general question which was investigated
by a royal commission only a few years ago,"
5 o e */ 6 
6-
Si~ one thing that stands out crystal clear in
this debate, which I ' think is a valuable one is that the
Opposition, having set about the task of deszroying the
Government, is not for thie first time destroyed by its own
attack. In reality what emerges from it and whiat everybody
ought to take notice of in the cities and in the country is
-the fact that if the Labour Party came back into office,
commercial television would go out and people would be cj~ osed
up. They might let their licences run for a year or two,
but they are bound by their policy which is to close up
commercial television and put all the instruments of television
communication with the people into the hands of a government
body, which, if exper-ience counts for anything, will be
compelled by a Lbour government 4ob" tekeei h os
of Rimmon, This is a very simple debate from my poi*; nt of
view. If I may say so, it has been. a very enjoyable debate.
I have never felt so clearly that an attack w~ as so futile
or so doomed to disaster, 



No. AV961
AUBSTRLUA 1 WEDDING oT TO IR ROYAL HIGIIESS
PRINCESS ALEXANDRA OF X[ UT AND THE HON* ANGUS
OGILVY.
Statm n I hr he EPUrM initr2 1 the It-a irO rt Ibnies
Australia's gift to Hew r yal Higha ss
Prinoess Alexandra of Kent and the Honourable Angu Ogl3vy,
on the ooasion of tbher maria g, vill be a set of eight
candflestiks = de froma Astralian silver, the Prim. Minister
anoueed today. The oandlestiks are east and hand-chased in
silver, being w. epSrouetions of a set Mad in the " ism of
GOorgo III, about Uwyear 1761. Each candlestick is in
the shape of a fluted Cornthian coluom with a square
stopped base engraved with the Australian 0oat-o-Arus.
Tby are l1i inches over all.
The e&amp; nMlesticks are being made h the firm
of Hannll Sons Limited of Iondon ad the gift will
berented to the Prinoess and her huxbaad-tobe bO the
Austtlian High Osmissioner in leadon, Sir Bria Harrison.
The candlesticks will be contained in a p'sntation asse
and a silver plate on the ontside, of the gase bears the
inscription upnated to e Ucyal Higbaess Princess
Alexandra of Kent and The Honourable Angus Ogilvy with
warmest good wishes fro the Oovewent and people of
Australia. 2i4th April, 1963. w
The s. t of candlesticks is being made to
order t a design known to be favxmred bq Princess
Alexandra, The sot has not yet been completed and therefore
no photogphs are available* It is expected that the
presetation wil be ade a few weeks after 24th April and
photographs w4il be obtained for distribution tn..
CANURRA, 21st April, 1963. 



PRESS CONFERNC GIVEN BY Tni PRI14E MINIS TER, THE
RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES AT LENNONS HOTEL,
BRISBANE, ON 22ND APRIL, 1963w
QUESTION: PRIME MINISTER: Q. P. M. I was wondering, Sir, whether you felt satisfied
that the special assistance in loans and the
grants for public works given to Queensland in the
past year or two are bearing fruit. Do you feel
they are having the desired effect?
Oh, I think there are plenty of signs of improvement
in the result, because when it came to the
non-repayable grants to stimulate employment, as
you know we weighted it a bit in favour of Queensland
very properly because the incidence of such
unemployment as there is is, is heavier in Queensland
than elsewhere. I thinik on the whole, that
there are signs of improvement and in fact it is
very interesting to note that the Arbitration
Commission made the improvement in the country's
economy the principal reason for granting a ten
per cent, increase in margins in the recent
judgment and the three weeks' leave. I don't
think anybody doubts that there is a marked
improvement all round. That doosn't moan to say
that the position doesn't have to be watched.
There is to be another Loan Council of course
the regular one in June as a rule and it is
at that time that we discuss the Loan programme
for the States including the housing component.
The tax reimbursement, as we used to call it,
is, of course, the subject of a current agreement
and it increases each year in accordance with the
factors that the formula provides for such as
increase in population and children o1l school age
and so on. I can't anticipate what will happen
at the June meeting but Loan Council meetings
tend to produce an improving result each time from
the point o1' view of the States.
Has the success of the last Loan made it easier,
Sir, to go to the Loan Council?
Well, you can't answer that with a simple " Yes"
or There is no doubt about it that the
success of the last Loan has improved the Commonwealth's
cash position for 1962-63. We were
budgeting for a pretty substantial cash deficit.
That will, of course, be very much smaller than
we anticipated because of the success of the last
Loan and I think there is reason to believe that
the Loan market will continue to be healthy in the
next financial year. I don't mean to say that
we will have œ C601,1. loans doubly subscribed. That
is an uncommon event, but I think we can look
forward to a pretty healthy Loan market in
1963/ 64 and, of course, one of the great effects
of that from the Commonwealth's point of view is
that instead of supplementing the Loan market
as we have for many years out of the Budget so
that the States will get their full money, we can
reduce that drain on the Budget and to that extent,
it improves our Budgetary position. ./ 2 
-2-
Q. There is an active movement in North Queensland now
Sir, called " People the North'. I understand that the
Queensland and Western Australian Governments are joining
together to make an approach to the Federal Govcrnrento
P. M. Well that hadn't reached me when I loft Canberra. I
don't recall getting anything yet.
Q. The Premier was writing first to the Premier of Western
Australia and then they were goin-to write to the Commonwealth.
P. M. Anyhow, I am having lunch with the Queensland Cabinet
tomorrow and if there is something like this in the
wind no doubt Mr. Nicklin will take the opportunity of
raising it. But I wouldn't comment on it because I don't
know what it is yet.
Q. Sir, there is no particular project you would be discussing
with Cabinet tomorrow is there?
P. M. No, I have no agenda. When I come up here, I usually
like to see them and sit around and talk about our
problems. They are probably at the moment fairly
concentrated on their own because of an election coming.
Not a Federal election, but a State one. It is a good
thing to have contacts. As a matter of fact, in the past
our contacts were not sufficiently good with perhaps some
unhappy results but we have greatly improved that position
in the last eighteen months, both by meeting each other in
Canberra and here.
Q. Sir, what do you think of the suggestion that has been
made that the Snowy Mountains Authority shouldn't be
wound up as an organization when the Snowy job is over
but should perhaps use the accumiulated talents and
techniques
P. M. Well, at the moment, that is nothing but an idea,
Needless to say, it is one that we have had in our own
minds because we don't want to see a great, skilful,
technical organization like the Snowy Mountains Authority
just fade away, It is much too experienced and competent
for that, but exactly what you do with it in the future
is a matter that can't be solved by a few rhetorical
phrases. It requires a close study. The Minister for
National Development has not only been going into this
matter himself very closely but has several times
discussed it with me and with other Ministers. There is
no doubt about it that it would be a very good thing if
you could use a body of that kind. You have to remember
that all these works projects in Australia are in a prime
sense, State works. We have, ourselves, come to the
party on a number of them, but it is not just a simple
case of the Commonwealth saying, " This is what we will do
in such and such a place and we will use the Snory
Mountains people for it." These things require a lot of
negotiation with State Governmonts, just indeed as the
Snowy Mountains Scheme did. It took years to get the
legislation through, to give the thing complete
Constitutional validity by having an agreement between
Victoria and New South Uales and the Commonwealth That
took a long long time. It is quite true that we wont
ahead with the job but we were going ahead on a very
precarious Constitutional foundation until the agreement
0 / 3 
-3
P. M. was signed and ratified by the Parliament. When I say
( Contd.) that, I am not contemplating that it is going to take
years to evolve some other scheme. I don't know what
the schemes are; what there might be. Certainly you can
take it that we are interested in getting full benefit
of the Snowy Mountains set-up.
Q. Has Senator Spooner expressed any ideas on this?
P. M, No, well, we haven't got to concrete proposals. We have
been rather talking about the general principle. No, I
am not in a position to mention any particular schemes.
Anyhow, if I knew, I wouldn't say because you get
headlines " So and So is to be done by the Snowy
Mountains Authority". I am too old a horse for that.
Q# Decimal currency Sir. Views have been expressed up
here that the acLal changeover could lead to some
inflation-for example where things are close, they will
just up i a bit to get on to the now currency, the new
coin.
P. M. Jell, that can't apply to the main unit because that is
to be he precise equivalent of 10/-today. One thing
is that 1/ 100th part of 10/-is 1.2d. so perhaps you might
find that 19/ id. might become 19/ 1.2d. I can't say that
I think that it has got serious inflationary possibilities.
Q. This matter has been deferred once, Mr. Prime Minister.
Do you think that this time it will definitely be introduced?
P. M. Oh, yes. You are wrong in saying it has been deferred.
ije first of all said that we wore greatly interested.
We appointed a Committeo to investigate it. You know, this
outside Committee. Then, when we got their report, we
said we adopted it in principle and since then a lot of
investigations have been going on as to the mechanics of
the chnngeover. It is no use announcing a date for the
chsngeover unless you know that you can live up to it.
Woll, they have introduced it into South Africa and our
experts learnt a good deal from South African's experience.
Then, we arc in process of establishing the Mint at
Canberra. The site is at present being cleared and the
Mint, of course 9 will1 need to be so created as to deal
with the new coinage and finally, for the first time we
fixed a date, and this is a firm date, for it to come in,
because we are now satisfied that all the mechanical
problems can be overcome in that time. There will have
to be a great deal of changing, you know accounting
machines and all this kind of thing; this will cost the
Government, of course, a lot of money.
Q. Is there any room for the GovornmenttD pay compensation?
P. M. Compensation to whom?
Q. To the people who are grossly affected, who have machines.
P. M. Oh, there is going to be a provision that the Government
will meet certain costs of the changeover. I don't carry
the details around but I know that it amounts to a very
considerable liability on the Government, running into
what f. 301\ or œ E4OM, 0 a 0 0 0 4 0/ 4 
4-
Would it be any great advantage to Australia, Sir, if
New Zealand converts to decimal currency at the same time?
P. M. Well, it would simplify transactions between the two
countries but, of course, they are on a different rate of
exchange anyhow because New Zealand is on par with sterling.
I don't disguise from myself the fact that when it
ultimately comes in there will be a great deal of
hullabaloo you know housewives won't be very pleased.
They will say we have got used to the old business of
pounds, shillings and pence. But I have no doubt that
within a few weeks the complete simplicity of this will
recommend itself. You only have to be able to do a long
addition of three or four figures and you have got it.
The great fun is going to be getting aname for the unit.
Q. Have you any preferences, Sir?
P. M. Dear me, no, but I have seen some verr funny ones.
Somebody wants to call it a ming. I think that's rather..
( Laughter) Somebody recommended that we call it a
" dinar". These are not Ministers; these are people who
have written in to the Treasury. It makes pretty amusing
reading.
Q. Have you formed your own opinion, Sir?
P. M. No.
Q. There have been movements lately through local Government
associations on the State and Federal level, pressing
for representation on the Loan Council. Are they likely
to get anywhere with that, Sir?
P. M. I wouldn't think so. You see, muanicipal bodies are deait
with by the States. They are created by the State Parliaments
arid they deal with the State Parliaments. What
happens in the Loan Council is that the amount of the
Government Loan programme is fixed direct by resolution of
the Loan Council and then under what they call " 1the
gentlemen's agreement'", an arrangement is made as to the
volume of borrowing on semi-government and local government
account and as a rule, everything that doesn't exceed
œ-100,000 is regarded as local even though it is by a
semi-government authority and everything above œ-100,000
is treated as being a semi-governmient borrowing. And so,
they have been along once a year Ito say, " Could you increase
under the ' gentle-me-n's agreement' the amount that local
governing bodies can borrow?" and we did it this last
time, increased it by some millions because their market
was pretty fertile. In that sense and only in that sense,
we deal with local governing bodies in thoir borrowing, but
they make their representations through their State Governments
which, I must say in justice to them, are usually
pretty vigorous on behalf of the local governing bodies.
I don't think their case loses anything in its presentation.
Q. Sir, it has been announced recently that several large
industrial enterprises are being established in various
parts of Queensland. This will, 9 of course, put a fair
strain, I should imagine, on the State's ability to provide
housing. Is there any likelihood of the Federal Government
making a special grant to the State for housing? 0 0 00 00 
Well, we did last year, not at the annual Loan Council
but in a subsequent one and I don't know what the
possibilities are on that. I can remember when the
overall Loan programme was fixed, say at œ C250M to
take a figure out of the air the States have always
named how much they want of that. Ve have never
dictated that bit at all. They say, I'de want œ 040M of
that for housing, or œ C42Iv." 1 Well, œ 4OM or œ C42M it is,
That is their business from our point of view... Of
course there is a great deal of activity on the housing
front. You know the savings bank provision for
housing has gone up very considerably in recent months.
That is all the savings banks. The current rate of
building in Australia is just about an all-time record,
something over 90 000 houses. If special problems
arise in respect to any particular area, I have no
doubt we will hear about that from the relevant State
Government. It is a very good thing to see some of
these industrial shows moving in here. I noticed this
morning the B. H. P. is going to establish something.
That's very good.
Q6 Have you any thoughts on retirement, Sir?
P. M. Whose retirement yours?
Q1. I wish it was.
P The last follow who raised this had me in the House of
Lords as an Earl. I will announce my retirement some
day, I hope. It may be that my executors will have
to announce it.
Q. Do you expect to see another election, Sir?
P. M. Oh, yes, I hope so but you never know. The one person
who is not interested in thiis problem is myself.
Q. Sir, do you anticipate spending any time in the
Queensland ele ction campaign yours elf?
P. M. Oh, I don't know what arrangements they are making.
I wouldn't have thought I had much chance. I am here
today and tomuorrow and I hnve a by-election in Grey at
which I have agreed to make two or three speechies and
the House sits until May 25th. When is your polling
da to?
Q. 1st June,
PIM. 1st June is the polling date in Grey. So I wouldn't
have thought it likely. But as for the other Ministers,
dontt ask me, Have they delivered their policy speech
yet?
Q. No.
P. M. How long do you run a State election campaign here?
Q. The policy speeches are due to be given on the 7th and
the 9th May.
P. M. Then it is about three and a half weeks. Long enough
too.
Q1. Officially, it started on Friday with the issuing of
the writs. e9o 9 ee/ 6 
6-
IP. M . Still. it is a while before ti-iy do the policy speeches.
It doesn't got going until then.
Q. Are you satisfied with your own coalition relationships
over this Electoral Act and Redistribution?
P. M. Oh, yes, I am not upset. There are differences of opinion
about the redistribution but if you got hold of twenty
people in politics, you would have twenty different
opinions on redistribution I am not crying myself
to sleep about it. I hope wi will be able to got a fair
redistribution.
Q. Will the Liberal Party stand firm, Sir, for fairly equal
Federal electorates?
P1. M. You mustn't ask me what the Liberal Party is going to stand
firm about. There never have beon equal olectorates.
The law has been the same ever since we had an Electoral
Act. The Commissioners can allow twenty per cent. up and
twenty per cent, down with the quota and this is a
recognition that electorates are not just to be mechanically
equal, that circumstances vary between one electorate and
another. It would be pretty odd if Kalgoorlie to take
a gross example had the same number of voters as Kooyong
which you can travel around in an afternoon, And it
never has. As to what the differences ought to be or how
they ought to be achieved, these are problems that excite
differences of opinion. ' do are not to think of them as
purely along party lines because I daresay there are as
many different opinions on that matter in my Party as there
are on any other, We were ready to accept the last
redistribution on the principle that the Commissioners
had been appointed, that thoy had gone throughi the
processes and that as a matter of principle we ought to
accept what they did, though some of our Members didn't
like it very much because a man looks at his own electorate
and says, NWhatts happened here?"; but we, as a Party,
decided that we would accept thena on the principles which
I have described. That wasn't acceptable and so they are
all in the suspense account at present and of course if
they remain in the suspense account, Queensland doesn't
lose a seat. What's this Festival Hall like? The only time
I ever spoke in a stadium in Sydney a famous occasion,
I think it was in 1949, wasn't it? and a boxing ring was
in the middle and they had a microphone in the middle of
it an all-ways microphone and all the Comis. had
got in the first three or four rows round the hall of
this place; you had your back to half the audience and
your front to the other half and I walked around this
microphone like a teetotum. and from first to last I
didntt hoar a word I said. I had to go back to the pub
afterwards and listen in to see what had happened.
You cantt hear yourself think when you have got an
organised show. You can't look your audience in thoeye
only a bit of it at a time and you don't know whether
you are beginning your sentences or ending your sentences.
This is really an appalling attitude. When I got back to
the hotel, they were rebroadcasting it and I said to my
wife, " By Jove this fello~ irts not bad, Who is he?"
And she said you." " Wfell " 1 I said, " wonders will
never ceasce I wouldn't want another of tho if I wranted
to get a mess,-ge over to the public. For an evening's fun,
there is a good deal to be said for it, but not if you
want to convert people. e . e ese.. .7 
7
Q. What do you expect to speak on tomorrow night, Sir?
POMP Oh, I dontt know. I have prepared my mind on a number
of matters but which onos I will decide on I don't
know yet.
Q. You haven't got a big upstairs gallery at this
place, Sir. Right at the back of the hall, there
is just a little one, It is not like the City Hall
which comes all round. So most of the audience is
on the floor.
PM. Wh at are the acoustics like? Have they got a
public address system?
I think it is quite all right. 



PUBLIC MEETING AT FESTIVAL HALL BRISBANE
ON RDAPRIL, 196.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon, Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Hulme and Ladies and Gentlemen
The acoustics in this hall are not half as good
as the audience because I have been sitting behind my friend,
the Chairman, and I didn't hear a word that he said but I did
hear a few glancing references to " Pig-iron" so that I knew
my old friends, the Commos, were hereo ( Applause)
Now, I just want to offer one piece of advice to
all of you in the audience if you want to register into my
ear, you must not all talk at once, Do you mind? Just take
it in turn and then I might hear you2 and, of course, I would
love to hear you. I would enjoy tha a Already I have heard
enough to be able to congratulate my friend Mr, Nicklin, on
his assured victory at the next election, ( Applause) because
when our opponents scream, they're in trouble, Now, don't
destroy your voice. Don't become too hoarse too quickly or
for that matter, too donkey too quickly. You please yourself.
Now, I'll explain to you, my dear fellow, that there is an
echo in this hall which makes it impossible for me to understand
what you are saying. Therefore, you are wasting your time.
But I want to say something tonight about matters which concern
my Government, the Commonwealth, and the nation of Australia.
Somebody over hjro says " You are not a Government." ihen he has
been Prime Minister by the election of the people as long as
I have, I invite him to get up and tell us, ( Applause)
Now, first of all, ladies and gentlemen, I just
want to say something to you, in spite of all this, about what
has happened in Australia in my own time, what has happened in
Australia since you've had the Commonwealth Government you now
have the Commonwealth Government, I beg you to remember, which
has been voted for by the people of Australia six times. Six
times, ( Applause) Sir, the Labour Party. I can speak freely about
the Labour Party, can't I, because you're not a Labour man ( to
interjector); I can tell that, The Labour Party is very fond
nowadays of getting up and saying, sometimes with one voice, and
sometimes with 36, that Australia has really gone to the dogs
we are in a state of acute misery in Australia and, of course,
particularly in Queenslando They are willing to say that because
they have hopes in Queensland; rather sketchy hopes but still
hopes. I wonder if I might remind the Labour Party that it
really contributed mighty little to the development of this
State, in fact discouraged investment in this State. I'd
like to remind them and if you can listen as well as roar,
you might consider those figures.
The tobacco industry is a great Queensland industry
and a growing one and, no doubt in spite of your poverty, my
dear boy ( to interjector), you are a great customer of the
tobacco industry, ( Applause) When the Labour Government was in
office the Commonwealth Labour Government they managed to
screw themselves to the point of requiring that 2-per cent of
cigarette tobacco should be Australian-grown. Today, under my
Government, and in current terms with the great assistance of
my colleague down here the Minister for Primary Industry the
percentage is not it is 40 per cent. ( Applause) And in
/ 2 
2-
the result, up at Mareeba and Dimboola, œ 3M worth of tobacco
is being grown. Tobacco which was an unwanted rather doubted
industry in Australia has become a major industry,
What else has happened? Up in the north of
Queensland, we have been seeing a new era of development
which is of supreme importance to Australia the great
bauxite deposits, the great uranium discoveries. I don't
remember that the Labour Party had anything to do with these
matters, The great sugar industry ( Interjector " What
about the worker?' Yes, he says, " What about the worker?"
that is an almost Edwardian expression: " What about the worker?"
( Applause) It's absolutely wonderful " What about the worker?"
Well, I'll tell him. I suppose that what he calls the worker,
the employed man or woman, in this State has some interest in
the fact that whereas when we came into office, the great sugar
industry in Queensland exported half a million tons of sugar
I'm not talking about money, I'm talking about quantity and
what is it today? A million and a quarter tons or more ( Applause).
Well, now, my colleague sends me a signal to say I am underestimating
it. All I know is that it has practically quadrupled
over the term of office of the present Government.
I wonder if I might make a delicate reference to
the great subject of pig-iron. Pig-iron and ingot steel these
are two of the great pointers in industrial production in
Australia and since we have been in office the production of
these two commodities has trebled today. 1 11 explain to some
of you boys what I mean by trebled three times as much today
( Applause) as there were when your boys were in officeo
Sir, I don't need to go through all these things.
Wevve had the most tremendous development in this country, New
industries every year. I was reminded this morning if I may
refer to the subject of coal, that when the Labour Party was in
up to 1949 for eight years ( to interjector " That's right
Happy DaysS) we were importing coalo We were so happy thaz
we had blackouts and power shortages and we, Australia, were
importing coal from India and from South Africa and paying
through the nose for it, Today, under a non-Labour Government,
Australia is exporting coal as well as using far moro coal
internally than she ever did before0 ( Applause) And some of
your friends, my boy, ought to be pleased about it, because up
at Gladstone, there are a few good, sound unionists who have
jobs in the handling of coal for export, who wouldn't have had
them at all but for what has happened over the last ten years.
Now, Sir, in this rather gay and friendly atmosphre,
I am not going to occupy your time by quoting a lot of statistics
and therefore, well, I know I wouldn't waste statistics on
you ( Laughter, Applause) but I want to turn to another matter
which I am sure will infuriate some of the exports around the
room, We have had in Canberra, ( I suppose you can mostly
hear me, can you?) in che last three weeks two motions of " No
Confidence" by this powerful Opposition that we have at Canberra,
They came along and breathed deep the night air at the Kurrajong
Hotel or wherever it was what was it, the other one, the
Wellington Hotel or something; they came along reinforced by
a vote of 19 to 17, which would have been 18 all and therefore
negative, but for a statesmanlike act by the Queenslander well,
now, I would have thought you would have applauded that.
ee aeea/ 3 
3
They came along and they had two goes at us. I have never
enjoyed two debates more, I have never felt so convinced that
a Labour Party is on the way out ( Applause) ( Boos) Now, ladies
and gentlemen, if you dontt mind me engaging in a little bit
of autobiography, I have been a Leader of the Opposition myself
and I know what it means and I know that an Opposition Leader
must occasionally move a vote of " No Confidence", It keeps the
boys together. It takes their minds off their troubles, and
we have had two, and the first of them seemed to have something
to do with international affairs and, as a matter of fact we
didn't assume an attitude of defence, we went on to the attack
and if ever an Opposition moving a " No Confidence" motion was
thrashed to its feet appropriate expression in this hall it
was the Labour Party on that censure motionø Their trouble was
that they know that Australia, whatever else it may think about
this or that, is quite determined to be free and secure in future.
Therefore, we decided that we would find out where the Labour
Party stood on these matters, and what did we get? What did we
get? We got, first of all, this extraordinary attitude that
they have about the signalling station in the North West of
West Australia. ( Interjector " What will it I' 11 tell
you what it will do, and believe me, Sir, if you understand what
I say to you now, don't waggle your finger at me if you
understand what I am saying to you, you will be better informed
than any of your cobbers in the Opposition because they have
never succeeded in understanding ito The Americans, the United
States of America, they are our allieso Do we all realise that?
( Applause) They are our allies, We and New Zealand ( to interjector
Well don't you like them to be allies?) Really what
have we come to? We and New Zealand are their allies in tho
ANZUS pact, just as we are also associated with them in the
South East Asia Treaty Organization, I wonder if anybody would
like to report that on a reference to the United States being
our ally, a few cheapjacks in this audience counted them out.
Is that the Queensland view? Is that the view that you want to
That's right ( voices counting out). That's exactly what
I expected. Yes, take a good picture, boys. They'll get all
the publicity, This is the usual thing. Wonderful. They ought
to get the Stalin Medal with a bit of luck. ( Cheers and Applause)
You know the interesting thing about those lads? They stand up
straight, but they can't think straight, ( Cheers, Applause).
Now ladies and gentlemen, what is the purpose of this
signalling station? I would like to tell you. The purpose of
it is to enable communications to occur between the United States
and United States naval forces in the Indian Ocean and the South
West Pacific. They have these facilities.... ( More counting
out by interjectors) By Jove, this is the first time that I ever
heard that the Pope was a Communist. ( Applause) Really, you
boys would make anybody laugh, Well trained, no doubt well paid,
Get a picture of them. That's the object of the exercise. All
over the press tomorrow, " The Pope calls for peace." All I am
saying is that if we want peace for ourselves in Australia, if
we want security for ourselves in Australia, it's time we woke
up to the fact that in this part of the world, the friendship,
the generosity the power of the United States is essential to
us. ( Applause PUhy does the Labour Party object to this
signalling station? Well, I confess I am wrong because by a
majority of 19 to 17, they decided they were in favour of the
signalling station, provided that if a war occurred, and the
signalling station was therefore needed, it couldn't be used
000 00 0/ 4 
4
except by the permission of the government of the day in other
words: " Yes America, spend œ 50M or œ 60M or œ 70M, put up this
signalling station and when the day comes that you need it, we
give you notice that if there's a Labour Government in Australia,
you won't be allowed to use it at all." ( Boos) If anything
has been made crystal clear, it's that.
Now, I wonder why the Labour Party has this extraordinary
view. Is it anti-American? ( To interjector Well,
I am very glad to have your answer, Sir, that it is not anti-
American) Does it believe that in the event of a great
conflagration in the world, Australia can defend herself without
friends or without allies? Does the Labour Party believe that
because nobody else does. The simple fact is that if we expect
the United States to do things for us, we must be prepared to
do things for the United States, ( Applause) ( Interjector
" What about Great Britain?" Not so powerful as she once was but
with tremendous significance in the old world. We expect Great
Britain to do things for us, We are prepared to do things for
her, The whole curse that has come upon the Labour Party
is that it has become isolationist in the last few years. It
wants to pretend that if it puts its head in a bag and looks
in the other direction inside the bag nothing will happen and
we will be left alone. And if we wanz any further proof of that,
we have only to look at the fantastic proposal of the Labour
Party that the whole Southern Hemisphere should be a nuclearfree
zone. ( Yells and cheers from interjoctors) Of course this
is what they are cheering. The whole Southern Hemisphere is to
become a nuclear-free zoneo What about the Northern Hemisphere?
They haven't said anything about that. Let's stick to the
point. The Labour Party has agreed that the whole Southern
Hemisphere is not to have, store, manufacture or receive or use
any nuclear weapons and that goes for the whole area of the
world south of the Equator, It goes for South Sumatra, but it
doesn't go for North Sumatra. It goes for Indonesia and for
New Guinea and Australia but it doesn't go for Thailand; it
doesn't go for Burma, it doesn't go for North Viet Nam, it
doesn't go for Communist China. And therefore, we have this
extraordinary proposition being put up: We, in the Southern
Hemisphere will say nobody can bring a nuclear weapon to our
defence south of the Equator, but north of the Equator, the
only aggressors in the world, the Communist powers, can make
use of them to their hearts' content, and if the time comes
( more jeering and yelling). These boys, of course, are great
exponents of free speech. We notice that. They are delighted
to have somebody express his mind and to give them provocation.
I would express my mind about them with even more delight. But,
anyhow, I am going back to my topic.
My topic is that this policy is one in which you
confine nuclear weapons to north of the Equator and you leave
the countries south of the Equator defenceless against them.
Absolutely defenceless against them. ( Interjector " Rubbish")
You say " Ribbish", but let me put this to you. Lot me put this
to you. The United States, I hope you will concede is our
ally, and the United States is significant to us and the United
States has naval forces in the Indian Ocean, including, of
course, naval vessels, either carriers or submarines or aircraft,
which carry nuclear weapons and it may well be in the event of
a great war that the capacity of the Western powers to attack
the Communist stronghold by nuclear weapons will depend upon
their control of the Indian Ocean, their capacity to use the
* 0 a O 
Indian Ocean for those purposes. But according to the Australian
Labour Party, they are not to be allowed to use the Indian Ocean,
except North of the Equator, they are not to be allowed to bring
their vessels into the Indian Ocean if they are armed with
nuclear weapons, unless they bring them through the Straits
of Malacca where they can be closed overnight and counted every
day, in any event, or bring them through the Suez Canal. Now,
I ask you, ladies and gentlemen do you want the United States
to think we are a lot of half-wits? Do you want them to suppose
that we are bogus in our attitude of friendship with them, of
alliance with them, because the best way to do that is to vote
into office a Labour Government with the views that I have been
putting and I venture to say that our alliances in a useful
sense with the United States will come to an end,
Now I am talking about this matter because I don't
want anybody to be under any misapprehension. I am very familiar
with the views of various people around the world. ( Jeering
slow clapping, shouting and yelling) Isn't it wonderful? This
shows that they are on the wane because the moment the Labour
Party becomes overwhelmed by its Communist friends and they all
start preventing people from listening, that's the end of it.
( Cheers and applause) Thank you, ladies and gentlemen. I
want to say to you you won't have any doubt of the truth of
this, though they do: The majority of the people of Australia
are decent people, ( Applause) which distinguishes them sharply
from some of these. Decent people. And what's more, they are
not only decent people but they are sensible people and they
know that the future of this country is tremendously involved
in us maintining our contacts, our alliances with the great
free powers of the world. ( Applause)
Sir, I was very interested to discover what the
Labour Party's policy was on these matters and indeed I took
the opportunity of pointing out, in the course of the debate,
how many of the front-bench Labour men and I presume they
were expressing the views of the 36, the 36 faceless men who
run the Labour Party several of them were at great pains to
say, " What's Malaya got to do with us, Wny should we have
forces in Malaya? Why should we worry about what happens in
relation to Malaysia? Why should we worry about anything
except what happens inside Australia?" Now that's the Labour
Party's policy, Di-me, my distinguished opponent is, I believe,
speaking in Brisbane somewhere tonight you know, the Member
for East Sydney. ( Yells and cheers) Well give him a cheer.
You're exactly his type. Give him a cheer. And I am told
he's here. Do you remember when he invented a story about the
Brisbane Line ( shouts and yells) Yes, invented a story about
the Brisbane Line and went before a Royal Commissioner and
pleaded privilege and said, " I can't give evidence; I have
parliamentary privilege." You must, some of you, remember this,
All I can say is, that if this business of the Labour Party, if
their policy to warn off the Americans, to control them at the
North-West Cape to ban any nuclear rovision in the Southern
Hemisphere, if this succeeds, it won't be the Brisbane Line
that they will be up to, it will be the Hobart Line or the South
Pole Line, ( Applause) Now, Sir, that is all I need to say
about that matter, There are a lot of people in this hall
tonight and a lot of people listening in who really understand
that it is the first duty of a Government to attend to the
security of the nation, that the security the safety of the
people is the supreme law, They know that, and therefore they
will be in a good position to judge the worthlessness of these
evasive, isolationist policies on the part of Labour, 
6
Well, now I just turn to another matter, because
we have had two " No Confidence" motions. I don't know how
many more we'll have.... ( Interjector " You'll get one
now") I welcome them, ny dear boy. I welcome themo But,
my dear fellow, didn't you listen in? Didn't you listen in
to the debate? Didn't you realise that the Labour Party was
thrashed on both, not only in the division, but in the
House? Come, core, you must do yourself justice. But the
second " No Confidence" notion had to do with television and
it was a very interesting one. Very interesting. It is
quite true that the Leader of the Opposition fell into the
error of making some outrageous charges of corruption and
dishonesty against people who were not involved and that I
find it very difficult to forgive. But at any rate, what did
happen was that the Labour Party explained its policy on
television. How? ( Shouts and jeers) Well in your case,
put it under the control of the Comintern. I understand
that. But to nationalise all television.
Now letts understand what this is: Every country
television station run by a local company, aery city television
station run by a company to be closed down; either at the
end of its current licence if they are being respectable,
or closed up with or without compensation, so that when we
turn on the television at night we will be privileged to
look at the one station run by the Government. Now that's
their policy. And, having stated that policy repeatedly, they
then began to support it by the rather villainous argument
that I referred to,
Now, ladies and gentlemeno this is something worth
thinking about, This television is something new in
Australia. It has boon introduced in our own tine, not in
a hurry and it has now been going and spreading and extending
for a few years. Does anybody in Australia wish to have a
Government monopoly of television? ( Interjector " What
about private enterprise?") Jell, exactly, you talk about
private enterprise. He's in favour of private enterprise
now. ( Laughter) He's in a confused state of mind, I think,
my friend down there. He wants private onterprisoe What I
am saying to this great audience is Do you want to have a
Government monopoly on television? ( Interjector " Yes")
Good. He has ambitions to be in the Government. ( Laughter)
A government monopoly in television, a government monopoly
in broadcasting sane sort of thing is that what we want?
A few rather feeble yessos. I imagine if I an any judge of
an audience that 90 per cent. of the people here tonight
don't want to have a government monopoly of television,
( Sustained applause) If they don't they had better take
a little more care how they vote at the next election than
some of them did at the last.
Now, ]. et's face up to it because here is a
Labour Party, publicly and solidly pledged, and repeating
it in the House to nationalise television, to wipe out
commerecial broadcasting over here he says, as if he is
talking to himself " Liars" ( Lnughter) If I thought you
could read, I would advise you to read the Hansard because
we went to great pains to have this established in the House,
and it is established beyond the slightest chance of contradiction.
And the Labour Party? Well, it's in a funny state.
It's a messed-up Party. It really is. I am almost sorry
for it at tines. ( Laughter) ( Applause) It is just muddledup,
the Labour Party, They sit down and they say, " Well, 
-7-
we ought to do this." For example, I think this is rather
amusing. There was a television licence to be issued in
Melbourne and one of the applicants had two directors representing
the Labour Party ( Interjection inaudible.) Oh, no. The
two directors representing the Labour Party. And they had one
or two extraordinarily well-to-do capitalistic types sitting
on the Board and they made their application, but it turned out,
when the House was meeting to discuss this matter, they didn't
believe in private enterprise even with Labour directors, they
must have their monopoly. And, finally, the Broadcasting Control
Board recommended, in the case of Victoria, the application by
Mr, Ansett's group. Oh, this was very, very unhappy. After
all, the Board recommended it and the 3oard recommended it
unanimously, and after all, one of the directors of the Ansett
group is a well-known Labour candidate in Victoria Sir George
Jones not likely to be a supporter of mine or of ours. But
the Board recommended the Ansett group and we said, " Very well.
We accept the recommendation."
SNow that, I would have thought, would have ended it,
because Parliament established this Board, Parliament passed
the law. Under the law passed by Parliament, there is a Broadcasting
Control Board; the Board is an independent body and
every application for a licence has to be referred to it and
people come along eight or nine of them in each case, and
spend thousands ol pounds on presenting their case to the
Board and the Board makes a report, and we accepted the Board's
report, I wonder what the Labour Party would have done.
( Interjector " Don't worry about the Labour Party") I'm not
worried about the Labour Party. I am only talking about the
Labour Party because I think there might be a few noodles left
who want to vote for them, ( Cheers, applause) Suppose Labour
had been in office, what would they have done about it? Would
they have rejected the report of the Board? Would they have
selected a few of their own friends? ( Sustained slow clapping)
There you are, you have got the answer. They would have given
a slow clap. That's it and while everybody was saying what
dumbbells these are, the Labour Party, no doubt, would have
either given the licence to one of its friends, or would have
said, " The whole thing is cancelled; we are going to have
a complete Government monopoly of television" because that is
its policy. Now ladies and gentlemen, I have spoken to you
about those matters because I think they are modern, they are
quite contemporary. We have thrashed them out in the House, and
I don't propose at this stage to occupy your time any longer,
but I do take the opportunity of saying that there has been
no great Party in the history of Australia ever to have won an
election by larrikin tactics. No great Party. ( Applause)
All I can do is to express my deep sympathy to my Labour
opponents for some of the curious characters who allegedly
support them on the fringe. 



MEETING OF REPRESENTATIVES OF WOMEN
ORGANIZATIONS ARRANGED BY THE 4OMEN'S SECTION
OF THE LIBERAL PARTY IN BRISBANE ON
23RD APRIL, 1963.
Speech by the Prime Minister_ the Rt. Hon Sir Robert Menzies
I've never discovered quite accurately how one begins
Madam Chairman is that right? ( Laughter) There is a certain
ambiguity about that, but still, wetll let it pass,
I want to thank you very much, in the first place, for
having congratulated me on this event that has recently occurred
in my life. The truth of the matter is that any properly
constituted man finds it almost impossible to say " No" to a
woman ( Laughter) and that is the whole story in brief. All The
Queen had to do was to smile and say, " Now, come, come. What
about it?" and I was sunk with all hands. Some people thiink
that it is in my nature to be given the Order of the Thistle
( Laughter). The motto of the Order is done into English
" Nobody hurts me ( or frustrates me) with impunity". One or two
of my Cabinet colleagues were unkind enough to say when it
was announced that they had known that for many, many years
( Laughter) and thought it quite appropriate. But the best
translation of the lot is in the Scots, where its version is
" Who dare meddle with me?" ( Laughter) You Sassenachs won't
understand that, but all the rest will.
Now, I thought I'd like to talk to you quite briefly
this morning about one or two matters of importance. In the
first place, I am going to tell you at once, to relieve your
minds, that I don't propose to run through a whole series of
figures and facts and give you categories of this or that because
nothing is more tiresome I think, and nothing more difficult to
carry around with you, But I think it proper to say and it is
worth while everybody realising, particularly in Queensland,
that in recent times the amount that has gone on in this State
and is going on, of a developmental kind, with the active and
powerful assistance of the Commonwealth is quite remarkable,
There are some people who think that all you need to
do, if you are going to get some help from the Commonwealth
which means from the taxpayers, is to go along and say, " This
is a pretty good thing to do-what about you paying for it?"
Now, this is not right. The Commonwealth does not carry out the
public works, for example, that the States do. We do to a
limited extant, in our own field. Most of the great public
works in Australia, the great works of development, are State
works, but increasingly the Commonwealth is becoming a contributor
to their cost and we have laid down a rule that there must
be some limit to this kind of thing, some rational limit,
We have laid down a rule that we will be prepared to examine
with a State Government the possibility of financial assistance
for a particular job of work, if that job of work can be related
to the export earnings of Australia.
You see, we have a great responsibility for keeping
this country internationally solvent and that means that we
must have our exports constantly increasing, so that we may
have oversea. s, held in various forms, adequate sums of money to
preserve the solvency of Australia in the international market.
It is a complicated matter, I don't want to look beyond that
point, but it is essential that our export industries should be
oooocoooo/ 2 
-2
encouraged, That is why it is so essential that we should
restrain inflation in Australia because the first industries
to suffer with inflation are the primary industries which are,
to an overwhelming extent, responsible for oir export earnings
sugar, wheat, meat and so on down the listl
Now we have laid down thtis general rule and if I may
apply it to the State of Queensland, it may be interesting.
I don't take them in any particular order, but take the great
railways converton on the Mt. Isa/ Collinsville lines. It turned
out to be impossible to raise the money, to borrow the money
from the World Bank, although at one stage, we had great hopes
that that could be aone and so the Commonw.. ealth Government
stepped in and said, " We will act in place of the 4orld Bank.
Wo will finance this up to the extent of œ 020M,.
Now œ Z2014 is a lot of money. Even for an Opposition,
it is a lot of money, Why did we do this? Well, we did this
because Mt. Isa has every prospect of being the greatest copper
minint hewordand whereas copper was in very short supply
oiny an fewoersd ago there is an increasing chance of a
substantial export market in copper, to say nothing of the
extent to which it saves us from importing copper in the first
instance. ] herefore this is a great export earner and if it
could be doubled or quadrupled that is what is going on at
Mt. Isa then the earnings from the mine are doubled or
quadrupled and that is of tremendous significance in Australia's
balance of payments. Therefore, we are certainly in on this.
Take a small example ( the other is a very big one)
the coal facilities at the port of Gladstone, Now it may seem
a little odd that the Commcnwdualth should come in to Some modent
extent about œ C250,000 on some coal-handling facilities at
a port like Gladstone, but the same principle was applied. The
principle was that if these facilities were increased, then
an export market frcm the port of Gladstone in coal could be
created. We have done the same with coal ports in New South
WA~ ole S Now you may say, " Oh, well, this is all raother
humdrum." It isn't humdrum. When we came back into office
at the end of 1949, after eight years of Labour administration,
Australia wan' exporting coal, Australia was importing coal.
Many of you will remember it. Importing coal. Buying coal
from India, buying coal from South Africa; and because shipping
was scarce in those days, paying the most tremendous freight
rates, charter rates, in order to land the coal in Australia.
Although Australia is full of coal, we were importing it, so
declined h. ad the fortunes of the country become. And, today,
of course, we have an export market in coal. It becomes
increasingly important. The production of coal has gone up
by leaps and bounds and so has its export, and therefore we
said, " Here's a case in which there is a chance to improve the
export earnings of Australia."
Similarly, and Itll still stick to Queensland, you
take the beef roads up in the north, where we are providing,
over a short term of years, œ_ 81 or œ F914, mest of it by way of1
grant, in order to construct properly a series of beef roads
which will onab'e a bigger out-turn of cattle from the cattle
lands to be made. This, of course, will add very very
considerably to the export earnings of Australia because let us
000ae 00oo/ a3 
-3-
remember all the time that while you may look at it as the
export earnings of John Brown or of the Mt. Isa company or
whatever it may be, in reality in the broad, this goes into
the great stream of export earnings of the country itself and
if our exports exceed our imports, then we arc accumulating
reserves overseas, If ve don't accumulate reserves ovrseas,
then we are just like a household in which there is no money
in the bank, no savings made, nothing to fall back on for a
rainy day and we musn't allow the nation to be in that State.
There is a great development going on or about to
go on in the Brigalow country and we have undertaken to find
millions of pounds in relation to that, and why? For the
same reason. It will increase the production of exportable
commodities beef, meat of various kinds, whatever the products
may turn out to be.
Now, I am sorry to be tedious about that, but I wanted
you all to understand the principle on which the Government
acts in these matters. It is not just a matter of kissing
going by favour. It must never be a matter of saying " Iell,
we will do that job because there are some votes in it." This
is pretty cheap stuff and politics of a poor order. We have
therefore established the principle that we must be shown first
by a State Government that the operation will come in aid of
the national exports and if it is, then we sit down and we get
down to brass tacks and in a great number of cases we have
helped. We have done it in oJestern Australia. We are about
to do it in South Australia. Wc have done it to a certain
extent in Victoria, though perhaps not as much as the Victorians
would like, Now, so much for that.
The other thing I want to mention to you has nothing
to do with that. It is far removed from it. There has been
a groat deal of argument going on recently about disarmament and
about nuclear-free zones in the world and about a communications
station, an American station, in the North-viest of Western
Australia. I thought I would just like to say a few words to
you about those matters because there is nothing on which there
is so much confusion of thought, particularly among my opponents
who have got it all messed up in their own minds and it is
essential to keep it clear.
First of all, you must realise that the Labour Party
approaches it from the point of their firmly-established
policy that there should be a nuclear-free zone in the Southern
Hemisphere. That is to say, in the Southern Hemisphere no
nuclear -, capons are to be made or stored or used. Now that
sounds wonderful, doesn't it? Vie don't want a nuclear war.
Who does? but we want nuclear power because unless we had
had it, we would have been at war long since. But it sounds
rather attractive to say, " Well, now, you can put the whole of
the world south of the Equator out of the nuclear arena. What
would that moan? Just in the name of coraonsense, what does
that mean? It moans that China, Communist China, north of
the Equator has no prohibitions about nuclear weapons but we,
south of the Equator would. So we couldn't have our allies
use nuclear reapons in our defence but Communist China could use
them against us without reprisal and with impunity. Does
that strike you as a very sensible policy? If ever I knew
anything unrealistic, it is that. And this thinking, this
thinking which would put us in the position of absolutely
letting down our allies and therefore being let down by them,
/ 4 
is pretty widespread. We happen and it is to the credit
of the present Government let me say we happen to have two
treaties in which we are in alliance with the United States
ANZUS United States, Australia, New Zealand and the
SEATO treaty in which Great Britain is also one of our partners.
Not that we need to have formal alliances with Great Britain,
but we are together, whatever comes.
But talk about America for this purpose.
America is the greatest free power in the world. If it
weren't for the enormous deterrent strength that the United
States has, this world could have been overrun at ease by the
Communist powers. What could have stood in the way? Therefore
the United States is very important to us. You, you ladies,
the custodians of the future of Australia, have a profound
interest in the security of Australia and the security of
Australia depends more than any other thing on the alliances
that we have in this part of the world with the United States
of America. Great Britain can do something here but sh-e has
enormous tasks elsewhere in the world. We have the United
States and the ANZUS pact and so on.
Do you realise that this Labour policy means
that if the United States became involved in a great war
with Communist China and that would be a world war on a
great scale that the United States couldn't attack Communist
China from any point south of the Equator and would therefore
be utterly handicapped in conducting operations of war.
Suppose look, God knows we don't want it; we pray against
it but suppose the world got into a great war, with the
United States and Great Britain on one side and Communist
China and Communist Russia on the other, and we as one of the
prizes of defeat or victory, and we have an alliance with
the United States can you suppose that Australia would
approve of telling the United States, " You can't have a
submarine with a nuclear weaponon it; you can't have an
aircraft carrier with a nuclear weapon on it; you can't have
an aircraft with a nuclear weapon on it south of the Equator,
otherwise you are breaking the rules that we have laid down.
The effect would be to destroy the Unites Statest capacity
to attack the Communist powers from the south from a point
from which they are most vulnerable the Indian Ocean and
its surroundingsø We would simply immobilise our own ally
and, of course, the United States, indeed no great country,
can trifle with its own safety in that way. It would simply
say, " We ignore your rules", and so all we get for our
contribution is a quarrel at that time with the nation whose
victory is essential to ours. Now all that nonsense, as I
call it the suicidal nonsense about a nuclear-free zone,
is clearly to be observed in the approach of the Labour Party
to this signalling station at North-West Cape. Really, they
have a bee in their bonnet on this business. They only just
failed to declare their hostility to it. Nineteen to seventeen,
If the gentleman from Queensland hadntt changed his vote, as
I understand, at the last moment, the hostility to it would
have been confirmed and a Labour Government the one that
you are going to vote for if you vote against us a Labour
Government would have served notice that if it won the next
election, it would term-inate the American rights to conduct
that signalling base in the North-West of Western Australia.
4 
Now what is this signalling station? They have
got an idea that it is going to be a fire control tower, that
somebody will press a button and that will fire a Polaris
missile off a submarine. This is so childish. It has no
foundation in life at all. That is not the way these things
are done. All that this station is for is to enable communiications
to be had from the Administration in the United States
with the United States naval vessels in the Indian Ocean and
South West Pacific, whether they are above the water or under
the water, It is part of the naval forces. And they need to
have the signalling connection with them badly. They have it
in the Pacific. They have it in the Atlantic. They don't have
it in this area, and the one place in which it can be effectively
established is in the North-West of Australia. de are their
ally. Their friend. And they are our friend and, to a large
extent, our protector. Are we to say to them, " No, you can't
have a radio station; the land would still be ours, of
course, but you can't have a radio station, because you know,
you may bo signalling to a submarine and a submarine
Oh, that's a rude word with the Left-Wingers in the Labour
Party, unless it is a Russian submarine in which case it is
quite respectable, thank you.
Well, you know this is puerile and yet, I repeat,
but for the more accident of a single change of vote, the
policy of the next Labour Government would have been to
declare, " Out with this station".* As it is, I am going to
take no chances on this matter. I've got too much sense of
responsibility for this country to take chances on this and
thereforcj, whon the agreement is finally concluded -because they
are still working out a few details when the agreement is
concluded, we are going to put it through Parliament and have
it authorised by the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
Australia and it won't be very easy then for a new Government
to tear it up because it will not only have to repudiate the
agreement, it will have to got Parliament also to approve
of the repudiation, and that's not so easy in Australia.
It is essential, from our point of view, tha-t this matter
should be confirmed, made absolutely clear, and the only
reason I am mentioning it to you is that once more it throws
light on what these strange opponents of ours think about the
problems of national security,
Of course it all illustrates this: that they have
gone back to isolationism. They were isolationist before the
war. They had to snap out of it during the war when they
went into office and did it very wel]* Now they have gone
back to isolationism. Everybody in ustralia ought to look
at the map once a week the map of South East Asia once a
week ait least. I go Into the Cabinet room and pull it down
and ? ook at it with regularity. I know it back to front.
What do you see? You see Communist China so aggressive in
philosophy that even Khrushchev is disagreeing with them and
saying, " Now, gently, gently; don't be so extreme". That
is the Chinese Communist outlook. And below them, what have
we got? We have got Burma, which lives under their shadow
and, I would imagine, in the fear of them. We have North
Viet Nam, absolutely violently Communist under Ho Chi Minh-
South Viet Nam, a little outpost of non-Communism involving
today the assistance of the United States and Aus~ ralia;
Laos which is in a state of chronic confusion due entirely
to Communist agitation internally and from ou~ side. We have
Malaya, peaceful, well-governed, quite a rich country, part of 
6-
the British Commonwealth; Singapore, the new concept of
Malaysia, and then down here well, wevbo hiado
course which is our ally and down below here, Indonesia
you never know and Australia. Aren't we interested in
seeing that the Communist attack doesn't come too near to us,
or are we going to put our heads in a bag and say, " Well, we'll
pretend~ we didn't know anything about it until it happened.
They can come down; they can infiltrate; they can get hold
of Laos; they can get hold of Thailand; they can wipe out
South Viet Nam." All imaginary things but, really, in terms
of military power, these countries left to themselves couldn't
resist it. And yet, in our Parliament, we have a member
of the Executive of the Parliamentary Labour Party, Mr. Haylen,
and who is bound to be a Minister if they come into office,
saying, " WIhat's Ma] lya got to do with us? The Commonwealth
Brigade in the reserve ought to be withdrawn from Malaya.
What's it got to do with us?" In other words, what doe3 ' Lt
matter to us if Malaya is overrun by the Communists. This
is wonderful statesmanship, isn't it? This is the kind of
statesmanship that has produced a war or two in modern history.
Don't lot us stand up for anything when we can; let it go,
lot it go let it go, until finally you are in it on the worst
possible terms, with all your outposts taken. It is worth
thinking about this matter, this suicidal attitude towards
what is, after all, the ov . irwhelmingly important thing for
you and for me and for our children and our granchildren, that
this country should be strong, self-respecting, secure and
living on terms of honourable friondship with great free nations
around the world. I once used an expression I daresay that like
most people I repeated it about our great and powerful
friends. I like to have great and poworful friends and so
do you. But this has become a sort of jeering thing now:
" The Prime Minister, of course, he bows his knee to our great
and powerful friends, while of course ' ve, the Labour Party,
so far from bowing the knee, kick them hard, because that's
the way to deal wvith great and powe rful frionds.,"
Now, this is a tremendously s: i-rious matter.
If the next election merely involved some change of emphasis
in how much money you spent inside Australia on this or that,
perhaps it wouldn't matter, but if a change of Government
involves, as I have shown you i does, an utter conversion from
one extreme to the other, from one point to another on the
attitude towards the security of Australia, then I want to say
to you it's a risk no sensible person ought to take. You will
be accused I will be accused of being warmongers. I was
one of the Prime Ministers who, at the Prime Ministers'
Conference agreed on a stateme., nt about disarmament, every word
of which now stands and to which the Labour Party pays lip
service. The operative part on the matters I have been
discussing I actually drafted myself in the Prime Ministers'
Conference. Of course we want to see a slowing-dowm of the
armament race. Of course we wfant to see a substantial measure
of disarmament, but the first thing to remember is that there
are two kinds of arraament in the world. There is the nuclear
weapon and there is what they are pleased to call the conventional
weapon conventional forces, nuclear forces. A lot of
/ 7 
7-
people like a few of those silly old men who sit in the street
in England, a lot of people have persuaded themselves that if'
you get rid of nuclear weapons you have solved the problem of'
peace or war in the world. You havent. You have merely
transferred the balance of power from the West to the Communists
and therefore we have said right throughout, " You must deal
with these two matters together. If you are going to reduce
nuclear armaments, and we are all for it, then you must reduce,
correspondingly roduce, conventional armament. You are not
to have a process of disarmament which throws the world out
of balance and gives some tremendous advantage to one side or
the other. So keep it phased; keep it in harmony and get
down to a point where ultimately, someday, the peace will be
kept., we hope, by some properly controlled international
force." 1 But in the meantime, there is -n awful lot of work
to be done, and those people who because of the sheer horror
of thinking about it want te abolish the nuclear forces while
leaving the other forces untouched are just if they go away
with it, making it a certainty that the whole balance of power
would swing around and that the Communist powers would be
able to dominate the world at will. Ind they are not very
gentle. They don~ t have too much of the Christian othic so
far as I have been able to discovcer and the prospect of them
dominating the world is one that would fill any average
Australian with complete horror.
Nqow, I have already spoken too long. Thank
you vary much. I didn't expect to seu anything like so many
of you when I came here this 1--orning. I have to go away
and be spoken to by the r:, erabers of the State Cabinet at
lunchtime and then I think I am on a television exercise
this afternoon and then a meeting in the stadium tonight.
So the day is only really beginning. Thank you very much
for making it begin so well.
I I 



" ROUND TABLE" TELEVISION INTERVIEW~
VJITH THE RT. HON. THE PRIME MINISTER,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, ONQTu CHANNEL 9
TELEVISION STATION, 7 BRIS3AINE ON
23RD APRIL, 1963.
Members of the Panel : Dean Baddeley
Ex-Senator Condon Byrne
Mr. H. J. Summers,
( News Editor ( QTQ9)
DEAN BADDELEY:
PRIME MINISTER Mr. Prime Minister, may I say how much I adore
every minute of the four and a half years I have
been in Australia. One of the things which I find
awfully fascinating here is to see the sort of
various levels of influence coming from other parts
of the world the American influence, the European
influence and the Asian influence. Now, in th-e
present situation, all of these influendes are of
tremendous significance to our whole way of life.
I wonder if you would like to comment how you think
this pattern will take shape in the future, whether
we shall gear ourselves more to one or the other
to Europe, to the United States, or to Asia,
Well, you know, I think that there are some influences
which are superficial and therefore obvious, There
are others that are perhaps more profound and it is
very difficult to forecast which will fall into
that group or which into that group. The influence
of America on Australian habits and speech is, of
course, obvious, largely as the result of the moving
pictures in the earlier days and still to an extent,
to television and what-have-you; and the vocabulary
in Australia tends to be garnished with American
expressions. All that's quite true. How far that
is permanent I wouldn't like to say. It is equally
true that with a lot of immigrants coming into
Australia, particularly from the European countries,
we are beginning to take a little interest in cooking
food new dishes new stYles, and I am sure that
the impact of these new citizens on what you might
call the " restaurant habits" of Australia is
immediate and obvious. But all these things, I
think, are on the whole, superficial. They are
interesting, certainly; they are sometimes very
engaging but they are superficial, if I may repeat
that worA. Our habits of mind are pretty deop down
in us and I think it will take a long, long time
before the instinctive processes of thought derived
from Great Britain are altered. You know, I
frequently say to myself and to other people if they
will listen, that the British habit of mind is
inductive. 1feIar gue always from the particular to
the general and this is deep in our consciousness,
It is the history of our parliaments; it is the
history of the common law, whereas Continental
countries are deductive and , aherica, to a remarkable
extent is the same: Lay dow~ n the general principle
and then deal with the particular case. It is a
different habit of mind. 66009 @ 06690/ 2 
-2
QUESTIONER Would you say th~-is is because in the English way of
life there is a tremendous value set upon individual
enterprise, individual thought, individual
ingenuity?
P. M. I think that's right but it is not the entire
explanation. I think this goes back to the fact
that England developed a process of civilization
which wasntt entirely dominated by the old Roman
ideas. Exccept for a fleeting century or two,
they were never in the Roman Empire and if you go
back to the roots of our legal system, our
parliamentary system, you will find something that
you won't find in Justinian, speaking legally or
in the codifications of Europe, speaking polilically.
Yes, I think there is a profound difference.
Q. We proceed, Sir, from the particular case to the
general principle and don't rely so much on codes
of law like the Code Napoleon or the Justinian Code.
P. M. I thoroughly agree with you.
Q. Do-vm from precedent to precedent.
P. M. Yes. And, of courso, the fact is that our systems
have been worked out on encountering a problem and
saying, " Well, now, what's the thing to do about
that, What makes justice and sense about that,"
and it's decided to do it this way. And in a
hundred years' time, some clever graduate comes
along and does a study on this and discovers that
certain principles have been evol~ ved. But the
people who did the things weren't much concerned about
the principles that they wore evolving, as in the
intrinsic justice and practicability of what they
were doing.
Q. What about Asia?
P. M. The Asian influ,. nce, I would have thought at the
momentl was very slight. Of course it is quite
true that, geographically, we have an intimate
association and will have a more and more intimate
association with 1' sia. I don't agree with people
who say that means that we are now to be regarded
as an Asian country. I don't think that's true.
I think that we will continue to be a country with
all our basic principles, our basic ideas deriving
from the old world. But more and more, we will have
to learn to live with the Asian countries, to
understand them not only to keep the peace with
them but to establish positive goodwill with them.
This is not going to be an easy or quick process.
QQ There is their cultural and trade associations in
Malaysia,
P. M. Yes, and we have much to learn from them and they
will have something to learn from us. I say all
that and I believe all that, 2 but I don't accept the
proposition that we ought just to go around saying,
11, doll, we are an Asian country now in Australia,
with no connection with the Old World," 1 but we
have e 9 / 3 
-3
Q. But you cannot escape geography, Sir.
P. M. Oh, no, Exactly. But I thought the point I was trying
to make was that, geographically, there we are
Indonesia next door Malaya, Laos, Viet Nain, Burma,
India, Pakistan, China, all'these countries, they are
in our section of the world, and I don't ignore
geography. I think that how we get to understand
them and how we can perhaps influence the way they go
about things may have a lot to do with our future.
But I can say all that and still be, as the Scots
would say, Robert Gordon Menzies QMingies") ( Laughter)
Q. Sir Robert, that brings us on to another aspect of the
whole situation and it is this: Presuming that
Australia does retain the hard core of the traditional
British point of view, traditions and culture; now,
we find a new British Commonwealth emerging, newi
Asian nations, coloured nations, black nations, with
different ethnic ties; we are going to see a
completely new British Commonwealth. Can this new
Commonwealth, in its new form, assume the place of
the old one? Australia obviously can fit into the
pattern but can they? Therefore, what part do you
thinks hr Robert, that the new emerging British
Commonwealth, with all these vast differences that
are now injected into it, can play in the new world?
P. M, Well, you have now put what I believe but the Dean
will know better than i do the 064 question.
Because, I don't think really, that anybody can answer
that question. You See, my memory goes back a long
way. I remember attending a Prime Ministers'
Conference it wasn't then called such in 1935.
A long time ago. I wasn't Prime Minister, but I went
there to represent my Prime Minister, Mr. Lyoens, who
was ill at the time:-. And there were five of us,
sitting at the table, that's all. Ie were all the
same kind of fellow, we all spoke the same language,
iwe all had grown up on the samu body of ideas. All
thi -s was quite simple and the last one I attended,
last year, there were what, fourteen or fifteen of
us, togethr with five or six or seven observers who
next time will be Prime Ministers themselves. And
it would be idle to contend that it is the same sort
of thing. It isn't. Itts a very strange mixture
this new Commonwealth because some of us are in Zhe
direct allegiance to Zhe Throne and ethers, who
recognise the Queen as the head of the Commonwealth,
but are themselves, republics. The Queen's writ doesn't
run in their countries, And, of course, some of them
are pretty rich in experience. You tako a statesman
like Mr. Nehru. He is as rich in experience of public
affairs as anybody could be, And take President Ayub
of Pakistan or the Tunku in Malaya these are people
who by long association really do think mere or loss
as we do, Then you get somo new countries, just
emerged, with the echoes of their struggles still in
their ears. You can't expect them to be looking at
things in the soa way and, in fact, if we all looked
at things in the same way, it wouldn't be much of a
Commonwealth, would it? I must say, I still find
myself saying every now and then, " I wish I knew what
he had in the back of his maind," 1 and perhaps he is
saying the same thing. 0 0 / 4 
Q. Isn~ t it a fact Sir Robert that each one of those
countries is changing, undergoing a process of change?
Australia, itself, is undergoing a profound process of
change, You would agree on that?
P. M. Oh, entirely, And as a matter of fact, what you say
just reminds me of this. We are a little bit tempted
to lump them all together. To take all the African
countries, for instance, that have merged and say,
IhVell, now, the African countries think so and so,"
It's silly because they are all different. The first
thing that we have to learn, if we are to be wise, is
to know that they are different, that there is a world
of difference, from the point of view of the Prime
Minister of Nigeria, Sir Abubakar Balewa, and Nkrumah
in Ghana, and probably a great deal of difference between
them and Tanganyika or wherever it may be. These are
not the same countries. You just can't apply a simple
rule and say " Well, that's where they fit in," because
the fact thai they have become independent means T~
they all have their own national aspirations. Difficult
enough to persuade a New Zealander that he's the same
as an Australian. ( Laughter) Much more difficult to
persuade a Ghonian that hets the same as a Tanganyikan.
Q. Sir Robert, do you think any common point of view
British Commonwealth point of view can continue to
emerge among these nations? That again is purely
speculation.
P. M. Well, I must say I am optimistic about this because at
several recent meetings I am practically the oldest
inhabitant now, you see
Q. You are the doyen of the corps.
P. M. and at the last meeting or two I have noticed
acute differences of opinion, then some discussion and
I have been interested to see how much advance is made
to a more common point of view, a more common understanding.
You can have a conference at which people
begin by emphasising their differences and at the end
of a week they are emphasising the matters on which they
agree. And that is the spirit of the Commonwealth.
So I am no pessimist,
Q. It's encouraging because the British Commonwealth should
have a tremendous part to play if it can retain its
integrity, its unity in the new world.
P. M. Tremendous, and the less dominating it is in the physical
world, the more influential it can become in the world
of tile spirit. It can indeed, presenting quality, wisdom,
character and experience.
Speaking of the changes in Australia, Sir Robert nobody
would have seen as much experience as you. In ail
Australian history, there hasn't beon a man who has so
long held the Prime Ministership as yourself. Nobody
would be in a position mere than you to judge the change
gradual, but ever so constant change in this country.
Viewing it as from today, what would you say are the
most significant changes in Australia's development, over
the span of your political life? 0 &amp; 00.1a/ 5 
P. M. Well, that would be a difficult one. Wie have had, of
course, the most tremendous internal physical development
and that goes on. But I think, on the whole, the greatest
development has been in the position that we occupy in
relation to other countries. I do think that we can say
without boasting that we have a significance novi with other
countries, a significance in London, a significance in
Washington which porhaps we didn't have before except by
fits and starts. I think there has been a very great
development of an understanding in those places of us and
of an understanding on our part of them. This, I think,
has been a great development.
Q. Do you think, Sir Robert, that our significance is somewhat
out of proportion and greater than our physical
strength, our population?
P. M. I am sure of that.
Q* And even our remoteness?
P. M. I am sure of that. Our remoteness may perhaps be a
contributing factor.
Q. We stand a bit aloof from the scene?
P. M. Oh, yes. Here we are; we attract the attention of some
of the old Wiestern powers by the very fact that we are
remote and that we are carrying on in the old traditions,
and I think this is a source of strongth for us.
Q. There are of course the cha--nges developmentally. There
are changes in the emphasis on Australian development.
You would agree I think we Queonslanders like to think
that it is so that there has been a greater emphasis in
recent times, very recent times, on the potential of the
north and the development of the north.
P. M. I think that over the last five years, the growth of
emphasis on northern development has been quite remarkable,
and it is not just all a matter of government or governments'
point of view. The discovery of uranium at the
time was most exciting and attracted a great deal of
attention; the great bauxite deposits in the north;
the phenomenal mineral developments in Mount Isa the
increasing emphasis in the public mind on mineral wealth
as a source of Australian development. All this has
happened in just a few years. And of course,
This oil discovcury in Queensland is, of course of
dramatic importance and if it is followed by other
discoveries, as I think we may reasonably hope.....
Q. In other parts of Australia?
P. M. Yes, or in Queensland or wherever it may be. If this
happens, of course, this could revolutionise the Australian
external ecotiomy by reducing the drain on our overseas
resources. I think it is in the mineral field that you
have had the dramatic and exciting things over the last
five years and they have all lifted eyes to the north.
There is no doubt about that. */ 6 
-6-
Q. Unfortunately, Sir Robert, we arc suffering in Queensland
from the fact that we do not seem to be attracting the
migrants here. Apparently migrants are attracted to
those areas where there is heavy industrialisation. We
are a magnificent primary-producing State. It would
appear that some conscious and determined effort by the
Commonwealth the State and the private sector of
business will be necessary to redirect the trend,
otherwise we become the victim of circumstances and the
gap between us and the industrialised States gets wider
and wider. Would you think that is the position?
P. M. I think that is the position. It's quite true. I read
with great pleasure about certain industrial developments
that are occurring here. There is, I think not the
slightest doubt that migrants will go where there is a
prospect of industrial employment. Indeed, unless we
have increasing secondary industrial activity, I don't
think we can sustain the flow of migrants because there
is not much additional employmunt to be got in the rural
industries, Every authority on the rural industries will
admit that.
Q. Particularly with increased mechanisation?
P. M. That's right. With increased mechanisation, and therefore
if you are going to have a hundred thousand people coming
into the country each year, there must be a sustained
development of secondary industries. Well, I think I can
look back to a time, you know, many years ago, when
industrial development wasn't f5Aightfully encouraged in
some States. I think that's right.
Q. That's perfectly true. The sugar industry for one.
P. M. So far as I am concerned, I think that every State that
has the potential within itself ought to be encouraged
in industrialization, so that it has a balanced economy.
I remember the time when South Australia was a purely rural
ccmmaunity, and during the war when I was Prime Minister,
we put a number of munitions establishments into South
Australia, South Australia is now, in terms of percentage,
one of the ziost highly industrialized States in Australia
and that's why the proud moment cane when Sir Thomas
Playford was able to say, " We are no longer a claimant
State".
Q. And, Sir Robert do you visualise that that position might
develop here with the concentration of effort in those
three centres?
P. M. I do. Well, I don't mind telling you and I am not just
saying this because I am in Brisbane that a lot of people
in England have spoken to me from time to time, " Where do
you think So-and-So ought to go to got in on the great
stream of development in Australia?" I always say
Queensland.
Q. Splendid.
P. M. Because I think Queensland has a greater potential for
future development than any other State in Australia.
I do. And it is beginning to come. oa. * e oa/ 7 
-7
One of the great contributions that Queensland has
made, it seems to me, is in the export market and I
think I am right in saying and you must correct-me
if I am wrong that the contribution made by exports
from Queensland last year and previous years too,
exceeded by far anything else that any other State made.
P. M. You mean per head?
Q. Yes.
P. M. That wouldn't surprise me at all. You take sugar, for
example. The export of sugar from Queensland, ten years
ago, twelve years ago, was about half a million tons.
Today it is a million and a quarter tons. This is a
very big item. The Mt. Isa developments alone will
produce an export income which nobody dreamed of seven
or eight years ago. The bauxite deposits, all these
things, coal exports now why, it is only the other day
that we were importing coal. You see? And now exporting
coal, and of course the big industry, the cattle industry
in Queensland, has suffered from time to time by droughts
and one of the counter-agents to the drought is to have
effective means of transporting cattle out; and beef
roads that are going on now all these steps I hopewill
continue and continue and mean that the exports of
beef from Queensland will grow and, I think, quite
phenomenally.
Q. I shall think you are a Queenslander in a moment,
instead of a Victorian. It's very heartening,
P. M. Well, Itm a Queen's Counsel. ( Laughter)
Q. It is very heartening for us in Queensland to hear you
say these things because we talk a great deal about the
future of Queensland and think of oil and bauxite and so
on, but I don't think half of us quite realise the
tremendous contribution it will have to the future of
Australia,
Q. Well, against this background of the future of Queensland
and of-Australia, so very very bright and so very.
promising and now starting to get under way, comes the
whole question of Australian defence, the integrity and
security of the country. Mr. Prime Minister, would you
care to comment on this? Do you think Australia is
regarded as a sort of Southern bastion of the American
defence arcl or do you think Australia and i1erica*
reciprocally have common security engagements, each as
important, significant, perhaps indispensable for the
other.
P. M. I think our relations with America must be regarded as
reciprocal. It would never do if we underplayed our
part in defence. I think we constantly have to revise
what we are doing in the defence field. We are doing
it now, at this very moment in the Cabinet, because we
can't just leave it to the other fellow. If we want
America to stand by us in a time of crisis, we must
stand by America. It is as simple as that. You can't
have one-way traffic on this matter and, really, I have
been very upset by some of the isolationist tendencies
which manifest themselves in some of this recent talk
4P eo/ 8 
8-
P. M. about a nuclear-free Southern Hemisphere; whether
( Contd,) the Americans ought to be allowed to have a signalling
station in the north-west of Australia. I think this is
just old-fashioned isolationism, and quite inconsistent
with our treaty arrangements with the United States.
Q6 It is something that is giving the Australian people
cause for very grave thought.
P. M. I am sure it is.
Q* In the course of your long and very distinguished
service as Prime Minister of Australia, Sir Robert, you
must have also seen great changes in the world of
education.
P. M. Yes I think I have. This is, of course, the evergreen
topic. I even find myself being attacked for not
being interested in it. I think it is a little
ironical.
Q. I remember a speech you made at Queensland University....
P. M. But really it is phenomenal when I look back at my own
schooldays, going to a country State school and then to
a State School in Ballarat, going to a secondary school,
going to a public school and then to a University, and
think of the relatively primitive arrangements that
existed then and the relatively small amount of money
that was spent in State Budgets on education. I really
thank heaven that things have changed so much. Of
course, we can always spend moro but the rate of
expenditure today is, I think, quite exciting. And, of
course, in the case of the universities which I have
made rather my own special responsibility well, when
I spoke to Sir Keith Murray in England ana said, " Would
you come and be the Chairman of the Committee?" and
finally stole him from Harold Macmillan who was then his
Minister and he came out, I wasn't even game to tell the
Treasury what I was doing. And we got the report and
this, of course, ran into almost as many millions as
people had been thinking in thousands, and each three
years it doubJ~ es itself and I don't grudge a penny
of it. But I think there is a terrific challenge to
us in A-ustralia. We are either going to become an
increasingly highly-trained and well-educated people
technologically, yes scientifically, yes culturally,
in the humanities, perhaps, much more important than
some people think. We are going to do this and become
more and more influential and responsible in the world
or we will become not only remote but second-rate and
that's no good.
Q. Do you think that the fact that the system of education
is very much bound up with each State is a weakness or
a strength?
P. M. No, I don't. I think it is a strength. I don't believe
in uniformity on these matters. I don't want to have a
Commonwealth power over education. I don't want to have
some centralised bureaucracy at Canberra deciding what
is a good systom for North Queensland and what's a good
system for South Tasmania. Really it doesn't work,
That's no good. Education is someohing that you do to
/ 9 
9
P. M. the individual, not to the mass. It is the individual
( Contd.) that you are dealing with and therefore -there must be
a tremendous lot of individuality about State systems of
educatilon and regional systems of education. No, Heaven
forbid that we should have uniformity in this,
Q. What is true there, Mr. Prime Minister, is true also in
the general sense, the general administrative, executive
and political sense.
P. M. Quite right. This is the case for Federalism. I'm a
Federalist. I think it would be a bad thing if we had
everything centralised. You know, my dear fellow, we
have both met these fellows who say, " I believe in
centralisation of power and decentralisation of
administration." As you would say, Dean, " Hooey".
( Laughter)
Q, Mr. Prime Minister, would you think that perhaps the
Commonwalth Constitution is requiring some amendinelit in
some particulars that may centralise some aspects of
power more,
P. M. I think that there are some amendments that could very
well be made to the Constitution but the difficult is to
get any five people to agree on them.
Q. And certainly to carry a referendum?
P. M. Yes,
Q. What about the other method, Sir Robert, of the States
under the appropriate section transferring powers? They
are most reluctant to do that I would think.
P. M. Oh, we have had an almost unbroken failure on that front
because if one State does, another State doesn't. You
can't have a Federalpcier that limps along, operating in
three States and not in three. But it is high time we
got over this idea that the States are all separate
bodies, that they are sovereign, because as you know, they
are not sovereign. They exercise sovereign powers just
as the poor old Commonwealth does. We all exercise
sovereign powers in our sphere of them, what has been
given to us. But we ought to preserve Federalism, but
to cu-1tivate the habit of thinking nationally a little
more than we do. The two things are not irreconcilable.
Q. Do you think, Sir, that oven though the States lost
a great deal of their sovereignty once the power of
diruct taxation was substantially accumulated in the
Commonwealth, that there is still a residue of sovereignty
that is well worth preserving and is most valuable and
salutary, a0 0 0 0 1 0* 0 00 
10
P. M. Well, you know, this word " sovereignty" is rather abused.
You don't have a sovereign State in a Federation. That
was settled a hundred years ago. You have sovereignty
in the community as a whole divided up, some parts of the
sovereignty going to the central Parliament and some
parts remaining with the States. This is the whole
essence. Sovereignty lies in -the nation. And I think
that if we just begin to think that way a, little and to
be first of all keen on what happens to the nation, we
can still be pretty strong Federalists. I am myself.
I don't want to see unification in Australia. I am
a Federalist, but I am also a Nationalist in the sense
that I balieve in this nation. Indeed I ought to.
They have been trusting me with the business of looking
after them for a long time.
Q. Do you think it will come off? Her Majesty The Queen
will have a residence in Canberra? She will be resident
here for say, two months of the year?
P. M. With very groat respect to His Grace the Archbishop, I
think this rather sweeping, a sort of bravura gesture,
because an awful lot has to be worked out, you know,
You can lay out a lot of money and have a residence and
who lives in it except for a month when The Queen comes
and what do you do writh it? Oh no. All I say is that
these proposals are well worthy of some study but they
don't adimit of a kerbstone reply.
Q. I shouldn't have thought it was practicable. If she did
it to Australia she would have to do it to New Zealand,
she would have to do it to other parts of the Cormonwealth.
Sheo would never be at home. So it does seem a little
bit unrealistic and I am quite sure that we all feel that
the recent visit of Hor Majesty was an unbounded success
and tihat Australia is as loyal to the Crown as ever before.
P. M. No doubt about it.
Q. I am sure you are basking in your Thistle. ( Laughter)
P. M. 14 Basking in a thistle is not a prospect that appeals to me.
( Laughter)
DEAN Uell, I think on tha-t rather humorous note, I ama afraid
BADDELEY we must draw our programme to an end, Mr. Prime
Minister, will you please accept the gratitude of our
viewers and listeners and the immense gratitude of this
station and particularly of Messrs. Summers, Condon
Byrne and myself for honouring us with this visit.
P. M. T'hank you.
DEAN Web always feel it is a jolly good thing for Southerners
BADDELEY: to come and sniff some of Queensland's sun and the
expansiveness and fun of it all and I hope that you will
go away a little refreshed by your very short visit to
Queensland. Thank you very much indeed for coming. 



OPENING OF TIE AUSTRALIAN GUARANTEE
CORPORATION BUILDING, SYDNEY, N. S. W.
ON 24+ TH APRIL, 1963.
Speech by the Prime Minister, 1 the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert-Menzies
I think I ought to make a personal explanationwe
do that occasionally in Parliament to explain why I am
here. When I received an invitation signed in a somewhat
truculent signature by Hector Clayton, my secretary, who
looks after my interests with loving care, said to me, " This
surely is one that you can refuse," ( Laughter) and to her
intense regret, I said, " No, this happens to be one I must
accept," and for two reasons one is that Hector Clayton is
an old friend of mine, and I am a little bit frightened to
say " 1No." 1 ( Laughter). The other is that I am one of the few
living old boys of a Legislative Council in Australia, having
begun my political life in the Victorian Upper House. And
therefore, you know, once a mortgage always a mortgage,,
( Laughter) and once a Legislative Councillor, always a
Legislative Councillor, and so by the strict union rule that
we apply among ourselves, I said, " That's the second reason
I must be there." It is very kind of the Chairman in the course of
his very interesting speech, in which he lefl me literally
nothing to say, to refer to the honour that has been conferred
on me* You haven't failed, I am sure, to notice that the
motto of this Order, " Nemo me impune lacessit" was published
in various newspapers andfor the benefit of those educated
at the university translated into English ( Laughter), and
one or two of my 6abinet colleagues wore heard to say, rather
unkindly, " Oh, we knew that was his motto fifteen years ago".
( Laughter) Well, now you've been told a good deal today
about the history of Lhis Company and it is really a very
remarkable one. It is tremendously interesting to people of
my own vintage to realise that the whole development of this
particular branch of industry has occurred in Australia during
my own adult life, so that this is quite young. I'm younger
than he is. ( Interject-1on " Not by much") He says, " Not by
much" but I still don't need to have a special resolution
( Laughter, applause), although I am bomnd to say I do
occasionally need to survive a " No Confidence" Motion which
is, roughly I suppose, the same thing.
But what I was saying when I was rudely interrupted
was that this is something relatively new, and it is like most
things in the world that we live in which are mostly new. I
imagine that if anybody else in this room had had my experience
of sitting down at the Prime Minister's table twenty-four years
ago and comparing what came then to the table with what comes
now, twenty-four years later, he would understand perfectly
how immensely complicated have the affairs of the world become.
They are so complicated that those who have to handle them
feel constantly puzzled by the aspects of them and the only
people who clearly understand them are the commentators who
don't have to do anything about them at all. ( Laughter) / 2 
-2
Forty years ago when this particular company
began forty-five years ago, whenever it was the use of
credit was something that was understood in certain orthodox
and limited channels, The complexity of the world's affairs,
the enormous pressure of the rise of living standards the
enormous development in what we are now pleased to cal.
" 1consumer durables". as the motor car became the commonplace,
as household equipment became the commonplace and so on all
these events could hardly be carried on by the old normal
routine methods that were available and so I haven't the
slightest doubt that this expansion of the instruments of
credit, which is represented by your Company and by many
others was something that was quite inevitable, full of value
and full of danger, like all credit facilities. A wonderful
thing for people, wisely handled and wisely administered and
for some people perhaps a little tempting as meaning that they
can get out of their depth and that the Lord will provide, the
Lord for this purpose being mixed up with Mr. Clayton.( Laughter)
Like every other instrument that we have to our
hands, it is capable of misuse. But I have no doubt whatever
myself that the present face of the country, the present
availability of private resources to private citizens, would
be nothing like what it is today if it hadn't been for the
facilities provided by the various credit bodies, including
in particular the hire purchase authorities in Australia and
therefore I acknowledge the service that this industry has
done, and is doing and will continue to do, to the ordinary
men and women of Australia.
Now there is another aspect of that and I hope
you will allow me to refer to it. Every now and then there
will appear to be a conflict between what the hire purchase
companies are doing, what thc trading banks are doing, what
the Reserve Bank may wish to have done, what the Government
desires to have done, There will appear to be and there
will be problems of interest policy, for example, and how
these problems are to be handled, and in Australia whenever
we encounter problems of this kind we are terribly tempted,
aren't we, to use the blunt instrument of compulsion. Funny
thing about us, we are cheeful, light-hearted, on the whole
rather happy-go-lucky sunsible people, but we have got a great
passion for compulsion. Wde even have compulsory voting, not
that I am anybody to complain about it because it has worked
out on the whole rather well ( Laughter) from my point of view.
But you know, instrinsically, there is something rather
fantastic about it, isn't there? Wse do think so rapidly of
compulsion. I, myself, am a great believer in the handling
of these problems in the instrument of co-operation, of
consultation consultation between the Reserve Bank and the
Trading Bank effective mutual understanding, consultation
between them and the outside semi-banking I suppose that's
a permissible expression to use instruments such as the hire
purchase companies. We ought not all the time to be looking
around to see whether we can invent a statute that will
produce co-operation. No statute ever did. Every statute
produces a crop of legal advisers whose business it is to
explain how you can get out of the net of the statute. That's
right. And as Mr. Justice Else Mitchell will recall one
wise man once said that in the classical conflict between the
parliamentary draftsman and the conveyancer, the conveyancer
always wins. Now, there is a good deal of truth in that. we
mustntt run to compulsion as our first resort. o9 / 3 
3-
I believe, from my own experience, that consultations
from time to time with people who have groat responsibilities,
particularly in this financial world we are discussing this
afternoon, do nothing but good. After all, we are all Australians.
We pride ourselves on being honest men, having some objectivity
of view, not a lot of greedy, self-seeking people, We are good
citizens we trust. I believe we are. And we will get further
sitting down together, so that if somebody says, " Well, the
interest rates being offered by tho hire purchase companies are
inconsistent with the bank structure of interest rates. Letts
sit down and talk about it, because in the long run, Sir, your
Company and all other companies like it have, just as much as
I have, just as much as any other person has7a vested interest
in sound stability in the economy of Australia. Not stagnation.
There is nothing stagnant about the industry that you carry on.
Not at all. If it became stagnant it would die. I don't
talk about stagnation. I talk about stability in the sense
of avoiding soaring levels of prices and costs so that the
development of the country can proceed on a sound foundation,
so that you have stability and growth. The two things are not
inconsistent, They will be more and more consistent with each
other if we take the opportunity from time to time, all of us,
in Government or out of Government, to sit down together, talk
about our problems and say," Well, now, what do you think about
that? What do you think can be done by your group to achieve
this common rosult?" 1
And therefore Sir, I am without any reservation
at atll delighted to be here this afternoon particularly
delighted, of course, because you are an old friend, but
delighted in any event because I think that you may look back
with pride on the record of this company. I hadn't realised
until you spoke this afternoon that you had been gathering the
organisation together from a variety of places into ono centre.
A great contribution to the company, a great contribution to the
city of Sydney and I am perfectly certain as I declare this
building open that the work it does wisely administered,
properly understood, will be a great contribution to the
commercial and domestic life of Australia. 



FOR PRESS P. M N3 96
S. A. RAIL STANDARDIZATION
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
Agreement which will allow an early start
to be made on initial work on the Port Pirie/ Broken
Hill railway standardization was reached at a conference
in Canberra today between the Prime Minister, Sir Robert
Menzies, the Premier of South Australia, Sir Thomas
Playford and the Commonwealth Minister for Transport,
Mr. Opperman. In a statement after the meeting, the Prime
Minister said that the Railways Comm. issioner for South
Australia and the Commonwealth Railways Commissioner
had already reached agreement on the standards of
construction to be observed in the works.
The discussions today with Sir Thomas Playford
had cleared the ground so that first steps could now be
taken. It had been agreed that construction work
should be done under a series of contracts and it was
hoped to call tenders for early contracts by the end of
the current financial year.
CANBERRA, 2nd May, 1963, 



63/ 040
EMBARGO: t NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, BROADCAST OR
TELECAST BEFORE 9 P. M. 2ND MAY.
FOR PRESS: 0
HANDING OVER BY THE PRIME MINISTER TO THE
CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL OF THE NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTR. ALIA OF HER MAJESTY'S GIFT
OF COOK'S VOYAGES.
During her recent visit, Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth presented to the Prime Minister as " a gift to
the Government and people of the Commonwealth of Australia"
a complete set of the original editions of Captain James
Cook's Three Voyages to the Pacific and round the world
published in London in nine volumes between 1773 and 1784~.
The set came from the Royal Library at Windsor Castle,
Tonight in the presence of members of the
Council of the National Library of Australia the Prime
Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, Landed the ift to the Chairman
of the Council, Sir Gxenfell Price, It will take its place
in the collections of the Library alongside other gifts from
Her Majesty, and other Cook material of outstanding importance.
The most recent gift also made during the Royal
Visit, was a copy~ bound in the Loyal Library, of H. B. Carter's
monograph on the Spanish Merino flock which was developed by
King George III, in association with Sir Joseph Banks and
which contributed to the establishment of the wool inaustry
in New South Wales,,
This followed a gift during the Royal Visit in
1954 of 13 watercolour sketches by 5. T. Gill and Captain
Charles Sturt relating to the Sturt and Horrocks expeditions
into Central Australia between 1842+ and 1846.
Her Majesty" Es first gift to the National Library
was one which the late King George VI intended to make in
order to commemorate the proposed visit to Australia in 1952
of their Royal Highnesses the Princess Elizabeth and the
Duke of Edinburgh-and the manuscript is so inscribed, though
the visit did not take place because of His Majesty's death,
It was transmitted in 1953 by Sir William Slim, as Governor-
General, to the Prime Minister,
The manuscript was a handsomely bound photographic
copy of the journal of the second of Cook's three voyages
to the Pacific and the Antarctic.. This supplemented the
priceloess original of the journal of the first voyage, kept
by Cook, in his owmn hand, on the ENDEAVOUR when hie charted the
East Coast of Auistralia after New Zealand, The Library
purchased this, along with other important Cook manuscripts
and pictures, in London in 1923 for about Cook
manuscripts of far less importance than those in the National
Library collections brought œ-70,000 sterling at auction in
London in 1960.
CANBERRA,
2nd Moy, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. A51961
SIR WINSTON CHURCHILL'S RETIREMENT
Statement b-y the Pring Ministers the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
The announcement that Sir Winston
Churchill will not recontest his House of Commons
seat is perhaps not entirely unexpected by those who
know him. But when the period of his membership of
the House terminates, it will be the end of a remarkable
parliamentary era.
Sir Winston has been essentially a great
parliamentarian with a profound low of the House of
Comons and many lively memories of the battles he has
conducted in that foram. All round the world there
will be hundreds of millions of people who will wish
him a happy retirement, a retirement in which he can
Justly recall that we all feel under an immense debt
to him for his courage and leadership.
CANBERRA, 2nd May, 1963. 



OPEING Of TEXTILE DIVISION BUILDINE AT
I8O2ATORIFS~ U4=
30D Wt1 IRL ~ oo
lae kK sou Pu-MWia* t t AiMA
Sir FwoeveIdt amA Wlaes SM Gain
fts NNserWsit I Viii weve the pan*" I
I elweth bIs da ops. C~ ama.
I did Late" them to e ad msa hv mks~ hut
I mt tos u " at UPPw Ywe4. wik d~ toA I ha MtAt
wev44" a so me sm mee Qa I won** tp in
or lss" brest ivig a the t" W m ikr thu vWd
as ys might say* 4811&amp; peld. Usona
am MssmW now ( kLin w so I'll mat In my
de. 01rM zr~ lel rof WtiJnus t tos&amp; ayda yt, hat I is" assW ttuiinu9Welllld M5 vhs~ r aairl"
Yederiek himsel bid to sOW a bout the ftet thu% 6eslopamt
in s meto tBAile inmhstw an -1etl modelrs.
Uhs I ~ eea bay am som o yea we. e bers aM gisI,
WWol Wol, thue it i, Weel was tgo asepled mml
Ueu mw vol,= ~ eWepd4 Its. eesMlAt~ destutatios 1W Not"
as one or thuie of iih; j It emu3 hurl$ be a&amp; Voe"*
In hft, 9 it was Alenh I wet we to laeds a . eqpS of yea" s
asita a similar set or wwmd that I dsm" ed thtthe softh
Is an Imemt eetre I deealt : t it doualt hit.
Adstiag It l-is mowthud luaw do the amp M
thei tbesJudging W thu ampllitios an iit,
little usakime thut i my -h tdy rOdpoebe.( agtr
. sutS. a mil= t rsmethimm am It Is lk* a nwe h
squi eu~ osmaor dx~ eting peunts in tu shou.
Wo re sestI# o ont of ego abmt thee matters.
Asfweolt wol, I It v" ~ se an ratw a sert of
divimo tha~ t1fW35m abv -It golv be lnpW
it ; W&amp; A smbwi. or 48e if you bedea WeLles bReast 1t
ated S ram % Mt beftz. 21gedU be me" as a g
aM'uthheU PPA beemms tu wsVtui w m ew or
mats. Theme is a let of trath in this ma it is oily aly
Inm or m ti I-have ud nothig Th do with It Wut It Is In
MWoft time ewbwlogall Oat tow sia--4 sts have
aetlyity avA am totwsmeoh
of wool out Co~ vse" vb~ mo of onamIe, take mm0 of the
issout of theuieaes Mlb. i
0hsite a muttal point of vie IhUf or Meoth
eaiillyavA theurehr I tM* k It Is tw-emusy emd idi_ 6
toln t aU S b ee oAsevo to w Ad bet to mop
thema ombws toam, tUwn. things wim Iwemsgly
v wele h01Mm~ moft kalsl~ l kads to
beprsstZto Mu vwlA and to insehywth i
amuty se" ters in Whu afufi fibrme* l7d . o
-on this is ur Wotm hmUief ve have 647y to keep an
0000* 00/ 2 
' 1
Ii
jl Ii U Ii Ii 000 
3*
AP" a n 0 se 0Like this = att be mmily the Who
growmwool orthe Pople vim buy wol bat = aMasse
of people this a Wabol of what an he dams b
00-. PeWstiQ bet1W tUS 04etifte wssIMw and the ma Outside,
we avel I thiakip 004 at the begisilag er this
Pw~ b1. it is mesm~ tliie ted in AWtielia bOMeus Is
.11 tbwo p1rms ilWs ~ eie w ew ew gwpwMe
to be teima late, seemt nt may tUe meth pysimgoat
whieh hretewistle11 s selyli tofw mombet
si last. Qomte of them wiftheII I t pl a
thai, saftlad aM * thfs, Permwba---m a Ilitt3le
Jel"$ sof the of e -1 1 T b
mintste sl I Gkm emethl abeu; It ad beer It teas.
! h~ ttbeil i~ e to be lsumd up 1w the
one tha that wil omome tbat is a S3~ voaS
Sahli dewstandiftg or tk&amp; rft that six ousths 106 i
W; st9uWMn6 0 disevvry fha the labmrtwy to tUs spat
AMPSe It Needs * 0 be 09lqMO IS six iNatb&amp; SOW Mt Of th*
history of the lin~ s hiek MR naee be swemptuied. ? lm
* Is st enmo side em mttin. We = mt soft time omw
hustwmliat I ital-" Mpotasm f e" Ma that vhet Is
415ew~ weS-Mm thw emm tIs beg"* e long, binig -3-ed
IV timh 5 IV, the ^ 041w bb&amp; mttot
C rewier dbmp a betthwssMtha t
Sir* I wmld like to ovsplimt you if I mey on
tewmwft3 Vert you do hoe th" s eur a1 I eareetate
It to the ftUl aa I think It Is sa -s-my-a ll aeslsed
All 6r Atisallao All I soedo am* is to wemiad
this audlemn this 1tumftlaw Uilemm that I hae
af'lieea4 deslared the bdidng oven* 



GREY BY-ELECTION MEETING HELD AT PORT
PIRIE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ON 6TH MAY, 1963
Speech by the Prime MInIster, the Rt. Hong Sir Robert Menzies
Sir Mr. Premier, Parliamentary Colleagues and Ladies and
Gentlemen I want to say how indebted I am to the Premier
( Interjector " Speak up") Can't you hear me? ( Laughter)
I am very indebted to the Premiei who was this afternoon ssfroray
from here as Mount Gambiev for having come up here tonight
they tell me that he knew the road so well that he drove
himself. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
But before I begin to engage in a by-election
speech in a political statement, I would like to say here in
Port Pirie how much I regret the occasion of this by-election.
After all, you had for very many years the late Mr. Russell as
your Member, and in my experience of him, he spared no effort
in his desire to serve you in Parliament0 ( Hear hear.
Applause) We all liked him li. ry much. I was delighted as I
came in here tonight to have the opportunity of shaking hands
with his daughter, who gave him devoted assistance for a long,
long time in the work that he was doing for you, ( Applause)
But the fact that he has gcne and that we ar-e
having a by-election will serve to dlsolose, I think, a very
interesting fact, and that was that Edgar Russell probably
secured many votes from people who woul-d not not normally be
Labour supporters, I am ncit criticising that; I think it
admirable but I think it vas due to his own personality and
his contacts with people in the electorate, so that the Party
lines as we would normally call them tended to be blurred.
That Is entirely an honcurable thing to be recorded about any
man0 But it means that at this by-election we will tend, I
suppose, to come back to what I will call Party lines so that
people who are Liberals will support the Liberal candidate and
people who are Labour will support the Labour candidate except
those who support the Independent Labour candidate and so on.
And I am here, not only as Prime Minister, but as Leader of
the Liberal Party to do what I can to bring about the result
of having Mr. V. Dyason in the Federal Parliament. ( Applause)
And for that reason, of course I am delighted to see so big
a meeting and delighted to find that apart from one chap who is
so eager to get to question time that he can hardly wait
( Laughter) there appears to be a very sound body of opinion
represented here tonight in favour of the candidate I am
supporting. Now, Sir, we have had up in Canberra, a couple of
" No Confidence" motions and when an Opposition moves a " No
Confidence" motion it, as A rule, selects the topic as the topic
on which it would like to go to an election if it won in the
vote, After all, let us admit it at once my Government has,
with a Speaker in the Chair, a majority ol one in division.
A majority of one. ( To interjector And if the one were you,
my friend I would resign at once) ( Applause) After all, if
an Opposition moves a " No Confidence" motion, and the Government
has a majority of one, then all the Opposition has to do is to
detach one voter from the Government side if possible and the
Government is out and we are out to the country at an election.
And, therefore, it is proper, I think, to regard the first of
60096.0.0./ 2 
2-
their " No Confidence" motions which was fairly general, as
representing the issues on which they want to go to the
country and, therefore, I think I am entitled to treat them
as the issues on which they would desire the Grey by-election
to be fought, and I want to say something about the two issues
which they raise, One of them is internal and the other is external.
It makes a fair balance, if I say something to yoa, I hope not
tediously, about each of them. In the first place, they said
that our economic management of the affairs of Australia had
resulted in chaos, in next-door to disaster, in the halting
of the economic processes, in a stagnant economy; in fact, I
could hardly remember all the words that they used to describe
the shocking state that Australia is in. And yet, I must
say as one who goes around Australia a fair bit, I don't feel
that I am going through a country that is suffering from
disaster. Do you? Some of these people who talk about
Australia being in a depressed condition, near disaster, ought
to have a look at some other countries in the world. I venture
to say to you, and I say this after now being continuously in
office for over thirteen years, that this country has the
highest standard of living of any country in the world.
( Applause) ( To interjectors Save it up, boys; save it
up, and practise the questions for after the meeting. Sit
down) I will be able to answer questions when the meeting is
over, Now, Sir, let me just support that broad statement.
We have had, in this period of time, the most tremendous
development in Australia. If you look around the nation
and the nation matters and see the enormous works of development
that have gone on all over Australia in the last ten years,
then you will at once admit that; there has been a tremendous
period of developmento Now, a great period of development in
the country ( Now this silly chap is talking on his fingers
to me ( Laughter) You would almost think I was deaf. Save it
up, mate. Save it up, Go out and buy a bottle of soda water)
( Laughter) Now, I was saying, ladies and gentlemen and
everybody here knows it is true we have had the most phenomenal
development going on in this country, and that development has
been made possible for a variety of reasons, one of which is
the fact that we have had a tremendous programme of migration
into Australia during that time, and it is quite clear to
anybody who looks into the matter that unless we had had this
enormous population increase, we could nev ELave had this degree
of development that we have had in the last ten years,
( Interjector " Who brought them in, Bob?") The Labour Party.
I agree, ( Laughter) You know, I am very glad you made that
interjection because this great migration programme was begun
by the Labour Government in which Mr. Calwell was the Minister
for Immigration, and I have always made it quite clear that I
regard this as a very statesmanlike action ,....( Interjector
" You was a Labour man") I've never been a Labour man, Oh, ho,
ho. ( Laughter) ( Applause) Oh, really, if you repeat that you
will hurt my feelings, ( Laughter) I have my own pride, you
must remember that. Oh, sit down. You know I have a sneaking
idea they came here to hear me, not you, ( Applause)
You will, of course, ladies and gentlemen, not
fail to realise that whenever somebody like myself is on a
platform and scoring something, some alleged Labour supporter
will get up and squeal like a stuck pig. It is always the
way. I repeat One of the statesmanlike things done by the 
-3-
last Labour Government was to implement the migration
programme and the migration programme will always be
associated, to his credit with Arthur Calwell. I have
given him credit, time after time. The amazing thing to
me is that although if I were a Labour man I would be
claiming credit heavens high for the migration programme,
half the Labour interjectors I encounter around Australia
are not only ashamed of the immigration programme. but appear
to be against it. That is an astonishing thing 6o me,
because without it, we wouldn't have had the rate of development
that we have hado
Now, there is another factor in this matter.
Australia with 10 million, 10J million people can't
( Interjector 11) !-ell, it will soon be 11. You do
something about it. ( Laughter) ( Applause) Now, ladies and
gentlemen, with 10 million, 101, 11 million people in
Australia. we cannot out of our own savings though we do
save money very well we cannot cut of our own savings,
produce all the capital moneys that are needed to develop
this country at the rate at which we must develop it, if we
are to hold it. Therefore, we have found, over these last
ten years, a tremendous coming-in of capital from outside
Australia not just coming in on Government borrowings;
there has been a little of that but coming in primarily by
the establishment or building up of new industries in
Australia. Hundreds of millions each year come into Australia
on private capital investment account and this has been a
phenomenally good thing for us, Wherever I go in Australia,
I can see factories, enterprises of various kinds which are
there because overseas investors had enough confidence in
this country, in the stability of its government, in the
liveliness of its future, to invest their money in it, and
you will see that wherever you goo
Have you ever heard any Labour leader in the
Federal Parliament say a kind word about investment from
overseas because I never have, I would be fascinated to
know who her anybody in the audience over heard a good word
spoken by Labour about overseas investment in Australia, On
the contrary one of their great slogans is that Australia
is putting itself in pawn to the rich overseas interests.
Now ladies and gentlemen, that is one of the other factors
in the growth. But another factor is related to our internal
attitude in Australia, the spirit of confidence, the desire
to get on with the job and that reflects itself in the fact
that in the primary industries vital to our future the
cost level of which is vital to future we have seen,
in my own time of office most remarkable increases in
production. I'm not talking in terms of money, but talking
in terms of actual physical production of the matters concerned.
I had a look at the figures I won't weary you with many of
them. Beef and veal 37 per cent, up sugar 96 per cent, up;
wool 61 per cent, up; wheat 30 per cent. up; mutton and
lamb 83 per cent, up. These are very remarkable figures
because they show that in spite of all the difficulties of
varying prices, the problems that primary industries have had
in overseas markets all the kinds of problems that we have
had leading up to the discussions on the Common Market, the
man on the land in Australia has kept on improving his efficiency
and increasing his production and the result is that the nation
is wealthier to that extent. 
Now, Sir, apart from that let me say thiso
When we came into office when was it? at the end of 1949,
Australia was importing coal. We had the finest coal measures
in the Southern Hemisphere but we were importing coal5 and we
were importing coal because the coal-mining industry had been
allowed to fall into a state of chaos,, ( Interjector -" Rubbish")
These are the factsø Well you must tell me sometime how it is
that we had to import coal, If we had all the coal in the
ground, we were still importing it and importing it from India,
from South Africa, paying through the nose for the freights on
it because charter rates were extraordinarily high.
Today, the production of coal in Australia has gone
up 64 per cent. and so far fr'om having to import coal we are
now developing a growing and substantial export market for coal.
Indeed, one of the things done by my Governmont on the east coast
has been, in relation to Gladstone and Newcastle, to provide
extra coal-loading facilities so that these export markets
could be developed. Now, that is a pretty good thing isn't it?
Something that any Government might be proud of any group of
governments might be proud of to know that in these important
commodities, productivity in Austre. lia in actual terms has been
going up. And indeed, Sir, we are now, as a result of a series
of wise incentive policies on our part, developing with the
co-operation of intelligent manufacturers, exports of manufactured
good, There was a time ( Interjector " How many shares
have you got?") Look, don't cry yourself to sleep wanting to
know how many shares IVve got in something. I've got a terrific
set of shares in Australia Unlimited. ( Hear, hear. Applause)
Now, Sir3 I was saying about manufacturing, that
we decided that we oughtn~ t to have all our eggs in one basket,
that we ought not to depend as much as we have in the past on
the exports of primary prcducts0 We need to develop our exports
in that field,, We need, and we are working for it at this
very moments both here and abroad, to get a more stabilised price
level " or the things that are produced on the land, a safer
market, a more stable market, But if we are going to be a large
country, industrialized as well as on the land, then we must
develop export manufactures. ( Inaudible interjections) All
right. Some chap who is obviously an old friend of mine, he
says Did he say that the Labour Party did this thirty
years ago? I wonder0( Interjector " Remember what you
said thirty years ago") Of course I can't,. Ive even forgotten
what stupid remarks you were making thirty years ago, ( Laughter,
Applause) When Labour went out of office, the exports of
manufactured goods from Austra]. ia were œ 29M and this year, they
are œ 134M. Now that is a tremendous growth from œ 29M to
œ 134M and I am hoping very much that as a result of the taxation
incentives and other arrangements that have been made, we will
find that our manufacturing industries will increasingly be
able to produce, at a cost level which will enable them to
compete in overseas markets and Lord knows, there are plenty
of them around Australia on competitive terms, and when that
happens we will find that we have a balanced economic growth.
But all these things, if they are to be done, require something
that is not always popular, They require a stable value of
money. You can't expect the man on the land to go on saying," Oh,
yes. I'll keep on producing, I'll increase my production of
this or that" if in fact inflation is going on inside Australia
so fast that all his costs have built up against him while his
.00./ 5 
price from overseas remains uninfluenced by inflation. And
therefore, for the man on the land, stable currency is of the
essence, And for the manufacturer, people say, " Oh, well,
he doesn't care because he can pass it on to the customer,"
A manufacturer can't pass it on to the overseas customer,
Therefore, he has a tremendous interest in keeping his costs
stable ana, indeed, cutting them down by increased efficiency
of plant and of management and so one And the man who is
employed, whether it is on the land or in the city, in the
factory, he has a lively interest in avoiding inflation because
I may tell you, to take a simple example, he is a very
substantial holder of savings in the savings banks.
Do you know, ladies and gentlemen, it is a thing
worth remembering, that in the savings banks Australia, there
are 10 million accounts and that the average in each of these
accounts is f185. That shows how poverty-stricken we are in
Australia, Ten million accounts in savings banks average
œ 18o5 And the employee who has money in the savings bank
he doesntt want to see the value of it run away by inflation.
The man and there are millions of them in Australia who
insures his life against his old age for lage or small sums
doesn't want to see the value of his insurance run awayo
Let me remindl you that there is no man who has got a livelier
interest in stabilised price levels than tha man who works for
wages. And what has occurred?
The fact is that as a result of policies which
sometimes have been unpopular I remember them very well
we have had stability i. n the cost and price level in Australia
for just about three years, This, of course, is the most
tremendous encouragement to people from other countries who
are looking around with surplus capital to invest and who are
looking for a country in which there is stability, in which
there is security, in which there won't be ratbag governments
or irresponsible governments. They have had plenty of
experience in South America of countries that turned out to
be completely unreliableo Increasingly, they are coming here
and so far from resenting it I take great pride in it and I
hope and believe that Australians all do,
Having spoken about that, I want to turn to the
other branch of the famous censure motiono ( Interjector
" I want to ask you a question") Oh, well, you are in a bit
of a hurry, lad, because when the meeting is over, when I am
finished you can get up and ask it but I might tell you in
advance that I will listen to the question and you'll jolly
well listen to the answero ( Applause)
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I perhaps occupied a
little too much time on that, because I want to turn to the
external problems on which the Labour Party took us to task,
What was their policy when they dealt with external affairs?
It seemed to me that they had two or three points and these
ought to be understood because if they win the next election,
these two or three points of theirs will represent the policy
of Australia, so let's all be careful as to what we are doing
about it. Dontt think you can have the best of all worlds at
all times. If the present Government's policy is bringing us
in the world, increasingly, friendship and security, then you
must hesitate before you throw it away in order to experiment
with people whose policy I am just now about to describe. 
6
First of all they said, " Internationally, well,
Australia has some troops in Malaya." Quite true, we have some
troops in Malaya as part of the strategic reserve under the
South East Asia Treaty. The South East Asia Treaty which we
signed, which we advocated, contains in its membership Pakistan.
Thailand, the Philippines, Australia and New Zealand, France and
the United States of America and the United Kingdom. This is
the group included in the South East Asia Treaty, commonly called
SEATO. And we have, with Great Britain, and New Zealand,
contributed to a relatively small reserve force in Malaya0 When
it went there, our friends the Malayans, under their distinguished
Prime Minister, the Tunku Abdul Rhaman, were being harassed by
a lot of Communist bandits in their northern counties. These
people were being fed and assisted from across the border and
it took a long time to defeat them and control them, and our
troops took a part in this business I had always thought, with
the warm approval of the general public of Australian
But the Labour policy, as expressed the other day
by a prominent front-bench Member and you know front-bench
Members of the Opposition at Canberra don't speak outside the
instructions of the 36 men outside, so this is authoritative you
may be perfectly certain he said, " Well, withdraw the troops
from Malaya. What has Malaya to do with us?" This is what
this spokesman for Labour said " What has Malaya to do with us?"
And now the proposal has been advanced and is considerably
advanced, to establish Malaysiaooo.. ( To interjector I know,
you are interested in everything except thiso You said that
earlier, But Australians are interested in this) ( Applause)
The Prime Minister of Malaya sponsored a proposal
under which tte Federation of Malaya and Singapore, where the
great naval base is and the three Borneo provinces, Sarawak,
Brunei and North Borneo should, with the agreement of their own
people, come together in a Federation of Malaysia and we, as
the Government warmly approve of this, as does the Government
of the United Kingdom as does the Government of the United States,
because this would establish a hard circle of countries highly
friendly to us and we need countries that are highly friendly
to us auite frankly, because all the pressure in our direction
here is from Communist China, down through Laos down through
North Vietnam and with constant threats on the Thailand border,
We would need to be blind if we didn't realise that the threat to
our future comes from that direction and from that source and so
we say we are all for Malaysia.
The Labour Party, after its recent Conference of the
36, who gave their orders, said, ' Woll, yes we have nothing to
say about in Malaysia in particular except that we are glad that
they will no longer be colonies." Not a positive word about
Malaysia, The Melbourne " Age", one of the greatest newspapers
in the Southern Hemisphere, wrote a leading article on it of the
most pungent description. It was a poor, equivocal, shuffling
attitude towards a great problem,
Then there is the next one, What is their policy
about nuclear affairs? Well, I hope you won't mind if I take
just five or ten minutes to deal with this because it is of
the first importance, They are bgginning to talk as if they
were the only people that wore against nuclear war, You know,
ban-the-bomb and all this business. They act as if they
were the only people against it. Presumably we are a lot of
blood-thirsty fellows in Government who want to get on with a
nuclear war. And they have the unparalleled impertinence in
a0* 0e aee* ac/ 
7
the course of debate of' quoting what the Commonwealth Prime
Ministers agreed on a couple of years ago i~ n London, forgetting
that I was one of them, and indeed not knowing perhaps that
the paragraph they most rely on was actually written by me and
accepted unanimously by all the Prime Ministers present. Now
we said two things on this disarmament problem. Wde said we
were all for dlsarmament7 we were all for getting armaents
down, step by step. we believed and, of course, we still
believe that the eliminating of nuclear and conventional
armaments ( non-nuclear armaments) must be so phased that at
no stage will any country or group of countries obtain a
significant military advantage. So I want you to follow what
that means. At the present time, Jit you talk about orthodox
weapons, conventional weapons, great armies, air forces not
devoted to the use of nuclear weapons and so on the Soviet
Union would outnumber the entire world put togelhero' If you
could abolishi all the rniclear weapons in' -the world at thin
moment and stick thorn in the uttermost parts of the sea, there
would be nothing to prevent the Soviet Union from taking charge
of Europe any fortnight it occurred to them, because she has
overwhelming power in non-nucloar forces, It is the fact that
the United States primarily and Great Britain to a certain
extent have nuclear weapons which serves as a deterrent to them
that prevents them from continuing their aggression in Western
Europe, an aggression which has been halted. now for about
eight or nine years. Now this is t emendously importat
What we said as Prime Ministers was, " Well. look, it would be
silly to wipe out or to reduce nuclear arms if you left the
others untouched, Therefore they must all be dealt with.
They must all be cut down -toget; her so that no country, or group
of countries is put at the mercy of' another country Qr roup
of countries. We all agreed on this. The Pr~ ime Ministers,
with an imiheasurable variety of ideas on most things, were
unanimous, And in the second place, we came to this paragraph
that I referred to, as I have a particular interest in it,.
and we said this, I am telling you this because I am tired of
al! this nonsense about the Labour Party being the only people
who are interested in this matter. We said this " Every
effort should be made to secure rapid agreement -to the permanent
banning of nuclear weapon te7. sts by all nattions and to arrangements
for verifying the observance of the agreement. Such an agreement
is urgent, otherwise further countries may soon become nuclear
powers, wicih would increase the danger of war and further
complicate the problem of disarmament."
Not much to quarrel wita there, I venture to say.
That is what we wanted. That is what we want. But ever
since that time, every conference at Geneva designed to bring
about a cessation of nuclear tests has dealt with positive
proposals by Great Britain and the United States to cease them
and complete obstruction by the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union
gets out of it by saying, " Well, it's all right for you, but we
are not going to have anybody inside our territories inspecting
what we do and finding out whether we are making nuclear tet.
The Communist power, the great Communist nuclear power the
O3oviet Union is today solely responsible for the fact ? hat
neclear tests are allowed to go on,
Therefore, ladies and gentlemen, I venture to say
that the Labour Party starts on this problem a little bit
a000 so 00a8 / 8 
8-
off-balance, but having claimed in this rather arrogant fashion
that they are the great spcnsors of getting rid of nuclear war,
then, egged on let's speak quite frankly egged on by the
Communist Party which began this scheme, they have now said,
" We are for making the world South ofl the Equator a nuclearfree
area, not allowing any nuclear weapon to come into it or
be discharged from it or be stock-piled in it or to be made
in it." This is the policy that you will be voting for in the
next election in Australia if you vote -Tor Labour,
Now, I just want to remind you, ladies and gentlemen,
what that means. ', Je are not a nuclear power. We have stood
clear of this kind of thing. We are not ambitious to be building
nuclear weapons. UIe think the fewer hands that they are in
the more chance of avoiding disaster in the world. But, under
the South East Asia Treaty and more particularly under the ANZIJS
Pact which my Government sponsored Australia, New Zealand
the inhited States under that pact, America is our ally, ana
America is a nuclear power and if a igreat war arose, you don't
suppose that we would be left out of it. Would we be just
the unwilling prize of victory to whoever won? It is worth
thinking about. But if a great world war broke out which
Heaven forbid would the United States a..( Interjector-
" You'd resign tomorrow) You couldn't be more wrong. I
resigned in August, .1941. It is about as accurate as most of the
things you have been saying,
However, ladies and gentlecmen,, I want to pursue this
serious topic,. Suppose there were a great war, and suppose
China by this time has developed nuclear weapons as undoubtedly
she will before long, and the United StEates of America is our
ally, and the United States decides to use nuclear weapons
herself in answer to a nuclear attack. Now this is something
that is no use shutting ou-r eyes to and pretending there is no
such danger,, We have to open our minds and our eyes and look
at it quite plainly, Would we say would you like the
Australian Government rather to say to the United States, " You
are not to have in the Southern Hemisphere, south of the
equator, any submarinas with nuclear weapons on them, you are
not to fly around south of the equator any aircraft with nuclear
weapons on them because thiat's against our beliefs. Suppose the
United States said, " We don't care what you say, we are going
to do it." This is a great contribution to our alliance
isnst it? But suppose, on the other hand, they said, " Well,,
we'll do what you want us to do. We will leave Australia out
of all this business. We will put our fellows in and take the
rap." How would they get into the Indian Ocean, which
strategically is essential -to an attack on the Soviet Union or
on Communist China? Do you know how they would have to get
into the Indian Ocean? Through the Suez Canal. You realise how
long that would be oren, or through the Straits of Malacca,
next door to Indonesi. a,, ( Continuous interjections) It's all
right, ladies and gentlemen, I sympathise with you, but it is
a well-known statistical fac~ t that in a population of say, 800,
you are bound to have a couple of nuts,, ( Laughter, applause)
The third item of Labour policy which I want to
mention to you quite briefly concerns itself with the proposed
installation of a radio signalling station by the United States
in the North-West of Australia, North-West Cape
( To constant interjector You ydon't think you've done me any
harm, do you? On the contrary, youlve been worth 100 votes
tonight to Vern Dyason) ( Applause) 000.0./ 9 
9-
I come to the final aspect of this matter, the radio
communications station in the North-West of Western Australia,
Here is something which, as everybody now knows, I hope and
itfs been made clear from the beginning is a radio signalling
station, under which the United States authorities can convey
messages to their naval vessels within the range of the station,
that is to say, in the Indian Ocean and the South West Pacific.
Very important that they should have this as in other parts of
the world, This is rather a blank spot. And they asked us
whether we would agree ou~ o allies and of course we said we
would, It wasn't without interest that it is going to be very
expensive and they are going to pay for it. It is a pure means
of conveying messages to their naval vessels and has nothing to
do with controlling thei~ r fire or these fanciful things that
people have been talking about, This is a perfectly commonplace,
straightforward idea.
What did the Labour Party do about it? ( Interjector
" What about the 36?" 1) Thank you very much. Yes, I wanted that
question. Yes, I'll tell you. The 36 outside bosses of the
Labour Party because the Labour Party doesn~ t believe in
control by Parliament but by control by 36 outside bosses who
lay down the law the 36 outside men or women they decided
ultimately that they would approve of this proviled that the
United States was not to use it in the event of war without
the approval of the then Australian Government. ( Interjector
" That's fair enough") Well, you say so, but I' 11 make two
comments on it,
First of all, that was carried by 19 to 17; 17 out
of the 36, apparently, didn~ t want them there at all and but
for one man switching his vote, it would have been Aall or
19.. 17 the other Now, how do you like that? Don't forget
that the 36 are not dead; they meet from time to time and they
lay down the lauy from time ' to tim-and every man in the Federal
Parliament on the Labour side is bound by it. Just within a
whisker of saying to thie United States of America, " You keep
off."' They must be feeling strong. They must be feeling that
Australia is a tremendously powerful country in spite of the
wrctched Menzies Government. They are prepared to say, 2We
are able to go alone, Wle don't wrant you the United States,.
coming along and building a n~ e-ion,." Imore fantastic point
of view I have never heard of and yet it went within a touch
of being carried, and the 19 said, " Yes well, no doubt there is
a lot in what you say, but it will be all right if, in the event
of a war, the Americans can be ordered out by us."
Now, ladies and gentlemen, do you like to imagine a
war in this part of the wrorld in which we are engaged, in which
the United States is not alongsIde us? Do you like to think of
it and if you were an American, woldv you expect that if you
hal an alliance with Australia, Australia would be along if
you were engaged in a war? The United States of America cantt
be engaged in a war in which it requires these facilities for
its naval forces unless that's a great war and a great war
against whom? Against the Cormmunist powers. There is no other
enemy, And to think that any nation would be prepared to invest
its money and its time and its skill in putting up a signalling
station on the North-West coast of Aus-tralia only to be told
that at the very moment it needed it, it couldn't use it, This
to me is sheer lunacy. Lunacy. And if that point of view
prevailed, I wouldn't give tuppence for the durability of our
arrangements with the United States of America and, quite frankly,
B &amp; 0606/ 1 0 
if I couldn't give tuppence for the durability vr thzoce
arrangements, I would-n't be -able to offer much for our
chances of surviLval0
And yet, this unreal view, this fantastic view is
the one that went within well was carried by 19-17 and
but for a little accident en route, it would have gone still
further and the Americans would have been ordered out if
I may be completely Irish before they arrived. ( Laughter)
Ladies and gentlemen, these are great problems
and they are problems here in a by-election, they are problems
in the next Australian election and, apart from being a matter
of political debate or argument, they are great problems for
our country, because this is our country and we have the
liveliest sense of obligation to preserve it security and
to preserve the standards and future of the people who live
in it, Now I really thiink, if I may say so, that this
by-olection where there is an a-xnirable candidate as you all
know, gives you a splendid opportunity of firing a shot across
the bows of the Labour Opposition at Canberra,
1U 



FOR PRESS P. M. 36/ 63
CCMI'. ON-AI TH PO STGRADUJATE SCHOLARSHIP S
Statement by the Prime Minister,
The Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
The Commonwealth in 1959 began a scheme of
postgraduate awards designed to encourage the training of
research workers in Australian universities. The scheme is
administered by the Commonwealth Scholarships Board in
co-operation with the universities. In each of the first
three years 100 awards were available. In 1962 the
Comonwealth Scholarships Board advised that the quality
of applicants was such that an increase in the number was
warranted. As a result 125 awards were made in 1962.
Following a further review by the Commonwealth
Scholarships Board, the Government has authorised the Board.
to offer additional awards this year and in future years.
It is expected that by 19,64 the quality of candidates will
justify more than 200 awards yearly,
The availability of so many qualified young graduates
is an indication of th.-level of work of our Australian
universities as well as of the quality of the students. The
fact that universities are able to provide post-graduate
training for those incixeasitig rnumbers of Commwonwealth
Scholarship award holders, as well as for Australian and
overseas students holding other awards, is evidence of the
development in the past few years of advanced studies in
this country,
This is gratifying because it is from pcrsons under-taking
this advanced training that we will recruit not only the
future research workers of the Commonwealth, but also many
members of the larger teaching staffs in our universities,
technical colleges, teachers colleges and other institutions
of higher education,
The Government has also examined a report of the
Scholarships Board on the operation of the Commonwealth
Scholarship Scheme. Under this scheme, since 1961 some
! 4,000 open entrance awards have been available annually and
in addition the Board is authorised to offer later years
awards to students who have successfully started university
studies. The rising standard of applicants for Commonwealth
scholarships was noted, as wel~ l as the success of the Scheme
in encouraging able students to undertake university studies.
No immediate changes in this Scheme ave proposed, but another
review will be made later this year.
CANBERRA
May 8, 1963 



FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 38/ 1263
DEATH OF NEW ZEALAND HIGH COMMISSIONER IN
AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzie s
I heard the news immediately after my arrival
in Melbourne this morning and I was deeply shocked by it.
Mr. Johnston was a splendid representative
of his country, well-informed, easy and friendly. It is
a tragedy that he should be cut off in the middle of his
service to our sister country at a time when he seemed to
have many years of public-spirited life left to him.
:. Ieex tend our very deep sympathy to his w. idow
and family.
CANBER. RA, 7
May, 1963. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 39/ 1961
DEATH OF NEW ZEALAND HIGH COMMISSIONER
Statement bv Hon SriotJb ert Menzies
The Government of the Commonwealth of Australia
has sent the following message to Mrs. Johnson
" ON BEHALF OF THE AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT
AND PEOPLE I EXPRESS TO YOU OUR DEEPEST SORROW
AT THE DEATH OF YOUR HUSBAND THE HIGH COMMISSIONER.
HE HAS BEEN A DISTINGUISHED REPRESENTATIVE OF HIS
GOVERLNME&amp; NT AND HIS COUNTRY AND HIS PASSING WILL BE
A GREAT LOSS. AUSTRALIA HAS ALSO LOST A TRUE FRIEND.
I SHOULD LIKE YOU TO KNOW THAT OUR THOUGHTS ARE WITH
YOU AT THIS SAD TINE. R. G. MENZIES
PRIME MINISTER"
The following message has been sent to the
Prime Minister of New Zealand from the Prime Minister of
Australia " MY COLLEAGUES AND I ARE MOST DISTRESSED
AT THE SUDDEN DEATH OF YOUR HIGH COMMISSIONER.
SYD JOHNSTON HAD BECOME A WELL-KNOWN AND POPULAR
FIGURE HERE AND DID VERY GOOD SERVICE FOR THE
CO-OPERATION OF OUR TWO COUNTRIES. HE WILL BE
VERY MUCH MISD WE EXTEND OUR SYMPATHY TO YOU
AND YOUR COLLEAGUES AND YOUR COUNTRY."
CANBERRA, May, 1963. 



EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED. BROADCAST OR TELECAST
g RE 6 P. M. ON 12THMAY. 1263
FOR PRESS P. M. NO. 37/ 196-
MINISTER FOR SUPPLY TO GO OVERSEAS
Statement by-the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Minister for Supply the Hon. Allen
Fairhall, is to visit the U. K. and the U. S. A. on
Departmental business during the Parliamentary recess.
The Prime Minister said today that following
a London meeting of the Joint Project Policy Committee
dealing with the future programme of weapons trials at
Woomera, the British Government had invited Mr. Fairhall
to look at United Kingdom developments in guided weapons
and defence production generally.
In France, Mr. Fairhall will have discussions
on the Mirage production programme and support facilities
with the French aircraft company under whose licence
Mirage is being produced. He will also accept the
French Government's invitation to visit the Paris Air
and Space ikhibition.
The Minister's visit to the United States is
at the invitation of James E. Webb, Administrator of the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, for a
review of current and planned NASA activities in Australia,
which are conducted in Australia by, or under the control
of the Department of Supply.
Mr. Fairhall will seize the opportunity
presented by his visit to make calls at New Delhi and
Karachi to discuss with the Governments of India and
Pakistan, matters of mutual interest in Supply, and
might include discussion of the possibility of mutual
exchanges of visits by technical officers in Defence
Production. beMr. Fairhall wilj le ve Australia on a 26th.
H&amp; ew be n to o o 0' the uphe
Department, Mr. Knott.
CANBERRA I
12th May, 1963, 



63/ 04
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 4+ O/ 196-1
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir
Robert Menzies,
I have decided that I should, in the
coming Parliamentary recess, pay a brief visit to
Britain and the United States in response to invitations
which I have received from the Governments of those
countries, I will have the opportunity of personal
discussions in London with Mr. Macmillan and in Washington
with President Kennedy. I am in touch also with
Mr. Pearson, the Prime Minister of Canada, in the hope
that we may be able to arrange a discussion between us
in Ottawa. I propose to leave Sydney for London
on 13th June and to return to Australia, by way of
North America, arriving in Sydney on 12th July.
CANBERRA, 13th May, 1963. 



03O4
THE PUBLIC SERVICE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon,
Sir Robert Menzies, in the House of Representatives
on Tuesday, 1h-th May, 1963.
I do not propose to take very long to deal with
what I must say is one of the most half-hearted attacks I
have heard my friend, the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr.
Colwell) make. Indeed one might weJ~ l be pardoned for
speculating why this matter was brought before this House
when it is coming before the Commonwealth Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission on 28th of this month. Is the idea
that the commission will be threatened and conditioned in
advance? This is in the teeth of all arbitration principles.
The fact about this present matter it is worth
reciting is that the case will come before the commission
on 28th May, The reference of the case to the full commission
was made at the request of the Commonwealth Public Service
staff associations. I have already made it clear that, as
distinct from a former occasion when we were experiencing
very acute inflationary pressures when this matter comes
before the commission the Commonwealth does not propose to
intervene. The matter will be contested and thrashed out
between the Public Service Board which, for this purpose,
is the employer and the Public Service organizations.
The honourable gentleman's idea of the arbitration
for which the people for whom he offers to speak have asked
is that the matter should be heard on 28th May and that there
should be no intervention by the Public Service Board except
for the board to say that it agrees to everything for which
the staff associations have asked. Really, I begin to wonder
whether if he had the power, he would, in all the other
applications which will crop up to extend the metal trades
margins decision to other industries, tell the respective
employers that they were not to intervene at the hearings
except to say " Yes". This is a fantasy. I am real1~ shocked
that a man who aspires to be the Prime Minister of Xis
country, and would then be responsible, as I am technically,
for the Public Service administration, should be prepared to
foment an idea of this kind.
Of course he went back a little and stated that in
1952 we introduced legislation which the Parliament passed,
to provide for an appeal procelure or a reference procedure
to the full Arbitration Commission. Why did we do that? We
did it to produce some consistency of results. The honourable
gentleman rather conveniently forgets if he will allow me to
say so, that many people employed by the Commonwealth are
doing exactly the same kind of jobs as are people employed
in a variety of private industries. The oldest game in the
world of industrial arbitration, with which I used to be
extremely familiar, is to jack It up by getting an award from
a limited tribunal and then telling the general tribunal that
it must apply the provisions of that awar'd generally, otherwise
there will be anomialies and industrial unrest. I suppose those
expressions are still being used. o9esooee./ 2 
-2
We knew that there would be industrial unrest and
anomalies unless some procedure was established under which
there was co-ordination of decisions. There had to be
co-ordination of the work of individual commissioners, There
had to be suitable -procedures for references to the full
commission so that the full commission could co-ordinate what
was being done by the individual commissioners. We felt that
in the same way, on appropriate occasions the commission could
be charged with the responsibility of producing some co-ordination
of what it was doing and what the Public Service Arbitrator
was doing. 14e still have the Public Service Arbitrator,
Listening to the honourable gentleman's speech, you would think
we had abolished the Public Service 4rbitrator. Listening to
the honourable gentleman's speech, with its somewhat tenuous
logic, you would think we had abolished all the individual
commissioners under the arbitration system. Of course we have
not. We have provided for co-ordination of their work and for
the determination of the big baoic problems at the top level,
How any one can complain about that, I do not know.
How on this occasion the Public Service associations can
complain retrospecti; vely to 1952, 1 do not know. Their
self-appointed spokesman, the Leader of the Opposition, has
said to us " You did a terrible thing in 1952. You wretched
people wanted to produce some consistency between decisions
over a wi~ e field," Now his complaint is that there is not
to be consistency over a wide field, When we say, on the
application of the Public Service unions themselves, that we
will go to the commission -the commission that made the first
decision and allow it to determine what should happen in
these matters, they say, " That is a funny th~ ing to do unless
you agree to go to the commaission and tell it to do what we
want it to do," That is a pretty strange proposal and all
the more strange when one remembers that subsequenZ to the
legislation of 1952 we had in 195' 9-60 the increase in
salaries margins if you wish to use the more precise term.
That matter wont to the full bench of the commission on the
application of the public service association, just as this
present application has. So apparently the now rule as
stated by the Labour Party, is: Ask for the matter Zo go
to the commission and do your best to get it on in time. The
unions cannot claim that we have held up their application on
this occasion. The application will be heard on 28th May,
The Labour Party then says, " Use parliamentary representatives
to frighten members of Parliament or to have the commission
itself feel that there is a great switch of opinion against
it." We must be timidl
Mr. Speaker, I have noticed in the local newspaper
a large and costly advertisement inserted by the Administrative
and Olrical Officers Association of the Commonwealth Public
Service. I must say I have had a happy experience of Commonwealth
civil servants. I have not mot one of the typo referred
to in the advertisement and I would refuse to believe that
such people represent a majority of the men who work so
faithfully and so objectively, not only for this Government
but for the country as a whole. It is a novel experience for
me to be told, " Come down quietly or we will convert ourselves
into a political pressure group." A letter has been circulated,
and a copy of it has been handed to me by my friend..
Mr, Peters Who is your friend? 00 0 0 a 
-3
SIR ROBERT MENZIES The honourable member for Ryan ( Mr.
Drury). The letter is a fascinating document. I do not know
a single Commonwealth civil servant who could have stooped to
write " Should I not obtain salary justice on this
occasion through the persistence of the Governmentts
attitude I must point out that as a retaliatory
measure I will cast my vote against you in this
electorate at the next election."
Do you suppose I will lose any sleep over that
threat? If I were any other honourable member of this House
I should take as an insult the suggestion that I could be
frightened into changing my public pclicy persuaded but
frightened by these foolish threats. I do not believe for a
moment that more than a tiny percentage of Commonwealth civil
servants wouldcb'eam of saying, not only to us, but also to
all the other people of Australia who outnumber them:
' Yb are not concerned about the great issues
that affect the safety and growth of the country.
We are not concerned with any matter of public policy
except our salaries. Give us what we are after."
Mr. Haylen They did not say that,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES : They did say that, At least that is
what the few people reponsible-for this concoction say. They
say, " 1Unless you do what we want in this regard, we will
convert ourselves into a political pressure group and vote
against you." As far as I am concerned they are welcome to
vote as they think proper. If I were in their place I should
hesitate before I set myself at variance on these matters with
the rest of the Australian people, but that is a matter for
these people themSelves to determine, All I want to point out,
and in the simplest possible terms, is that these threats proceed
in relation to a matter which in a fu) w days will be before the
lawful tribunal the very tribunal that has already dealt
with the margins applica-tion in the metal trades case. That
tribunal will not be pressed by the government of the country
by way of intervention. It will thrash the matter out and
will arrive at a conclusion, Following its invariable practice
the Government will accept the tribunal's decision, Is this
a threat that somebody else will not accept that decision?
This is something now. r I do not for one moment believe that
such an improper exercise of the forms of this House designed
solely to bring influence to bear on the tribunal will have
the sympathy or support of either the general public of
Australia or of 95 per cent, of members of the Public Service
of the Commonwealth. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 42/ 1963
SHOW TO BE OPENED BY TELEPHONE HOOKUP
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, tomorrow afternoon
at 2.30 will officially open the Moree Agricultural Show without being there
in person. Instead, over a two way telephone hookup between Canberra
and Moree, Sir Robert will listen to the Mayor of Moree introducing him and
will then perform the opening ceremony by speaking into a microphone on his
desic. A public address system at the Moree showgrounds will
0 amplify his address to the people present.
The telephone hookup for this unusual procedure is being
arranged by the Post Office. The two centres will be connected via Sydney
over a telephone system which will give perfect reproduction in Mores of Sir
Robert's voice. The Prime Minister is performing the ceremony at the
request of the Agricultural Socioty and the Federal Member for Cwydir ( Mr.
Ian Allan). Owing to commitments in Canberra, Sir Robert cannot visit More
personally. But rather than disappoint the residenlts of this important and
progressive centre, he agreed to the opening being performed by " remote control".
CANBERRA: 16th May, 1963. P. M. 



1' tRTH-WEST CAPE NAVAL COMMUNICATION STATION
AGREEMENT WITH U. S.
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
Sir Robert Menzies, in the House of Representatives
on Thursday, 16th May, 1963.
Mr, Speaker I am indebted to the House and I hope
that I will not neea this indulgence. I think that I ought
to begin by saying that I am vastly indebted to the honourable
member for Bowman ( Mr. Comber), who has cast me with a
versatility of role to which I have never aspired. It turns
out that I rode into office on a dead horse that is not
a bad feat sitting at the time in a gilded cage and drawing
a red herring across the trail. I am indebted to my friend
for this, It is in some way a compliment.
There is one thing that I would like to say quite
seriously about the end of ti-ic honourable member's speech
and about other speeches that have been made this afternoon.
This is a vory curious debate, I thought that we were to get
to the heart of this matter and have the points of difference
fought out as they are entitled to be fought out for the
public benefit. But most of the campaign on the Opposition
side of the House has boon directed at justifying the system
of internal government in the Australian Labour Party. No
doubt, this is a very interesting thesis, but it is hardly
an answer to the issues that are being dealt with here in
relation to the establishment of this station and the conditions
on which it ought to be established. However, Sir, I will
not occupy any time on that.
I just want to address myself to some of the remarks
made by the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell), who
if I may say so was in uncommonly vigorous form this alternoon,
He bocame almMs excited, I thought, at one or two stagas,
when he indulged in the luxury of making a little free with
history. I suppose that that is pardonable. For one thing,
he seemed to me to set out to establish that there was not
much wrong with this agreement with the U. S. A. for the stablishmont
of a naval comm-nunication station, That surprised me
having regard to recent events and recent votes. It astonished
me, and it must have astonished some of those opposite who
have taken Trappist vows in the course of this debate, After
all, what did the honourable gentleman say?
Ho attacked my colleague, the Minister for acternal
Affairs ( Sir Garfield Barvrick), for having misled the House
about the effect of the agreement. How far can a man mislead
the House about the effect of an agreement that has been tabled
and is explained in simple and measured terms? The Leader
of the Opposition said " lThere is nothing in this agreement
about solo control. his is a device used by the Attorney-
General" Then later he said, " There is nothing in this
agreement inconsistent with joint control." I am glad to see
the honourable member for Bass ( Mr. Barnard) nodding his head
because that shows that he followed the argument of the Leader
of the Opposition, Therefore, in that event there is joint
control and, if there is joint control, the Australian
Government can veto any decision because obviously joint
control involves the right of veto. So everything in the
garden is lovely. 9 / 2 
-2-
I put this quite seriously to honourable members and
to the people of Australia. They should consider it. I am
repeating the argument which was advanced by the Leader of
the Opposition. If I wore in opposition and entertained those
views I will demonstrate in a moment that they are wrong and
I will face up to the great problem in this matter without any
hesitation I would support the bill ratifying the agreement
without any qualification and without needing to do what the
Leader of the Opposition has done and without engaging in this
by-play. I begin by being puzzled to know where the Leader of the
Opposition, who has been much instructed on this matter, now
stands. Yet I cannot suppose for one moment that he took
forty-five minutes of passion and invective and I repeat, making
singularly free with history I will put it politely just to
say " Yes" to the bill. If one can judge by the atmosphere, one
thing is clear that he does not like the bill or the agreement.
But if I am wrong about that perhaps the Opposition will relieve
me of all my responsibilities by saying, " We are all wholeheartedly
in favour of the agreement," If Opposition members
will say that I will be glad to resume my seat, but they know
that they cannot say that because it is a flat contradiction
of everything that has been happening during their debates.
I will address myself to the genuine issues in this
matter and the deep differences that are disclosed here because
I think that the people of Australia want, quietly and carefully,
to understand them, But before I address myself to the major
task, I want to dispose of the allegation repeatedly made that
we, and in particular I, have concealed the true nature of this
station at North West Capo, Long after the Minister for Defence
( Mr. Townley) had made a statement about this matter, I made
quite a lengthy statement on 17th May last year and again on
26th March this year, saying all that could be said about the
proposed station. There is nothing to be added to or. subtracted
from that today. Indeed, if any confirmation were needed, it
was afforded by the distinguished visiting U. S. Admiral who
came here for the Coral Sea celebrations.
Mr. Allan Fraser Donrt bring him into it,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES We brought him into Australia.
Mr. Allan Fraser Don't bring him into it. That is
very bad.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES Come come, grow up. The Admiral came to
Australia. I wonder what the honourable member would have said
if the Admiral had criticised the Government on this matter,
We would have heard all about it in this place and the television
audience would have listened to it and wondered. All I know
is that the Admiral said, obviously with complete accuracy that
this was a radio communication station and nothing more. That
of course is true. But on 8th May this year the honourable
member for Yarra ( Mr. Cairns) was exercised o say: " You said
that this was a naval communication station to communicate with
naval vessels. You did not mention submarines." I did not
mention submarines. No. I give it to the honourable member
for what it is worth I did not mention aircraft carriers and
yet I am told that they are naval vessels which carry aircraft
and that some of the aircraft are so furnished that they can
deliver nuclear weapons. The Leader of the Opposition used some
pretty hard terms but I would venture to describe the point made
by the honourable member for Yarra as puerile. If any one in 
3-
this place other than the honourable member for Yarra believed
that submarines asnd aircr-aft carriers were not naval vessels,
I would be astonished at the illiteracy of the House,
Therefore, there is no occasion -to alter a single word of
what was said then.
Having said that I want to return for a moment to
the central problem does this agreement provide for sole
control, as my colleague rightly said that It does, or for
joint control, as -the Leader of the Opposition hopes that
it does? This requires two answers. First, what does the
agreement provide? Secondly, is it right, speaking responsibly
on behalf of our own country? As for the agreement itself,
I must say that I was taken aback by he-aring an argument that
the Attorney-General was wrong. The preamble to the agreement
is in these terms " Considering that the establishment, maintenance
and operation of a United States naval communication
station in Austrolia will materially contribute to
that end
That being the end of Common defence
in accordance writh the terms and conditions
set out in this Agreement, the United States Govarnment
may estaiblish Imaintain and operate a naval communication
station.'?
The United States Govern~ ment, not someone else. Then there is
a provision in Article 3 to which my distinguished friend
referred to the effect that the two governmen-ts will consult
from time to time at the request of either government on any
matters connected with this station and its use, Of coursej
We are allies. In that sense we are partners. Of course we
will consult about all sorts of things. We want to be able to
use the station ourselves for our own communications. But
there is nothing in this agreement I had thought this was
the nub of the matter from the point of view of the Labour
Party which proposes joint control of the station which
enables the Australian Government to veto the use of the
station in the event of war. If honourable members opposite
object to that I imagine they do from all that I have heard
and read on this matter, and it is an intelligible view
let them say so. I am here to defend it, to say that this
is a proper arrangement, If it were not made in this sense,
the fact is that in the event of a war breaking out in which
nuclear weapons were involved, if you like, Austraba could
nullify the effect of U. S. nuclear weapons in the Southern
Hemisphere by saying to the U. S, " You are not to use this
communication station,," I will come back later to that aspect
to explain what a fantasy that is and how utterly inconsistent
it would be with the safety of our own country.
I began by saying that I agreed that this agreement
provides for sole control. Therefore the agreement is
inconsistent with the Oppositionfs desire of joint control and
inconsistent with the power which the Opposition wants to say
to the U. S. in the event of war, " You are not to use this
station because it right involve us in some way." I state that
m atter quite clearly. These are the matters at issue. It
would be very advantagoous if the people of 1astralia could see
quite clearly the points on which there is deep division of
opinion between the Government and the Opposition. 0 * 0 
4
Having said that, I want now to clear aside a
little lumber that has come forard in the course+ of this
argument. Argument about the establishment of the station
at North-West Cape gets muddled every now and then with
argument about the establishment of a nuclear-free zone in
the Southern Hemisphere. Indeed, I think the Labour Partyts
ambitions in the direction of a nuclear-free zone have
largely affected its attitude tow-: r2ds the North-West Cape
project and have created within thie Labour Party, putting on
orm side all shams most determined opposition to the establ~ shment
at North-UMs Cape, Labourts argument has become so
muddled that the Leader of the Opposition cited, not for the
first time, the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference of
1961 and said that that Conference produced the right ideas,
I agree; the Conference did produce the right ideas. I
should know something about the two paragraphs to which the
honourable gentleman has constantly referred because I drafted
them at the Conference and I adhere to them.
Paragraph 7 of the communique issued that year
read " Every effort should be made to secure rapid
agreement to the permanent banning of nuclear weapons
tests by all nations and to arrangements for verifying
the observation of the agreement, Such an agreement
is urgent since otherwise further countries may soon
become nuclear powers, which would inc_-oaso the danger
of war and further corm-plicntc the problem of disarmament.
Moreover, an agreement on nuclear tests apart from
its direct advantages would provide a powerful
psychological impetus to agreement over the wider
field of disarmament. 0
Quite true; we said thiat, That is why this Government has
not taken steps to make Australia, in the military sense, a
nuclear power. W! e believe that the fewer hands the greater
and more responsible those hands are in which this terrific
weapon resides, the better for mankind. Earlier in the 1961
communique I recommend this section to my friends the
Commonwealth Prime Ministers said
" The elimination of nuclear and conventional
armaments must be so vast that at no stage will any
country or' group of coiuitries obtain a significant
military advantage,"
This is of course, of fundamental importance. For us to join
with otE~ er peoplet if they can be found to strike out of the
hands of our friends and allies the nuclear weapon in some
vast area while leaving it completely in the hands of our
potential enemies in respect of the same area would, of course,
be hopeless. For us to promote the idea this is something
that people should think about that you will help the
world' s peace by getting rid of nuclear weapons and not
touching conventional armaments is simply a policy which
would leave undisputed power in the hands of the Communist
nations. I do not for a moment say that the Leader of the
Opposition proposed that course, I want to make it quite
clear that this is one of the issues that we must determine.
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Pending disarmament on the grand scale, the existence
of the nuclear deterrent the capacity to deliver the nuclear
deterrent at the right time and in the right place is the
condition by which we live. The nuclear deterrent will cease
to deter if the Communist powers come to think that it cannot
be effectively organised or deployed south of the equator
though from the point of view of thne Communist countries, which
are north of the equator never forget that there will be no
prohibition or inhibition at all. It is essential for the
effectiveness of the deterrent that the United States naval
forces I mean cruisers, destroyers, frigates, aircraft
carriers, submarines and anything else you care to mention
should be within reach of a radio communication station. That
is essential. Sir, I have no expert views to offer on these matters
but the best military opinion that I have been able to discover
is that while it remains possible for Communist China to acquire
nuclear weapons I think that will be agreed to be an understatement
because most certainly in due course Communist China
will acquire nuclear weapons a nuclear-free Pacific Ocean or
Indian Ocean on our side would be suicidal.
I am happy to say that that situation is clearly
understood by 80 per cent, of the people of Australia, Suppose
Communist China gave a guaranteeo I do not suppose any of us
would be very excited by a Communist guarantee, but suppose
that happened. The military disadvantages of a nuclear-free
Southern Hemisphere must be unacceptablo to the United States
and her global allies because such a situation would reduce
their overall nuclear deterrent capabilities, Honourable
members have only to look at the map of the Indian Ocean and
the South-West Pacific area and note where the equator is, to
understand how crippling it would be if, having that power, we
should say to the United Statcs: " You are not to deploy in
the Indian Ocean south of the equator any naval unit carrying
nuclear weapons or any aircraft on an aircraft carrier carrying
nuclear weapons," In the world picture, the Indian Ocean is
strategically placed and under those circumstances to which
I have just referred, if you were to defend yourself against
Communist aggression, naval units would have to come in through
the Suez Canal on the one side or through the Straits of Malacca
on the other. Really, the safety of our country is of paramount
importance to use We are not to trifle with it in this way,
Some of what the Minister for External Affairs ( Sir
Garfield Barwick) said in his second reading speech has been
decried or questioned by the Opposition, Some very offensive
words were used about what I thought was a singularly objective
statemento But some things are not and cannot be challenged.
Perhaps we have forgotten those things. Perhaps nany people
have forgotten them. It is my duiy to make a reminder. All
I want to do is go back to the ANZUS treaty of 1951 and 1952
the treaty between Australia, New Zealand and the United States.
People forget the nature of that agreemonto Some people say
that we should not tie ourselves too much to the United States
because, who knows, it may have so: ne day a President other than
the one it has today,
They forget the nature of the ANZUS pact, which is
a treaty between nations ratified by the Parliament of each
nation. And in its preamble it says coaae, 9-o/ 6 
6-
" Desiring to declare publicly and formally their
sensc of unity, so that no potential aggressor could
be under the illusion that any of them stand -alone
in the Pacific area1' l
Then, in Article II, which was also read previously by my
colleague, we read " In order mnore effectively to achieve the
objective of this Treaty the Parties SeDarately and
jointly by means of continuous and effective self
help and mutual aid will maintain and develop their
individual and collective capacity to resist armed
attack."
It is in that context and against that background that the U. S.
is being allowed to establish this naval communications station
in the North-West.
Article IV is worth recalling. It says
" Each Party recognizes that an armed attack in
the Pacific Area.."
which was the broad sweep they were taking
0any of the Parties would be dangerous to its
own peace and safety..." 1
In other words, America has declared in this treaty that an
armed attack on Australia would be dangerous to the peace and
safety of the U. S. This is a wonderful provision. The article
continues declares that it would act to meet the common
danger in accordance with its constitutional processes."
Then, we come to Article This is worth mentioning,
not, perhaps, entirely with reD. tion to this measure, but because
for general purposes it ought to be known. It states
" For the purpose of Article IV,
which I have just referred to
ar-med attack on any of the Parties is deemed
to include an armed attack on the metropolitan
territory of any of the Parties, or on the island
territories under its jurisdiction in the Pacific
or on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft
in the Pacific."
That is the ANZUS Pact, We are really now being told by the
Opposition, as I understand it not so much from the speech
of the Leader of the Opposition as such, but from other general
indications that although we have this partnership; although
wre have this treaty which is absolutely one of the vital elements
in the safety and security of this country, we are to say to the
most overwhelmingly powerful member of the pact, " But understanding
we insist on the provision that if you are attacked by nuclear
weapons without wa-' rning" because, of course, there will be no
gentlemanly stuff if that happens " you cannot give orders to
your people in our area or within the scope of this station to
deliver their retaliatory blows" which ought to be delivered
in an hour " until you first arrange to have a meeting with the
Government of Austala in order thcat it may say VYes? or ' Not".
00 0 00 0 
7
Sir this is so iunreal and so much preferring
barren theory lo the actual security of Australia, that it
baffles me. How does that kind of thing fit into the facts
of life or into the ANZUS concept? Because joint control let
me repeat is not just the power to consult there is plenty
of power to consult but a power to veto, a power to say " No"
and that is what the Opposition wants to be said to the U. S,
Is the U. S. which, at vast expense can create this essential
facility for Western defence and for the carrying out of the
obligations of the ANZUS Treaty, to be told that it must accept
the risk that at the very time when these facilities are most
needed that is to say when the U. S. is attacked in a nuclear
war it may be denied Lhem by the then Government of Australia?
Sir, that point was elaborated in another way in
a statement ma de on behalf of the Opposition. The Opposition
underlined it by saying that there should be a provision that
the station should not be used by the U. S. at war without the
consent of the Australian Government. It is the same thing.
It is merely another way of putting it. I would like our follow
countrymen to think. Do they suppose that if the Communist
powers decided that the moment had come to strike they would
give any warning? I, like most people around the world, am not anticipating
that there will be a nuclear war. So long as we have the
deterrent and the deterrent can be used and launched with the
greatest effect, I do not think we will have nuclear war unless
somebody goes made somewhere. After all, we are talking about
a provision which is designed to help this country and other
countries in the event of war.
Suppose a war came how would it come? Only by
one of the Communist powers, or both, launching an attack on
tho rest of the world in pursuit of world power and dominating
the world with their strange ideas. They would give no warning
about it. Do not we know that from the very first moment that
some nuclear attack is made~ the retaliation the reply must
come within minutes; not within weeks or days0 Of course, that
is why it is necessary for somebody to be able to say " Go";
not a committee; not a laborious consultation at this end~ of
the world. Every minute will count and if we are twenty minutes
late, thirty minutes late or a day late, this may mean the
destruction of our kind of world all around the world.
Sir, suppose a war of that kind occurred! It would
not occur because the democratic nations attacked the Communist
world. Nobody is silly enough to believe that. Suppose a war
of that kind occurred, begun without warning, launched by a
Communist dictator who does not have to consult anybodyi Can
we in this Parliament representing, as we do, a pretty fair
cross-section of the people of Australia, suppose, as sensible
men that in a war of that kind the U. S. would be against us?
That is not real life, That does not come within the wildest
imagination of anybody,, Can anybody imagine that in such a
war if we were the object of attack the U. S. would be
neutral would tear up the ANZUS P-ct, would forget all these
associations that we have with her'? Not for one maoment, in
the wildest imagination of men.' That could not happen.
Would Australia, supposing we were not the first
object of attack but that Aerica or Great Britain or somewhere
in Western Europe was, wish to be let us face up to it a
neutral observer waiting to be the prize of victory? Nothing
a a e e / 8 
8-
in the history of Australia suggests that that would be our
role. Could we rationally suppose that, should the U. S. be
in a war in which the U. S. naval forces in the Indian Ocean
must receive signals clearly a war against Communist
aggression any Australian Government would repudiate ANZUS
and declare for neutrality and evict the U. S. from the North-
West Cape? Of course we cannot. And that is why the agreement
that they should establish this station and that they should
control it and that we should have certain rights of access,
as described in the agreement, is a completely justifiable
a greement. Before I conclude, I hope I have gone to the centre
of the real problems in this matter soberly and seriously.
They are great problems. They deserve an informed public
opinion, Before I sit down, I just want to say that my
friend the Leader of the Opposition really he does not think
as badly of me as some of his remarks might suggest offered
a very remarkable argument. He said
" In fourteen years of office, the Government
has not acquired nuclear weapons. Australia is
therefore nuclear-disarmed without any agreement.
Whether the Prime Minister realises it or not, every
argument he advances for the need for nuclear weapons
for Australia's defence is a self-condemnation of
his own defence programme. The Prime Minister cannot
have it both ways. t
This argument fascinates me, I have already pointed out that
we have not ourselves acquired or produced nuclear weapons.
I have pointed out that we ourselves took a prominent place
in the discussions in the Prime Ministers' Conference which
led to the statement that nuclear weapons ought not to be
spread into too many hands. Therefore, Sir, of course we
have avoided being a nuclear power in cur own right.
The point that the honourable gentleman overlooks is
that we are not prepared to bind the unknown future by pledging
our word that we will never allow nuclear weapons to be used
in our defence, because that would be suicidal. If they are
to be used against us as they well might, under conceivable
circumstances we are to say Under no circumstances
will wo allow any power to co-me into our defence and deploy
nuclear weapons from our soil or from our waters. On top of
that, I want to end by repeating that so far as the Government
is concerned, and I would think so far as the vast majority
of the Austra-lian people is concerned, we will not handicap
our allies in the use of such weapons to resist nuclear
aggression by the comm.. on enemy of all, 



OMUUG OF THE MOiU 31104 a Tax~ ET. Hmo.
Till PRIM MIXI8T3 ( SIR ROAftT
Ot ILUMMIN ES OnFIC I* PARLIAMf 41
UOGSt CJish" Of 17/ 1963
Xr., Pfsidmnt and Lodie" and Gntlsnom and Parliasontaiy
I mst begs h saying that this In the frst tim
in my public Ut., whieh Is am a fairly Lsogtbi Ono that
I hae oer been 4do , d to ore a fosetiom I tw lsan
ever a landlIfte. am yos, ' a P1residmit I ZedIbI!
iaft= d hr IW frsMi Mr, U&amp; s Alias, Koko oweei4 this
movol Idea and I ; Izasnrmed .4w to do what y have
aO6 It In SnAdod ew of the miracles of moderm ommuethat
I* sittlag as I an In my offis In Cabema * had
be a1ble to speak to Vean the spoit in Nmie and I haa e
bear&amp;. gut st~ lls utso enti* elJ UP to the okilm
I certainly wish I seuld be with you but It I we
with you, I would comne beak later an end fin that the pile
of Vwk an or 60s Which is already to blh had boom
rather W 0r and so I Mst may smething to you ftm a
16mg distane SWO of sas rowr distriot is a le1* btod es.
YOU onetw ye " e~ wtems In the middle of ams * plemia&amp;
emomwe mwv ye am P" eis lee have yewr em
ambitims Los tfhw deo" emt * leo are doveted as I kam
to impwUM the qual1% * f itOm~ and to the ievTiOpmmM
of yo ame an tro Itg Atwlian pWdofttoR sul
Rev Siw, this lia a wdrl thing. These wha hews
omto so s mn" tIA1a city rbllew ULMitpehs
be WLz tsImsbr be ubtt cutry i itsa
1p u there to a *. rtaim stag In mW lioo I an mt
l. i! tf Tm ith the2! rim of the ma em the land# and oven
ithat arms Is A1 w a hwn L hd seft the Mt isenon
chaps and the most to -dm A" vlomeits is the ' eof
or o~ m ifttims This Is as It shold bet becaus. we can begin
aU e tbughs a this Problem br MnYing, " yell Agtwalia
cannot doeep " a she ab@ WA devolop U41446 she atva et people
mid moloss she attracets moey to her serv oe." She malt
attract either people or gas us Less * ba, herself has a wipos
ad growing Iietnommes beeaus a lot of these thmngs e
an the st. LtTooO" a ezILim eVemq
Nw, it Is quite Uam that we hae had em very
happy 4ewl mato of recent es. In the sow of mntetuis
and I h~ ttct will tsom us that will ownsl ts to stand
en t" But it . si wwem asgly time and wll
eintim. to be so fs mr Years that the Weftoa of Aatralia,
Instimly and tlberofte her capsacity to attrat boeth
" is and emp, M. will comtim to depend * VY powfmlly as
ateexors ~ iprliay prouts fri. Australia* An4 we jSt
ma~ t enhavi a pst wime of primwy axpart msom Just
hrwshig fbw i, Wmmmus the primary indstries are ftoing
as they always do, Sweat psobasims. They loquire two thwItg
thr re to oantimma to maooe Tbv require an expanding
nor" as the-PkWladW Vof thing that Ay 14lepW.~
Is nov dis isnmL md and in Geneva and they req~ ar a
stab" tr wisk a~ mo to l" red effsiamy, wil
industrtes Uo pe an to be Prosperous. 4elim
staWblIty of eats Is aomthin that we have deveted a osa-a GO&amp;*
amet of attentiu tog and 20t Witmt mses, an" the " aot 
level, buoads has beem stable for tka last tWO yeams
an tWO questi of * e1f olmay enW O.* S
WM asmwith me tt thin does" s m a ti; AOS
slwimtmm, ? Lut of &amp; Ul slemUifl rmssok and
ta. huloe mi s" G Of a Id oder*. *. 1,9w hae. a
y" dadrof thet In AWUstsia. 30,06, WOe " URtmhle Of
the ueelto or " Nat voewok to tshe tial ms m thea fbim.
That is of tnmbumep andM pe bps up to this stalg,
that e I ban meen e stoxW. we uye. a and
4" 1 of thUght to It at the pismnt turn. Andti w so"
sadhi is wzOba e eWueps alio laft whe
plets we a pe nam gowing Interest In both of
tbmu ater omthe pat of the am n the eewitw MA the
am In the eltr. Amu In the city$ an am to my* one
is am i fteia toeat lais ablm I fled In wim
aiss teaslg Interest in the Beb9l b i " s the t0141
tosmeenzudq I dst th1* It islways inelised bow pest a
pfts Inplaye IA this onliveing of Interest In thee pu'oblems
1Wth e itutal and posthss societies of Aatislia.
lour tohevw h I m about to*" is us
œ ist boef thee thisp. e It IS
. esentiaWl am ppert-mty for all lef you to get tegethe. to
OW ' whet you a" ~ ag to ame whet ameby * Is is 6lag
to 3. mptove the isles of eru and peecta mr
the fito and vt ansa ploutarel s setorei sooety &amp; e
all ovo kastalia and in yorplue In pawtia LaI to bring
tosetber, Wot may ae but'ieasy kving tolpther not only
sea" so but = veeul œ n tegthtw for the bmnftt of pol
I" live In a town = w the bevefit lot peeple vtm live ai
fbwu -0 andImag of ho mus the? aeel. j dePed UPOR
emsob other* it thes ts aw Ulm I hevo learu. ed ia the omus
of 1W poliml We* b it Is that not mee of me ia Awtralia
amu veho self. t The old days whan you weo iet i&amp;
frmw of m ua cbtuulg or you oneo is tbvou of taumlag beesmee
T ecouldat be in favourt of bethp those WiA fats hoe we.
a: oatw TW we at wem. w at all stages the rights
or eas Of us = A 1 spe04lu as a se 10ws a lawyer' beflom
he lommol aa . O re t WIth the greatest Plsses
that tos otimg~ SeIia spiep etme preservation of
the peat unsl 1ullnie, their bulMiin hir laarssi9AN
. mcileaw, so ta In years to som thy ean met troubles,
tioablea ails., ad suRVIVe USE
girt I oftgetulate Y Society an Its laa
hommble " W" a in this a". U I eigaate the ws of
mmea om hawing 06slekuted Its usuwlast youro I ompstWLat
all aedmys t I belle" to be YomW lvev~ aehie" Onh a
the mtiaml 11.14 of 46evelopeet a" evh
AMdq Uthei, * ra&amp; siUlttalee of * tat I
lae slov, leeyawt l o
4Ihoe Lwt w Loelmieth we hwsisa bdynp
of teiOW4044s0 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 45_/ 1963~
VISIT OF MR. AVERELL HARRIMAN
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, Sir
Robert Menzies
The Prime Minist-er ( Sir Robert Menzies)
announced today that Mr. Averell Harriman, Under-
Secretary of State for Political Affairs in the
Unittod States of America will pay a short visit to
Australia following the A. NZUS meeting in Wellington,
Now Zealand, which concludes on 6th June.
Mr. Harriman will arrive in Canberra
on the evening of Thursday, 6th June and will have
talks with Cabinet Ministers in Canberra on Friday,
7th June. He will leave Australia for overseas on
Sunday, 9th June.
CANBERRA, 17th May, 19630 



FOR PRESS: No. )+ 1/ 1961
FLYING OF FLAGS ON GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzie s
TI-e Australian JFrLag will be flown on all working
days on Commonwealth Government buildings throughout
Australia. The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies has
expressed a wish that the Flag should be displaye. more
prominently and has asked all Departments to arrange to
fly the Flag from the main flagpole on such buildings
between 8 a. m. and sunset on working days.
On special days of national sorrow or rejoicing,
the procedure will be as follows
Days of national sorrow the Flag on the
main flagpole to be lowered to half-mast
as previously.
Days cf nntional rejoicing additional
Flags to be flown on all other flagpoles
on the building or in its vicinity.
CANBERRA, 17th May, 1963, 



FOR PRESS P. A. No l/ 263
PRESENTATION OF CHEQUE TO LEGACY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, this
afternoon presented to Canberra Legacy a cheque for
œ 1 910.17.4, being proceeds of the cricket match
between the Prime Minister's XI and the M. C. C. at Manuka
Oval on February 6. The cheque was handed to Mr. George
Kimlin, President of Canberra Legacy.
Also present at the handing-over wore the
President of the A. C. T. Cricket Association, Mr. C.
Morrison, Treasurrofthe Association, Mr. H. J. Beatty
and Mr. J. H. Fingleton, the former international cricketer
andcaptain of'tho Prine Minister's first team which played
against the West Indies in 1951.
CANBERRA, 17th May, 1963. 



CIVIC RECEPTION$ CASINO, N. S. W.
MAYf 1963
S'Peech by the Prime Ministers the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert-Menzies
Mr. Mayor Parliamentary Colleagues Mr. President and
Ladies and Gentlemen and Boys and Girls
I don't mind starting by telling you that this
is the biggest Civic Reception I ever had in my life, ( Laughter)
( Applause) It is not peculiar simply for that reason because
when I looked at my programme this morning, I found " Civic
Reception. Four gentlemen would speak and the Prime Minister
wil~ l make a brief reply." ( Laughter) Although I have had a
long experience, I was silly enough to believe it ( Laughter)
until I was put on warning, as you have just heard, by the
previous speakers, In fact I might tell you that at all sorts of
civic receptions I am an old hand. You have heard a reference
to my longevity in my present office. I don't like hearing
these references to how long I've been Prime Minister benause
I remember vividly that eighteen years ago I was walking along
a street in Perth and a few bright boys were trundling along
in a car and they saw me walking along the street and you know
what they said to me? " Cheer up, grandpa" ( Laughter) And that
was eighteen years ago. Now, in Melbourne, if they have a
civic reception, you have a hundred carefully-chosen people;
you go into a room, you stand on a little dais and speeches
are made, I regret to say. In Sydney, in my experience, if
they give you a civic reception, you stand near the door with
the Lord Mayor and you shake hands with everybody and there
are no speeches. This, I regard as the most civilised form of
civic reception that I have so far encountered.
One other little preliminary remark I would like
to make and that is that the Mayor was kind enough to produce
a brochure " Message from the Mayor of Casino" I did get
this in Canberra and I studied it and when I had finished
reading it, Mr, Mayor, I wondered what I had done to deserve
the honour of visiting such a remarkable place, ( Laughter)
( Applause) " The Hub of the North" " The Crossroads of the
North" I've been acquiring the language and high time
too as somebody said, because although I have flown over
Casino and I have passed through Casino by train in those
happy days when we were allowed to travel by train, I have
never~ in fact, beon inside the town before, and I have been
delighed with what I have seen.
You know, I think ladies and gentlemen, I c-tight
to tell you so that there will be no misunderstanding, that I
wasn't always a city slicker, I was born in the bush myself,
in the wheat country up in the north-west of Victoria, and I
grew up there and I know a little at first hand of the problems
of the man who is on the land growing wheat. I dontt profess
to have anything else but acquired information and knowledge
about other rural industries, But I would like to say this to
you Here I come into a country town, a sizable town what,
8,000 something of that order, in the town itself. It has a
great district around it. It's the centre of four or five
remarkably important primary industries. And yet it, as a townm,
/ 2 
-2
and its people as its citizens are producing services for
the man on the land, marketing facilities for the man on the
land, a meatworks, a butter factory, all this kind of thing.
You know, this is worth thinking about. It's commonplace no
doubt, to you, but it is a very important commonplace. it
demonstrates the complete interdependence of the people who
live in cities and towns and the people who carry on their
productive labours on the land itself. Interdependence.
I remember when I was a small boy in the part of
the country in Victoria that I have mentioned, I used to hear
arguments because people will argue wherever they are
and the first political arguments I ever heard about were
between protection and free trade. This would be relatitvely
early in the first decade of this century. If you were a
protectionist you were the enemy of the man on the land and if
you were a free trader you were the enemy of the man in ~ h
city. The arguments went on with immense ferocity and as I
subsequently came to understand, with singularly little
intelligence, I have lived long enough to find how well
understood it is by all the people in the Commonwealth
Parliament and many hundreds of thousands of people outside
of it, how well tnderstood it is that there is an interdependence
between manufacturing industries tertiary industries primary
industries, because unless we all manage to hang together,_ we
will, in the famous words of Lord Melbourne, hang separately.
Let me illustrate this a little. One of the great
problems of government I am not going to make a political
speech, I don't think this is the occasion for it but one
of the great problems that any government in Australia has,
or will have, is to reconcile the vital interests of the
country with the need to expand the population by a large
stream of migration and further, with the development of
secondary industries, to employ an increasing population. Now
this sounds very easy. It is, in fact, the most complex
problem in the world. No government in the world anywhere can
profess to have solved the problem completely. Shortly I
shall find myself talking with the President of the United
States. He wontt have the complete answer to this matte".
I will be talking to the new Prime Minister of Canada, W." o1
is an old friend of mine. He won't have the complete answer
to this matter. This is infinitely ditfi-cult) and above all,
when governments approach these problems, they must not Just
settle down to a dogma in their own mind; they must have
flexible minds, they must be willing to make changes fromi time
to time, so that they may preserve the balance of considerations
that I have referred to.
Now let me pursue that a little further, even though
I am stealing my thunder for tonight. We have, in Australia
and it is common to both parties a policy of large migration
into Australia which this year will mean a total of something
over 125,000 migrants. Add that to our natural increase of
population, and for years and years now the population of our
country has been increasing rather more rapidly than the
population of Japan, It is worth thinking about that, This
has been a tremendous accretion of numbers. You can't bring
people to Australia and dump them down and say, " Well, now,
heaven help you." t The state of the country must be such as
to enable them to engage in gainful employment, in gainful
occupation and establish themselves as citizens in our
community and, for the overwhelming most part, they are very
* a ass 
.03
willing to do that and have been very industrious and contributing
people. But YOU can't employ more than a mere fraction
of them on the land because in the great primary industries,
the development of whose production has been I think, quite
outstanding, there has developed particularly in som~ e of the
industries, an increasing mechanisation. The increased outputt
whether it is in beef' or mutton or lamb or whatever it may be,
has not been accompanied by a corresponding increase in the
number of people working on the farms. You all know this to
be true, and therefore if we are going to hbave employment for
many thousands of migrants each year then we must encourage
the development of secondary industries and service and
transport industries which can provide expanding opportunities
for employment. Nobody really quarrels about that.
One point then arises. I must say to you, quite
frankly, I never permit myself to lose sight of it We are not
to do thse things irresponsibly so that we push up costs and
prices because the man who suffers from increased costs and
prices is the farmer himself and he can't pass them on.,
Somebody else may in a city, somebody else may running a
service of some kind, but the man on the land, controlled as
he is directly or indirectly by the world's markets, must at
all el'fort prevent his costs from rising; have those costs
prevented l'rom rising, where possible, by government action.
Now it is a source of some satisfaction to all of us that in
the last two or three years the costs have not risen I am
taking the broad state of affairs in Australia. But unless
governments continue to be careful, astute to watch this
element, we could easily see costs rising, and rising against
the man on the land. This is one matter which my distinguished
colleague, John McEwen, the Minister for Trade, is discussing
at this very moment in Geneva in the important trade talks
that he has been having.
. Can we by all the efforts in the world persuade
the great industrial countries in the world Great Britain,
the United States Germany and so on can we persuade them
that it is essential from their point of view that the countries
which are large exporters of primary products should have stable
and payable prices for the things they produce? This is not
easy. Great Britain herself has had a policy of cheap food.
One can understand it for she is overwhelmingly an exporter
of manufactured goods. The United States has had extremely
high tariffs, even against wool, as we know in Australia. The
President of the United States, I think has a fresh mind on
this matter. He wants to negotiate with the world and he
has now been given power to do it by his Congress to make
flexible arrangements, to enter into commodity agreements with
the rest of the world. This is what we are fighting for.
Let us have a true sound, international commodity agreement
in relation to mneat or wheat or butter or whatever it may be
sugar, as we go further north and this would do more to
stabilise the costs and profitability of primary industry than
anything else that I can think of. Well, it is a hard job.
My colleague is as capable as any man I know in the world in
arguing that case ( Applause) but I will lay odds that when he
gets back in a fortnight's time, he will be looking pretty drawn
because this is a tough assignment.
I mentioned that to you to illustrate the point
that I was making. It is a good thing to be in a town like
this and to be reminded of the fact that we all depend on each
other, that not one of us in the town or out of it can live
without the other. This is tremendously important and when
you get an illustration of that in some country centre, it is
vivid because it is close to you, 0 0 
You know, ladies and gentlemen, it is a very
interesting thing in the history of Australia, to notice how
many people who have been significant in our public affairs
have come, either from the country itself or country towns,
from areas outside the great metropolis of whatever State it
may be, If I could talk to everybody in Casino and talk to
all the youngsters in Casino, Itd say, ' Dontt be in too much
of a hurry to think that there are hardships in living in a
place like this." l You may ask " Wouldn't it be wonderful to
live in Sydney?" or " Wouldn't It be wonderful to live in
Melbourne?" Forget about it, Some of the men whose names
are household names to us were born in smaller places than
this and lived in smaller places than this, but because they
had fresh minds and imagination and close experience, they
became significant people. I could refer to a dozen people
of moment who came from quite small centres of population.
There is a great privilege in living in a place like this.
A wonderful privilege and I hope that nobody here, particularly
tiue very young, will cease to understand that.
Now, Sir, you have been extraordinarily good to
me. All sorts of very generous remarks have been made I've
even been tempted by you, Mr. Mayor to say something about
New Guinea, Well, if you don't mina, I do an awful lot of
work at the weekends. I have to because I don't get much
chance to do it when the House is sitting. But one job 1was
doing during this weekend was to prepare myself a statement on
the review of Australian defence policy. In the course of
that I will perhaps say a few things that will be of interest
to you. Well, I won't say it until I get up in the House and
deliver it I dontt know when perhaps tomorrow. Depends
on what time I get hack tonight, or Wednesday, or conceivably
Thursday. Nor, Sir, I want to thank all of you who have come
here this afternoon, As I tell you quite seriously, I have
never had a civic reception like this before and if some of
my critics are right in what they say, I'll never have one
again. ( Applause) At any rate, I have had the advantage of
really a quite human audience of men women women have the
divine faculty of not being hostile io you, except at a
political meeting ( Laughter) and children. I hope your
prayers will be with me tonight when I have to address myself
to the meatworks authorities of the State of New South Wales
hardbitten men who will be looking at me expecting a message
and seeking to convert me, if they need Lo. ( Laughter)
I11l conclude by saying this. Flying up today from
Canberra, we came low over Kempsey and circled low 500 or
600 feet ( that mustntt be used against us) over Grafton,
I realise that I did not see these floods at their worst because
it was clear, looking down, from the watermarks and so on that
the floods had subsided perceptibly. But there have been
disastrous floods and they have the habit of occurring with
almost dreadful regularity,
There is no doubt about it that a lot of heads will
have to be put together, not just to consider this matter as
an occasional exercise of some relief of distress, accept the
flood as inevitable; we have to put our heads together to see
how this can be prevented or mitigated on a permanent basis.
( Applause) I won't say any more about that. It is a matter
0 D 
that engages the sympathy of all of us, but I know that the
local authorities in assembling their views I understand
that they are going to put it to the State administration
which of course has the primary responsibility on such work,
and if experience counts for anything and I have had a good
deal now I anticipate that at some stage the State will say
something to the Commonwealth. So I will wait until then.
All I say at this time is that this is one of the problems in
Australia which really ought not to be dealt with on a shinplaster
basis, In fact when they tell me to get up and be excited
because another rocket is going around the world or a capsule
or something and that it costs a couple of hundred million
pounds to put it up, I find myself saying in a dull and
unimaginative fashion to myself, " A mere fraction of that
year by year and I can solve most of the developmental problems
of my own country." ( Hear, hear, applause) 



SEVENTH ANNUAL MEATWORKS CONVENTION
HELD AT CASINO, N. S. W.
MAY, 1961
Speech by the Prima Ministpr, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen
I speak here tonight under a certain disadvantage
because I have to make a speech about the Seventh Annual Meatworks
Convention and I am not a meatworker, norindeed in any
non-human sense do I drive any cattle ( Laughter) and I am up
here with an acknowledged Australian expert who has just spoken
to you, but I will try to survive this handicap.
Before I begin to survive it, I must tell you that
.1 looked at this pamphlet, somewhat ambiguously colured orange
on one side and yellow on the other ( Laughter), to have a look
at what you were going to discuss, and at once I felt at home
" Country Meatworks Effluent" ( Laughter). Nothing could make a
chap like me feel more at home instantly ( Laughter). " The
Tallow House" that awakens echoes in my mind. Then, of
course, remembering some of the debates in which I have taken
a hand " A Meat-cutting Demonstration" ( Laughter). And
remembering division lists and divisions in Parliament " Belt
Conveyors for Handling Meat" ( Laughter). Really, I must say,
Sir, that in the whole of my public life I have never known such
superb tact exhibited well in advance in the selection of The
topic. Now, as you have already been told, and I will
repeat it because that is one of the habits of my trade, this
is your Seventh Annual Meatworks Convention and the spons: ors,
the Country Meatworks Association, are twenty-one today, so
that this is at one and the same time, a relatively recent
organisation and a relatively experienced one. You really stand
in a very happy stage of your development and your work, and
I know what your purposes are I think I know. You want to
bring people together from the various country meatworks all
over the State executive people and so on, and let them get
to know each other and let them get to learn something from
each other bocauso wb. nll hnve something tG. o . learn from other
people, poolingour kiowledgea and"-. iap* oving our: technical
officioncy 0
It is the improvement of technical efficiency that
I want to talk to you about not at undue length but for some
little time. You will be surprised looking at my youthful
appearance, that I first went into Parliament in the State
Parliament of Victoria thirty-five years ago, I just almost
whisper that. Thirty-five years ago. And thirty-five years
ago in my own State, the one thing that you could get a heated
argument about instantly was inland killing establishments,
because we had about three and they were all broke ( Laughter),
and whatever government was in office they had to go along to
it and say " What about a little subsidy?" I learned at that
time that they were not financially successful because they
didntt have a long enough killing season, they didn't have a
sufficient variety of commodities to be handled they had all
the disabilities of long-distance transport to the principal
markets, they had the problem of an extra handling. / 2 
-2
So all the wise men including myself, no doubt at that stage,
who had ambitions to be wise said, " This is hopeless. You
cannot have establishmnents of this kind except at the main ports."
Now, Sir, I think you will agree with me that this was alr:', ost a
received doctrine at that time, thirty-five years ago having a
quick look at you before the lifetime of a considerable number
of you. And yet here you are celebrating your twenty-fivst
anniversary and celebrating it in an atmosphere of high confidence
and remarkable achievement. This, I think, deserves to h-ave a
chap~ lter of its own in Australian history the thing which was
thought to be doomed a failure by sceptical people has now proved
itself a magnificent success.
It hasn't done that by accident. Times have changed,
of course. Our production is a long way up. There is a mu--h
greater through-put. Excport markets have been opened in tho most
remarkable fashion. We have better markets at home and abrcad and
we, indodd have much bettor thansport than we had at the time
that I am talking about. All those things have added togeti-ier to
produce the foundation for what you are doing, but only the
foundation, because no system of this kind can succeed unless
you have individuals in government, if you like, scientific
people, experts in the service of government, individuals in the
induistry looking after the managerial side of the industry, and
indi1 viduals who are in themselves producers in the industry. All
these people must get together if you are to achieve success,
the kind of success that you have so far obtained,
I want to elaborate that. One of our problemns
in Australia is that we have never quite got to understan', the
system of government under which we live. We know, donli; we,
that we have a Federal Constitution. There are some peopLe who
can remember the great battles in the 90' s of the last century
to introduce it " one people, ono flag, one destiny" t.-jese
old slogans come back into the mind. So we became 62 yea-s ago,
a nation a nation which embraced within itself six separcate
States with limited powers, just as the new national ParlJament
had limited powers but of a wider, national character, And
beneath those, we have had the local governing system in Australia,
a system with a proud history and a remarkable record of service
to the people. But here we are Commonwealth, State, local
government, the individual. There are very many people to be
found in Australia who, whatever the problem may be and whatever
the power of the Commonwealth ma: y be it may be non-existent on
that point always speak first of going to the Commonwealth.
This troubles me because I am a federalist. I believe in States.
I believe in the distribution of power but as I have had
occasion to say before today, if we drift into the habit of
mind of saying that everything is, in financial terms, a
Commonwealth responsibility then the day will come when the
people will say, " Well if the Commonwealth the central government,
the central parliament are to have all. the financial
responsibility then perhaps they ought to have all power."
This is a great danger, but it can happen. Therefore I want to
put it to you that if we are to have this federal system of
ours working properly, we must begin by understanding tho
individual responsibility of each arm of government what is
its responsibility, what is its power? What is the power of
the State? What is its responsibility? What is the powerV of
some local authority or some statutory body? It sounds liJke
a lawyer's exercise, but it isntt. It is the very essenco of
understanding our own country and its problem. 0000" 00~~ / 3 
-3
Of course, the answer to it is not to be standing
off fighting about various things: " That's your business
that's my business thatts your business that's my
business." The answer is to establish a system of co-operation
so that each of us, each form of government will bring its own
power, its own authority to the common pool, in order to
achieve a common social result. Now I hope you don't think
I am being academic about this. I'm not. Vv been trying
to run a federal system for more years than anybody else in
the world and this is the kind of thing that constantly comes
up into my mind. We must have a system of co-operation.
Let us apply this, Mr. President, to this great
organisation and the kind of thing that you are engaged in.
You can't hope to produce the development in the meat industry
tlhat you want and that we want unless, year by yea~ r, there are
people engaged in research in the laboratoy on the farm or
wherever it may be, and unless there are other people who take
t; he results of the scientific research and who take them to
the man on the land who must put thom into practice if the
results are to be achieved,
Finally, we must have the man on the land wil-1ling
to receive this information and to put it into effect. Now
this sounds very simple, I venture to say it has prov-rI in
practice to be an amazingly difficult thing: scientifi.:
research, extension services and a willingness to receive
them and to practice them.
Sir, I remember when I was a boy of about twelve
I suppose, being up in the bush in the north-west of Victoria
in the wheat country in which at that time there was a
deficiency of scientific knowledge and application it was
marginal country with a somewhat dubious rainfall. I remember
going out as a youngster and standing behind a ring of good,
solid farmers in the district. On a little mound in the
middle was a notable agricultural scientist from the Vict,' orian
Department of Agriculture and he was standing there he was
a most practical chap and he was talking to them about when
they ought to burn their stubble and when they ought to harrow
and that thoy would all do well in this particular sandy loam
in that area by putting a hundredweight of super on to their
ground. They looked at each other I could see them. Little
pitchers occasionally have long ears I didntt miss much
that day. You could almost hear them saying to each other,
" Well. I've never done that before. What is this stuff,
anyhow? And what does it cost?" The scientist was magnificent.
He was practical and convincing. I was twelve years old.
He made me understand it crystal-clear, but of course I didn't
have a farm to put the super on. ( Laughter) There were three
farmers in the district who were first-class men, reco,-iised to
be the best farmers and they were persuaded but not com-pletely.
So they said, " Well, you know, it's a bit of an experirient.
What did he say a hundredweight. dell we'll try a half a
hundredweight." ( Laughter) And they useA half a hundredweight
of super and in that country with that soil and that rainfall,
when the harvest came in they were all three bushels to the
acre better off than their neighbours. Of course, the news got
around and within three or four years, everybody was using super
and not being frightfully afraid to use a hundredweight and
some bold spirits were using a hundredweight and a half.
Now I merely tell you this little story because
this is, in a small compass and in a small boy's memory, the
0 0 0 0 1100 
whole problem of extension services somebody at the middle to
discover it; somebody on the scientific side to be competent
to analyse soils to discover what the deficiencies are, to
discover what ail must be given to that soil, and then otiier
people who can take this precious, carefully-garnered scientific
information and make it available to the people, and thirdly
the man on the land willing to receive it. You see, my l~ ittle
story has a moral in it because most of them weren't willing
to receive it, This calls for immense skill on the part of the
man who is running the extension service. He must have a clear
mind and a persuasive tongue and he must be backed by the
research work done here or here or here,
Now, Sir, I venture to say that this has a complete
application to the meat industry. I remember that before the
war, I wont over to England. I was then Attorney-General, but
a sort of useful rouseabout chap, you see. I went a couple of
times to argue about what? to argue about meat, the excport of
meat to the United Kingdom and we gave an awful lot of attention~
in taiose days to freight advantages that the Argentines had
you know, shipping freights and distances of voyage and these
were very important. But perhaps at that time we were not
giving enough attention to how you were to im~ prove your breeds
of cattle and accelerate their periods of maturity not only
by the genetics of the cattle industry but by developing pastures,
by producing appropriate legumes in particular parts of Australia.
These things were almost in their embryonic stage. These are the
things that have been worked on; these are the things til-at have
produced such an enormous development in the meat industr-y that
writh the slightest push, you would supplant wheat and flour as
the second-greatest export from Australia.
Sir, I think this is a groat work and I wish it
well, We have discussed it a great deal in my Cabinet w~ ith
my colleagues, indeed we have one or two papers coming up in
the lift at this very moment on it. I, myself, have had long
discussions with the Chairman of the C. S. I. R. O0 Sir Frederick
White, who is tremendously keen on this not only in connection
with extension services in the primary Industries but also in
the secondary industries.
You know it is a remarkablo thing in our country,
but we produce scientists of the first rank we needntt be
apologising for the native intelligence or the capacity for
scholarship of the Australian young man or woman. This is quite
clear. C. S. I. R. 0. and other bodies of a corresponding kind
conduct research into rural problems into manufacturing
problems. C. S. I. R. 0. researches inio wool, on which I opened
a new institute that they have created in Geelong only the other
day, operate both ways,
If wool is to be sold and if the woolgrower is to
continue to have an expanding market at a competent price which
is, of course, an entirely different matter but if he is to
have that then wool must sell itself around the world. I know4
there will be people to sell it but it must sell itself, it
must have a quality which commends it to the hundreds arid
hundreds of millions of people around the world who want to be
clad and kept warm, Therefore the C. S. I. R. 0. has done the most
remarkable series of research jobs into shrinkage, into
crea ' sing, into moth-proofing, into all these things whica
affect the sale of wool and, happily in the case of that
industry they have in quite recent times been able to establish
a compleie communion of spirit and of understanding with the
S 0 060009.15 
wool industry. Sir ' Uilliam Gunn and Mr. Vines and these other
leaders in this field are now absolutely in touch, mentally and
physically, with the C. S. I. R. O. and the result is that the work
they do in that field can go oui.
But there are other people concerned. What about
the manufacturer? He can't conduct research into wool, He may
do it in a very trifling way but he can't conduct the great
researches into wool, into ail these aspects of it and therefore
ho is one of the people to whom the extension service must go.
C. S. I. R. O. do a lot of industrial research work. They produce
ideas. They find there is a litt'. le difficulty in bridging the
gap between whathppens in their labs. and what happens in the
factory. Therefore believe me, we all have to go out and sell
this idea of extension of scientific research into the ultimate
field of action, whether it is a factory, or a farm. This is,
I think, of tremendous importance. And It is because, Sir, I know
how warmly you agree with this general approach that I have
ventured to say something about it to this great and very important
convention tonight, Very important, because you come from all
over the State. Very important because in tho vary nature of
your occupation, you are in a position to influence the mindsevery
one of you of scores of people and perhaps hundreds of
W peopla. i am a species of Prime Minister and I have been
there a long time and there are those who say that I am notA
improving with age ( Laughter) and no doubt they are quite :. ight.
I wouldn't dare to dispute it but at least I have been thure
long enough to have some pretty clear idea of the problems of my
country4' This is my country and it is yours and I want to help
to solve its problems because, like you or some of you, I have
children and grandchildren and look to the future. Now, this
being so, what do ixre do about all this. We have at the moment
I repeat something in a different form that I said this afternoonin
this country an enormous period of development going on.
I am not going to make a party political speech there are some
who think it should do better and some who think it couldn't,
but, anyhow, we have had an enormous period of development and
W welre having it and in the course of this time thanks to the
policy instituted by Mr. Calwell when he was Minister for
Immigration, and pursued by us we have had a great order of
immigration into Australia. I saw this morning in the newspaper,
which perhaps was right ( Laughter) that we have now had two
million post-war mi grant s. All I know is that the rate of
increase in our population in Australia is quite formidable, quite
formidable. W~~ hea ve a bigger percentage net increase from bth
natural increase and immigration than Japan has at the present
time and as I took the opportunity of saying to the American
Congress on the last occasion that I was invited to address it,
we are receiving more migrants into Australia, per thousand of
our own existing population, than America did in the heyday of
her immigration after the Civil War. It's worth remembering that.
You cantt have this enormous increase in population,
with all the demands that it sets up without having certai n
results. One of them quite obviously is that if you are ' going
to have migrants, they must have work to do, and if they are to
have work to do, it is oqttally obvious that a mere fraction of
thorn can hope to find it on the land, on fars, for reasons that
I needntt discuss with you. Therefore, you must have manufacturing
industries and tertiary industries, servicer transport and the
like,, And all this is good. All this puts a tremendous
pressure on the resources of the country. All of this means that
o / 6 
HMnA Qj
rrrrt.-1 1 r. 1. ' I ' I
' 1 I I,
I I
I* I I j 0 0
. J.
A N Q nA fjj,
rr 1;:
C'
I-i
.4 . i 0
I I I I 
6-
you have to develop new things, whether they are a vast affair
like the Snowy Mountains or whether they are beef roads in
Queensland or coal-ports or something somewhere else, You
must keep on developing the resources of the country and
this takes a lot of money and all of these things adled together
put a great pressure on the currency of the country. A
great pressure. Unless it is watched, it can become an inflationary
pressure and produce a rise in costs all round. Thatts why
every government has to say to itself, at least once a week
and indeed, I say it to myself more frequently " Our
international solvency depends on what we can sell to tho
world to match what we buy from the world." What we soll to
the world, although there has been a very healthy increase in
manufacturing exports is still predominantly the product of
the farm and the station. Because that is so, one of tLa
conditions of our international solvency and with it cur
prospects of future development, is that the cost level. should
be hept as stable as possible.
Now, everybody will agree that this is a great
problem. So it is. You don't solve that problem merely by
thinking in terms of wages or arbitration systems. You will
help to solve it very materially by increasing productivity
which means that the overheads are spread over a much greater
turnover; increasing efficiency in the means of production,
increasing efficiency in the means of handling, because these
are elements which counter cost increases and which enable these
great industries to continue to stand on their own feet and
look confidently to their own future.
And by that route again, I come back to what I
was saying to you efficiency efficiency is not something
you read about in a book, not something you necessarily achieve
by practising yoga exercises in the morning which I don't.
( Laughter) Efficiency for thlis purpose is something whW. ch
derives from increasing knowledge of the problems of the
industry, increasing knowledge of the scientific aspects of the
industry, whether they are biological or physical or whatever
they may be; increasing efficiency in the treatment of the
product, the handling of the product, in the marketing of the
product. Sir, I hope that nobody supposes that when your
organisation has a convention people just come along because
they are going to have a picnic and meet each other and have a
good time because I hope they will have all those but I am
perfectly certain behind all this is your determination that in
spite of the eccentricities of politicians and there are some
occasionally ( laughter), you are firmly determined that your
industry is-going to become more effective in itself more
efficient in itself and therefore meet the problem ol~ its growth
and of its costs. Sir, that is, I think what I wanted to say to you.
I think it is a great compliment Zo be asked to come up hiere,
Ifm going back afterwards, I hope. We haye a Cabinet meeting
in the morning. Lifets just one long routine, you knows
( laughter) in politics, but if the boys look at me in the
morning and say, " You know, you've got a bit of a { 7leam
in the eye this morning " 1 1 will refer them to you ( Laughiter)
and attribute all credit to you. Thank you very much for having
listened to me thank you very much for having invited me,,
wish you well and, for once, I mgigt0eebrwa
stood up to do I am going to declare the Convention open. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.
ON
DEFENCE REVIEW,
MINI STERIAL STATEMENT.
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 22nd May, 1963.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister).-by leave-May I begin
with some general observations of no great
novelty, but the recollection of which is
essential to a uiseful review of Australian
defence. Every defence programme must,
in its nature, be flexible. As international
strategic considerations change, so we must
be ready to change our own defence
arrangements. Every measure we adopt is
so adopted with knowledge of the appreciations
put before us by our expert military
and diplomatic advisers. In other words,
the condition of an effective defence programme
is that it should be based upon as
accurate an assessment as can be made of
the probable source and nature of the apprehended
attack, the area of possible conflict
and the nature of the operations, and the
nature and extent of the co-operation we
-may expect from and give to the United
Nations in general and our allies in particular.
Plainly, most of these elements
are not static; hence the importance of being
ready. to. accept changes when their need
arises. Again, ther e are internal and equipment
factors which, whatever new proposals are
adopted, will affect the rate of increase in
defence expenditure. For example:. Naval
vessels iave to be designed, laid down, built
4647163. and equipped over a substantial period of
time; aircraft cannot -be bought out of existing
stocks, and their domestic produotion,
having regard to their enormous complexity,
cannot be encompassed except over a period
of years; and the Army cannot in time of
peace be strengthened numerical-ly and in
terms of equipment and training very suddenly.
I give those illustrations for this
reason: I will be giving some new figures
for our anticipated defence votes. They will
indicate substantial increases; but, because of
the time factors which I have referred to,
those increases will be smaller in the earlier
part of the programnme than in -the later.
In -brief, no government in Australia should
announce a dramatic increase in defence
expenditure for 1963-64 just for the sake of
doing so. All new proposals must be
-phased over the necessary period of time.
In October last, my colleague, the Minister
for Defence ( Mr. Townley), whose con-
-timied absence through ill health we all
-regret so deeply, announced a new threeyear
defence program-me covering the years
1962-63 to 1964-65. He emphasized that
the programme was not static, and that adjustments
would be made as new circumstances
developed. In January of this year,
following a review of the naval programme,
which had been left a ' little vague in the 
October proposals, we announced some
additional measures for strengthening the
Royal Australian Navy. I will not repeat
these two announcements in detail, as copies
of them are available to honorable members.
But it may be helpful for an understanding
of the financial quantum of our new
measures if I now set out the financial involvement
of those earlier announcementsthat
is, October plus January. Based on a
continuance of the approvals given before
our current review, the annual expenditures
were estimated to be as follows:-
1962-63
1963-64
1964-65
1965-66
1966-67
1967-68 212,200,000 219,200,000 220,000,000 222,000,000 220,000,000 220,000,000
Those figures give a total-necessarily
approximate in the case of future
years where costs are unknown--of
œ 1,313,000,000 over six years-
œ 651,000,000 in the first three years and
œ 662,000,000 in the second three years. I
want no confusion on this matter. I repeat
that this is the last October three-year programme
plus the January addition in the
case of the Navy.
We have now completed a further comprehensive
review of developments in Southb
East Asia. We have noted the uncertainties
in Laos, the acute problems in South Viet
Nam, the conflicts which exist over the
creation of the new Federation of Malaysia
-which we heartily support-and events in
and concerning West New Guinea. It certainly
cannot be said that we have entered
a period of stability in the area of immediate
strategic concern to Australia. We have
made this recent review in the light of our
treaty arrangements, but particularly in
reference to the security of our own country
and of the Territories of Papua and New
Guinea. We will defend these territories as
if they were part of our mainland; there
must be no mistaken ideas about that.
We have decided that there should be a
further progressive increase in our military
capability and preparedness. I will take the
three services in order. It will be recalled
that as recently as January we announced
two large naval projects--the purchase ot
a third guided missile destroyer and the procurement
of four " Oberon" class submarines.
We have now approved of provision
for fitting the Ikara anti-sibmarine missile, which is under development in Australia,
with United States of America cooperation,
into the Type XII. frigates and
the guided missile destroyers. This will be
a most significant development in anti-submarine
warfare. We have also approved of
the building in Australia of a 15,000-ton
escort maintenance ship. We have reviewed
our 1959 decision that fixed-wing naval
aviation should cease in 1963. After recent
re-appraisals of the wing-fatigue life of the
Venoms and Gannets, and reports of the
very low wastage and accident rate, we have
decided that fixed-wing flying is to continue
until the Venoms and Gannets reach the
reasonable end of their service life. This
will be about 1967 when the position can
be reviewed. These aircraft will, of course,
be used in conjunction with the Westland
Wessex helicopters already under delivery.
The personnel strength of the will
be increased from the , present approved
total of 13,900 to about 14,300.
I turn now to the Army: Last year it was
decided to increase the permanent Army
strength from 21,000 to 24,500 by June,
1965. We have now approved of a further
increase to 28,000. The order of battle of
the permanent field forces will be expanded
by the formation of a third regular battle
group. This will add considerably to the
flexibility of our forces and their ability to
operate in a variety of circumstances. The
Australian Regular Army Reserve will be reconstituted
to ensure that its members are
medically fit, up to date in their training,
and ready. There will also be an increase in
the strength of the Pacific Islands Regiment,
which includes Australian officers and some
senior Australian non-commissioned officers.
The present strength of the regiment is
about 700. This will be doubled as soon as
possible, consistently with adequate training
and equipment. When that has occurred
further developments will then be considered.
No major change is at present proposed
in the organization of the Citizen
Military Forces, but its target strength of
32,500 will be increased to 35,000. Major
purchases of new equipment for the C. M. F.
-and that is very important when it comes
to recruitment-have now been approved.
The procurement of modern equipment is,
of course, essential. Current expenditure in
this field is running at the annual rate of 
about œ 1 1,000,000. We have now approved
as an objective the provision of the equipment
and reserves needed by the Australian
Regular Army and C. M. F. components of a
complete pentropic division of five battle
groups with appropriate combat support and
logistic units. To meet this, expenditure on
Army equipment, which has been running
at about œ 11,000,000 annually, will rise to
œ 14,000,000 in the coming financial year,
and to 17,500,000 in the succeeding years.
The items will cover the whole range of
weapons and ammunition, engineering and
technical stores, radar and radio, vehicles
and landing craft. There will be additional
purchases for the Army light aircraft squadron.
These are separate from the purchases
under the Air Force programme, which I
shall mention later. The increasing Army
strength will require a considerable expansion
of the construction programme. It is
provisionally estimated that the Army vote,
this year œ 68,000,000, Will rise to
œ 87,500,000 in 1964-65 and to œ 97,000,000
by 1967-68. But I will return to the general
financial figures later on.
We have approved of a number of
important new projects for the Royal Australian
Air Force.
A major feature of the re-equipment programme
has been the introduction of the
Dassault Mirage Ill, jet fighter to replace
the Avon Sabre. The Mirage has an
advanced supersonic performance and is
regarded by those who are in a position to
speak as the best fighter available in the
world for our purposes. As honorable
members know, orders have already been
placed for 60 of these aircraft. The first,
from French production, has already been
handed over to the R. A. A. F. and is undergoing
tests and trials. Deliveries of the
remainder, which will contain increasing
quantities of locally assembled and constructed
components, will commence late this
year. We recently secured an option on a
further order of 40 Mirage fighters. We
have decided now to take this up, thus bringing
the total to 100. At the same time, since
the effective employment of fighter aircraft
depends more than ever before on adequate
ground control of their movements and
operations, we have approved the purchase
of two new control and reporting units and
these are vastly complex and costly things. One of them is to be at Brookvale in New
South Wales and the other is to be mobile.
Tactical air transport support for the
armed forces has also received attention. We
give it a high priority. Last October, we
approved of the purchase of eight heavy-lift
helicopters and twelve fixed-wing short takeoff
and landing aircraft, subject to R. A. A. F.
evaluation and selection. It has been found
that a suitable type of heavy-lift belico-pter
is not at present available. We have therefore
decided to purchase a further eight Bell
Iroquois utility helicopters in addition to
the sixteen already approved, and to purchase
eighteen Caribou Mark 1. fixed-wing
aircraft, which have a proved capability as a
short take-off and landing aircraft in South-
East Asian conditions. The introduction of
both of these types will complement, in the
tactical field, the strategic mobility provided
by the Hercules Cl130 transports.
In addition to the current extensive programme
of airfield works and development
in such places as Darwin, Amberley, Williamtown,
East Sale and Townsville, we have
now approved of major and extensive improvements
to the airfield at Boram, near
Wewak, in New Guinea. This will have
great value for defence purposes, for civil
aviation, and for the general development of
the Territory. Overall, the new projects for
the Air Force will require an increase in
personnel strength from the present target
of 16,440 to something of the order of
18,300. It will be observed that I have so far not
spoken of the problem of the re-equipment
of the strike-reconnaissance force. This is
an important matter. The Canberra is by
no means obsolete; it is still being used by
overseas air forces, including those of Nato.
But we are giving close consideration to the
future as we must. There are, of course,
great financial problems, but there are vital
questions as to the availability of suitable
types to meet our requirements. Having
regard to our special geographic circumstances,
we must consider range, the capacity
to perform both reconnaissance and attack
and the ability to use existing runways and
services. An on-the-spot evaluation by a
team of qualified experts is necessary, as it
was in the selection of the Mirage. Such a
team will be sent overseas at an early date, 
under the Chief of the Air Staff, to investigate
and report. Then, of course, the
Government will consider the matter further
in the light of the report.
I now turn to the total programme figures,
putting in parallel columns, for clarity, the
figures I quoted earlier, on the existing programme,
and the new figures based upon the
announcements I have just made, but without
anticipating or estimating the cost of a
striking reconnaissance replacement-
Annual expenditure
in existing
programme based Annual expenditure
on a continuance in new programme.
of approvals given
before this review.
Ern. Em.
1962-63 212.2 212.2
1963-64 219.2 237.5
1964-65 220 253.4
1965-66 222 269.6
1966-67 220 277
1967-68 220 269. 5
Total 1,313.4 1,519.2
This means that, beginning in 1963-64,
the average increase in the defence vote
over a period of five years will be of the
order of œ E41,000,000 a year, leaving out of
account a Canberra replacement and assuming,
of course, that no additional proposals
are approved during that period.
The effect of these decisions, when they
are carried out, will be to establish a fully
equipped, fully modern, fully supported
pentropic division. We will have an Air
Force able to provide a measure of strategic
and tactical mobility, and with 100 supersonic fighters, properly controlled, to
provide air protection. We will have a
relatively small but modern Navy equipped
to defend our shores, and to seek out and
destroy the submarines on which an enemy
is likely to rely in order to deny us that
command of the seas without which the
overseas employment and support of a
division is impossible.
Such forces will provide a significant and
welcome addition to any allied effort
required in our area of strategic concern.
But they will do more in that they will
provide a capacity -for independent action
to meet the initial shock of any emergency
with which we may in the future find ourselves
faced.
The increases I have announced will
impose substantial additional burdens upon
the Budget in a period in which the need
for national developmental expenditure will
be great and growing; greater in proportion
than may be the case in older and more
developed countries. But we feel that such
burdens will be cheerfully accepted by our
people. They are, of course, not solely
financial burdens. The improvement of the
nation's defences will require much public
co-operation, by those who join the forces
and, in the case of citizens who join the
C. M. F. and the reserves, by those who
employ them. We look for this co-operation
with complete confidence.
I lay on the table the following paper:-
Defence Review-Ministerial Statement, 22nd
May, 1963-
and move-
That the paper be printed.
By Authority: A. J. ARTHURt, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH 13Y
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
UNITED STATES NAVAL COMMUNICATION
STATION AGREEMENT BILL 1963.
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 22nd May, 1963.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 8.50].-When I remember
that not so long ago the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr. Calwell), like myself, was
a little out of action, I feel that I ought to
congratulate him on having come back in
such magnificent form. It is a long time
since I heard him to such advantagefor
my side. He really was in very good
form. Mr. Stewart.-Where is the Minister for
External Affairs?
Sir ROBERT MIENZIS-It is all right;
I am still in office.
Mr. Stewart.--Where is he? Put him up!
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-41e is still
here, and I am still here; and I am speaking.
You do not mind, do you? Come, Frank,
do you mind?
Mr. Stewart.-No, but I want to hear
Gar. Mr. Ward.-He has gone out to get his
medal. Mr. SPEAKER.--Ordert
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-The Leader
of the Opposition has really waxed very
eloquent to-night. He follows in the footsteps
of one of his senior members who
4751/ 63. explained to us earlier, in -the second-reading
debate, that the House would not be
divided on the-question of the communication
centre and that therefore the motion
for the second reading would go through
without division; but that in committee and
at the third-reading stage there would be
amendments. It is very interesting to note
that, after the next division, the Labour
Party, which wants to be able to go out and
say, We are really supporters of the
establishment of this communication
centre will have voted four times against
it and only once for it.
Another interesting thing is that, although
we were told that the whole of the serried
ranks of -the Labour Party-now so happily,
if precariously, united on this matterwould
be put into the battle, so far the
divisions on this bill have shown a majority
for the Government not of one but of seven
and of five. What has become of the
Opposition? Has the will of the Opposition
weakened? Where are our wandering boys
to-night? Why, with a majority of seven
or five I could live an awful long time in
this office. But, Sir, here it is; for the
fourth time we are going to be asked to
divide. What about? I will answer that
question first technically and then in
substance. 
First of all technically, I say to the people
of Australia who no doubt are following
our proceedings with rapt interest-or we
think so-that Standing Order No. 237
deals with the third reading of a bill. After
all, this Parliament is governed by its own
Standing Orders. My distinguished friend
the Leader of the Opposition, made a somewhat
obituary reference to Sir Thomas
Erskine May, the author of May's Parliamentary
Practice who, he said, lived a
long time ago. He suggested that this is an
antiquated idea. I am surprised, because
our Standing Orders were not written by
Sir Thomas Erskine May who
lived a long time ago; they were
written by the Standing Orders
Committee, with the approval of the members
of this House, and they were revised
only the other day. So there is nothing
dead about our book of Standing Orders.
This is the last and final edition of our own
Standing Orders. I remind honorable
members opposite that in Standing Order
No. 237, dealing with the motion " That
the bill be now read a third time" this is
the provision-
The only amendment which may be moved to
the question is by omitting " now" and adding
" this day six months", which, if carried, shall
finally dispose of the Bill
Let us understand this. Supposing -that in
a passion of eloquence or by persuasive
oratory my distinguished opponent had
persuaded a couple of people on this side
of the House to stay away or one person
on this side of the House -to cross the floor
and vote with him, the carrying of this
amendment would have killed the agreement
' and there would be no radio communication
centre established at all.
It ill becomes an opposition to say, Well,
of course, we moved it this way because
we know that it will not be carried ". That
would be humbug, surely. Therefore, we
must be able to test members of the Labour
' Party by saying that they moved this amendment
hoping that for some reason or
another it would be carried. If they care
to deny that, if they care to say publicly that
it was all a bit of flim-flam and that they
-moved the amendment hoping and ' believing
that it would not he carried, then we can
judge them and so can the people of Australia.
But if they are prepared to stand
up and say. We moved this hoping that in some fashion it would be carried then
let them admit publicly that the carrying
of their amendment would kill not only this
bill but the establishment of the communication
station.
, Mr. Reynolds.-What rubbish!
Sir ROBERT MENZIES-It is of no use
saying rubbish I do not need to talk
about rubbish to you.
Mr. Allan Fraser.-We are seeking decent
treatment-Mr. SPEAKER.-Qrde r! The honorable
member for Eden-Monaro will remain silen't.
Mr. Allan Frasr.-I am sorry.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-The honorable
member -for Eden-Monaro always feels
a little troubled when somebody puts the
cold hand of reason on him because he is
not a rational man. I shall repeat my point.
I know that I will not persuade some of my
friends opposite, although I suspect that one
or two of them already agree with me, ' but
I think it ought to be made clear to the
people of Australia somehow or another that
this amendment, if carried, would dispose
of -the bill and that the bill having been
disposed of, this communication centre
would not be established.
Of course, ' there are some ' honorable
members opposite who imaigine that if this
agreement were disposed of we could, in
due course, at leisure and with some comfort-
or they could after another election
-have a pleasant negotiation with the
United States of America. How unrealistic
this is. The fact -is that the United States
has not all that time to ' burn. When it wants
to establish a communication centre. it wants
it soon. When its Congress is asked to vote
for proposals of this kind, the members
Of Congress want to know that ' the proposal
will contribute to the safety of the free
world and' that it will go ahead. Yet this
poor, ' bemused Opposition puts -itself on
record with an amendment which, if carried,
Would mean the destruction of the bill and
the destruction of the agreement. Sir, anybody
with a most elementary knowledge of
the procedures of Parliament could not
doubt for onc moment that that is the
Position. 
All I want to say on this point-because
there has been a long debate and there is
not much to be added to it-is that this
amendment is the fourth attempt by the
Opposition to destroy this proposal by
destroying this bill and this agreement. The
only other thing I want to say is this: This
afternoon and, indeed, yesterday a careful
campaign was conducted by the Opposition
to suggest that Labour members alone are
interested in the rights of Australia, the
sovereignty of Australia and our right to
determine our future. I do not want to be
preached to by these people about this matter
because, as a matter of fact, in the last war
it was I who, as the head of the then govearnment,
stipulated that the Second Australian
Imperial Force which was going to the
Middle East was not to be submerged in
other formations; that it was to be under
Australian command; and that it was to be
in contact with the Australian Government
whenever it wanted to be. This is an old
practice. Nobody can claim a monopoly in
this. It was established twenty years before
I and those who sat in government witb
me re-established it at that time.
But, Sir, this is a case in which the Labour
Party, however it may cloak its intention,
wants to establish a proposition in the name
of our own sovereignty that this signalling
station is not to be used by the United
States, except with the express approval of
the Australian Government under circumstances
in which the United States is at war.
That is what the Opposition members are
saying. Mr. Cahvlwell.-No, they are not.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.--Of course,
they are. The Leader of the Opposition is
rather handicapped in debating this. He
began his speech in the second-reading
debate by saying, in effect, that there was
joint control. It now turns out that he
agrees with us that there is no joint control.
There is a power to consult. Therefore, he
has gone to all this trouble and called all
these divisions to try to produce the joint
control which a few days ago he said already
existed. We must be alive to the circumstances of
the times. Australia is not a nuclear power.
The United States is the greatest of the
nuclear powers, much to our comfort. The existence of a nuclear deterrent in the
United States and in Great Britainalthough
at present to a much smaller
extent there-is the condition by which we
live. I repeat that. The problem that has
to be considered is whether we want to
have a deterrent that does not deter,
whether we want to have a deterrent that
cannot be used at the right time and in the
right place. Picture the position to the
north and west of Australia. Go west into
the Indian Ocean, south of Communist
China and south of Communist Russia. The
United States is the great power that has
the deterrent weapon in the air, from submarines
and otherwise. I put this to everybody
as a matter of plain common sense.
Suppose the Communists decided that they
would attack. Nobody would be so silly
as to think they would send a courteous
letter giving notice. When the Communists
think that the time has come, they will act,
and from that moment it will be a matter
of minutes before the instruments of detection
ascertain what they are doing and
where their missiles are going. In
those circumstances, literally with ballistic
missiles in the air, we are told that there
must be political consultation before the
United States can retaliate from the Indian
Ocean in order to render unprofitable the
attack by the Communist powers.
Sir, this is bedlamite nonsense. Why talk
about a lot of theoretical matters when the
fact is that it will be a matter of mere
minutes before, the word having come
through, the President of the United States
will have to send a message to his own
naval forces deployed in this part of the
world, " You are to strike". We are told
by the Labour Party that in those circumstances
we must stipulate that before the
United States authorities can send a message
from our soil which might impair our
neutrality they must have a political discussion
with us. If I were running one of
these great Communist countries, I could
wish for nothing better than to see the most
powerful enemy of communism hamstrung
by having to engage in consultations of this
kind before the return blow could come.
We do not want the blow or the return
blow. No honorable member of this House
has any monopoly of humanity. We are 
men with families and we are men concerned
with the future of our country. Of
course we do not want to have this
diabolical disaster come on the world. But
the best way of guaranteeing that it will
come is to impair the efficacy of the counterstroke
after the stroke comes. In other
words, the best way to destroy our future
is to put an impediment in the way of the
great Western nuclear power-the great
home of freedom for this purpose and the
great protector of so many free nations in
the world-and prevent it from being able
to make its retaliation both certain and
swift. A retaliation that is not certain and
swift is not a retaliation at all.
I beg honorable members opposite to
come up to date on this matter. We are living in a world in which a war, if it came,
would not leave a matter of months to do
things and to prepare as in the past. If a
war came, and it was a war on the global
scale, it would have reached its peak in a
day or two days. The first massive blows
would have been delivered in minutes, not
days. Sir, I am an Australian and I am
proud of my country. I would not willingly
abandon any of the rights of my country.
I am a great believer in them. But, in the
name of a theoretical protection of
Australia's rights, to abandon Australia's
real interests, to leave this country defenceless
in a war of this kind and to leave
Australia, as I said earlier, as the prize of
victory is something that I will not accept,
that my colleagues will not accept and that
the people of Australia will not accept.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMdMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTEB, CANBERRA. 



PJBLIC MEETING, t1HYALLA, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
24TH MAY3 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt_ Hon_ Si. r Robert Menzies
Mr. Chairman Senator Laught, prospective Member for Grey,
Mr. President and Ladies and Gentlemen
I must say that that speech you just heard from
the candidate discloses him to me, and I hope to you, as one
of the best candidates I have supported on a platform. ( Applause)
Itve never heard a clearer statement of his beliefs, of his
point of view, of the qualifications that he has by experience
and residence. I had the great pleasure of speaking wita him
at Port Pirie at the opening of his campaign and I thought he
was good. Tonight I think he is very, very, very good, It goes
to show how a man trains on. In fact, by the time he has been
Member for Grey for three yJars for six years they'll be
talking about him as, you know, one of the coming men. He is
in the same position now as I was when I first went into
Parliament when, believe it or not, I used to be referred to as
a " very promising young man". ( Laughter) ( Interjector " What
about when you abdicated?") Thank you so much. I was so
disappointed, I've been waiting for somebody to have a go at
me because I was prepared to point the moral of it, that they
didn't have a go at him, and if you approve of him, I can put
up with a little bit of disapproval of myself. ( Laughter)
( Applause) In fact, if you don't mind, ladies and gent.-emen,
that reminds me of a little event that happened some years ago.
Every time there is an election, I go down to speak
for my friend and colleague, Hubert Opperman, in Geelong,
( Interjector " On a bike?") ( Laughter) Oh, no. I am asbhmed
to say I was in a car, but he meets me on a bike. ( Laugh-cer)
I will refrain from saying the make of it because you kno%;, of
course. But " Oppy" always arranges that I shall have a ieoting
at the Ford works and at the luncheon break I have two meetings,
because the shifts vary, and I stand on the tail end of a lorry
and, you know, give tongue and the boys look at me with a
sceptical eye and eat their lunch, occasionally making a
courteous remark ( Lauglhter). One day I had finished this
exercise of mine and got down off the lorry and a big chap
cane across and dug me in the ribs and said, " I hate the sight
of you you so-and-so,. o." I leave it to the Whyalla citizens
to fill in the gap....( Laughter) " I hate the sight of you., you
so-and-so but I'll vote for ' Oppy' any tick of the clock,"
( Laughter3 Now here it is. The perfect analogy. Do what you
care about me, Lut send Vern Dyason to the Federal Parliament
which, I assure you, will be improved and added to by his
presence. ( Interjector " He probably hasn't had his sins
on your head yet") ( Laughter) What do you think will happen
in this election, brother? Do you think he won't win? Well,
in the words of a famous statesman you wait and see. You wait
and see. If he is elected, the citizens of Grey will have good
reason to be thankful for it in the years to come.
Now, Sir, when I helped to open this campaign in
Port Pirie, I gathered there were one or two people who thought
I had made a speech to the nation and not to the electors of
Grey and that really I should have got down to other local
issues. Well, I don't mind tolling you that when I addreosed
the electors of Grey I regarded myself as addressing the
nation. I feel no obligation to treat Grey as something o 
-2-
inferior to the run of the nation because it isntt. The fact is
that in this electorate you have the most tremendous variety of
occupations and interests, from remote rural properties from
primary production of one kind or another to great smelter, at
Port Pirie to a railways junction town in Port Augusta, to the
industries in Whyalla about which I will have a word in a
noment down to the fisheries and all the intervening industries
at Port Lincoln. This electorate is, in fact, a superb example of an
electorate in which primary industries and secondary industries
live together and depend upon each other and therefore, this is
a good electorate in which to address the nation. Anyhow, being
Prime Minister, I have a duty to address the nation,
Now, Sir, I will just say something about Whyallao
This place has grown, of courseenormously, and it will continue
to grow. I think that it was when I am sure it was I was
Prime Minister for the first time, many years ago, in 1939, that
the. Premier of South Australia who, I dontt need to say was
then and is now and forever will be ( Laughter) Tom Playfo-d,
discussed with me this great proposition about the pipeline,
without which Whyalla couldnft exist. It was my privilege at
that time to do what he asked me to do and the Commonwealth to
do, in order to assist that project. In 1940 I was stil. Prime
Minister and had established the Department of Munitions and
had appointed to be its presiding man, Essington Lewis, one of
the great industrialists in the history of this country0 . It
was in that very year that the first orders were given some
craft to be built at Whyalla, so I can claim to have some
foundational interest in the water supply of this city and in
shipbuilding in this city. ( Interjection inaudible) Now, if
you don't mind would you just listen to this. You would. I am
sure, learn a lot, I am anxious, of course, that you shoui. dn't
prevent your friends from learning a lot on this matter ( Laughter)
because there is a lot to be learned.
Now, Sir, what is the position today. In ship-building,
many, many ships have been built here. This has become the
most effective and efficient shipbuilding centre in Australia,
and with wisdom and good sense, it will increasingly be a shipbuilding
centre but that will require good sense on the part of
a few people and I will refer to the arguments a little later on,
This afternoon, I went out to have a look at the development of
the steelworks. I had been there before, but today I was
astonished at the tremendous extent and quality of the work that
is being done there0 And this is the important thing from the
point of view of this town of Whyalla and of this electorate
in Australia. Here we have already established a blast furnace. We
have all the work going on and going on fast for the establishment
of a complete steel activity. In its first stages I gathered,
it will be geared to produce half a million tons ol steel and
then in due course with another blast furnace, another million
tons of steel and so on until it is a million and a half tons
of steel. Ladies and gentlemen, I seem to remember that hen
I was first interested in these matters and concerned abo,. t them
in government, that total production of steel in Australio wasnft
much more than a million and a quarter tons and you are going to
have that in this place alone.
This place, Whyalla is going to be a place rivalling
in its extent and its life and its expansion Port Kembla and
C oo/ 3 
3-
Wollongong. This is a most exciting place from the point of
view of Australian development and, really, whatever party
I might belong to I would take immense pride in that fact
and feel some of the excitement and feel how good it was to be
living in a place whose future was so full of immense possibilities.
But, Sir, there are some people who are llknoc'Iiersll.
I suppose that if you elect the Labour candidate, whoever he
may be there seems to be a mixture of...,( Applause) I suppose
that il~ you elect him, he may turn out to be He will have
to go to Canberra and join in the anti-BH. P. chorus and learn
to denounce the Broken Hill Proprietary Company as if it were
the enemy of mankind and then come back to Whyalla and say to
the hundreds and hundreds of people and families engaged by
th'i. e Broken Hill Proprietary, " Well, don't misunderstand me of
course, I did that because it was the party line. I don't
mean it. I did it because the 36 chaps outside told me to do
it. Not because I befleve it." Well, this sounds funny and
it is funny but it is true. Is that what you are going to
do on June 1st?
Now, Sir, having said that, I repeat: This place
has the most exciting prospects of future development of any
place in Australia. It is bound to become, very rapidly, more
and more rapidly, the place of immense importance in the State
of South Australia, and as what it is doing is of immense
national importance to Australia itwill become one of the
great significant things in the life of the nation. Now
Sir, I say that to you because I believe that's true and
believe that everybody in Whyalla ought to recognise it and
be proud of it and be excited about it. But, of course, the
more it succeeds, the more it grows, the more steel that is
produced, the more peoplo who are employed in producing, the
more shipbuilding goes on Itll come back to that in a
minute,...( Interjector " Tell us why you bought those ships)
My dear boy, there is nothing hidden that shall not be ma~ de
known, You content yourself, ( Interjector " We couldi have
built them here") Well, are you one of the fellows who
doesn't want to have another tanker built here? Are you one
of those? ( Laughter) ( Applause) I'll come to that. I'm going
to tell a Whyalla audience the story of the P. J. Adams tanker
because it is high time that people realised a great matter
of political difference in this country. But I'll come t'Vo that
in a moment. I was at the moment addressing myself to the development
of Whyalla and to what is involved in it and, quite clearly,
this place can't develop whatever the position may be on steel
or shipbuilding, unless it has an assured water supply. And
it is therefore proper to point out to you that long before the
Grey by-election, I had convened a meeting with Sir Thomas
Playford and the Premier of Victoria and the Premier of New
South Wales, as a result of which, the Chowilla Dam is to be
built on the lower Murray which will added to the existing
facilities, absolutely ensure the water supply of South
Australia in general and of Whyalla in particular. ( Applause)
Now, Sirs there is an eager shipbuilder over there
who wants to know about it ( Laughter) and so I would like to
tell him. The " 1P. 5. Adams" the biggest tanker ever built in
Australia and I hope not the last the " 1P. J. Adams" was
built by the Broken Hill Proprietary Company at these yOards.
It meant an enormous development in the yards, it meant enormous
ezJ. bymentt and it was built when the Company said, " Well, 0 0 a 0 
we would like to have it built in Australia, We would like
a Commonwealth subsidy." My Government has been subsidising
ship-building for coastal business at the rate of 33 per cent.
for the last seven years. Before that, it was 25 per cent.
They said: " We would like a subsidy. We know that you dont
subsidise the building of a ship except for the Australian
coastal service. Are you prepared to subsidise the building
of a ship for international trade, which will trade from
Australia to a place outside and back," 1 and so on. An0 we
said, " Well, whatts the proposition? This is terribly
important, It is tremendously important for ship-building
in Whyalla. It is tremendously important for ship-building in
Australia. We are prepared to have a look at it. On what
terms will you do this?" And they stipulated, and I quote
their precise words: that they would be prepared to have the
ship built here provided the Commonwealth Government agreed
that they could register tine ship as a British ship at the
Port of London. No. r that was their condition.
Now, to add to this we having said, " Yes, we will
accept this proposition" we Aidn't do this in a hurry
we had to balance the impact it might have on the employment
of seamen in Australia against the impact it would have on
the employment of hundreds and therefore the livelihood of
thousands of people in Whyalla. And therefore Sir, we
decided that we would play on these Lerms, ( Interjector
Z4+ million) Don't bemuse yourself with millions, You are
only imagining them. ( Laughter)
Now ladies and gentlemen, the company then
proceeded to find out at which price it could get this tanker
built overseas, It had quotations from Japan for a 1l,. wer
figure than the loca'l price minus our subsidy. In other
words, it would at that stage have paid them hundreds of
thousands of pounds to get it built outside Australia but
they said, " No we want to have it built in Australia?. it
was an Australian Company " we want to have it built 1ñ ere. ll
The price was a little over œ C4 million; we
subsidised to the extent of œ C1 million. The ship was launched-
I was here for the launching. It is the greatest sing'le
ship-building achievement in the history of Australia and
when it was launched all this had been known for years an
agitation began among the seamen, among the more intransigent
of the relevant union and they came to me at Canberra and
they said, " Look, won? t the Commonwealth compel the Company
to register in Australia?" Now, you know, I don't care for
this kind of thing. The Government had undertaken with the
Company that if the Company would build the ship here even
losing something on it, and we subsidised it, we woula agree
the company registering it in London because this was the
condition on which this job would be done here and I am not in
the habit of entering into obligations of that kind and then
tearing them up because somebody threatens to call a strike,
Really, what all the people here engaged in shipbuilding
have to consider is what side they are on in this
matter, what would they have liked us to do. I put this to
every man engaged in the ship-building business here, In our
Place, how would you have answered that question7 Would you
have said, " No, insist on the ship being registered in Australia
although you know that if you do so insist the ship won't be
built in Australia." Is that how you would have decided it?
Now, ladies and gentlemen, think about it. These are facts a 7*/ 
beyond the slightest chance of contradiction. These are wellknowm
facts. These have been discussed with the trade unions and
with the company, and the fact is that the question to be determined
was: Should the ship be built here at all or should it
have been built on terms that it should be registered in London?
Now, I just say this, I repeat this to any of you gentlemen here
tonight who are engaged in this activity. How would you have
decided that matter? We decided in your favour. Would you have
decided against yourselves, that the ship was not to be built
here on those terms? ( Interjector " No, Now, don't
say, " 1No, The only thing that interests me is that
you do say you can save all the " buts" ( Applause)
Now, the last thing I want to say about this matter,
ladies and gentlemen is this because I am told that the Labour
candidate or candidazes were actively concerned in challenging
this decision, It Is worth remembering. I wonder what tho
A. L. P. or what remains of it here I wonder what it re:.-lly
wants done about shipbuilding at Whyalla or, for that mattcr, in
Brisbane, or for that matter, in Newcastle, or wherever it may be
in Australia. Do they want to say to the world " Look, we are
not going to build a ship in an Australian shipyard for a foreign
owner who wants to get one built or for an owner who wants to
register his ship, being a foreign owner in a foreign port"
is that what we are to say? Is your ambition for this prospectively
marvellous place so small that you want to give notice that you
are only interested in building for the local coastal irade and
that you have no ambition to build large vessels for people who
are outside Australia? That's the question that has to be
answered and really it is not to be answered by getting excited
about it, It is to be answered in a cold, clear, rational fashion
by those who are engaged in this business, who depend on it and
who want it to expand. ( Interjector " 114hy didn't you think of
that before you bought these three new ships?) ( Laughter) My dear
air,, thatts a very happy excuse for you. I don't think you know
any ing about these three guided-missile destroyers that we are
building. There is only one place in the world that is producing
them and they are very little the most tiny fraction of them
is the hull. It is what goes into these ships, many mill11ions of
pounds worth of it not made here that's the thing that makes the
difference, A man who says that we could have produced one of
these guided missile destroyers in Australia in our present state
of engineering capacity knows nothing about it. That's all,
( Interjector " The other night you said you Lad
many shares in this company. It doesn't sound as if you've got
many shares in it now.") 5 ( Laughter) I said I had a lot of shares
in Australia Unlimited. That's right. Well I am glad to
acknowledge it, sir, and I hope you have because the more you
have by way of shares in Australia Unlimited the more likely
you are to become a warm-hearted supporter of mine in politics.
( Applause) Now, 7 Sir I don't w-nt to say any more about that
particular matter. All I say by ~ way of summary is that in this
very electorate of Grey, you have this tremendous conjunction
of the planets. You have this wonderful development proceeding
so rapidly in steel and in ship-building in Whyalla and you have
Port Pinie and Augusta no longer at the tail-end of a transcontinental
line now being worked on the West Australian section but on
a line that will go clear across the Continent from Perth to
Sydney to Brisbane and so on. Sir I think myself that this is
an exciting matter. I have no doult whatever that the improvement
by standardization and re-grading of the Port Pinie/ Broken Hill
line will serve to reduce the costs of transportation to the 
6-
smelters and to the rest of the world and in these days we in
Aucztralia must preserve our export capacity and we must do it
by keeping our costs at a competitive level. Now, I am not
one of' these who says that we've got to keep costs down, that
you ought to slash wages. I am one of' those who have said,
and said rep eatedly, that in order to keep costs down, we must
increase our efficiency by every possible means and improving
the efficiency of' transport is one of' the ways of' doing that.
My colleague, the Minister for Trade, is overseas,
He's been working hard tremendously hard as he always (. oes
on these trade negotiahions. They are all intensely difficult.
We went through the whole argument last year about the
European Common Market there's been a hitch there and now
he's been over discussing the problems that followed on that
matter. He's discussing the initiative taken by the Pre'.) ident
of the United States of America and in all of these thirv~ s, I
undertake to say that he has been constantly keeping ina mind
how do we maintain a fair price for the things that we sell to
the rest of the world, and how do we maintain a fair costi of
production for that commodity in our country. This concerns
everybody engaged in the mining or metal industries; it concerns
everybody on the land and because it concerns them, it concerns
US* It concerns the solvency of' Australia in international trade
and without that solvency, we won't have much heal. th in our
economy at home. Therefore tte are great matters and
thnerefore a further step in the rendering more efficient of
our transportation system is not to be regarded just as some
election bid; it is to be regarded as a first-class step
for-ward in containing the cost of production in our own country.
Sir, we have spoken.... I have tonight and my friend
has about these four main centres, all of them tremendously
important, all of them very much in our minds, but we must
never forget, and he certainly doesn'tt that outside all these
places there are thousands of people in the electorate of Grey
who are living and working on the land in various forms of
primary industry. We must think about them. Some people never'
think about them at all, I find it part of my duty to *; hink'
about them constantly and for this reason we have going on in
Australia the most tremendous works of development.
I've been mentioning some tonight, but must also think
about what goes on in minerals in the north of Queenslar-12 in
the Northern Territory and in Western Australia, what goos on
in the export of coal from Australia what goes on at th e Snowy,
what goes on in water supply and reticulation all these are
tremendous things, tremendous works of development, and we need
them in Australia and we need them as fast as we can get them.
But they all put enormous pressures on our resources,
Tremendous pressures.
Immigration which we need so badly, and which goes
along so well, puts an enormous pressure on our resources in
tVie first place. In the long run it contributes immense power
to the country, but in the short run all these things mean that
there is a pressure on our resources of money, a pressure on our
resources of materials and manpower. Anybody who? like myself,
has been sitting in the middle of government for so long knows
these things well, You must watch them all the timze and unless
you watch them, those pressures can produce an inflationary
effect in Australia which will begin quite quickly to destroy
the value of whatever you are paid by way of income salary,
wages or whatever they may be. And if that happens what
happens to the man on the land? His costs of production go up.
eoe. e e9/ 
7-
He cantt pass them on to a customer. The wheatgrower can't
pass on an increased cost of production to the customer because
apart from the home consumption price, he sells in the world's
markets, The woolgrower sells in the world's markets. His
wool goes to auction and it is what the world will pay for it
that he will get. herefore all increases in his costs by
inflation in Australia are a net loss to him.
This goes for all the major primary production
activities of Australia and therefore the enormously complex
business of government, which I am afraid some people dontt
begin to understand, is to try to keep a balance between pushing
on with development, getting that new job done, getting it
forward getting more people into the country, and at the same
time not striking a blow at the primary producer of Austr-alia
who is still responsible for over 85 per cent. of our export
income and is therefore primarily reponsible ( Interjector
" Did you realise that Yes, and I am happy to tell
you, my dear sir, obviously a thinker about these matters
( Laughter) I am happy to tell you that every deputation I
had from people representingbTrming interests in Australia
warmly approved of what we had done. Warmly approved of it
because they said, " Well, your Government at any rate has been
concerned about our costs of production," and we were and we are
and we will continue to be. Now this is a serious matter and
I address myself to it quite seriously. ( Interjector " You
weren't a cocky Bob") Sir, I was born in the " cocky country"
if you care to describe it as such and I' 11 undertake to say
at a quick guess I've done three times as much work in my life
as you will ever do. ( Applause)
Now, ladies and gentlemen, this is the great problem
of statesmanship on the economic front and it must be borne in
raind, and you must be represented in Parliament by soraeb~ dy who
understands that that is the problem and is prepared to address
himself seriously to it,
Now, Sir, I will just turn away from that because I
have been speaking for some time to say something about another
problem which concerns our external relations with other
countries. It has had a good deal of discussion of It
was my Government, if you will forgive me for reminding you,
which brought about the ANZTJS Treaty with the United States
and New Zealand. It was received in stony silence by the
Labour Party but we got it and it was written and it was
passed and it is today just about the sheet anchor of Australian
security the United States, Australia, New Zealand entering
into a mutual treaty to resist aggression against their
countries from outside. This was one of the great events in
Australian foreign policy history. We are also among the
promoters of the South East Asian Treaty which involves some
of the Asian countries as well as our own.
Now, Sir, that means that the United States is our
ally. We have, in the South East Asian Treaty an alliance
with the United Kingdom. I am happy to say we dontt need
formal treaties with the United Kingdom. When the day comes
that we are not an ally of the United Kingdom, I shall have
to resign in shame. I just take it for granted that we are
allies of the United Kingdom and I hope that nobody in this
hall will disagree with it but we have and this is quite
remarkable, this formal alliance with Ifhe United States which
before the war, was not willing to enter into alliances at all.
These were regarded as something against the tradition of the
United States and, therefore, Sir, the position is that we
00694CO00/ 8 
q8
have our ally in America, That country is the greatest nuclear
power in the world thank heaven the greatest nuclear power
in the world, because if it were not, we might not be here
tonight. Say what you like about it, the one thing that has
kept the peace of the world, in spite of the most blatant
Communist aggression around the world ( Interjector " What
about Cuba?") Yes, that was a superb example of what American
strength can mean for us.
Now, Sir, does anybody here doubt that but for the
possession of the nuclear deterrent primarily by the United
States and7 to a smaller extent by 6reat Britain which hasn't
so much of it but for that, we would have been overrun by
aggressive Communism. Of course we would have. People say,
" lLook, wouldn't it be a wonderful thing if there were no nuclear
weapons." We all understand that. Nobody wants to see these
wretched things employed. We all have our own hopes and family
hopes for the future in our own country, but Mr. Chairman, if
there were no nuclear weapons today, the Soviet Union would
have more ordinary military strength than perhaps all the others
put together. If there were no nuclear deterrent in the hands
of our friends, there would be nothing to prevent the Soviet
Union from marching clear across Europe in a few weeks because
the strength of her conventional armaments is enormous.
Therefore the existence of this terrible weapon of reprisal has
been the thing that has kept the world at peace. So long as
that is the state of affairs, so long as we live under this
threat then I am sure you will agree with me, we must see to
it that whatever we do we will do in order to make the existence
of the deterrent effective.*
Certainly it is not for Australia to frustrate the
existence of the nuclear deterrent in the hands of the United
States of America. That would be a suicidal and a shocking
thing to do, and so the day comes when the United States says
to us and all this was announced within two or three days,
two or three years ago-it's been blown up lately, but it was
all public property a long time ago. They come to us and
they say, " Look, weld like to discuss with you putting up a
radio station in the North-West of Western Australia." 1
" What for?" " Well, we want to have means of communicating on
a very low frequ-, ncy with our Navy, primarily," which, of
course obviously means " with our surface ships, with our
submarines, with our aircraft carriers, because they are all
involved communicating with our Navy. This will make perfect
our means of communicating with our naval forces all round
the world, We have them in the Pacific, in the North Pacifia.
We have them in the Atlantic. We want one here if we can get
it because this will cover the Indian Ocean and the South West
Pa cif ic." 1 And being allies of the United States of America
and being profoundly dependent upon what they may do if we
are attacked, we said, " Yes, we are quite prepared to discuss
this and work out appropria e terms," and so we did and they
are about to build the place and spend a powar of money on itor
f-40 million. But they said, and I think they were dead
right, " Of course, we can't have joint control in a matter of
this kind. We want to be able to have communication with our
naval forces not subject to a veto by whatever government may
exist in Australia7 but in our own right," and we said, " That's
right. We would like you to consult with us on every conceivable
matter " 1 but we werentt going to put them in the position of
being told if they became involved in warlike activities out of
00* 06000./ 9 
= 9
the Indian Ocean which could only be against Communist attack
we were not going to put them in the position of being told by
us on that day not by me but by my successors " You can't use
this station. Get out." Think of how that would handicap them
in the deployment of their naval forces in the Indian Ocean.
Think of how that would handicap them in delivering a stroke of
retaliation against an attack made by the Communists, the Soviet
Union. Ladies and gentlemen, my opponents in ParliamentC are
out of date on this business. They are thinking in a lost world.
The Soviet Union, if it does decide upon the criminal folly of
attacking the free world is not going to send a courteous letter
and say, " Take notice that in a fortnight or three weeks, we are
going to do something." If they ever got into this bedlamite
condition of making an attack, the first thing that anybody would
know about it would be when the tracking stations picked up the
missile en route to the United States and that gives you what
five minutes, ten minutes, no more than fifteen minutes to give
orders to the people who have weapons of retaliation " We are
at war with these people. You go ahead." Because unless the
return blow followis swiftly after the blow of attack, it is
finished and finished unfavourably for us, for the free people
in the world, These are serious matters and they deserve not
hysterical consideration but serious consideration. I tell you
quite plainly I will not be held accountable for rendering the
deterrent power of the United States futile in the waters off tihe
Australian coast and if the people of Australia disagree they
know exactly what to do with me. But I think they will understand
this position very clearly. This is essential to our success,
Well now Sir, what does the Labour Party do about it9
I am sure some of the people sitting opposite me in Parliam~ ent
are all in favour of the establishment of this communications
station, all in favour of it, but they had a great hullabaloo,
you remember, and the y had a special conference of what we now
refer to respectfully as the " 36 men" and they decided by 19 to
17 that yes, they could go ahead on condition that there was
joint control. In other words, on condition that Australia
would have a veto over everything that was done in the station.
And so we got into Parliament. We introduced a bill, we
attached the agreement to it and the bill was a very simple bill
as a bill. It simply said, " The execution of the contract
contained in the schedule is hereby ratified" and so therefore
the matter of substance in the bill was the contract in the
schedule. Well they spoke on it. We have had the most
fascinating debate in the Parliament about it. ( Laughter) All
the boys who hate the idea of this station and who hato the
idea of the Americans and who aliays take an entirely different
line were disciplined into suitable silence. They spoke
softly. They cooed like doves, if I may coin a phrase. And
you've never heard anything so mild, mild as curdled milk.
( Interjector " Is that why you threw Eddie Ward out?) Oh no,
the House threw him out. ( Laughter) You forget that. Tha~' s
not without difficulty, but the House did. ( laughter)
Well, now, I just want to complete my narrative on
this m~ atter. One of the front-line spokesmen for the Opposition
said what they were going to do how they were going to vote on
this bill and it was explained that they would not vote against
the Second Reading, because they wanted to make it clear that
they were not in principle, opposed to the matter. They would
vote against the schedule because they wanted to make it clear
that they didn't like the particular agteement and that when they
came to the Third Reading, they would move an amendment that the
0 
10
Third Reading would be deferred for six months. Well they
were better than their word because they didn't have a division
on the Second Reading but they divided the House four times
before we got to the hird Reading, Really their friendship
for the bill was magnificently concealed. They kept on v: oting
against it in connection with this bill time after time and
then we got to the Third Reading and up got the Leader of the
Opposition and he made a powerful speech, very moving, that the
bill be deferred for three months and he gave his reasons and
I got up and gave my reasons.
And the Opposition found itself in such a state of
confusion that for the first time in my Parliamentary experience,
they forgot to vote for their own amendment. ( Laughter) This
is literally true. They forgot to vote for their own amendment.
It was rejected on the voices and when they gathered themselves
together because it is a bit difficult for them, you know,
they have a series of groups and caves and various different
views and they meet ea, 2h other distantly in the corridors
( Laughter) they got together a bit then and said, " Oh, dear.
Wie did make a mistake there." So they voted against the
Third Reading. No postponement. Nothing else. Just pointblank
against the Third Reading of the bill, In other words,
if peop , e are to be judged by their votes the Australian
Labour P arty in Canberra had voted against the ratification of
this agreement and therefore against the establishment of this
very important American radio communications station in the
North West of Australia.
Indeed, if I may quote myself, and that's a very
poor business for any man to engage in, I must tell you that
on my speech on their amendment to the Third Reading, the one
that died by the way, I pointed out to them that they need
not pretend that they were really in favour of this bill because
under Standing Orders of the Commonwealth Parliament, Standing
Order 237 it is expressly stated that a motion to defer the
Third Realing for six months, if carried finally disposes of
the bill and therefore I pointed out to them that it would be
the end of the bill and the end of the session because the
Americans were not going to dangle around for six months waiting
for something to happen. They are in a hurry. They regard
defence provi~ ns as urgent. I therefore asked honourable
members opposite to tell me did they really want to defeat this
bill under the Standing Ordur because if they did, they ought
to say so, they ought to vote against the Third Reading,
They just ought to come clean on this matter. But were they
putting the amendment up because they didn't want it to be
carried, because they knew that it wouldn't be carried but
they would have the kudos of having moved it with none of the
risks of carrying it.
What would happen to them if two of my members failed
to hear the division bells and failed to vote and they won
their amendment. Where would they be then. They would have
the shock of their lives. So I said they could take their
own choice, They were either demonstrating that they were
hostile to this installation which is favoured by the vast
majority of the Australian people or they could admit that
they were humbugs having put up an amendment of a fatal kind,
knowing and bolieving that it would be defeated, And of
course this choice, the only choice as I told you so disturbed
them that when it came to the point, they forgot tovote on it
at all, 0 0 00./ 11 
11
Now, ladies and gentlemen, these again are tremendous
matters the security of this country, what we do for our own
defence about which I made an elaborate statement the other
day, hoa we co-operate with our friends, whether we realise
that the security of Australia depends, not only on our own
efforts which can never by themselves be adequate but on our
capacity to have co-operation with our allies. Ihese are the
things that wo have to understand and when you have allies
particularly a great ally like the United States, you can't say
to it " Look, you cantt use a point of land in our country for
signalling to your ships because somebody maightntt like it."
Do we want them on our side? Do we believe that we must have
them on our side? And if the answers to those questions are
" Yes", what's all this nonsense that the Opposition is engaging
in, the Opposition that wants you to give a recruit to its
strength or weakness in the Federal Parliament on June 1st. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 46/ 1963
FLOOD BELIEF
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzi. es
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
announced today that the Commonwealth Government had
decided to make a further œ 60,000 available to relieve
distress in the flooded areas on the Northern Rivers
of New South Wales, This sum is additional to œ 20,000 made
available when the floods occurred earlier this month.
The total of œ 80,000 will be on a
for basis with a similar contribution from the
Government of New South Walesu
CANBERRA, 27th May, 1963. 



THlE GEORGE ADLINGTON SYME ORATION
by
THE PRIME MINISTER
( THE RIGHT 40ONOURABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
KeT., Q. C. M. P.
a t
WILSON HALL, M--ELBOURNE
on
Tuesday, 28th May, 1963.
S PE E CH A ND SPE AKVER S 
THE GEORGE ADLINGTON SYME ORATION
SPEECH AND SPEAKERS
In April 1929, being then a junior Minister in the McPherson
government, I arrived at Scott's Hotel to attend the annual dinner of the
Melbourne University Graduates' Association. Ten minutes later I was told
that Sir George Syme, who was to have made the principal speech, had suddenly
become ill. Would I speak in his place? I agreed, and did the best I
could. Sir George Syme died a week later. He bore a name which has been
part of the stuff of Victorian history. He himself added lustre to it;
not just because he had remarkable technical skill, but because he had
statesmanship, unselfishness, devotion, and a clear integrity. The great
medical profession does itself honour by regularly calling his name into
remembrance. My own qualifications to deliver the Syme Memorial lecture are
open to grave doubt. True, in my hey-day at the Victorian Bar I appeared
in quite a number of medical cases and cross-examined a considerable number
of medical witnesses. True also, I have, on satisfactorily rare occasions,
been a sometimes impatient patient. I have no more reason than most to
believe in the infallibility of medical judgment, which in my own lifetime
has had to be exercised in rapidly changing circumstances and in times made
turbulent by a greater achievement of new knowledge and new techniques than
can be found in almost any other field. But I have emerged with a profound
respect for the medical profession, and in particular for its leaders and
original thinkers. Sir George Syme was one of these. He sought to raise
standards and to accept growing social responsibilities. He was one of
your great statesmen. A statesman in any aspect of life has great responsibilities.
He must evolve ideas, and, even more importantly, he must intelligently
understand and assess those of others when they reach him. The product of
these processes may be a policy and a course of action. In this event, he
must convey to others something of his own beliefs and enthusiasms. He
will sometimes do it in writing; he will, more frequently, find it
necessary to do it in speech in conversation, in conference, in all the
means of persuasion. For good or great ideas are not commonly their own
advocates. They must be conveyed, with lucidity and conviction.
In our world, speech grows more and more important. If
competently engaged in, it can shorten time-tables and accelerate results.
It is this reflection which has led me to select as my topic
" Speech and Speakers", a topic which may not be so irrelevant to medical
and surgical progress and practice as might appear on the surface. 
2
The art of speech is of course much admired.
are numerous, for it is attractive. Its masters are few,
are great. Yet it remains the most potent instrument for
and political progress. Its practitioners
for its difficulties
spiritual, social,
The passion for making speeches is prevalent, particularly in
our own country and in America. It is, in my considered opinion, possible
to survive, and, with good fortune, enjoy three speeches after a public
dinner. But six or seven or eight, or more, are beyond reasonable human
endurance. Yet, at a Smoke Night of a respectable body some years ago there
were 29 speeches, and not all good. In a sound country town which I visited
for some official purpose when I was Attorney-General of Victoria, I listened
after lunch to 14 speeches, thirteen of which were, fortunately, highly
critical of myself. In the United States people are so addicted to listening to
speeches that they actually pay people to make them. This must be a splendid
experience for the speaker; I have yet to enjoy it. In my own earlier
political days I suffered greatly from two classes of men. One was the
Chairman of a public meeting who, clearly and perhaps reasonably doubting
my capacity to expound my subject, would make a preliminary explanation of,
say, 20 minutes, usually leaving my political audience in such a state of
vocal exasperation that it took me another 10 minutes to get a hearing at all.
Still, it may turn out that I owe that Chairman something, for he unwittingly,
in my salad days, gave me much practice in the handling of interjectors.
The other
called upon to move a
minutes to explaining
said had I know how. man I am thinking of was the good friend who, being
vote of thanks, took the opportunity of devoting
to a rapidly dispersing audience what I would have
Yet, these little souvenirs of mine do establish that there is
a widespread interest in speeches, a popular desire to make them, and even,
though I hesitate, to listen to them. The subject therefore warrants
( as I hope you will generously agree) some examination of principles and
some illustrations from my own life and experience.
In a growing world, the complexity of whose problems invites
but at the same time defies quick or superficial judgment, the evolving
or the criticising of ideas remains pre-eminent. Every research worker
knows this. And, because " there is no new thing under the sun", which
means that research is discovery, not creation, truths of an earlier discovery
will from time to time have to be applied to new circumstances.
The work of the thinker cannot end in the laboratory or the study if it
is to be fruitful for mankind. It must be conveyed to others clearly
and, where possible, simply, in writing or in speech. 
-3-
Tonight I am, having regard to the clock, confining myself to
speech. Indeed, I go along a narrower path still. I want to speak about
that kind of speech Which is public or semi-public, des-igned to achieve
some result other than the rare pleasures of conversation.
As I understand the matter, public or semi-public speak ' ing has
three main purposes; to instruct. to persuade, to entertain. The three
are. I hope, not mutually exclusive. There ha79 been, of course, speeches
designed for vanity, for personal notoriety, or for the purpose of occupying
time, as in the case of a stone-wall or " filibuster". They do not fall
within my thesis. There are almost as many methods of speech as there are speakers.
I will illustrate some of them, from my personal knowledge.
Winston Churchill wrote and read his speeches on most occasions.
When I say " wrote", I should say that, in my own time, " wrote" meant'llictated
and amended". Most of us, when we dictate, either to a human being or a
machine, prefer to dictate alone. There is still a certain amount of selfconsciousness
about it. Churchill was not like that. Early in 1941, for
example, when I spent about 8 or 9 weekends with him at " Chequers". I walked
in to his small study one evening, to find him, pacing up and down, dictating
a draft of a broadcast. The stenographer was tapping away at a silent
typewriter, in a corner. I offered to withdraw. Winston gave me a cigar
and waved me to a chair. I soon discovered his methods (" You know my
methods, my dear Watson!"). He tried every word, every phrase, for weight,
for meaning, for sound. He knew, of course, that a broadcast speech must
come effectively to the ear and must, if possible, achieve its instant
persuasion and inspiration. He knew also something which, for the rest
of us, would be a vain dream; that posterity would dwell upon his words.
In the result, he had arrived at a composition with his stenographer.
When he was just trying out a phrase, he would speak it in a low voice,
almost like a grumbling whisper. When he had arrived at the phrase, he
spoke it " loud and clear", and down it went.
Thus softly " until victory is as~ ured" " until we have
emerged victorious" " until" " UNTIL THE DAY HAS COME!"'.
I remember, many years ago, when Ramsay MacDonald was Prime
Minister, sitting in the gallery of the House of Commons, looking down on
Churchill, who was then in the political wilderness. He sat, as he has
in more recent years, in the front row, just below the gangway. He was
speaking, i. e. he was reading his typed speech, which he had ensconced in
a species of book, held in front of him. This disappointed me, for I
had never heard Churchill speak before. But I suddently realised the
superb art with which he could read. He wbuld pause, chuckle, change 
4
the tempo and the inflexion, and then deliver the carefully prepared phrase
as if it were literally a brilliant impromptu. That was the occasion,
recently referred to in a Melbourne newspaper, on which Churchill was
criticising Ramsay MacDonald and, referring back to an earlier speech, said
" and that, Mr. Speaker, was when I ventured to
describe the Right Honourable Gentleman as er
chuckle chuckle ( while every Member sat forward
with expectancy) " as the bonelsss wonder!"
So you will see that Churchill had his own methods. But the
result, as we all know to our advantage, was all clarity, and feeling, and
inspiration. I did not ever hear Lloyd George in a public or parliamentary
speech. But I did have some opportunities, in long private conversations,
of asking him about his methods. He wrote his speeches, memorised them,
and delivered them in the high Welsh manner. This faculty of memorising
a speech is one to which I have never been able to aspire. For me, it
would be dangerous: I am sure that I would, mentally, be looking back
over my shoulder, and the forward drive of my speech would be lost. But
Lloyd George managed it to perfection. He was, of course, a-man of
extraordinary and-magnetic personality, like Winston himself; such men
can survive the dangers of any technique. Lloyd George's son, Gwilym,
who was to become a Conservative Cabinet Minister, once said to me, at a
small luncheon in London, " I believe you have been seeing something of
my old man. What do you think of him?". I protested that this was an
impossibly embarrassing question. Gwilym smiled, and waved my protest
aside. So I sat up and said " Well, for many years now your father has
made no political pronouncement with which I could agree. But if he
thought it desirable to make me a disciple and an apostle, and exercised
his powers upon me, I think I would find it necessary to follow him!".
My third example of this speaking technique is the late J. M.
Barrie. Back in the thirties, when the late Lord Dunrossil was " Shakes"
Morrison, he took me to Stanway Hall, in the West Country, to meet
J. M. Barrie. It was a fascinating experience, upon which I have no time
to dwell tonight. But, as I walked around the grounds with Barrie, we
fell to talking first about cricket, and then about speech making, and in
particular about Barrie's famous rectorial address at St. Andrews on
" Courage" one of the great speeches of our time. Those of you who
have read it ( as I imagine you all have) will remember its extemporaneous
quality and its flashes of whimsical and penetrating humour. " Well", he
said, " Menzies, I wrote it, and learned it, and delivered it, and a
fortnight later I could not have remembered it at all!" 
I mentioned, then, the word " whimsical". I am of course
conscious of the fact that the coantemporary intellectual rejects
whimsicality, and probably rejects Barrie.
I don't know whether they will regard this as evidence in their
favour, but I feel compelled to tell you that, on this same memorable ( to me)
occasion, Barrie said to me, " Did you ever think of writing a novel, Menzies?".
Those of you who have known me only as a political tactician will be surprised
to learn that I replied " Yes, frequently, but though I think I could write
the dialogue, I could never invent a plot". To which Barrie replied:-
" Take my advice". Write a play. A novel means 90,000 words. A play
mean~ s only 20,000 words and they pay you five times as much for it."
I record this memory not to cry down the name of one of the great
literary figures of our time, but to prove, if it needs proving, that he had
a wry humour of his own.
Take anoth ' er type of speaker the after-dinner speakers. We
have all suffered from many of them. After-dinner speaking is a great art,
much neglected by the kind of man who thinks that, the state of euphoria
induced by a good dinner should be counteracted by a dose of heavy statistics.
Before the war, the late Lord Hewart, then Lord Chief Justice, was regarded
as a great after-dinner man. The first time I heard him was at a great
Anglo-American dinner in London. When his time came, he unashamedly pulled
out from under his plate a typescript and held it up, and read it! He did
better on the last occasion when I heard him, at a dinner at the Goldsmith's
Company, when he was down to answer the last toast, that of " the other
visitors". His speech I can remember vividly. " My Lords and Gentlemen,
at this time of night I have two speeches of thanks. One is my short
speech ' Sirs, thank you very much!' . The other, is my long speech ' My
Lords and Gentlemen, I take this opportunity of thanking you very much
indeed!' Pray regard me, on this occasion, as having made by long speech!".
The best after-dinner speaker I-~ ever heard was the late Norman
Birkett ( Lord Birkett), who was also a wonderful cross-examiner and advocate.
He had a beautiful voice and a flashing wit, and, so far as I could tell,
did not prepare the language of his speech in advance. He entertained his
audience without fail; it was only later that they realised they had been
instructed as well.
Speech, especially clear speech based upon knowledge and clear
thinking, is of immense importance to the expert witness. I will take
just two examples from your own profession, many members of which have in
my own forensic experience, failed as witnesses by under-estimating the
cross-examiner and not refreshing their memory of the text-book elements
of the subject in issue. But cross-examiners usually fell back defeated 
6
before Alan Newton and Victor Hurley. How admirable it was to listen
to great experts who knew that a capacity for clear and authoritative
expression is as important in one profession as in any other. Alan
Newton was, of course, a man of most versatile genius. I thought he
would have excelled in any field. The point I am concerned to make is
that Newton never fell into the not uncommon error of thinking that the
precisions of speech do not matter that " You know what I mean" is good
enough. My personal methods may perhaps deserve a very brief mention.
I invariably write memorial lectures, since I have what is, as
yet, a not completely defeated hope that some day somebody may wish to read
them. I write important formal statements for the House. All this
writing I do in long hand, by a lead pencil! But I do not write debating
speeches or public political speeches ( except, of course, a Policy Speech),
or social speeches. I do a lot of preparation of facts and ideas, and
make highly summarised notes and headings; but I never prepare the actual
language. Naturally, drawing upon my own forensic experience, my mind
turns to the advocacy of the courts of law. Yet, interestingly enough,
the most persuasive advocate I ever heard was a soldier and engineer. Sir
John Monash. When I was, for a brief period, a junior Minister in the
McPherson government in Victoria, and John Monash was Chairman of the State
Electricity Commission, a proposal he had put forward was almost unanimously
rejected in Cabinet. When the news reached him he came straight up, and
was without delay admitted to the Cabinet Room. He was given a seat at
the table. He asked whether he had been rightly informed of the rejection.
The answer was " Yes". He hitched up his chair, looked at all of us, one
by one and said, slowly and firmly " It is clear to me that Ministers have
not understood the matter. I will now explain it." He proceeded to do
so, with a clarity and force I can remember to this day. We were all
attracted by his magnetism and swayed by his argument. Questions were
few, hesitant, and almost apologetic. When the final silence came, Monash
produced an Order of Approval from his pocket and, with the mere hint of
a smile, said " I take it then, Mr. Premier that my proposal is approved.
If you will be good enough to sign this paper, I can depart". The Premier
signed. We all, quite spontaneously stood up, and the great man left.
I have always felt certain that if Monash had not possessed what the late
Brudenell White once described to me as " the divine gift of utterance",
his place in military and civil life would not have been as assured as
it is. 
7
I have just referred to the great John Monash. I could contrast
him with another great man and soldier, Field Marshall Lord Wavell. When
Wavell wrote, whether in a life of Allenby or in a despatch to Winston
Churchill, he wrote like a master. In the earlier part of 1941, when
Wavell was greatly outnumbered in the Middle East campaign and Rommel's
panzer divisions were rolling eastwards, I saw quite a few of the pungent
messages sent out by Churchill, who was of course in complete command of
direct and ( where necessary) colloquial language. I also saw some of
Wavell's replies. They rivalled Winston's own. Yet, oddly enough, Wavell's
conversational powers were limited., When I was in the Middle East in January-
February, 1941, and had proper occasion to put quite a few questions to him,
Wavell's replies were almost always monosyllabic and frequently cryptic. I
naturally concluded that he did not approve of me. This did not surprise
me, for many people had felt the same way. But later on, when I had arrived
in London, I found that this was wrong; that he was very well disposed
towards me; but that he had found oral utterance difficult and even
embarrassing. He preferred to work out his ideas on paper, and was
cautious of talk. It is perhaps for this reason that some other generals
of the war achieved a quicker fame. The historian will ultimately, I hope,
correct this, for Wavell's mind and character, exercised under great
difficulties, were of the loftiest order. Perhaps the truth is that the
power of exposition and persuasion is more important in an operational
commander. I don't know. Wavell was acutely conscious of his great
responsibilities, and would not lightly speak about them. Yet, years
afterwards, in 1948, at a dinner at Leo Amery's house in London, I found,
to my joy, that, with the responsibilities off, Wavell could talk freely
and with fire and conviction.
My first profession was that of the law, as a barrister. I
loved it. Some people think it dreary; I cannot think why. But it is
not my purpose to write or read a treatise on the practice of the law.
Tonight I am concerned with expression, particularly oral. Expression
in writing, as I have endeavoured to show in the case of Wavell, must take
a high place. Barristers are briefed by solicitors to write opinions on
matters on which the solicitor or his client thinks Counsel's opinion
necessary. In my time at the Bar we wrote our opinions on blue draft
paper, and only occasionally sent them out to a professional typist for
copying. One consequence of these primitive methods was that, in order
to avoid writer's cramp, we wrote with economy of language and managed to
answer the questions without undue circumlocution. If, when we were
juniors, we were briefed to draw interrogatories, ( which are written
questions delivered before action and to be answered on oath by the opposite
party), we seldom drew more than seven or eight. But they were drawn with
such care that in most cases they could not be evaded, with the result that
the calling of certain evidence at the hearing was rendered unnecessary.
Then came the great age of the stenographers. They proliferated in 
8
Selborne:: Chamb'ers,. Opinions became much longer, and sometimes, cynical
friends have told me, less intelligible and precise. As to interrogatories,
their numbers multiplied out of all proportion to their results. It may
be, of course, that one tends to glorify the past.
" Old men forget: yet all shall be forgot,
But he'll remember with advantages
What feats he did that day.'"
But, from the point of view of speech, the great art of the law
is advocacy; the examination or cross-examination of witnesses, and the speech
to the judge or jury.
My learned friends tell me that cross-examination is not what
it used to be. Perhaps it never was. But, in my own time, I knew more
than one case to be lost by bad cross-examination. Too many advocates
forgot that to cross-examine a witness effectively you must study the
witness and try to assess his strengths and weaknesses, instead of putting
your head down and laboriously making notes of his evidence in chief.
Good cross-examination requires homework to determine the real points of
issue on the facts, a close study of the human being in the box, and a
most careful, though perhaps casual-seeming, precision in the framing of
each question. Repetition and noise and a belligerent attitude may tickle
a few ears, but they will seldom win a case.
But it is in the address to the court, judge or jury, that the
highest arts of consecutive forensic speech and argument are called for.
Here there is a distinction to be made between argument to a judge ( who
is by popular legend a man not swayed by emotion) and an address to a jury
( which is by equally popular legend subject to all the frailties of mankind).
I hope that the greatest of contemporary lawyers, Sir Owen
Dixon, will forgive me if I say that I did not ever think him to be quite
at home addressing a jury. To use the modern jargon, he found difficulty
in getting on to the same wave-length. But I never expect to hear a better
legal advocate. And I say this having in mind, at the English Bar, such
men as Wilfred Greene, Gavin Simonds, and Stafford Cripps. He wasted no
words. He knew his case in all its aspects, and was of course extraordinarily
well furnished with its legal background and its subtleties.
But above all he had a superb sense of selection. If you were his opponent,
hoping that you would have time, when your turn came, to dwell pleasantly
on your better arguments, you suddenly found yourself precipitated into
the most difficult argument of all, Owen Dixon having most unexpectedly
sat down with a characteristically Dixonian smile.
On the criminal side, I remember with pleasure George Maxwell,
the most formidable advocate to a jury I ever heard, or, for that matter, 
9
ever heard about. Maxwell played, not upon the intellect, but upon the
human emotions. He had a remarkable faculty for identifying himself
with his client. So much was this so, that I have known him, as we
robed at adjoining lockers at the Law Courts, to speak despondently about
his client and tell me that all he could do was " to make a bit of a plea
for mercy", and be back at the luncheon adjournment, shaking his head at
me and saying " It will be a gross miscarriage of judgment if the young
fellow is convicted!". By the time George Maxwell had made his final
address and had convinced the jury that they ran some risk on the " dread
day of judgment" if they wantonly or unreasonably convicted the accused,
the case was almost over. I have heard quite a few professionally
humorous counsel laugh their own case out of court. I have known a few
criminal advocates succeed in being so detached that they lost contact
altogether. But Maxwell was pre-eminent. Even when he became blind,
at the height of his career, he had a superb touch. I looked into his
court one day, just in time to hear him say:-
" I now turn to the witness Robinson. I could not
see him, gentlemen, because it has pleased the
Almighty to deprive me of my si* 1t. But although
I couldn't see him, I could hear him. And he sounded
like a damned rogue!"
Could I turn to my own second profession, that of politics?
That it involves the art of speech is of course clear. It is hard to
suppose that a great thinker who was inarticulate could command support
and give effective leadership to a democratic electorate. This may seem
to you to be a misfortune, and in one sense it is. But we must face the
facts of Parliamentary democracy. People will not follow a eader whom
they do not understand, or who seems to them to be unaware of the problems
of their own lives.
Thus it is that the great Parliamentary leaders in Australia
or Great Britain have, in I suppose the great majority of cates, had the
faculty of speech. They have, of course, varied. Fashions of speech
change. The classical speech of the famous parliamentarians of the late
18th century is still most readable for us. Burke, for example, may have
bored the House of Commons, but he still reads uncommonly well today. On
the other hand, coming to the 19th century, I find the speeches of Gladstone
somewhat dreary reading. I remember that, having just been reading the
story of his famous Midlothian campaign, I got hold of the speeches he
then delivered. I am bound to say, with improper irreverence, that they
would never have done for a modern audience. I at once concede that this
comment ignores the effect of the voice and the appearance, which must have
had a magnetism of their own. Of all the 19th century Parliamentary
speakers, I confess to a preference for John Bright, whose flashes of simple 
and moving prose, coming, as such things do, fromi the gerterotis emotions of
the speaker's heart and mind. have the stuff of imortality in them.
" The angel of death has been abroad throughout the
land; you may almost hear the beating of his wings:"
It is, of course, to be remembered that uncommon eloquence is
sometimes self-defeating. The critics are all too ready to asisume that
fluency and an apt choice of words can create -a great speech independently
of thought and ideas. This not uncommon error'has temporarily done a
disservice to the memory of that very great Prime Minister. Alfred Deakin.
" Ali yes", you will hear someone say, " He was a silver-tongued orator" ( the
word orator, by the way, has achieved an almost offensive connotation:)
" but, after all, what did he say?".
Now I heard Deakin only when I was a school-boy. But~ years
afterwards, I became immersed in the stream of Australian political history,
and became a Prime Minister myself. All I wish to say is that Deakin did
more to fashion the great national policies of Australia than any other
leader we have or have had. Men and their work are easily forgotten.
But if you care to examine the foundations of Australian policies on defence,
tariff, British trade, industrial arbitration, to say nothing of our
irrigation systems, you will find the mary of Alfred Deakin. Yet, for
the short run of history, he spoke too wet
" Billy" Hughes observed no rules; as a speaker he was
sui oieneris. The more eloquent of his earlier speeches do not, in my
experience, come well out of a second reading. They lack restraint and.
are over-decorated. But at the time, delivered with enthusiasm, despite
the defects of his voice, they had a profound and at times an historic
influence. Those were, of course, the days when he was expressing deeply
held beliefs. Later on, when I was associated with him in Cabinets, the
fires had burned low, lHe had become much too conscious of the pressures
of what he regarded as contemporary or even temporary public opinion,
The old wit remained, cruel and devastating, but as a speaker of persuasive
or compelling power he had cepsed. Perhaps he stayed in politics too
long; I will make a mental note of it.
So that it will not be thought that I am entering upon the
risky experiment of making a graded list of Australian political speakers,
I will mention only a few, simply to illustrate my theme.
Among leaders in my own time, J. A. Lyons was, I think. the best
Parliamentarian. In my opinion, this has not been adequately appreciated.
At question-time or in debate, he preserved, with the greatest of simplicity,
the personal friendship of his opponents. He had-gre~ at. human. it1a nd gio 
11
malice. He could, of course, speak, and speak very well. But other
aspects of Parliamentary life and government administration attracted him
more, for he was above all a great humanist. There was much to learn
from him. John Curtin and J. B. Chifley, both notable Labour Prime Ministers,
were quite different personalities and speakers. Curtin had a philosophical
quality; he spoke with great effect, and enjoyed the rounded period.
Chifley was no orator in the conventional sense, and had a somewhat grating
voice: but he was, in his direct and homely fashion, a powerful and
commanding leader of his party.
Quite a different type of speaker was W. A. Watt. He was, I
think, the best platform speaker I ever heard; the voice strong and vibrant,
the appearance almost piratical, the tempo measured, with every word and
every syllable receiving its proper weight. He created a sort of
intellectual compulsion. I should add, by way of irrelevant reminiscence,
that many years ago, before I had thought of entering Parliament, I was
asked to speak, as a sort of preliminary pipe-opener, at Geelong. The
principal speaker was Watt, who was at his top, rejoicing our friends and
destroying our opponents in the hall with unerring strokes. The next
morning, I turned to the local newspaper, hoping, no doubt, to read some
of my own boyish profundities recorded. What I read was a first-class
report of Watt's speech, followed by the encouraging sentence " A Mr.
Menzies also spoke, and revealed a peculiar sense of humour".
No doubt my amour propre was wounded at the time, but I have
since come to believe that it was one of the best reports I have ever had.
The art of Parliamentary debate is, I think, suffering from
some adverse influences. The introduction of the broadcasting of
Parliamentary debates at Canberra has some advantages in public information.
But my own feeling is that speeches are tending to become set speeches,
and are losing something of their true debating quality. It was for the
fear of this that Winston Churchill, himself a great Parliamentarian, used
his influence, when the bombed-out House of Commons was being restored, to
resist broadcasting and fighit for the re-creation of a House which could
not seat all of the Members at the same time. He wanted to preserve the
intimacy of debate, to make members still conscious of the fact that they
are addressing the House, their fellow-members, and not the outside public.
There is much to be said for this view, though perhaps the changing
techniques of today are tending to impair it. In spite of the disproportionate
and adverse publicity which is frequently given to quite
trivial incidents, Parliament remains a remarkably good cross-section of
the people; and this, after all, is its historic function. 
12
I hope that what I have said will have shown that there are
many varieties of speech, several different purposes to be achieved, and
greatly differing techniques. Are there, then, any basic principles?
I would think not, for there are even more variations in audiences than
there are among speakers. Indeed, there are clearly different tastes in
different countries. In my limited experience, Americans, who practically
invented that phenomenon, the lunch-time speech, delivered on the precarious
foundation of cold meat, a lettuce leaf, and a warming draught of iced
water, enjoy listening to written speeches, suitably stocked with statistics.
In England, where the best after-dinner speakers are the best in the world,
because they regard the speech as an expression of art, most speakers in
the House of Commons appear to read their speeches. At Canberra, for
intelligible reasons, many second reading speeches by Ministers and leaders
are read, but most of the speeches in general debate, certainly most of
the effective ones, are expressed in impromptu language. I have occasionally
written out a speech on international or economic topics, or even a memorial
lecture like this, where precision is essential. But whenever I have to
do so, I dislike it. It is good for the record, but is not good for the
direct audience. It secures better newspaper reporting, for obvious reasons;
the art of reporting is in decline. But if the object of a speech is to
persuade, the speaker must be sensible of his audience, must catch its mood,
and must be prepared to turn aside into productive avenues at the expense
of the pre-determined course. For, if you are to persuade an audience,
you must metaphorically be down off the platform and among your listeners.
And the object of persuasive speech is to have your audience not leave saying
" He can speak", but saying " He was right!".
My final observation is this. Over the course of history, many
men have been asked to give advice about speaking. Let me start high.
It was Demosthenes himself who said that the condition of oratory was
" Action! Action! Actioh!". This was a somewhat cryptic statement, and
has been sometimes misunderstood as if action meant physical action.
As it happens, I have on a few occasions been asked by young
men to offer advice on public speaking. My invariable answer is:-
" There are three rules. The first is, have something to say. The second
is, have something to say. The third is, have something to say.".
I stand by this advice, though you will be the judges of my
capacity to take it myself. 



63/: 058
H O LD 0 R RELEASE
FOR PRESS P. M. 47/ 1963
DEATH OF POPE JOHN
Statement by the Prime Minister, the RtHon. Sir Robert
Me'. zies
The world has lost a most remarkable
mano He came to thie great office of Pope at an
unusually advanced age; yet in a few years he made an
immense impact upon the world and upon the contacts
between the Churches, He impressed everybody by his
noble simplicity and Clr-istian character. He was a
splendid servant of humnanity,.
CANBERRA, 29th May, 1963. 



63/ 059
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 48/ 1963
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS WITH INDUSTRY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rto Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
announced today that the Government will hold a further
series of Economic Consultations in mid-Julyo The
Government has had valuable discussions with representatives
of industry on three occasions over the past year or so,
and is arranging the present meetings on the eve of
Ministerial consideration of the 1963/ 64 Budget,
The consultations will take place in Canberra
on Monday and Tuesday, 1ith and 16th July.
For the discussions on 15th July, the following
organisations have been invited
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
Associated Chambers of Commerce in Australia
Australian Council of Retailers
Australian Bankers' Association
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Woolgrowers: and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Master Builderst Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Trade Unions
On the 16th July, the Government will meet
separately with
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council
Export Development Council,
CANBERBA, 31st May, 1963, 



IUSSAG FOR Mi iCOUtPOPAD) LAI SOCITY
OF M! LU
On behalfo iw Govsu'int and people of
hustislia I send to the Inoorporated Law Society
of CVlon cordial greting to rut yw law, Day
Celebostion with It mal hasis an the rule of law.
Through ma eentiesq, lawa hav regalated
relations betvsen indiduYl lse There still exists
today a great field for the oonstructive efforts of
lavyora to develop rules which wil reulmte an a f1i
foundation of Justice relations between states as wl
as betweea indipvIdials I hope that your deliberations
will be atteuied by marked moess,
PRU\ UE MOUSST~ h WY M'TK; CVWl-li; Q~ vV1,; i. LTT
ii aJI2rkZk ~ thhcO~ aOIl AL'
OF AUSTMLAk
CA11" RA,
Juno, 1963. 



/ 00
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 49/ 1963
GRBY BY-EIECTION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Grey has been regarded as a Labour stronghold,
Even since the general election of 1961, many voters have
been added to the roll in the industrial centres like Whyalla.
In 1961, Labour had an absolute majority of 7,000 over the
Liberal and DoL. Po candidates combined.
We threw ourselves into the by-election campaign,
hoping to reduce the absolute majority to 3 000 a result
which would have shown considerable movement it party support.
By the time the campaign finished, I found myself hoping
that the absolute majority might fall to 2,000. Mr. Dyason
was easily the best candidate in the field and making obvious
headway. On the voting so far, it seems clear that the
Labour absolate majority will fall to under 2,000, and this
in a by-election. By-elections have a long history of
tending to go against the Government in power.
I notice that Mr. Calwell is whistling hard as
he pretends to enjoy what he himself would call a Pyrrhic
victory. So far as the votes have been counted, the byelection
has given great encouragement to the Government,
CANBERRA, 3rd June, 19633 



I FOR PRESS P. M. No. 50/ 1963
LOAN COUNCIL AND PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Mini. ster, the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert
Mtnzies
The Prime Minister said today that the
States had agreed to a Meeting of the Loan Council and
Prcmiers3 Conference in Canberra on the 17th and 18th
June. CANBERRA, 3rd June, 1963. 



.1963 AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP CON'VENTION
THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES, M. P.,
PRI. E MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA.
Sir, Mr. Calwell, Dr. Schnyder, ladies and gentlemen;
Arthur Calwell and I have both had a pretty good
write-up or a speak-up this morning, I because I have now
become a thistle and he because he has just become a celebrated
author. It used to be said, " Oh that mine adversary had
written a book." Well, he has written a book. What is more,
I am going to buy a few copies to present to my friends for
the very good reason that if it turns out that what he has
written is unconvincing it will do me a lot of good, and
if it is convincing I shall have to mend my methods.
As for being a thistle, I met my old friend and
political opponent, John Dedman, yesterday and I dare say that
he is here this morning. He took up with me the question of
the interpretation of the motto of this order which I had
thought to mean, " Wha daur meddle wi' me!" " Who dares to
meddle with me!" But he assured me, if I remember accurately,
that the interpretation is, " Meddle with me and I will jag you".
I will check up on that and tell him about it when I see him.
The accent of this conference is on youth. Really
remarkable things have happened in my own political liftime.
It does not seem so long ago although it is about 25 years ago
that we had some experts brought to Australia who issued, with
all the confidence of statisticians, a prognosis of future
population trends in this country. They assured us that the
population of Australia woul never be more than 7,500,000,
that it would reach that total about 1975 and that, thereafter,
the population would begin to decline. You know, one cannot
argue about figures. Thqre they were.
.4 
Another remarkable thing was undoubtedly happening at
that time. Through the activities of' medical science and because
of important measuxes of public health the expectation of life in
Australia was growing very rapidly. For example, the expectation
of' life of' a male child when I was born was about 50 years. Now,
it is about 70 years. This process was going on. Therefore, a
remarkable demographic fact was establishing itself' in Australia.
That was that the number of people who were of what we call
pensionable age kept increasing and the number of' people who
were actively contributing in the earning phases of' their
life was becoming a smaller proportion of' the population.
That was the position just before the war and it was on those
assumptions that a variety of things took place. You all know
how these have been falsified in the light of' history. But
nothing has done so much to falisify them as the immigration
programme. And inside the immigration programme nothing is more
remarkable than the proportion of' young men and women boys
and girls to the total increase, through this means, in our
population. The Minister was kind enough to have me provided with
a figure or two. That is what Ministers are for when the
Prime Minister has to open something. I was astonLshed
although I should have known them at the figures. There
have been 672,000 post-war immigrants who were under 21 years
of' age on their arrival. A total of' 700,000 children have been
born to immigrant parents over this period. In other words
and. Mr. Heydon assures me the figures are correct one quarter
of our people in Australia under 21 years of age either came
here with their parents or were born here to imniigragits since
the war. This has been, one of the most remarkable events
ini our hinstory. Its sigxnificance can hardly be over-estjwmated..
It presents pa challep'r tpu-saM oreJA qtltyg it preq~ pts
to us a great sou roe Q f sa-6isf action, bec. 4' use it means that 
3.
the ratio which our earning population bears to the whole is
increasing. Indeed, it has been increasing steadily since the
war. It has been a silent social revolution which has been of
immense value to Australia as a whole.
There is another thing I should like to say which
has been prompted by what I have just been saying about the
proportion of young people in our community. We talk, do we not-
I know you do, because you come here year by year with great
public spirit about the problems of assimilation. Perhaps.
we tend to believe that the problem is one of the native-born
Australians let us say the old Australians conscientiously
setting about the process of assimilating other people who have
come into the country. But let us not forget that the receiving
body, the total Australian people the body corporate of the
Australian people has itself changed materially. It now
includes a tremendous percentage of groups of children who
have come here or who have been born here of those who came here.
In other owrds, the assimilating body itself is not static. This
body includes in its many hundreds of thousands people who,
to use this wretched word, have been assimilated into the
Australian community. So year by year, decade by decade, it has
become a remarkably new community. It means that we are not to
get into our heads stuffy ideas that some of us are of the old
brigade and it is very nice of us to be dealing with people
who arrive here. We must realise that, although some of us as
individuals may not have changed very much, Australia as a
community is experiencing a sea change into something rich and
strange. These conventions provide a magnificent opportunity
for us to reflect on some of these truths, to broaden our
understanding of the problem with which wqe are dealing, to
take pride in the past, and to exhibit courage and determination
for the future. 
It is a very great pleasure to me to be here. It
is indeed a very great pleasure for me to be accompanied by my
wife who, I would have you know, is at least as responsible for
the twins as I am. The older I grow the more I realise that,
although a good deal of hostility is to be found in the wo rld
I know something about that there is a tremendous lot of
generosity. People give one credit for the strangest things.
Many years ago nobody rushed up to me and said, " What an
extraordinary chap you are to have a family of a couple of sons
and a daughter". Oh, no! That was the merest commonplace.
Nowadays, if I go to a club or some other place where men gather
together I find myself saying to somebody, " You have some grandchildren,
have you not, old chap?" He replies, " Oh yes, I have
seven." Then I preen myself and say, " I have nine". Then he
congratulates me and shakes hands with me. Not only for the
earlier reasons I have mentioned but also for this reason, I
think that this is a rapidly improving community.
Sir, I shall not occupy your time further. As I
have said, it is a privilege for me to be here. It is a very
great piece of luck that before I have finished I have remembered
why I am here. I declare the convention open.
Department of Immigration,
CANBERRA. A. C. T.
June, 4th, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P, M. No, 51/ 1963
OVERSEAS VISIT
Statement by the Prime MinisterL,. the Rt, Ho Sir Robet Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, will leave
Sydney on Thursday, June 13 by Qantas, flying direct to London
through the Middle Easto He will fly from Canberra to Sydney
on Wednesday, June 12,
During his overseas jour) ney, lasting for one
month, the Priime Minister wi. ll have discussions with the Prime
Minister of Great Eritain, Mr. Harold Macmillan and other
members of the British Cabinet on matters of mutual interest
including trade and international affairs, He will also meet
the President of the United States, Mr, Kennedy, in Washington,
and the Prime Minister of Canada7 Mr. Lester Pearson, and
members of the Canadian Cabinet in Ci: tawa,
The Prime Minister's itinerary provides for him
to be in Edinburgh on July 1I where he will be installed in
the Order of the Thistle in the Order's Chapel in St. Giles'
Cathedral at a ceremony to be attended by Her Majesty The
Queen. Sir Robert will fly from London to New York on
July 2. On July 3, he will go to Charlottesville, Virginia,
where on Independence Day, July 4, at the invitation of the
Jefferson Memorial Fcu. ndation, he will deliver the Thomas
Jefferson Memorial Oration at Jefferson's home, Monticello.
On July 5, the Prime Ministur will be in Ottawa
and on July 8 and 9 in Washington,
He will leave San Francisco on July 11, arriving
in Sydney on Saturday, July 13.
Dame Pattie Menzies will accompany Sir Robert and
their elder son, Mr Kenneth Menzies, who is travelling
privately, will also be with them on the journey,
Two members of the Prime Ministerts personal
staff, Miss L. H. Craig, private secretary, and Mr. R. C. Maley,
press secretary, will also be in the party,
Mr. J. F, Nimmo, Deputy Secretary of the Prime
Minister's Department2 is travelling to London ahead of the
Prime Minister to assist in the London and other discussions,
CANBERRA, 11th June, 1963. 



FOR PRESS NO.
BRITISH BUTTER MARKET SITUATION
( Statement by the Acting Prime Minister and Minister
for Trade, Mr. J. McEwen)
The Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Trade,
Mr. J. McEwen, commented today on the British Government's
announcement of the immediate action it was taking to increase
supplies of butter in the British market over the next few
months. Mr. McEwen recalled that imports of butter into
Britain were regulated under a quota system which was designed
to ensure that butter was sold in Britain at reasonable prices
and that the unduly depressed prices which producers in exporting
countries had suffered from time to time would be avoided.
Mr. McEwen said that as a result of the introduction
of quotas the price of Australian butter ex store London had
been steady at about 314/-stg. per cwt. for some time. This
price was, of course, very much more satisfactory than the
level of 247/-stg. per cwt, which applied before the operation
of the quota system. The increase is worth more than million
by way of extra returns to the Australian dairy indujtry for
a full year's exports.
Mr. McEwen said that over recent weeks the butter
supply position in Britain had tightened and this had been
reflected in quite significant price increases. The price
of Australian and New Zealand butter had increased last week
by 20/-stg. per cwft. and qr'otations for European butter
had risen even more steeply.
It appeared, the Minister said, that this development
in the market arose principally from the adverse affect
upon European butter production of the severe conditions of
last winter and the lateness of the spring. The British
import trade was apparently working on the basis that some
European butter exporting cotzntr'ic L x: uld be unable to supply
their full quotas into the British market. 
-2-
Mr. MoEwen said it was difficult to forecast
whether the current tight supply situation would continue.
Much would, of course, depend upon the extent to which production
in European exporting countries, throughout the full quota
year ra1nning through to next March, had been influenced by the
climatic conditions. The British Government had taken the view,
however, that supplies within existing quotas would continue to
be very tight over the next month or two. It had accordingly
arranged that Ireland would ship up to 5,000 tons of butter over
and above its quota, provided this amount was available fo~ r
import into the U. K. before the end of August.
Mr. McEwen said that the British Government had
indicated a few days ago its intention of permitting the
importation of this Irish butter over and above the Irish
quota. He had made known to the British Government that whilst
the Australian Dairy Produoe B#" ard naturally regulated its
shipments to the U. K. on a basis compatible with its marketing
opportunities within its annual quota, additional supplies of
Australian butter could be made available speedily. He had
also made clear the Australian Government' s view that in a
situation where additional supplies over and above quotas were
required, such additional requirements should be allocated on
an equitable basis among those quota holding countries in a
position to supply. He had, therefore, sought consultations to
review the current and prospective situation in the British
market and the sources from which additional supplies should
be obtained if the circumstances warrant it. It was expected
that consultations between British and Australian authorities
towards this end would take place within the next few days.
Canberra, 57/ 63T.
Sunday, 16th June, 1963. 



FOR PPEh,: S, ~ 964
D1 C4, i. T ION TO VTSLT
SHY L~ SI
Statement b~ y the . Autify Prinic Minisfex., The % THon. John
McE woen
Tho&gt;~ in rmeMini'ster and MvinisE; ter fr Trade,
4r Twethis morning announccd ' tat t Poatmnstcv-
Gencra]-, Mr. -Davidson, will lend a Joint -Parlimcntf. ry
delogft on to Thail. and, 1Thamma figace Malaya, Indone sia
and the Philippincs.
Thc de-legation will lo-Lve on Saturday, June 22, and
wilbc , ib,; nt * for cpproxianately three v. ecks,
In addition to Mr. David,-son, who is Dep, Uty Lea-derL of
the Country, the deil qaticri will compyise:
lvMr, HILYLEN ( Labor Pa-rty), Csenarcr ', UGHT ( 2.' tiberal Party)
Senator MAT~( Country Pa-rty), Senatlor DRY" RIY ( 1, abor Pa-rty+)
Senator OlpFYRNE2 ( La-bor Ecrty), LMx. Y ( Liberal Party)
(, OibLe~ r al ' Part y). Mr. jFSS ( Liberal Party)
Mr, KITNG~ ( Country Party) Mr. 11-O\ T ( Labor Party),
Mr. Gray ( Labor-Party), Mr. -( kaibAoMr, A Pa-rty) 0
C ZJ i Z-16 



CEREMONY AT ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS,
EDINBURGH SCOTLAND, ON 28TH
Y 3NE, 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister..-the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert-Menzies
The fellow who lives my kind of life, Sir, moves
along in a kind of rakefs progress. Itm invited to come here
I'm greatly honoured I'm told that I will in effect take an
oath to be a law-abiding citizen not for tile first time, Then
when I say, " This, of course, will be a highly agreeable occasion
with no speeches" the answer is, " 1Well we would like you to say
a few words." A lew words. This is the most masterly understatement
of the century and whenever I am told " a few words", I know
that I am for it. You have discovered that too haven't you.
Yes. " You're for it*" And, really, I felt that I was entitled
to some kind of revenge because when we went in to the ceremony,
never has any politician stood so straight and so silent
( Laughter) as I did for so long. ( Laughter) Then instead
giving me a ch" c: ir because if you give me a chair to sit on I
can write an almost legible signature almost but when I have
to stand up and do it, it is indecipherable ( Laughter) And so
here I am, not knowing whether I am to be penalised or take my
revenge, but I wontt take my revenge for too long.
I was very amused well, " amused" is not the right
word, Sir interested when you were reading the long statement
to which I have by implication attached myself, because I listened
to it and I thought, " Well, now, this is all a matter of protecting
the interests of the College of Physicians and its members," My
Public Orator wher3 is he now? Oh yes, there we are he
produced one of the whimsies of the century when he sa~ d that
there was a long and friendl association between the doctors
and the lawyers, ( Laughter) This, I am bound to say, I have
never previously observed, ( Laughter) because in my respectable
days at the Bar when I was doing a lot of work, I appeared in a
considerable number of medical cases.
Well I am happy to say that by luck I usually
appeared for the loctor ( Laughter) and that is a pretty difficult
job because civil juries, presented by a child with a twisted
arm or a man with a hole in the side of his face, will always
say, " Oh, yes. Yes" This is what they call, loosely, British
justice, you see. They say, " Oh, isn't that terrible. How would
you like that to happen to you. They tell me these doctors have
a defence fund." ( Laughter) And so if you whip the damages down
by a œ 1,000 or œ 1,5O0, you are doing rather well.
But I thought I observed at that time that there
was a sort of occupational friction between Counsel and medical
witnesses, and I think there was something in it, I gave it a
lot of thought at the time. I used to confer with my medical
witnesses and give them fatherly advice -or brotherly advice
at that time of my life, filial advice -as to, you know, what
to beware of, how to play this game, But I think I learned one
of the truths at that time and I pass it on to you for what it
is worth. A medical man is going to be called in a medical
case, He is a doctor being sued for negligence and all the
sentimental stuff piles up one end and there are medical witnesses
to be called and they are eminent men, and like all eminent men,
they have long since risen superior to the alphabet or the
elementary textbook because they have gone beyond it, they've
ooeeeeeee/ 2 
-2
moved on to a different levl This is true of all of us who
practise a profession. You become so concentrated on what you
might call the upper reaches of the business that you almost
forget the elementary things that you learned years ago, And
of nourse the cross-examiner, like me, who knows nothing whatever
in reality about anatomy or physiology or whatever it may be,
says to the instructor, " What's the leading text-book on this2
Itts a case on the elbow joint." ( Jones on Joints, I think,
used to be the thing) " What is the last edition?" And you get
that and you wrap towels around your head. My wife can remember
me doing this kind of thing. And you swot up the text book and
then you cross-examine some distinguished fellow who knows far
more about it than you will ever know, and you get him to commit
himself to a proposition, and then you say in that smart fashion
that characterises a cross-examiner in a case of this kind, " Do
tell me, is Jones on Joints a recognised textbook?" " Yes"
" What would the last edition be? Would the 1 5th?" ( or whatever
it might be) " Yes" " Now, I wonder if you would mind taking this,
witness, at page 657 and reading out to the jury what it says,"
after he has committed himself to the oppositci proposition.
( Laughter) Well this you may say is indecent and although
I used to think it great fun, I am free to admit that looking
back on it, it was a rather shameful proceeding. But then I
blame the medical witness who ought never to assume that Counsel
is a fool and won't know the techniques of his own trade and
practise them. So when I heard you say, Orator, this morning that
there was an old and friendly association, I was very grateful,
It seemed to me to argue on the part of the medical profession
a quality of compassion and forgiveness which I think is
completely remarkable,, ( Laughter) And the best proof of that,
of course, is that, as you have pointed out to me, I am a
physician in Australia and I am a physician here.
Do you mind if I give you a little boastful remark,
Sir? I mentioned it because I am still rattled by it. I am
a gynaecologist and obstetri~ cian ( Laughter) of the Royal College
( Laughter) though when they gave me a searching look they were
not clear whether I appeared as practitioner or as a patient.
( Laughter) I am a Doctor of Science in some university somewhere,
I am an architect in fact, I have been given, except
in the law about which I do kno. w something, I have been given
honorary degrees and honorary fellowships which have been
cunningly devised to relate to the things of which I am most
ignorant. ( Laughter) This, I think, is very satisfactory.
But at the some time Sir, I would like to recall
the fact that I was able once to do the medical profession in
my own country some sm.-all service. I was sitting in Opposition
I was Leader of the Opposition in about 19418 when this happened
when an amendment to the Constitution was being promoted by
the then Government to give the Commonwealth Parliament power
over medical health services, among other things. This had
become necessary because a doubt had been exposed by the High
Court and, of course, in a Federal system, you know, the limitations
of power are constantly the subject of dispute in the
courts. We, in Opposition, felt that the Commonwealth ought
to have power to provide medical health and pharmaceutical
benefits and things of this kind, but there was some anxiety
in the medical profession as to whether this would enable thKe
Government, which was a socialist government, to institute the
/ 3 
-3
system of nationalised medicine. This was a very real apprehension
and my little contribution to history is that for the
first and only time in the history of the Commonwealth Parliament
in Australia, the Loader of the Opposition got an amendment
accepted to a constitutional bill and may amendment was to include
in brackets " but not so as to include any form of civil conscription"
which blew out all the prospect of a nationalised,, medical
health service. It turned out later on that that was what it did
because there was a challenge in the High Court on some bill
that had been introduced, and the High Court upheld the effect
of this amendment. I'm not quoting the words with precision,
but it did prevent the creation in Australi" and does it
permanently of what you might call a completely nationalised
medical health service, Now that doesn't moan that you can't
have a government medical service. Wre have one. I think we
have a remarkably good one in Australia, but it is all based on
the voluntary principle, on the basis of insurance with private
effort and with Government subsidy and backing, but it loaves
completely untouched the choice of the patient. The doctorpatient
relationship remains free, inviolate, but when the
treatment has occurred between the doctor of choice and the
patient who has gone to him, then the paymunts that are made
are adjusted ultimately through some insurance scheme like the
Hospital Benefits Association. I have forgotten what the
total is but by and large you can take it that about 90 per cent.
of the fee in a normal case comes from one or other of those
two sources. But the free choice of doctor by the patient
remains and, if I may say so, we think this is not too bad and
we think that this is increasingly known in other countries and
approved of, perhaps envied in other countries.
But I do simply say this, that I am most happy to
have an obligation to defend the interests of the College and
its members because I believe that in the new world, the world
that we are living in the function of the medical man is
increasingly important, increasingly difficult, lie is called
upon for a most complex body of new knowlodge, new techniques
and new expertise in this world, u believe that it is
essential that the therapy of the individual confidence in the
man should not be lost because I am sure that it is of tremendous
importance and I am sure that you believe it too.
Now, Sir, the only other thing I want to say to
you, because I am really not making a speech but merely offering
a few words, is that I have been a bit taken aback by discovering
that there is an argument about how my name should be produced.
( Laughter) It turns out that the Aberdonians say " Menzies"
though I must say that the Lord Lyon this morning seemed to
me to take a rather insistent view that it was " Mingies"
( Laughter) and in Edinburgh they say " Mingies" and in these
parts of Glasgow which have been adversely affected by the
Irish, they call it " Menzies", So who is to know? All I can
tell you is what I said was it to you, Sir? this morning
that at one of these big Dinners in London where there is a
red-coated Master of Ceremionies and where I myself heaven
help me -have made many speeches to patriotic gatherings of
800 people and 1,000 people and that sort of thing this old
boy who runs through the name of the man he's announcing to
the last flourish of " Justice of the Peace" you know
wonderful business having introduced me about four times,
nipped across to me this time and said and he had always
delivered this in a Home Counties accent which was impeccable
he came across to me and said, " Excluse me, Sir, but am I to 
~ 1+
introduce ye as ' Menzies' or by yelre proper namae?" ( Laughter)
And I said, " By my proper namel by all means," and so out it came
with a fine Doric quality, Home Counties entirely forgotten.
The only other thing I want to say to you on this
fascinating question of my nane is that in England, I think,
more than in Scotlandl the pronunciation of names and of place
names is calculated cunningly and wickedly to put the visitor
at a disadvantage. ( Laughter) It is. I mean, people say,
" Well, I visited they pause, and they 11say, I
visited Beaulieu 11 only to be told it is " Bewley". W. ell this
is very difficuli. It is like Cirencester " Cissister".
Chichester which is called " Chychester" in Australia. This
is all very difficult.
Many years ago I found myself appearing in the
Judicial Committee in a case which invv~ lved a patent of some
novelty and the name of the case was Paper Sacks Ltd. versus
Cowper, who was an eminently respectable solicitor in Sydney
and a great friend of mine; but he was on the other side.
His name had been given to this case for some reason of a
techhical kind, and so it was Paper Sacks versus Cowper in
Australia and versus " Cooper" before the Judicial Committee.
One of my opponents in the case was a Sydney Counsel who
discovered not only thzit Cowper had become " Cooper" by crossing
the ocean but that Menzies had become " Mingies" in the course
of the same voyag~ e, because the Judicial Committee had none
of your hesitation they said "' Mingies," you see. And so
this fellow from Sydney wrote some verse I'll just quote it
to you. It has always stuck in my mind. It was rather nice; it
was a nice double rhyming scheme. dhen I have given it to you
I will conclude* It said
Said M~ enzies to Cooper
I swear like a trooper
To be classed so it seems
With the Chumleys ( Cholmondoleys)
and Weems ( Wemyss)
Said Cowper to Mingies
Look here, Bob, the thing is
To alter our names
To Tompkins and James,
All you have to do is to remember that simple quartet, you see,
and all these things will be solved.
Well, now, I mustn't resume my seat as they say in
Parliament without telling you that you have given infinite
pleasure today to three people my wife, myself and my eldest
son who is here for the first time and to whom this experience
will be unforgettable, and our joy is added to by the fact that
we are in Edinburgh and the joy is further added to by the fact
that we are among our friends and if I may say so, further added
to by the fact that we are in a street and in a building and in
a city in which, from time to time, you can see the work of the
greatest architect of our age, or any age, Robert Adam. I hope
I may say that in Edinburgh which has so much of his work,
Thank you so much, Sir. We are delighted, we are
honoured and you have filled us with happy memories. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON. SIR
RCERTMrTNZIES, ON T1IE OCCASION OF A GoADITATION
CEiEMONIAL C0ITFELRTUG ON ! IIM THE HONODLARY DEGREE
OF DOCTOR OF LAWS, AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
EDINBURGHq SCOTLAND ON ! st JULY, 1963
Your Royal Highness, Mr. Chancellor, My Lords and Ladies
and Gentlemen This is every bit, as His Royal Highness said, a
tremendous day in ily life. You know, in Australia we address
our political people with a certain amount of offensive good
humour. Nobody who leads a party or leads the Government in
Australia is ever allowed to suffer from the illusion that he
is important, because he really isn't and every time Ive gone
abroad I have found here or there, a degree of importance that
I have never been able to sustain in my own country.
Of course I have been particularly honoured and delighted
today. I went through the Ceremony of the Thistle this morning
at St. Giles and came out as proud as Lucifer. I hadn't tripped
on my robe, I hadntt stood in the wrong place. Everybody
seemed to be quite content, even the Lord Lyon' But when I
knew all that time that this was to be followed by receiving
a Degree at Edinburghq I would like you to understand how full
my cup of happiness was. This is for me, and for my wife, and
for my elder son who has been here today, the greatest day in
our lives. And, of course, this Ceremony is added to by the fact
that His Royal Highness is your Chancellor. I've never been a
Royal Highness myself, I've never had to suffer the slings and
arrows of outrageous fortune which come to His Royal Highness0o
And we in Australia of course, know him, We thinkq on the
whole we know him pretty well. He has been out sometimes in
great ceremony on a full Royal visit. Twice he's been out
once to the Olympic Games, once to the Empire Games in a
fairly informal sort of fashion and he has won a place in the
Australian. heart which is second only tc that occupied by our
Sovereign lady, The Queen. But perhaps if he had just been His
Royal Highness Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh, th.. se are
very considerable attributes, but he has in his own proper
person, added to them titles all around the world, which are
appropriate to be mentioned in this famous University on this
occasion because if there is one man in my own time who has
raised the banner of education, who has encouraged the young,
who has encouraged scholarship, who has encouraged widening the
frontiers of scientific and technological knowledge in the world,
it is your Chancellor, so that I venture to say that, at the end
of his liLfe, which is bound to occur in another sixty years, not
earlier I trust, but at the end of his life as he sits., as we
are all supposed to sit as we get older, by the fireside,
meditating on our sins of the past, extracting a little pride
from the few good things that we might have done that applies
to me he will be able to look back and know that nobody has
done more than he has in these great causes to which I have
referred and, therefore, while it is a singular honour for me to
be given a D6gree at the University of Edinburgh it is a profound
honour, an unforgettable honour, to receive it at the hands of
Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh. 
-2-
Now, I must say that my sponsor today I thought did
me rather well, rather better than well, perhaps, and I will,
in future, forever love him forj. two reasons. One, he delivered
his address in English, I mention that Si:, because a few
years ago, some error having occurred at Oxford, they made me
a Doctor of Laws, a Doctor of Civil Law of Oxford? and they
had a variety of people, some distinguished scientists and
even Margot Fonteyn, who was to receive a Degree as a Doctor
of Music, of lovely gown, one of these things you see but
rather lacy, and lovely, and we paused at the School of
Divinity where we were given our tickets, you know our
instructions. I didn't have any today, so I wouldn't know.
But it turned out that every one of the Honorary Graduands
had the public oratorts speech in Latin and in English but
I was first I didn't get my copy until afterwards and so
I stood in front of Lord Halifax, who was the Chancellor and
I heard the public orator, in an impeccable modern pronunciation
of Latin make a speech about me, and I had to follow it,
He made two jokes, as all public orators do, particularly when
they are speaking in Latin, and I say with boastful Menzies
pride that I laughed at the right time, and when I came in
here today, I was rather apprehensive because I thought, well
now, I can cope with the public orator speaking in Latin in
the modern pronunciation, but how can I cope with the public
orator speaking in Latin with a Scots accent? And so I want
to say thank you very much for having delivered me from this
embarrassment, The other reason that I was delighted with him was that
he did say something about what might almost be regarded as an
adventitious association that I have with the University
development in Australia It is one of the remarkable things
in our generation, not perhaps mine but the current generation,
that when the Second World War ended, the first result in my
own country and, I think, Sir here was that there was a
tremendous upsurge of demand for University training. In my
own University I think there were 1,500 undergraduates, in my
own town, and within a year or two after the war there were
6,000, 7.000, 8,000, and the result has been that the pressure
of demand on universities for university training has been
phenomenal. The last estimate that I saw was that, by the
turn of the century, in Australia, with a population of something
under 11 millions at the present time, there would be
100,000 undergraduates and this of course, has put the most
tremendous pressure on universities. It is beginning to
produce new universities. It is beginning to present problems
of the most tremendous kind.
Ten years ago, realising these as a university man
myself, I performed one of the greatest acts of trickery ever
known in Australian politics. I say nothing about your
political scene I don't understand it. But I was in
England and I saw Sir Keith Murray, Chairman of the University
Grants Commission, and I said to him in a rather beguiling
fashion, " What about coming out and being the Chairman of a
Committee to investigate the university position in Australia?"
And he said as a few other people have said in the last week
or two, " Well I can't come unless Harold approves," because
Harold Macmillan was then the Chancellor of the Exchequer, you
see, and so I spoke to Harold Macmillan and he was in an
amiable and relaxed mood, and he said, " Certainly, old boy, yes,
why not?" He hadn't experienced then any of these recent
vicissitudes this is ten years ago and so I stole Keith
Murray. 0o0 / 3 
-3
And then we set up a power~ ful Committee and it was only
after I had set it up that I confessed to my Treasurer, or,
as they would say in London, the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
what I was doing, and he said, " Oh yes, old man well if you
think that's all right, that's all right0" l " Well, I said,
" I want to warn you that these Committees are not economical.
This might cost a few million pounds," you see, and he being
in an amiable mood, said, " Well old boy, if you feel that way,
that's all right," and the result has been, you know, one step
leading to another as it always does, but we are now spending
almost as many millions as a Commonwealth on universities as
we were spending tens of thousands when this thing began and
in the result, it has meant that the universities, confronted.
by utter bankruptcy with this pressure of demand on their
resources, have been able to expand, to build.
I see among my audience this afternoon the Vice-Chancellor
of the University of Melbourne. If he could be persuaded to
break all the rules of a Vice-Chancellor of the University of
Melbourne and become vocal, he would tell you that this has
revolutionized the position of the universities. Or course
the work is not over. The work is beginning. We have great
p-foblems. I wonder whether we can cope with 100,000, 200,000,
whatever it may blxi, of prospective undergraduates by following
along the old paths, by having the university of the old
pattern. I think the time is coming when we must vary our
activitiese Graduate, postgraduate, the higher levels of
learning, the Ordinary pass degree, the Technological Institute,
the Technical Institute these present the most tremendous
problems to us and in all the work that I have to do about this,
and all the thoughts that I have to engage in, I confess, once
More, I have been remarkably assisted by the modern, forwardlooking,
active view of your own Chancellor. This is of
tremendous importance for the future of the world,
For all that is a generalisation, yes, but not so
generalised, perhaps, as you might think, because it is a
problem that comes to all of us. But to come here into this
place in Scotland is to be reminded that there are certain
foundations of learning which continue to be of supreme importance
for mankind, Scotland, of course, and I speak without any bias
on this matter, Scotland has a unique place in the history of
learning in the world. The farm worker of one hundred years
ago saying, " No, no, Jock must go to school, He must do something
better", and Jock, himself, with his son saying, " He m-ust go to
Edinburgh he must have a Degree". Learning, the ambi. ticn for
learning, the instinctive sense that the cultivated mind not
the snobbish mind the cultivated mind, is essentia3 for mankind,
has found its expression in Scotland more, I believe, than in
any other country of the world0 And, of course Edinburgh
itself with its ancient history embodies the whole of this idea,
And th3 idea is not just to be able to take a Degree, to got a
licence to practise the Law, or a licence to practise Medicine
or whatever it may be. The whole idea has been to reach out
to something which is at the moment, beyond you but which you
may attain with efforz and with character and with skill,
As Robert Browning said and it deserves to be the motto
of all great universities " A man's reach should exceed his
grasp, or what's a Heaven for." This is it a man's reach should
exceed his grasp and so you don't want to have coming out of
universities people who will say, even inadvertlentl y at some time
in the future, " Well, I finished my education in 1961.11 The
# a a 0/ 4 
people who finished their education when they took a Degree
are not worth much, They may earn adequate incomes, but
they're not worth much. " A man's reach should exceed his
grasp, or what's a Heavurñ for," and so the graduate continues
to be the student. TMe graduate continues to feel that there
are, in the intellectual sense, fresh worlds to conquer,
And if you, of Edinburgh, realise as I do, and perhaps you do,
how much this great tradition in this mother country of so
many of us, has done to stimulate the minds and spirits of
people, to make them feel the future is more important -than
the past, you would share my profound pride on this occasion,
This is a great day for me; it's a great day
for us, as I said, I am grateful to you, I am proud of the
honour which you have done me, and I hope tl'at in time to
come, when they write those rather cynical obituaries that
they write about all public men and I am something of that
kind in my own country they will te prepared to say that, at
any rate, the fact that Edinburgh honoured him in this fashion
is a mark in his favour. 



WBD PROWOST'S WI~ I~ f INWB~~
Lord Provost~. a drW rovest a
Whn you wre telling as of this highly eradito
note that Y" wo to yo thmen o if that Isun't a
debsed ezpwesilem I was delighted it imiW e me of
the met fbm~ smM alden Speaesh m made I&amp; a t1 ] buse of Comms
vho ws the only 6Q; nsewtIm, I thiimft'h e great electin
of 1" 6 to win a meat That immat n bee tifgo und
himself as a am Member Met like mrslt, hely endowed with
Impertinenc ( Laught.) a there heam ao the other side
I~ otber p4I411 David Usyd Goge and Usyd George boA
enatteziñ arg Toules in. the ei1m and exp 11111-that
If they we voted tO. l, Qduese alamW would bekouI
the Wlsh hills bmuse strsaely enoh nmto s election* a" e
osnimoted an wint a" esbeunl rather amusing issMw really,
nytm the I~ berals won and the Tories wev in
opposition. and I LoYOU heve all " ead you should.
119 smith's waiden ak beinus. the Spker In due cow"
arinsmkcalled Vn Smth and few 4r mea-lecm stood iV.
This is-of ocre, omof the Ziedwiatap of aving a nn
like Smthe If It bad beenMeasles or Mingles, it would have
be" s different. Butt anyhav I -n not going to rePeat to you
the entre a bt be il end up br quoting a little Latin,,
asyoi d, i sksva id all thishvg atta* d Ltd Qeorg,
lmv" nattioked the idea of 61= e sl" wy in the Welshlm ts ins
so p bysq 1g Paoxlwj sealegs. erfbat., And b
he b" Odt as you 4in't Sir, * For tise benefit of those efteted
at StI I wlil this into '&amp; mlish,' ( lau* Ate) and be did It
Into ftlis. Ad he said OPPOKiw 1 ' In the a4J! 7INARn
e ~ of eve. * thmeo rpi ght km-ma L ll'
film Carnarro Burrouhs' Ardebat s ' was letting offMi"
me~ mi ( Leaugter) And I hae alims like this becuse with
mr rather seemA hI-u -. djp of Latin I hoe always bees delighted
to kne that tbere was so a peliti elan wb produced the right
twefor' the ward " auietbat*. b An so I listezod to yom, Sir,
today with Vset plesure ad I thought, * wel* elassimel
learning Is nt ded in, Rdinbursh. 0
NOW the A0Xt thing I WUNt to Say is that this 11 2 e
aret poea on about b-to proee mug. me I ea member
wvmIwas a mLl bey Wrin fmhsa in a vashei
o. watint fashion 9404910 Llook 9 It'ss2m aei
1 * 100: 1tbw wouldat kae it*. t0a*-ps1081
tbqretore it Is Measles. And last Friday I itmebed here with
the Calejp of Pbvsielams and I was 55W four phrsleia
out of fly* that Menzies Vag the right pwiumia adthat
Mingles was an Edinburat affeetationmLugtr
Bat yea" s age, I had this matteo" uunuently settled
for me in landen. Yea knw a Landie, when th have a k~ g
padrieti 44 I thin at which pear, wmenring
Calonaltypes i1e nyseif hami to make a speech thmey have
an inposing gaeamn ia a red oat and he aee esswyrbody
' nLing up wbere psisie with the Prermant ha J0BUie of
" Is Ps en( Jagt) vidbI m no. hsodboy bad Ipt
rater tired. Behad produeed all these thins time arter tim, 
is % tt I aight Aeswibe as a im UNia O0mati * glieb.
( Laughter) Most beor he mes to aas not he 6
aaws and with a flue Doric, qmuli on his to" M b m
Cmwty this stuff be saidt *" x~ iese 31r , bet on I te
( Applauee iY. wiea or (" Lavgher)( L
Aplase'oAad I sid, 00 OLMt a-. m ww
Now, you kv&amp;. irs thUse is Mtbi rather
attractive t he inAS d about Mdlabwgb* In
next" s thit, dw'tou I'll ssANOessMtiA, about nt -a
In a amt. W CLeaht I ra r ! at~ edta
ye had a Wlthqwww -elastzf s~ itdloptim
onsmiher. imeludiag ~ asoupte and a definiti
ILM 1 1rot. o that an year we had
a epim r Pool" of lottery, t was 604ld6A
that x woud " ePly insw bam-oa soa:. I in anoter
plac and Z In aother pi~ ee, and woit sin to Miaabmi
thelad Piovest ve a kepta &amp; a the am o= Ze the let
bed tales t had 10 Rae. to do with Seetland, I thoughts
tthe wM m' un. t Stul he got up and be said. M
' a kwv 1--d Provst# I have Lwth and is ay Ve 40 and
Vo oe ali flabbergated -and be said, * Toss jy wife's at
was a 8-taeams' ( Jau---' And with ay usual itrwexraeeo
I iaiadito, my meighboar and said, C st Live been a VM
Vedikgo ( Laughter)
NM, Sirt wow. Tw tastStl. Xoave a bra
kiat I&amp; the oaroe a " aging se: t the stowy
sested with as k miagN a Treana of 1Mi~ ab. so" e ef
y. have hoard It bat ethers of 7e" my met hove board It.
louve no the opprtsmity, so I wi1l toll It bessi nw
of ye. igtw 9afyo ertt his fellow to bemew a Freumon
of AbA-1-is a Mtt 10iek requires xQl amtlon.'
( rauw~ 11, it cmo aboat In this way.
in itutS I VMS what ma all0dl soilled a
health Lwua~ y I was than Leader of the Oa~ lt i.. in
Austral le poeios, whisk I ida
that tine ' for se*" aws w which I oeapid I an hapff to
say, Zrt eVl oe year oes, IV wita Vas vNit as and varlow
p. e and we travlling is Scotland* Zlab Vakhe had
1of now Jinth. Vales aOd we had beon in tmok with,
him am be meot Us at the Assembly Reomn G eurg Street.
Vboa, we arrived, well# there we awe By wife Wand my db 1
Mhe was ith so t~ manted to sa balletq you ka1 allet
is a little boyemd my peep ( LeAr and manted to see the
Lindsay alyand this klod of Lidj -w e arrive&amp; and I
said to VA kebert " lea kasv we have booed invhere and
the Plostivol is in fyI! myj. r whana we 4' AM ha said,
' Cmo acoss hoe A moet bdProset who was then Lord
PioVet xwrrayt I thiok I tight in sayingq. * f ware
Na'edin teemr to the bird P t and I said with, all
* bana amrie a Austnaiaa ( lmagtr)
' Vei19l, d Pre to I hate to lop* o this an o but eamid you
W~ l no to boe* a f~ w seats. boe a" t youn know,.' An&amp;
beat so Mmd said, swP r ir, as a Fteamn of
Ed~ tboehoall doors a" e 4aM to YOU*' I said, * Ila sor7t
iwwt-Vu-d oumind repeting that?' And ha repeated it Is a
loa clear vise# and I said, ' Well r don't uwrstmd this
at ft said, ' ae eiseted you to be a 7ueaa in, 194M'
ra t9' i1 I bad been in omit btitala duriag the war amd I
happed at that timt tr reasomt or amthor, to be * o/* 3 
go3
rIlm Nalso of Am tCLIM9 and it omute . th at the
" eSolution held been fle a" that the letter had been pod
Of eaume inii a lot of eMil wont astray becaus sahp
M-4 Amd all that sut of thiag. I bad miev hewA of it.
s-oa0A t was % at three Weeks l Vtm00 01 UP Into this maT
Rom with the wd am a ad the bellies and I reslved. the
NZL; of 3diMMWgh SOeM yftr after It had been Voted
( laughter but e~ thWo weeks after I Wa leaziat about Its
kAis ) Wn&amp; I no" d toll you that La a rem at boa" e
~ r ewevarius ths=-tee Is the Frooku of J~ nmg~
there' Ssom" Isn't there, Pat, 0 anngth
as to who Is to Pet it. ( Laugter)
Mw theme in soother oeasion that giwes a
œ MW pleasur beesuso, sitting an the ri hand side of
the Laoy Prvwt is Ia&amp; Donressil amd sit on the left.
hanI side of air * I* e hrSsa, that harat'w=&amp;-w ho
t-Wa ai Wrest Is~ ladw AlM. ( Applause) I
4 " W# 1 ead " Mylgew go mture. An o all JOWO
J44 Slim Is se. f the &amp;" at isa of owt ti ( Applause) sl
Me WS Qe mG of ostuulia. 1 11ve In a state of
odateat terro of bin ( Isaghter) boosupe he Is a teable
-ane Thse of you wh ko-Mp kno that to p Into his
4~ bPaI sM tMotM MU(" aaku"" e ) a Uttlo Isa; n sda mI iws as Mqour~ e, A kWigA da lbltleobis h
( Apan se) h s Mrriamn, an old hm-lunw Moa
Appaus) bon being a great fwie e in aI emd--A
being a pot lod of everybodyr in Antralis. ( Applao wh
dWieIn Autai* I s pru and delighted to tbink that
Alisc&amp; Dmresail should be hem. today. ( Applause)
Now, Sitp the emly ether thing that I vent to
tyes and to row &amp; eat * M* Wa Is tkis. It's a cuious~~ g
isn' t It abm e opl of the Owts Mle" that tbe have a
pritde wtalk suestains any tvurW and suwvie atn UsoSWt Ats
I don't use the worid In Iti tohnisl seose -nt the root of
the Wl. IC eas s fee about that beomse, I an ham
to syy tapt. to outto Austsolia after tisasp tatiom
had mAse8 ( au trI. h the great thisP about the soou,
werve they may be In the world and there a" e br no" e
of tbom outsid MOU" Atln than LUIns i etiand a great thing
abot the Seets is tht they retain their pride. % hWay
a ALogthaeu r den' t talk about old gpev! ee 2Mnaly
griovene that they knwanything about is that in the am
* 0Mt7 inwhisk tbay lila, the other people bav the giiewuuse
ma other werde, the peat quality or the scot is
not Billy self.. mnei, whisk is alwje * f-4ofeatagg
WtV;~ a4 I M a -~ oa as Lef to hav lesbodInx
wMiMA. ( Laughter) 1W. wif who wsa a Leekie Yan theroft
beongepd to a sept of the N~~ esis as Wood as tacifor
and yea" s a 0.0dam in OWe Muls oo~ mty she had a Panml
42er one se the el" Als were * ranevder y tnthey
Ited to a blastedo na ak ) kI jujsde ~ the~ weor~ d I n Its iteral sMeD
thy'dm " And that's where we
laughter) e hlsid( Oe 1toe took a ather pows view
of thisp a rather scor V1411# until oe0 OW, at the weeAW
we wlked aroud t6 01i StrOWyar at If~ s and ina the kirk
at OW" there they were. Tbere Vol Na41ots, 3de( QePrs
and 1 voumh hato to put welds intO 2W vwfts nmuth I -n em
she was sayins to herseLf, * I wusn't the first to got baok on
the XIngle. W ( Ughter) 
I do
air# IaIs ol ething about Prdmost * gñ sh
word talatde ovesto isintewpvetation, and If you tat
James oow or Robertson vas a po" man it Is easy tf art
" e8l be mat hae a goode OmIen of hlaself." Tnt#$ IV
., mw. L as t havoe zw ofocseelt. The Seats pride
Is mUtbin Ilk, that at all. Pu14e of osaset toea Soot or
to a dewIvatiwe Bsot Ubke mself fellow a owtain * ws of
I P-1001 ipityv of pesonal autwitro and that's right.
Assims thing weg with that in this wurld and, God knm,
that a Prime Nlalster v~ has been a Prine Minister for uixteen
, Vems as I have* needs It tram tine to time, 9 t an top of all
that, of erse, the other eemtates of pftL. to a pes, of
loop MObLity -a yor14Adi this# your aeestmr did this,
you mt aevr la4' thm 4om Yen soc this is the bme
ofths neall pride WA&amp; yew bead WjelL. -kzm that
you bay* a sons of we~ uibiltyb that you can moew lot your
elan# your , meh atw It Na , a Leum.
ftese are the tm facets of pride* Whe I found that
this tine I " a to oe to IUlubmAv to receie thisI to mo,
0Ktirly unexpected hemour of the Tistle, this thing so ll1ar
to amt Naloaty, to ber SIM tivo, I ws vry rmt
think that tbis m" bld en i 4n-hbeau" s t sh~ It p
mand all mW family ! f ing my hestyswe who Is ber for Ito
an immmm feeling ofjoyit a se* e a&amp; sm er to all
or us that ve have Imem bspailttes and that wbtever
mes or gm, vs mst awr lot Low * Itbw Bdinhawh 1~ A
W Iemla or Bootland Is general* It's a proudhin to be of
Soboos od Its apru ting to have been boae tefty;
itts a promd fO Wna nlo f no to hame been received 1Wou
to beer youspa vith mnob SwUstle, ezeept abt tha 112 Hie
( 1ghtor aA o be able to lp hieand in the ease ofC
older of as to says " Wels own nor. hamo bee= In Ould Reokie.
We hewe bea n i land of our forefthers and ve shall rember
It for' the " ast of our liviso 


The Battle For Freedom
JEFFERSON ORATION
By SIR ROBERT MENZIES, The Prime Minister. of Australia
It is a rare privelege for the Prime Minister of a nation of something under eleven millions of people  to be invited be invited to speak, in the United States of America, on a day which commemorates the Declaration of Independence and, 50 years later, the death of its draftsman, Thomas Jefferson.
Yet I take comfort from the fact that, when Thomas Jefferson
became President of the United States, he presided over
the destiny of a nation with only half of the present population
of Australia. Yet he is immortal, and his work endures. 
There is nothing more stimulating than to recall that the
American Colonies, as they moved into independence through
blood and revolution and much suffering, and encountered
the immense practical problems of fashioning a system of
self-government, had in their service a group of men so
superbly talented as Washington, Jefferson, Hamilton, Madison,
John Marshall, and their great contemporaries. They did
not all think the same way, but each was remarkable. These
names, after a lapse of time of a century and a half, remain
familiar to millions of people with even a superficial knowledge
of political and constitutional ' history.
But it is important to recall that men of great talent who
embark upon the stormy seas of public affairs, and particularly
those who achieve posts of leadership and responsibility,
will frequently be over-praised by their friends and overattacked
by their opponents. For the arts of propaganda are not
of modern invention. They were in a flourishing state in the
United States of America and elsewhere in the first quarter of
the nineteenth century, and -have been practised ever since.
The great trouble about all contemporary propaganda is that
it tends to create a false dichotomy. The people under discussion
are, so we are -asked to believe, all pure and shining, or
wicked and worthless. This is, of course, absurd. History, we
hope, sorts these things out and finds an immense variety of
shades of grey.
The art of politics, and the ' history of politicians illustrate
this simple truth. For, in spite of people of allegedly superior
and independent mind, politics derives its vigour from partisanship
and partisans.
The only non-party system of government is a dictatorship.
But one by-product of the party system is that if we come into
a long era of Tory domination, the names of former great
Whigs become dimmed. And vice versa.
The great name of Thomas Jefferson has experienced these
" whirligigs of time." Greatly admired in the formative years of the United States, draftsman of -the Declaration of Independence,
George Washington's first Secretary of State, Vice-
President, President for two terms, his career as a statesman
was a formidable and glittering one.
Add to this his astonishing attainments as a scholar, a
lawyer, a farmer, an architectural designer and you ' have a man
not easily to -be surpassed in any country or at any time. I love
the remark attributed to President Kennedy at a ' White House
dinner for a notable group of guests. " I think this is the most
extraordinary collection of talent, of human knowledge, that
has ever been gathered together at the White House-with
the possible exception of when Thomas Jefferson dined alone."
Yet when his political opponents had achieved their turn of
office, a turn which lasted a long time, the name of Jefferson
appears to have suffered an eclipse. It was not until the twentieth
century that a suitable memorial was erected to him in
Washington, and Monticello re-purchased and preserved.
I do not profess to understand with any precision the philosophical
differences between your Democrats and Republicans
of today. I suspect that your party lines are not so sharply
drawn as ours are in Australia, where, as Winston Churchill
once said, we " conduct our political battles with a fine eighteenth
century vigor." The currents of your history -have buffetted
your parties so much that no outsider could hope to
trace the ' history of one party and find in it complete consistency
or continuity. I am convinced that you have had great
leaders of one paty who, generations later, might have proved
to be leaders of another.
This is, of course, inevitable in any changing world or
progressive society. Yet certain beliefs have an enduring validity.
This,. indeed, is the secret of Thomas Jefferson's immortality.
He believed in the importance of the persistent search for
truth, and therefore in the liberty of the mind. But the liberty
of the mind which he sought was something which was to be
enjoyed by the well-furnished mind. It has never occurred to
me that he believed in the appeal from Philip Sober to Philip
Drunk. He had disciplined his own mind by the most amazing
intellectual training. He was equipped for freedom. He
wanted others to be so. His founding of the University of
Virginia was in reality his testimony to this truth; a democracy,
to be effective, must be educated.
Looking at the matter in the light of my own extensive
experience in my own country, I would be disposed ( if, in
this famous place, this. is not a species of blasphemy!) to
647 
VITAL SPEECHES OF THE DAY
think that Alexander Hamilton and his " Federalist" colleagues
were right in attaching great importance to the creation
of a powerful national administration and authority.
I am even imprudent enough -to think that many of today's
Democrats have a not dissimilar view. But Mr. Jefferson was
strong against tyranny or the means of creating it. To him
individual liberty was the vital essence. American history has
reconciled both conceptions. For it has been your glorious
destiny, notably in the turbulent years of the twentieth century,
to evolve a system in which national power has grown
on the basis of a passionate and Jeffersonian belief in individual
freedom.
The Communist powers, who have created a ruthless imperialism
of their own, to the acute discomfort of their neighbours,
have, for diversionary reasons of their own, painted a
picture of " American imperialism."
It is therefore important to recall, and to emphasise, that
the interventions of the United States in world affairs have
been directed, not to territorial expansion, but to the achievement
and preservation of individual liberty in far-away countries
where that liberty is threatened.
Throughout the whole of my adult life, the great ideological
conflict in the world has been -between those who believe that
the national power of governments is something granted by
free people to their political rulers, and those who believe in
the all-powerful State which concedes to its citizens such freedoms
as it thinks fit.
Well before the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson himself
had resolved the matter in classical terms:-
' These are our grievances, which we have thus laid
before His Majesty, with that freedom of language and
sentiment which becomes a free people, claiming their
rights as derived from the laws of nature, and not as the
gift of their chief magistrate."
This truth is, of course to us " self-evident," so that we find
it difficult to realise that so many hundreds of millions of
people either reject it or are unaware of it. Yet it is important
that we should arrive at a clear realisation of the facts.
We are all a little disposed, when interesting ourselves in
the emerging independence of some former colony, to think
that democracy can be successfully transplanted in a comparatively
brief time.
We are so utterly familiar with what I will call " parliamentary
self-government" that we somehow forget that it has been
a thing of slow and sometimes painful growth; that it has
come from below, and not from above. You cannot create a
democracy as quickly as you can create independence.
There are still too many influential people who forget that
the granting of political independence is not an end in itself.
It is, indeed, a beginning, just as capable of producing a new
tyranny as it is of producing an independent community of
free men. Indeed, we all know of more than one case in which
independence has been followed by either chaos or something
singularly like dictatorship.
There are lessons here for all of us. You are Americans.
You detest colonialism because, to you, it connotes subordination.
Whenever you see some surviving colony, somewhere,
you are eager to make it independent. But it is a mistake to
underestimate two factors.
The first is that a modern and intelligent colonial powerlike
Australia in respect of our Papua and New Guinea territory-
while aiming at complete independence as the goal,
realises that the process of fitting native inhabitants for selfrule
must be relatively slow if it is to be relatively sure. We
know a good deal about this territory, with its confusion of
tribes and languages, its rugged mountains, its towns in which
the Papuans are comparatively advanced in civilisation, its remote valleys and jungles in which sheer savagery survives.
When well-meaning people tell us that we should create
complete political independence in one blow by the simple
process of creating a popular Assembly and arming it with
full powers, we marvel that they should think self-government
so artificial and so easy.
This does not mean that we favour dilatory tactics; freedom
is too precious a thing for mankind to be wantonly denied.
But the best guarantee of individual freedom is the existence
of a community so constructed that freedom is its daily guide.
The building of such a structure, starting with the foundations
and not with the roof, takes time and conscious effort.
I repeat, in a slightly different way, that you cannot endow a
country with democracy as simply as you can endow it with
money or goods.
I am saying these things because I think that we are all in
danger of considering our international relations in too
limited a way. The great issues of peace or war, of armaments
and alliances, remain paramount so long as we live in a world
in which aggressors multiply and are strong.
The great issues of trade, to which we are all currently
directing much attention, have all the complexities which are
inevitable when legitimate national interests have to be reconciled
with the clear need for growing markets and rising production
in a world whose population is increasing at an almost
bewildering rate. But are we yet doing enough to increase
our knowledge of other peoples, or their knowledge of us?
If, as Mr. Jefferson did, we believe that an informed democracy
is the greatest and most humane system of government
ever devised; that it elevates and enfranchises the individual
citizen; that it reconciles some demagogery with much dignity;
are we doing enough to make it understood by other
nations and peoples? Are we, perhaps, too negative in our
democratic faith, defending it against aggression from outside,
but not doing enough -to preach its gospel abroad? What
would Mr. Jefferson do and say if he could revisit us and look
out upon this new world? For freedom was his burning faith.
It was not something just for the study or for reflection. It
was a faith to be practised, but it was also a faith to be
preached. For Mr. Jefferson was a vastly civilised man, with
the roots of his learning and philosophy deep in the soil of the
old world. Virginia itself was a characteristically English community
in many essentials. The colonies themselves felt no
sense of quarrel with the people of Britain. Yet, when the need
arose, they took up arms and by declaration, severed their ties
with their mother country.
Here was no war for territory. Here, indeed, was no ideological
war in the sense in which we now understand that
expression. It was simply a battle for freedom, fought in fact
against an unimaginative government in London and British
soldiers and mercenaries in America, though in form, ( ironically
enough) against -the people of Britain, whose record in
the achievement and defence of freedom was and is so long
and honourable.
This is one of the paradoxes of history, but, in the result,
a happy one. For, just as ' the issue of the War of Independence
was freedom, so was freedom the result, exalted in the minds
of the colonists and destined to give character and direction
to their later national history.
You are today doing great honour to an Australian. May I,
therefore, say something about my own country and yours?
Australia has, I need hardly say, many points of contact and
understanding with the United States. It is the fashion among
a few cynical observers to treat our friendly attachment to
your country as a sort of " cupboard love," based upon selfinterest
in a dangerous world. This is a superficial view, for
at least three reasons.
648 
JOHN BARTLOW MARTIN64
When Britain's colonial adventure in America ended
in 1782 with the birth of a new nation, Captain Cook
had already explored and reported upon the East Coast
of Australia, but there had been no white settlement.
It -had been the practise in Britain in the 18th century
to transport to -the colonies large numbers of persons
convicted of offences ( many of them very trivial)
against the law. Between 1717 and the War of Independence
the historian records that some 50,000 English
convicts were received into America. But this had
now ceased. Where could such people be sent in
future? The choice ultimately fell on Australia, the
particular site chosen being Botany Bay, just south of
Sydney. A fler under Captain Phillip arrived at Botany
Bay in 1788, and the modern history of Australia
began The first settlers were convicts and their custodians.
In short, a colony began in my own country
just after and because colonialism ended in America.
When people in England make jesting remarks to me
about these lowly origins of our now thriving and
law-abiding Commonwealth, I make the good-natured
retort that, though many thousands of convicted persons
were sent to America, and many thousands to
Australia, -the records show -that the great majority of
persons convicted in England during the transportation
era remained in England.
The whole point I make is that, though nobody
could have foreseen it at the rime, your War of Independence
created as it turned out, two nations; one
your own, the other Australia.
When, at the close of the 19th century, the Australian
colonies decided to federate and become one nation,
it was to -the Constitution of the United States that
the draftsmen of the Australian Constitution turned
for light and leading.
During the months and years in which some of the
best political and legal thinkers in Australia were engaged
in the work of drafting, the Constitution of the
United States of America was never far away from
hand. In the great Convention Debates, the decisions
of the United States Supreme Court were extensively
cited. True, your Union had grown out of armed conflict;
ours came more peacefully, by reason and argument,
the gradual persuading of self-governing colonies, each
with a well-defined local pride, that a national existence
should be achieved. It came about that the Australian
distribution of legislative powers between
Commonwealth and States is much like your own. The
separation of powers, legislative, executive and judicial,
though not, perhaps, such a high matter of doctrifle as with you, still makes its impact upon judicial
decisions. Your founders were, of course, much influenced by
the great French commentators upon a British C6nstitution
which in a real sense had no existence. And
so, for example, your Executive does not sir in Congress
or, in a direct sense, answer -to it. But we inherited,
and bad long practised, responsible Cabinet
government, with Ministers sitting in Parliament and
answering to it and, from time to time, being put out
of office by it. It is this fact which gives a special
colour to the Australian Constitution, and provides an
underlying difference partly concealed by remarkable
similarities of form.
In my bhey-day at the Bar of -the High Court of
Australia in constitutional cases, it was still the practise
to make much reference to the currents of American
judicial opinion, currents, may I say, in which backeddies
have occasionally occurred, but the main stream
of which, as in Australia, has moved towards an enlarging
interpretation of national powers. We may not
always like this if we believe in a federal and not a
unitary system of government and see, as Mr. Jefferson
did, some guarantee of individual liberty in a
division of governmental powers.
But there has been, particularly in times of national
emergency or strain, a real value in a Constitution
which can be applied to new circumstances without
crippling rigidity.
But 1 grow tedious. All I really wanted to say was
that, if the na-mes of your great founders and brilliant
political philosophers are familiar in Australian minds
and mouths, it is largely because our constinutional
history -has been profoundly influenced by your own. A
Jefferson memorial would not be out of place in
Canberra. My third reason has, I believe, a fine Jeffersonian ring.
For I feel sure' that Mr. Jefferson, though he worked
primarily for the liberty of Americans and felt no call
to impose his views on an older world, would, confronted
by the -problems of the modern world, have
vastly approved the world defence of individual liberty,
a defence in which the U. S. A. is playing such a splendid
and vital part.
Australia has a deep feeling for your country, not
just because your friendship contributes so greatly to
our national security, but basically because, great or
small, we work for the same kind of free world. The
freedom of man is not a local perquisite and cannot be
defended in isolation. There can be no better place
than Monticello in which to remind ourselves of this
great, though occasionally forgotten, truth.
See video at: http://menziesrc.org/sir-robert-menzies/sir-robert-menzies-in-his-own-w…



631" 64
PIES,_ Pu^ JI1T T" ELF TKNON
R~ jJ 7C_'_ P1T. IE ~ R2P.. P1JD N C7 VD* 111 1J lY 11_
063 at3* pm
MR, J. B. COMMINS
PRIESIDENT OY'
IZL'!-ENTAP. Y
JtRESS GA'LLERY
PRIME MINISTER: Welcome " ho1me, Sir Robert, and we congratulate
you on yi instcllat icn in the Order of the
Thistle. NowV tolme little mor-e rmundane
things Eir. You spoke in fairly general
t ermns yeisterday,, Could you give us something
more specific on your talks with Mr, MacMillan
and Pr-esideat Konnedy?
I was wiordering what procedutre would suit
you. ha T had in mind was that I might
perchaps maku some observations of my ov. fl on
some of' these iia tes, a nd then the-ire will ' be
questions th. at some or you would li; ke to put
and it iJs a_, vvayn concoivabDie, of course,
that I mig-ht be able to anerwer some of them.
Bat, I think it might be helpful, if I sai~ d
somaething in a gene-1-1 wo-y, It has u. 1.2 been
pretty hurried, because I had a totlal of
twelve days in London, somewhatineutd
by certain domestic events not on. m. Iy part,
but on the part of other people three
da~ ys in Scctland., 1 had a day in Ottawa Ond.
wodays in Wa-shington, with 1beforeth,
the better part the day i', n Virginia at
Charlottes. 111c. 1 thin" K, howiever, that the
main mn-tters tha-t I had discussions about can
be put faIrly briefly0 My rpa-in talks in the
United Kingdorm wore with the Prime Ministev.
Mr0Ivi( amilln,-n, viith the Lcrd Hovne, with
Mr,~ Sandys a-, nd wihMr. Butler. The
prcincip~ ral things tha,, 7t I discusoed with theohadf
rela,-tio-. n ill ' South-East Isiza, in
/ jarticular 11el aysia a-nd the developments of
that new Federation. I also had somne ta-lks
albout Southern Rhodesia, about which there
are some very Jl3. pu. tant discussicns taking
pLace, nnd about the possibility of a,
/ nuclear test ban, which is now. the su-bject of
discus~ ricno in Mloscowv wit-h Lor-d. Hailshrem
rc-aTrescntin37 the United Kin. ridcrn, anid
Mr. œ lerell I. arrirman reoro sent ing the
Pre-sidjLnt of the United States. 1 might
-; c'rb-) aTs take i~ n some crdei' 0 / 2 
2
p 1 M
( Continue-d) Gs aQsa "'-Ila i s c orioorn d 9 thi ide : Sb~
actively supported byv the Unite d Y-Jradom. suiiported by us
as a mnatter of prinipie quito. clearly, and s~ pre. s
the United Stat_-s as C matter of principle; the one
reservation being byte Uandt ed States to the efc
that any dfefeneiie arrangemaent in reLation to M111alaysia
seems to the United E! taUtes to b~ e essential~ ly a Ccmimonw, ealtb.
matter at this stage,
. L was very relieved to find that an ' agreement was
made when I was on my way ho-me, between the Tuiku' and
Mr. Lea Kuan Ye;. r tho Vrinm ister-of Singapore, about
the financiLal aispects ofC th-~ e Fede;. ration, becauise as no
dcubt it is10 well. 1 kno~ vn th.-at one of ' the aldvantages from
the point'E of view -t S~ ingalpore in bcorm-ng an
1nt~ nw eeaio stat, finzancially, spea1ki-ng in
teras of tanriff po" lic( y and so on, ther: e ohould " be in the
sho~ rt run, at any -rate, if, the no-t sco long~ 1411, Bome
form of customs union 1be-twee-n the various minemrbers of the
Fecleratior., 1At one stagoe, it lirc-K ed as if this might
give riscP to great difficty bio these dfi~ te
have apparently now been reso~ lved1 so -that with the
exoe:, cp t ion of Brunei, the cons-tituents in the Fedo.-ation
haitve no w come tegether nand have ma7de an agreent, Th I s;
I thjnn&gt; is of treniendcus impotnnce,
Vt ias tho-iught for oome t-Lrqo tha1, t thIe G 1 iont o
Indlonesia, decicded not to uursue wha), t I lbelieve is called
the polifcy cf " confrontain! on, this matter in other
~~ orrs a-4. li L atitude of criticisim1 and even of
hostJ. 1!_ t,-and there/ rertto no-ticoe tha-t Dr. Socks ma
has apparently Peneied IIs 1'--ubli*_ c crituicmor of the idea
-nisno wv -romoting the idao" e.-dtrinto and
pb. oieall of which coaunds a lit.' tle odd, whon onie
re~ sri~~ that the publio statements that have been made
of, lante aotWest 1Iew &amp; Gineai have appeared to e -: Chib it
an inter4ion not to have a p-lebiscito oand. not Lto hcave0
-elf ina t iod Tbi,. J i all very odd, We would nsed
to have a god1 d eal of clarifica: tion on it, I ' think.
any eventL-, the po~ ieachievement in relatont
1a-asay ins Ict hink, vCJ'yimpotant S3 far as Southern
Rhodesia is concerned, wephps iLn " ustralia ha--e not'
f olojwed thicE mritter asclosely as 1,, e MigSht ha-ve.
Southern Rhodesia has been, as a self-overni-ng colon~ y,
asscociated in a cens-e with the Commonwealth for a very
lonc time. i first m'-Iifestecl mylself In a P Z 4roje
Ministers' Conference vwhon L. vasn' a Prime Minister,
' but was actinlT s dcej egate for Mr. Lyons, and that ViOS
0 0 C .1. 
( Cent inu~ e c) bpolr in 1-935, Two yefrrs r'rtht SiGo'eyIu; n
as, the Primp, . nister ofc uhrfiRoeiahdbe
-oreent, Ther'o is rne disprositicn, 1 tIiq
Southern Rhodesc~ ia, . Li some r~ cctherep to ' believe
that that means that ISuuthern Rhod-esi1a has been a
member of" the Commrronwealth for the . wh~ ole of th-at period
o-f t i. 2Ihis of course is not right. In effect : f-r-stof
all, through Si-Gcodfrey Huggins, and at er on
th-rough ' S ir 1Rocy We Ie nsk y. f ir st ESo u th ern P hcd e s ia and
then -the Federationr have b-een present at PrPime Ministers?
mecetings in effect as observers svery welcome
cb e, ves e a -L part*'-icul2 ar t here is a vry old
assoc" iation between Great B-iitain and 0outhern Rhodesia
and, wi* 6h-t'he FBeo'o,_ poan p opjulat icn in Southoryn Rho e sia~,
But the f. act is tha t at pre sen~ t; SOuthorn Rhodlesia,
n~ rin~ the final detc-tainatitun of the Federation, ics
not a member of the C n eat it is only as an
4ndezendent nation that-a nationi co(). n bea a member of the
Cocamm con w e l1th p a ndc thcrPe f rre aft c-r i. nd e: erntIe n c c e
q11e-_: tJorL vi. ll arise as to. w hethcr Scutheri, Rhodes*!. abecomes
a member of the Cormoneal1th or not and that
wlof course, d~ ep,-end primarily on teveso h
FPrie Ministevs in the C.. ommnwealth as it now stands
and we aire now quiJte a nukmerous I dcn't cz
that * bh-, is very C learJzy u'ndc_,' strocd. Certain
conversations, I had with repCres-, entatViveS of Southern
!' hod! esia atorsuggoestoe&amp;" thot _ J was not, but the
efecuf itall is thllat if SouthDer.-PRhodesia, " te
, t in being dis olved, is toc be-ome a memibe:-r of thae
Cora~ onwalth, then there will need to be some sa tJi rjf" yig. 0
o~ the minds of existing CL: -: IoncAlth oit rioS a to
, the nraturel of the fronchjme in Southern 11hodesia and the)
proo] pectq that within a measurable time there will * bc
in efec a mjorty in the Legislative ' ssemnbly, or
whatever it may be calledl, ro-presenting the indigenous
nha! bit.-nts-.,, Of course9 this. is a problemn which gives
ri~ se -to a good d eal of emtion as well as a grcoc deal
of rational1 arg1unent,, All I neccd sa,. y is thlat Mr. Butler,
who has boo-n s--oeiti" Ll chairgcd waiih the negotiations,
has made proposals, the nature of which i am no at
liber-ty to islos bu~ t which see-m1 toL.; m c to be
re a onable ipro') os-ls and a substantial step in the
ultimate dirctir'n, How fo"-r that ha s bcen accepta-cle1
I donlt know;,, Something may have ha) Tened on my way
home. that I cn not awiare cof. But frcm the pocint of
view of the Ceinmoneltn it. e it is, 9 T think /, 1 
on ueM important that ESoutflorn . hdca should,_ be a ~ ro'Arof
It has in hietefc, saitc wi. th the Cc11orwon~ eoltU.
w~ hich one would: be extrcmely sorr-y to lose Linf frcm-the
-OJint of Southe-Iiho õ -esia itselfteeSmstmeo
be gre-nt i-iportrnces in the relationship tha't she
achieves with the Cnmlmor-i,* ealth. Her lair.' est cmDort
industry, ft. r example 9 is tobaccoi which -t p) rese: nt
enjoys Comzmonweilth refcrencas, and I can' t see mlch
avtage to Southern 11hodesia in being outsicdle the
Comriinne 1lh. IT do() n ' t d ct ectl a ny grroa t CLesoi re( onr th e
mart of their rejpresentat* ives to join up) with the Union
of So uth AIiivca noi can I see any a~ tva. n1Ua7gcb fo~ r them
in being an entirely so--arate, inCde-ondent nati-on,
unassociated wiith tU1A Unioni o.-n the South, unass-ciatead
with the Ccrriinwelth inf genieral. In othor words, this
is the crucial period, I think, in the history of
Souterr Phdesa., It hns been attrcigaretea
of cttent1io: n in Lcndon9 very natujrally, andfl Mr. Butler
is very seric-usly de-vc-tAng groat talents to this
The other mnatter tha cameo undecr disclussiun thereY
wns the I.-roblei of the test ba--n. Now, the Prime Minister
of G-relst Britain and the P--reside-nt cf the Uni-ted States
and, for that matter, my cown cGavernnment, attach
importance to-securing a test ba-rinoa a fir. st practical
measure in a pro) gra. mmie of dis.-rmament,. Mruch more
pr. actical than so: me other mattecrs that have been raised,
because a-suxming god i and aosumJ. ng a w,, illin-nass to
expse otivities to acereasonable insp-ection,' there
would, not seem to be iJnsup ezrble Cliff2. cul1tes a bout an
internationa-l agreement tha-t furthei? te sts will osase,
I don't , want to-Tbcin to o ffee rjy views , as to whvkat the
French attitude to this rna-. ter might be because General
DU GaCulle ha,. s !? Ahor taken a line o-f his own, ' but I
thinkr-thnt overf;. ojy will Qgro that in the first
~. ntancagreemrn etenhe SoviA Union anad Great
Dritain and the United Stnte s of .! Zparfca on thi'e banning
offurther nuclear testswudbamtero et
encouragement to the world and1 a vary ,,-owerful step in
the direction of reducin-: ccension and reducingcomptiton0I
don't undertake to. say what is going to
hapr-. on to, the bulk o~ f these talks, buvt I am bound to
say ' that bcth in DL-. nd1on andf Wa-shington, I felt there
was an ntmo--s-ahere, no-t of Jespir on this mnatter, but
what I will call rotrin :,~ timicm. Anda: one of the
thin, 7-that ima,, y vepy w,, ell af-Zfect this io, that there is 
P. M.
( Continued). undoubtedly a very deep gulf between Chinese Communists
and the Ccraimnist of the Soviet Union. This is not
a mere matter of words; as we all know from reading
the news from day to day there are very big differences.
I think myself that the Soviet Union-it seems odd when
one looks back a few years the Soviet Union feels that
the aggressive quality of Chinese Communism is something
that is to be resisted. The Soviet Union itself has
been, I think, rather more willing to negotiate than
it was in the past and I attach great importance in
this connection to the remarkable perfrmnance of
President Kennedy over the Cuba matter a performance
which I think has undoubtedly given a check to
agressiveness on the part of the Soviet Union and
produced a state of mind in which we may well hope to
have agreement on such matters as the test ban. And
that attitude on the part of the Soviet Union, of course,
can very well be affected by this increasing friction
between the Soviet Union and Communist China a certain
feeling of apprehension about the large Communist
neighbour. And that is why this seems to be tne right
time for the Western powers to pursue their negotiations
with Mr. Khrushchev and to pursue them in the atmosphere
that an agreement is possible on this and perhaps other
matters, yrovided there is a realistic state of mind and
provided, of course, that there is some goodwill and a
desire for peace. The President of the United States
and the Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk, both, if I may say
so, seem to me tc have grown in authority in the handling
of the international affairs.
I know one reads occasionally about internal politics
in the United States. I don't profess to understand
them very clearly.. There is always some friction,
Well, we are not unfamiliar with that in our own
country. But these two-very important for us and for
the world seem to me, in the handling of the
international matters, to have acquired increasing
authority. It has been said in various quarters that
there are reasons for dispute or matters for dispute
between Mr. Macmillan and President Kennedy over some
of the NATO problems. I think it proper to say that I
found on both sides a very healthy personal friendly
relationship between them. I think that it is quite
clear that Mr. Macmillan and President Kennedy are in
constant communication, always meet as friends,
always discuss things with frankness and that any / 6 
P. M. sugerest~ on-that the,-re i~ s some division betw-, een thiem-* tia-
( Contd0might be of JInmense im-rortarnce O', ihit to be rjc~ ted. T
donit believe -the3re will be with' th-e agreement ofeiL
of thlemi0 Thaey both wesnt to continue their close
a ssociation, So th,. at sumi1ng it all'I ol syta. m
general imnprE ssion is on'Ce of some easing in . Soviet 7nionidestern
tension, particularly since Cuba: some stimulus
tthtincreasing understuandin-arising from the differences"
the Sino-Russion differences and that as betLween theo United
StI.-ates alnd th-e United KS~ ngdoin th-. e relItions are very good,
very hecalthy, vary, constr1' uctive-and th-at wheon theoy say., as
they did ' Dft-re their last meecti-* ng th-at nuaibe-r one is the:-
test ban,. they mecan it:. and they both mean t,, o do thieir bes~ t
to achlieve i'tt,
Ipa Id a hasty visit -to Ottawa. I wanted to see Mr,
Pearson is (-an old f: i'iend of mine, He asa bit'. ou-t of
aCtion. because he had had a sJlighat throat operau'ion. So I
went out to h-is country nouse and ve ha-d a couple of h1-ours
together. has sonie probloms ofIL curse. Yo-will1 be
astonished whien I tell you thot they cief] 7'. y rolate tIo thle
3ud ge t, Not 3altogethaer about the sutstance of the10 Budget,
but to some extent about hoic g it camne to be prepared.
Whethaer thaat is going to bo trouble thIa t coc. n t inue7s 92L
wouldnTt like to ! udge. The11, Libcral Governme-nt there
remains in office ith thia sujppaert of a couple off mincrity
0zroupsc~ nu as th-e mainority groups, aSfrasIcnjde
hia-ve both lost some seats at the lasL e-lection0 it may be
thiough-t that there will be a considerable anti -diS sol'ut-on
par-ty in thieir ranks. However, thnat is not any business.
We. ll,-now would anybody like to probe ine a l-ttle
on theaco tb1ingsZk
Q U EST 1 CIh R Sir, ycu ntioncd thei auestienl of a Budget a few
minutes agc. Hero in Australia, Mr. I. IEiwen has said he wants
bolder econoixc ro-licios for, eXpanzsion. Mr, Bolt hsacid
wansrt a 13udgot bansed con groi-th and prosperity0 Would you
lik.. -to give your views on it?
F'JI0 You find a material1 difference between tiaose. doc you?
Q-Not necessarily.
P. M. 1110i l I will, kn2ow miore abcit. tha)-t hen the Budget)-' comres out,,
Let; 1: 0 rennind you thaizt whe-n thie Dadget is produccd. it w1ill
he the 25ad. get-of thie Gove.-rmnt and therefore of everybody
in it,
Q ~ Could Mr(, Prinic Minister, gi,: e u~ s thei tieoA-cqbl*' e Of the
Budget preparations'?
W start ab'out the end of this weekc, I thi nk, dontt i,+ e?
We hnave sonie inter-views with thLose outside bodic.. in the
next three day 0
That is before theic Cabine'. iotings?
P. W4. Yes. ~ ewill. h-ave theSO fi rst, and theon we. will1 got into
the Biudget discussions, 1 3-oealIly ought to know. Somebody
may knew0
1MR. FTO0LT~ Tuesday afternoon,,
I1) 0Wel there you aio, ooo6 0/ o7 
7-
Sir, 2 there seem~ s to be somne ba slc ccrf ic U bat-. ! ecn Mr,
McEwen's views as exunessd at Orange recen2tly and It-hce
views and po-Licies ofL thae Governmnent,,
I-think it is ver,-y unkind of you as soon as I have returned
and had a refreshing sleep to want me to go and re-ad all the
newspaper reports of what11 somebody has said and thaen begin
to sit in judgmient on them. You have to remember , bouat the
Ca bint that we are a comoosite o ; ome it is tu
It worko very satisfCactorily we think, and Ihas for a long
time and this idea that there are two views is one th1-at I
reject. When thec Budget iJS produced ilet me repeat this
will the Budget of-1 the-Govern,-ment0 I directed a lot
of time and energ2y Some tim~ e eaio1L'er to exrplaining that it
waslilt Yr. Holu-' s Butdget that it'u was mine Lind -that it wa~ s
thei Bud get o-f everybcily celseo wacas in the-. Cabir Ct,
Ministers are human beings; he all L ive different views.
Thaey w Il" l com: along and we will stGart off iwithn te(, n
dlifferent views aboutC any partioular itcir o: tlhe. Budget,
We w. 1ll end up 1-with. one and that will be tLhe view of the
Gover-nmont,
Siir, on that could yvou say waetoihcr or not you think the
Budget shoul1d be more cixlpanasionary thiLJs time?
P M. I have no o-pinion en it at al'! 2. have just -ecoived on my
table a val. uable imss of do--umje. ts f-,, ro Vae Treasurer whlinh
wI enable mo to study theo facts and T have an old-fa shionedl
preojud. J. co in fEavour of understanding iacts beoroe I offer
opinions,
QO Do you thinkn-1 thU'at Mr. Khx'usiichev will _-can inore towards
President Kennedy now that h-o is having so m~ quchL trouble tLa
Cormunist 01rina? That thero miglbt be a chan-ce of closer
t ies there?
IK; MO % My owii view, and 1, only my own view. is thact th!-is friction
witha ConiuniS. t China, this c-rowing gll I h1ave hear. d that
word used -betwv5eer. them will +. end to give Mr. Khrushchav a
mori. e amen,) abl-at'titLude out it that -way -in his
: colaticns wihthe dest. In other,--. woirds i f he has w hat he
regards a-s rival-Is and potential oppononts on one f lank, he
may be very uch more disposod tCo think tat a polily of
live and let liv wihtUreto he world may suit hr
Arid indeed a &gt; Lnt of hiis oim people m'ay increas. I~ rgly thninkl
Doyuhnk tha Li policy hLas beean well discussed in
Commni~ st Ci' ne se c . cl es 17that tl-, ey are worried about this
possibIlity thz-t he l1io0at: 2oro towar.,. ds Kas tea-n
pinciplos?
P i11. Well, 9 I can't speak for the Chinese. I don -t know, Nor
indeed cEan 1 speak', for Mr,, Khnrishcheov, My own view is that
thi. differences between wqhqt cal) Il for th1-is purpose the
iRussi'ans and tlie Chi-nese in the Cormunist world is a dfeec
which does no hLarm wvith rolations with the Wstern world,
but may tend ultimatlely to improve thaeme1 At any rate to
relax them, 2 to take somle of-1 th-e tension out of the matter,,
si 9 just coming back1 to tho local scene again. T he re has3
been ouite a lot of discussiLon as to wheither there w,, ill be
a redistribution this year and pcirICaps an a2erly election.
o v o o e / 8 
8
P. M~ Tiel, as soon s I kniow the &amp;:. nz-, rer to tha t quest4on~ Iwl
announce it.
Q. ~ Sir Robert. can you answer it to this extent have you
any timetable of when you willl discuss redistribution with
Mr. McEwon?
P. M. No, but it will have to be soon,
Sir Robert did you ask President Kennedy about a visit
by{ hima to Au1straiia daring taie talks withi him this time?
P4M% 1 Ve had a general discussion about that matter, but 1 am not
in a position at pr~ esent to say anything,
Sir Robert.. i~ n vr: oew, of your imfpr s ; ion t~ lnt the tronsion is
easing, does that rake any d: Lffoei. roco to youri Governirint's
atLitude to d., efence in vie-! of the statemen-t you made?
No. Look, a defence prograrmm e is not soilething that can
fluctuate froma day to day according to wlaetfter the weather
signals are bOetter or worse, You Lave take a muc,!, l longer
view than that.
But -the sense of urgency is growing?
P. M4. I still bave a considerable sense of urgency about the whole
problem, yes,
Q. ~ There has been -a lot of speculation, Sir Robe-rt while you
were overseas about the prospect of an early Federal
election. iDo you have anything to say oni ti'sT
P. M, 11o, would yoxu o:* iPcct me to? I wouald havo -to abandon 7:, 11
claims to Laving any knowledge of political tactics wouldn't
17 _ f Ista--tcd to answer that k-ind of questin. Wnni
happens you will kniow0
Q. Sir Poberot there(_ La,. s also boen while you were away
a 7ot-,. cL discussion about the namne TrSy lt" h erie any
chanrce that :, ru may review the Gabinet' decis-1on and chango
that rnane?
P. M. Well, I would h.-ve to find out from my colleague the
Treasurer if heL, 0, We had a discufs-sion j11 the ~ bto
ttiis matter an. d caneii out with. cu G i I notice a
considerpable amount of specull-tiC'f as to who di~ d it and
iiho made the casting vote. I road all this with great
interost, My: favourite form of f-ict-ion,
Wou: Ld you allow a -free; vote of theo Parliament on it?
P0I will say nothing about that at tho present time0
Q. Do you like the nameio " royal" Sir?
P. M. Yes.
Q. Is it your name, Sir?.
P. M. No, My name -is Menzies. As a mpatter of fact, tho0 most
powe r ful argumelnt in the worl d was unt~ il it was answere . d
that the name ought t'Vo be " pound". I was most attracted by
the idea myself call it a new pound, just as the French
0,06000~/ 9 
IC;
I~ 7Zt 7 I
' I -tY 4 I,
us; 6 4U &amp; isi Cy~
I-itJ' 1 ' K
It' if
I. I a
3 '' 1 r A Vt
J. ' I ' f N ItT.
' XI,
r ' a f
I j
a '' a
a i A
I
1 C. * j A-'
.~. AI t .1.
xi. 
9
P 0M.
Cont d)
P oMo
P. M. o
P. HM. called it a new franc. The technical answers to that were
tremendously powerful. All right in the case of France;
you move a decimal point two to the left because you
already had a decimal system, so the new franc was got not
by altering the system but by an alteration of the decimal
point, But a new pound based on the decimal currency,
operating what for two years, ide by side with an old
pound ( non-decimal), and in fact at twice the value would
produce so our experts advised us, and I accept it, the
most in olerable confusion, because it will take a long time
to change over the accounting machines, tne cash registers,
all this kind of thing, and the confusion between a pound of
one breed and a pound of another, one being decimal and the
other being non-decimal, was too much to contemplate. So
I myself, if you are interested, withdrew my advocacy for the
use of the word " pound" which would have otherwise suited
me, my personal view, very woll,
Sir, are you worried about trends in overseas investment in
Australia? I am not. No, I road the other day a statement made by Mr
Holt, the Treasurer, on this mratter, answering something that
had beon said by some Opposition spokesman, and if I may say
so, I thought it completely accurate, This doesntt mean that
we deny the possibility of problems in the future, but it
does mean that looking at the matter now, , w see advantages
which outweigh the disadvantages in the flow of capital into
this country, And we would be pretty sorry for ourselves if
it stopped tomorrow. There are two ways of stopping it
deado One is to prohibit it by scme means or other, and the
other is to attach such rigid conditions to it a: 3 to
discourage it, and capital being a shy bird it very easily
fls awayo We as a nation have no reason o complain if we
receive a tremendous inflow of capital, Our development in
Australia would have been less if we hadn't received this
confidence and practicable working investment You have
always to keep two things in mind. One is that capital
which merely comes in to buy something out that is one
kind of thing, That is the kind of thing we scrutinise
very carofully, But capital. private capital . rhich comes
in to create an industry to develop some product in
Australia, to increase employment in Australia, this is
of tremendous value to us, In past elections I have had a
certain amount of fun addressing meetings at say, Ford in
Geelong, and inviting the Labour voters standing in front
of me to consider whether they are opposed to capital
coming into Australia from overseas. In other words, whether
they are opposed to the jobs they nave,
Did you encounter Hioffr-on in his porogrinations in
search of capital?
I didn't see him with the eye, but hear rumours of him with
the earo I didn't actually see him. Wait a moment, I am
wrong. I think I said good-day to him in London at the
Reception. I apologise
Has he achieved anything of any great moment at all?
I couldn't tell you that, All I know is that the Commonwealth
representatives around the world have been doing
their best and devoting a considerable amount of time to
helping these State roprosentatives, I heard very good
reports in America of what Mr,, 3rcnd had been doing. ® o / i'O 
10
Q. Sir Robert is it embarrassing for the Corr onwealth
representatives to have these State Premiers and officers
moving around the world in apparent conflict?
P. M. Well, you see, that is a loaded question " in apparent
conflicto" I think their experience is that when State
representatives are going around the world their relations
with the Commonwealth representatives are the most
harmonious in the world. It is only up here that we get
differences,
QO Sir Robert we are associated with the UK,/ Malayan defence
agreement through an unpublished exchange of letters. Can
you give us some indication of what type of conmitment in
Malaysia is contemplated?
PoM, No I can't because we have none at present. This is all a
matter that has to be discussed. You say that we are
associated, We are not. Great Britain has a defence
agreement with Malaya and has indicated her willingness to
extend it to Malaysia, that is to say when Malaysia comes
into existence. It will not be very shortly,, Our relations
with Malaya on the defence side have been indirect7 through
the Commonwealth Brigade the reserve, We have not,
ourselves, had direct obligations to Malaya in that field,
but we have come in on the side so to speak of Great
Britain, Whether we should now make a defence agreement
with Malaysia a direct defence agreement in which
obligations are accepted is a matter which has yet to
be discussed I had some discussion about it in London,
That is true, But as a Cabinet matter, this has yet to
be discussed because up to now, Malaysia has been a concept
and not a facto Now that Malaysia becomes a fact, the
time arises when we have to determine what we are prepared
to do in that field and there are many aspects that have
to be considered
Qo Will it be in the near future, Sir, that discussion?
P. M. I don't know. I daresay we will be concentrating our minds
on the Budget in the next week. Without undue delay.
Q. I am thinking, Sir, in relation to defence ' discussions
that have been going on for some time at home here.
P. Mo What defence?
Qo Our own. defence policy. Would it be related to that?
PM. Well, look, you are asking me to anticipate a problem,
Suppose the Commonwealth Governmont said, " Well, we are
prepared to make some agreement with Malaysia," Then-. the
next question would be " To what extent, in what form,
through what arms." The next question would be Are
they to be additional to what we already have or are they
to represent a different disposition of the forces that
we now have or will have under our programme?" These
problems are not to be disposed of by a sweeping sentence,
I assure you,
Qo Did you have any discussions with President Kennedy on
defence and trade that you can tell us about? 0 a 0 a 0 0/ 1 1 
11
P. M. No I did not have any discussions on trade, My colleagu.
had been there only a week or two before. He had had very
full discussions and had had some very useful ones in all
places and I didn't see any reason to duplicate them.
Q, Did you discuss the question of the position of Australian
New Guinea either with Kennedy or the U. oN administration?
P. Mo Well, I think that apart from reiterating the proposition
two propositions we didn't have any, The two propositions
were first, to repeat what I had said in the House
that the defence of Australian New Guinea and Papua was
regarded by us in exactly the sam way as the defence of
our mainland and that any overt attack on it would be
resisted in the same way; I repeated that, That is well
understood, In the second place oi course, it is well
understcod and agreed that should such an event occur,
ANZUS would operate and we would have the assistance cf
the United States of America, These , re two things....
there is nothing new about them, I have said them time
after time. They are worth repeating so that there will
be no room for error in any other country,
Q Si. r Robert, proposals have been reported for the Western
air defence of India Will Australia be associated with
mnerica and Britain in this regard?
PM. I woul. dn't say anything about that at the present timeo
Certainly we have no obligation to do so. As to what
discussions may have occurred as the result of some of
these investigation teams I am not up to datoo You may
take it that we have entered into no new obligation in
that fieldo
Qo While you wero in London did you discuss the possibility
of any future Royal Visits perhaps Princess Margaret?
P. M. No, I didn't have a discussion about that, No, I think
I will say that this has got nothi: ng to do with Princess
Mar garet
q, I was going to ask about the Queen Mothero.. o.
P. M. Yes, I know you wore. Well, there is nothing I can say
about that at present.
Qo Sir Robert, in your discussions with the loaders of the
world as Prime Minister of Australia, how did they feel there
about Australia? What do they look on Australia as being?
Why I said that question, I will explain it Sir. We have
so many business leaders that como back and they seem to be
preoccupied by the thought that Australia has to have more
money to go in advance Now, we know full and well that
we are pretty well set up in Australia. Is this a question
largely thought of overseas?
FoMO I don't know what you mean by " pretty well set up".
Q. We have a country here which is going ahead by leaps and
bounds. We have so much to offer in Australia. Does it
look to these world leaders the men with whom you have
discussed and talked to, that we will have to have all
overseas capital to go ahead with our plans in the future
or do they look on Australia as a land of opportunity or
look on it as a land where things are just a * ooo/ 12 
12.
PMo I see, It would be a mistake to think that the relationship
between us is that we are begging for help, so to speak,
because we are noto They look on us as a strong country,
as a friendly country. They look on us as a growing
country. They think, particularly in their business fields
that this is a land of opportunity and they are much more
affected by the attraction that they feel towards the
Australian opportunity than they are to any argumentative
view that may be put, urging them or begging them or
something of that kind. That is not our position, We
are not regarded, in other words, as a sort of poor relation.
On the contrary, we are looked upon both in the United States
and in the United Kingdom as a pretty good relation, a
relation that will someday be a rich relation, or as I
think as Compton McKenzie said, a rich relative,
Q. Did President Kennedy ask us to assume any extra defence
obligations in this part of the world?
P. M. No. I told President Kennedy about our recent expansion
of the defence programme and the contingent addition to
that which would arise on a Canberra replacement on which
there is an evaluation team at this moment. I think they
have reached America. I told him all about that. He was
extremely interested in it but not any more than that,
Q, Sir Robert, is there any possibility of Australia being
asked to conduct a fact-finding mission to Southern
Rhodesia?
P. M. I think perhaps I would prefer to answer that by saying
that there is no possibility that we will conduct one,
I think I am right in saying that almost every Commonwealth
country has been asked by the Government of Southern
Rhodesia to send somebody, but that is not a proposal that
attracts me at all. We are not settling the problem of
Southern Rhodesia We have got enough of our own, We are
not going to be the people who have to advise as to who
ought to have a vote in Southern Rhodesia. I have been
concerned in this matter chiefly from a constitutional
point of view as it affects the Commonwealth and quite
frankly, I donTt want to see Southern Rhodesia out of
the Commonwealth. They are one of our old friends, o But
whether they are in the Cononwealth or not will depend,
not upon us, our view, so much as what happens over the
next few weeks in relation to their discussions with
Mr. Butler and to their own decisions as to what, if
anything, they are going to do about the franchise,
But we have no abmitions to be busybodies, you know,
Quite enough busybodies in the world without us joining
their ranks, 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 51/ 1961
INDUSTRY COINSULTAT IONS
Statement by thte Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Monzies and a group
of Cabinet Ministers today met representatives o1 Australian
manufacturing, commercial, banking and primary producerst
organisations to hear their views on trends in the domestic
economy and to obtain a first-hand account of current and
prospective developments in various sectors of the economy.
This meeting was the fourth in a series of discussions with
industry leaders over the past eighteen months.
The industry representatives present wore
Mr. T. M. Ramsay, President, Associated Chambers of Manufactures
of Australia.
Mr. L. F. Atkinson, President Associated Chambers of Commerce
in Australia
Mr. Theo Kelly, President, Australian Council of Retailers
Mr. R. J. Abercrombie, Chairmasn .. c iAa utisotrna. lian Bankers'
Mr. R. J. McAuley, representing the National Farmers'
Union of ALustralia.
Mr. T. L. Bull, President, Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers'
Federation.
Mr. L. Heaslip, President, Australian Wool and Meat Producers'
Fede ration.
Mr. A. A. Dawson, Chief Executive Officer, Australian Primary
Producers' Federation.
Mr. AoV. Jennings, Past President, Master Builders'
Federation of Australia.
Mr. W. D. Ferguson, President, I nFduesdterriaels Chamber of Automotive
The Australian Council of Trade Unions was not able
to be represented but, with the Government's concurrence, it
arranged to submit to the Prime Minister a rritten statement
of its views for consideration by the Government.
After the meeting the Prime Minister said that
Ministers had been most anxious to have the up-to-date views
of these national organisations before they took up consideration
of the 1963/ 61+ Budget. He added that the talks had been
valuable and would assist Ministers in their Budget deliberations.
Tomorrow morning, Ministers will meet representatives
of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the
Ecport Development Council.
CANBERRA, July, 1963. 



6 3/ VO6
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 5+ i6
PRINCESS ALEXANDRA'S WEDDING GIFT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. SIr Robert
Menzies-
I have today received the following letter
from P~ rincess Alexandra, acknowledging the wedding gift
of the Australian Government and people to the Princess
and her husband, the Honourable Angus Ogilvy
H Thatched House Lodge,
Richmond Park,
Surr-ey.
July 1st, 1963.
My Dear Prime Minister,
We are both overwhelmed by the magnificent
wedding present that you, the Members of the
Government and the people of Australia have
given us. I am deeply touched that you should
have thought of us in this most generous way,
and I want you all to know what immense
pleasure your gift has brought us.
These beautiful candlesticks, made of
Australian silver, will always be one of our
most treasured possessions, and a wonderful
reminder of your great kindness,
Please will you express to everyone
who joined in this present our heartfelt
thanks and all our good wishes?
Yours very sincerely,
Alexandra,
CANBERRA, 17th July 1963. 



VCSD MOTOR CQPAN! DINIIR HI13W LT
ROML CLBMIR CAfLNM
OF 1" M JULY, 1963
fm"~ th rm Nnna the KA m. a ir Ehr ~ se
NAa~ tnb m nafa WtimIQUgkt bhe
Von ran as a inttof facbt, torn between tkme mtios
am Is that I Amv to oat ba&amp; to see that my Wcllea, the
KIMite for the Interior doesn't got awy with mord" da the
Balgat &amp; iseassiow., The seesad Is that I-m you knowe1W
-m* I Wa a " eet aftleetion and still havj"
God for Cbarli* Nmdth and a 7eat afftetion fomy trieo" on
the leoto and ur wife is aw. te ot~ imeastle drivers of a
F&amp; au espa. V. 1, thatos eli. an that sift, Oa t" e ether hrand
Newr Ford 11 owne opt mwInto a lot of ta'mhLe, at the ~ tm
LSaZi* v i&amp; Ottawa beftame 0 0 0 1 ma there and my wife was
there Mnd somebodyr arnad. that I was to eat with his -Probably
Cberlie, if I remesbae. Bonnie Prinoe Charlie. Ar to out a
1469 story sb0st, we boW so Interested, had cur elbows on
the table took a little touhb of this. or tkat as it arrived you
se aM at It e'tlok In the -4--in 1 iet badt into sm~ dU
at 4Z Chqtomx; t Lo~ e ad re took me three am t
MRsO VWm. ( Lou trr
Bet I do want to % t al up ooth that~ e
followig Upes two ' PLe Who e ommspiemsly UIdentip
themmevex$ while tc; heae been he" e, with ti m otry, TA
will bera lot of argamt and of surse Cams" a iears a lot
mmt about the presmn of * vents hasm outslde invetse and
all this. We Umdestando ftt I belive that Dme of tm. greatest
thlmg that a Vm~ t or ams o eomin Into Atraliag is
to have people VWh 1. f m~ z M ~ eut7
New# ftas Prim Charmb beem th* greatest living
expers ca Australian Mos ftotball. ( ZeagTer) This ws a
wmefel thing to 60, exeept In Steq ( lAugter) I haven' t
really Frm" m YOU emubJeft to &amp; tsoovr whether you a" t
taken up In tim am way, hat I would strongly advise you, Kr.
Boothto devet. e fo the lonigwinter 01111SLUtS to a
Aftelilan rules; footb9l to ptœ n to kmivth things ta
; Zito tbo m. le un matas of mankind In Atrali-.-i's a
very great mistake totlkthat people In Autralia are
p aa1to about naklities. not. Te1* alng a pelling
ayand say a s ht 014 se so.. still W ll1 he# s
anet bad' sU they voe. me&amp; n er thber say, * 004 it's time for
a ehange amd they veto so ON[ t. This dom't oxaite U&amp; Asiam
In the Dubuic mind. The eau ole IL-out psalomm -b
it are pelitIsiae But mt do" eite Passion is what sIM
you are am In tUm fbotball or the qrinket, or that stirangp
thdUm-fVy I B&amp; what'S It eRaile rwgbF wale.
: Itbini, damslynt
mat quite seieey the gnat tigthat has been
dan ryour p-e2seoesags Is tht thq bhave. wt" avmial
short eiod of time, aiUired a 4irde of W; 0"~ il ed b-taestl
Wdek ha ae epese quite quinkly that tk. W are em ofus
Now this is the easemm If I aw ay so, of tm. Avtali~
a&amp; r-e~ e, We dal't staind off1 and miff and sneop. We reall
are not so diffiat as sam* in the world appear tothi* W 
we A* 10m to mt people and 6.. l with people who, iana
La ouw instimmtiw are mn the samem&amp;
VW. talk their anp the talk ours* They a" one
Of ns and you Souid nt have saedd oe-. half as wish as you
hewo if it we". nt for the tet that you hae been awof us,
and I au perfleetly ontaia that Wr. Bmth wiil be oe of us.
No's mae a Jelly Sod stawt anyhew, be's living ix Melboumme.
NDewwt e hae tor bae to Vak and all that, Wt
I md t t tllym me ttl* IEI" imt stery. MiPe
Imit, ftitbfml ftriumtaxy rop" ti te is or
teminister ft Transport up* Mr Oppern", spoke
to e cat ieasipsted t af tor a Pelimisa2. meetng Wt
Wotba ad said MTe Tioo-Prosident of Ferd in Cmad is
0Aa n sit a~ ad elm is owing out amd I m
thm p t CabervO and 1a an expansive aod, I sad%
Om11 I ea leyt mw kmm atto &amp; tahaadnd, I will
b4 1 il to give them a laebmp 1Uhave a few NMnsters,
and all this, 910100 Ad be said# '* 11,9 that's very als of
so 06th~ e wa ind ad promouttlym
mind, but ma of emv weto). d u. r~ f t vofte
WM dwritten It &amp; f Rthe diary.% r ~ Iñ in mo
ofte 6MAtbe thiap about hewing a pON private
" no~ l as tim ww and we had a povewful I s n
pz." In a little = and I vas the Mble, Los= nm of
Pwel~ m to dlimw the apeo L the lose amight. Tis
in 1 1o the al" a tax onm= e vebiles; It did all erts of
thiap, and I moedly hawdly sa, wasn't reeved wiLth Altimato
ro ? thU people, omiemod, and I went off hem the nt
Ii" whem I arrived in the offlee, the entire staff was lised
up, I theught the we". ping to Sly* so a pzesentatiom or
mq tey said* OWe've Just been arguing as to whaothem
Is~ ? mSgIhk to be givea the Viotwia Cro or etifLed as a
lmatio,.' I said, OThmse a" e bard wetds. flqlw TSad
' toay, you aro, having * be Ned Pe"' le for' lum* ob% gt
Ad I net Chrlie &amp; dth In the emrido. about a
bait an hWW berm* h e am darting late a Obhw. Peiwe
re-and I said * ood mninga~, Cbwli,' and he 94id,
Gedmermingm and I "" id ' stl frimds?* anid be said,
yea, kit of cause with a enutaia aot of diffloaltro.'
Tem ve veat toe lumo Rmbet Oppeima was there NOW I weS
delighteed wiLth the edef Ned4 ma jWoeat who, q M I maid to
him, 01 œ' ft low what to do* 5 I Vt uner the tabKe?'
so saidt * I liatmd In to you lost ight. I heard ewe7 wftd
0* f it. a I said, OAll, mind you, It's right, YOU kv'. Be
aiA,* ' ar with you. 10 kn a let of0 ol talce a sbout
VieW. Vm L Iping to bapm is ihii next t X-lwe mnths. If
you n ar ima a show of our dimensions YOU do't look at the
attwelve math&amp; y" u aW leokkag a em, ed of time.*
And kw said mash 16 O Vle0f. 1001 don't mi nd that in
Ya 400s., 1 thij* I Would hae dome zaetly the sme thing.'
And that lpv* me a pasifonate beliof in the statoumaaship of
tho Ford oom~ s tVat I hmm e ver yet lost, Sir. 



63/" 83
FOR PRESS:
EMBARGO HOLD FOR RELEASE AT 294-~ 5 Pams
SATURDAY, JULY P. M. No. 55/ 1963
ORD RIVER DAM
The following message from Her Majesty
The Queen was read by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon.
Sir Robert Menzies when he opened the Ora River
Diversion Dam at Kununurra, Western Australia, this
afternoon " I am so much interested to know
that you are opening the Ord River Diversion
Dam today. Both my husband and I have the
happiest memories of our visit to Kuriunurra
last March and we send our good wishes to
all assembled on this occasion, which is
so important for the future economy of
Western Australia and for that of the
Commonwealth of Australia. ELIZABETH R.
CANBERRA, 18th July, 1963, 



63/ W~ 7
FOR PRESS P. M. N~ o. 56/ 196-3
ORD RIVER DAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzios accompanied
by Dame Pattie Menzies, will fly from Canberra to the
Kimberleys tomorrow to open the diversion dam at Kuriunurra
on the Ord River. The Kuriunurra Dam is the first stage of the
Ord River Irrigation project a scheme which is aimed
eventually to develop large tracts of land in the far
north of Western Australia.
The Deputy Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen and three
other Federal Ministers, Sir William Spooner, Minister for
National Development Mr. P. Hasluck, Minister for Territories
and Senator S. D. Paltridge, Minister for Civil Aviation
will also fly with the Prime Minister from Canberra tomorrow,
to Kununur'ra,-whore they will be net by the Minister for
Mines and Northern Development in the Government of Western
Australia, Mr. Charles W. M. Court.
On Saturday morning the Prime Minister and the
other members of his Cabinet will visit farms established
on the irrigation area and will see the Kimberley Research
Station. In the afternoon, Sir Robert will unveil a plaque
to mark the Official Ooning of the diversion dam,
The Prime Minister, Dame Pattie and others in
the official party will fly back to Canberra on Sunday,
CANBERRA, 18th July, 1963. 
a
r 4 



OPENING OF TIM ORD RIVER DAM AT KUNUNURRA.
NORTHERN TERRI-TORY ON 20TH JULY, 1963
Speech by the Prime Mlinistrtht. Hn Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Acting Premier, Parliamentary Colleagues and Indies and
Gentlemen In mny family, we have a little family joke. I
have to open th-.. ngs occasionally and every now and then I get
up and make a pc.-. wcrful speech, of course, and forget to perform
the opening ceremony. So I am now under firm instructions by
my wife to get the job over and talk afterwards. So I declare
the Ord River Diversion Dam opon. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
So you see, ladies and gentlemen, from this moment,
nobody will be able to look at this Dam and say, " What a pity
it was never opened." Everything is now in order.
The next thing I want to say to you is that I have
received a message from Her Majesty The Queen who came up here
some little time ago on, I believo, a very hot day and enjoyed
it, and has frequently told rme since how much she enjoyed it.
This is the message from her, addressed to myself
" I am so much interested to k-now that
you are opening the Ord River
Diversion Dam today. Both my husband
and I havc the happiest memories of
our visit to Kununurra last March and
we send our good wishes to all
assembled on this occasion which is
so important for the future economy
of Western Australia and for that of
the Commonwealth of Australia,
( Signed) Elizabeth R. 11
It's a strange kind of world that we live in.
Today I am credibly informed is Saturday and on Saturday morning
a week ago, we carie pie-eyed out of an aircraft that had just
arrived from the Unitod States of America. And on Sunday
afternoon, I had a pross and television interview than which,
I warn you young fellows there, there can be nothing more
terrifying in the world. Then we sat down in the Cabinet room
and have been discussing financial matters and of course
whenever we discuss financial matters, West Australia is never
very far away. ( Laughter)
We stopped on Thursday exhausted by ill-doing, no
doubt, and declared a simple adjournment so that some of us
could come over here and then go back and resume our iniquitous
tasks, so far as I am concerned on Monday. I don't mind telling
you for a while I rather felt inclined to grumble and say, " Oh,
dear me, welve just gt back from a tiring journey. Fancy
having to go all that distance." What I said under my breath
about Dave Brand and Charlie Court was really not quite polite,
but we have arrived and weVebeen driving around or been driven
around this morning and I don't miind telling you, speaking of
myself and I know even rjore so for m,. y wife, there's no weariness
left in us. This is the most exciting place in Australia at
this moment. ( Applause) oe. ./ 2 
2-
For years and years what, seventeen years, I thinkyou've
had this experimental station, a combination of the
talents of your own officers and those of the C. S. I. R. 0. it
couldn't have been very easy for men of learning and qualifications
to come and, as they might think, lose themselves in what
was comparatively a desert, rune of the amenities of life,
isolated, sustained only by their tremendous skill and their
burning enthusiasm. You know, all round the world, there is a
disposition to think of the Australian as a rather cynical
fellow you kno~ w, agin everybody, agin everything. Well,
true enough in politics of eourse, temporarily. ( Laughter)
But whenever I go to where things are being done in Australia,
I am reminded that this country can produce more concentrated
enthusiasm and skill and devotion to the appropriate task than
any other country that I know, and I want to make my bow in the
direction of those people who started the experimental station
and who did work, without which we wouldn't be here today and
there would be no Ord Scheme at all,
The application of science, combined with enthusiasm,
based upon caref'ul research work we have today a dermonstration
of one stage of what can be done when those things come together.
It's been a very great privilege, I think, for the Commonwealth
and in particular my own Government, to be associated with this
work, but I don't hesitate to say that the work could not have
been done except for enthusiasts far far mmovod from the Cabinet
room at Canberra. The work has been done by your people and with
immense skill, The other day I was at Washington and then two days
before that or three days before that I was at Monticello,
tho home of the great Thomas Jefferson, and I there made a speech.
I'm not going to repeat it to you, so be at ease on that point.'
But one remark I venture to rop eat today. When the United States
of America was established and, when in the early part of the
nineteenth century, Thomas Jefferson became President and served
as President for two terms, he presided over a nation of 5 million
people. We today have 11 million. We know what has happened
in the case of the United States. We know that there you have
a country roughly with our area which, within a measurable term
of years, will have 200 million people and which will be, as it
is now, the grea~ test physical power in the world. All I want to
say to you is that there is nothing that has happened there that
cantt happen here. Eleven million poople. Twice the population
we had forty years ago, with the clear prospect of having
million peopleo in the lifetime of quite a few of those present
today. We can look forward with confidence to our future
provided, of course, that we keep in our minds that nothing is
impossible. In my own grown-up lifetime, in my own time in
public life, which now grows, as anybody can tell you, very
lengthy, I have seen things that were regarded as impossible
brought to fruition. If anybody had by some process gone
through this country thirty years ago and had talked confidently
about having this great irrigation scheme this enormous vista
of the future, beginning in an ostablishoa way by 1963, he
would have been told not to talk nonsense " That's quite
impossible." But the whole history of Australia is the history
of the impossible becoming the possible and of the possible
becoming the probable nnd of the probable becoming the certointy,
the living fact. This, indeed, is the challenge to all of us
who are Australians and it is a challenge which ought to give us
great pride., 9* */ 3 
3
It isn't a challenge, ladies and gentlemen, that
can be postponed indefinitely. If there is one thing that
we have all lea.' nt it is that in this country of ours, the
future hurries in upon us. What we thought of as something
that might be looked at in ten years, all of a sudden becomes
something that we ought to look at in five years because the
future is pressing in on us. One of the reasons for that is
that our population is growing, gzowing at an unprecedented
rate, and the rioment that you begin to increase your population
in a country lie this at the rate of say, 250,000 a year, you
begin to feel the pressure upon resources so that we may sustain
that population and so that we may attract more so that we may
become a bigger and a stronger country, more and more rapidly.
Therefore, the pressure is on all of us to attract our minds
to works of devlopment which will be the foundation for future
economic and population growth.
Now there is just one aspect of that that I would
like to say something to you about not that I want to keep
you here too long. Australia, we dontt need to remind
ourselves, is a large place. de have our population concentrated
to an enormous extent in a relatively narrow stretch of country
from Brisbane to Adelaide probably at least 80 per cent. of
the people of A. ustralia in that area and every now and then
we do attract our minds to the problem of getting over this, of
decentralising, In every State you will hear State Premiers,
State Ministers discussing the problem of decentralisation, of
doing something to prevent the movement of people, the aggregation
of people in the big cities, so that the country may live
and prosper, so that the nation may live and prosper. Well, that's
a very powerful problem, but viewed nationally, there is another
aspect of it and that is that we must cease to regard Victoria,
Now South Wales, for example, as highly-developed States
affording a great field for future growth. We are not to
think of it simply in those terms. What we must think of
increasingly is how in the larger States we can secure a development
which will lend strength to the nation as a whole.
There are two outstanding examples of this, of course,
in West Australia and in Queensland, the largest States, States
whose resources are not yet fully known, States in which development
may occur which will alter thie entire economic balance of
the Australian nation. Now this is not going to be done
overnight. I don't profess to say nor does anybody else, that
what has been done here solves the problem. It doesn't. It
begins to solve the problem. It i. s an indication of what may
be done in the future. 1%. aer e not at the end of something
here today; we are at the beginning of something, just as
the experimental station is not at the end of its work but at
the beginning of its work. We must go on and on and on if
these great areas in Australia are to grow and become effective
contributors to Australian life. Now that is a broad statement
but it is a trla statement. I ho! ce that it is one that we
will all have in mind.
In Queensland, for exazpie, the discoveries in the
mineral world, :. ncluding some oil., have been such as were not
dreamed about * ixenty years ago, and in mineral development in
particular, thm-t State may have t whole of its character
changed and the whole of its cont.: z. bution to Australia increased.
In Western Aus,. alia, of course, you also have mineral development;
only at t[ te beginning of it, I venture to say but year
after year after year, this area associated with great names
among the early settlers I say nothing about the best-known
ones because I don't need to mention them, but even a man
0 000/ q + 
namied Kelly put his name on a knob of rock somewhere hero.
Alexander Forrest investigated this place many years ago and
wrote hopefully about its future, but for the most part it has
remained as a sort of vague dream. Rainfall, yes. Water, yes.
but what do you do about it? And that's why it was
a masterstroke, in my opinion, for somebody to conceive the
idea that investigation might develop an agricultural industry
in this part of the world on a quite roemarkable scale.
Well, of course, this has boon taken up with
immense enthusiasm; the work has been done as far as I have
been able to see it quite magnificently. I have had a close
look at things I have never looked at closely before. I saw a
cotton harvester at work this morning. It looked as if it had
been designed by the late Heath Robinson. It does all sorts of
things like this under cover and brings in the cotton. Those
in charge of the cotton work here, of course, are so enthusiastic
thp't they have already persuaded no that it is the best cotton
in the world that in due course, and with occasional interruptions
it will be practically immiune from pests that it
will command the worldts price nnd well I don't krnow....
I got so excited about it I began to think that the Commonwealth
might be raising heavy revenues out of the cotton industry up
here. But that it cnn be done is clear. I greatly enjoyed
seeing these marvellous green stands of safflower until a very
distinguished representative of the OSIRO took occasion to say
to me " You ought to be interested in that. You know, after
all, it's just a thistle."' ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Sir, the only other thing I want to say to you is
this. If this were just a miatter of opening a dam of this
particular size, if this were just a matter of opening something
that deals with a relatively few thousand acres of land, somebody
might say, " Well, intrinsically, that's a matter of no great
moment, That kind of thing must be duplicated many places in
the world." But it is more than that. This is a most symbolic
occasion, Man has here conquered nature in the most spectacular
fashion; has done it in a part of Australia in which it was
needed and needed desperately for the future of our country.
And it has happened, and having happened it will go on and as it
goes on, more and more people l~ iving 1,560 miles 2,000 miles
away from here will become interested in it, will come to realise
that what's going on up here is on the whole rather more important
than what's going on in Toorak or Bellevue Hill, And it is.
This is a memorable occasion. This is a symbolic
occasion. It is a very great honour for me to have been invited
to come here and open it. I congratulate everybody associated
with it. More than that, I thank everybody associated with it.
This has been no mere clock job. This has been a work of the
heart, a work of devotion, as well as a work of the mind and of
the hands. Sir, I repeat myself. I declare it open. 



OMIING OrTi . S A. 3ANK C&amp; NMIRL, ON
26tUkL Y91963,
I dont thinjE that r ought to be thAnked in
qparti ua~ r wpy for aagnS he". this afternoon because the
UgS truth is that we have just finished oscoocting a M pt and
somme of You may think* vele that's anl rigtato The % XY4Tis
AU oase Is am lifted from XY ShbOUJAews until Auawt 13th,
or to be more ppeciae, Augut 1th,, when the xkwsp Vws a1Ipeaw.
( Lu~ e) hmt the truth is that this is a rather ppy 1nem
beeaue what happens vhunt a gem k is starting to oncoct AL
,&amp; Apt and is vwking IMS MY through it is thalt all the ote
. qom13~ ooSit1imte a Tiitus~ of the Prime ministe Pile up an
the yandwhen I Isead at thm this afternoons having
finisbe another omittee or two this smning, for once in
ifty I was vwy thonkfal that I had to aam aWay and do 201Whin
else in amt pios, Inc sort of pleasant ottosphewe.
Now, YouaSir said "" thing about w1sula~ ty
maea glancing reflerene to the imaidty or baniters, the
~ uty of assamnee, son. Bat what I liked whnI wea the
litrataria that yous sent me wo that littl, bit of early history
of the 1.8. A* Duk. The 3.5. A. Bak to as has abs been
a thingv I have gemn in Melbourne and glance at ecaina[;
e" w else but you a Makid enough to lot se have a
ibitrioul srh gping back over rn'sther no" then a century*
For the first time I relsed. the Scottish influenoe in the nme,
OMhlshk Scottish and Awtallan Bank Limted. " m of you
may not Iaw it and thfre I shold tell Yag ex relatione the
mlyh atprowlded me with the dopey that th* first establiskthtthe
Bank had wa In Sydney In George Street. It amnsistod
of a two ~ tee 9mvelty that the hank bought frm a vime and
spirit morchant. ( Iaugatew) Nov deeinit that appeal to yw
youa Ma ijmigiii the m aw i Ua of b; expatriated sootin, paing
in an Interview with a Qleat to sniff up tUs old aromas. f" is
smthing I understand peretly besause many yearr ap whsn I
was respectable and ws-pamtising at the Bar and In l=
Cbbers in Melbourne, V.. ewaa win, merdhant immediatelyv = Ar
my chaaube it ws a marvellous thing. dharaver the nali
barmaeute, mnpleauant that you werea working an, all hait you
ddto do ws to goer near the window and take up a sood
abostful of air loade with the fames of the demon &amp; W" ic So
am I anderaiQh about the history of the B. S. A.
As fbr the Leal. General, I an bound to say
that go409 eamayculd have a more respectable title. ( Laughter)
sawe people ame legal avid som people aw. ganeral hat it Is very
seldam tumt yea can rt this powerfual oombitnm of ciroumstances,
( Laughter) the word lega V* atig sam rather harsh and
prelso onfrwemnt of Mh enand the vWar pneal IupwIng
a mwt of element of genial huanity ( laughter) fthere I
ws not surprised to We tiild in the paRpers that I received&amp;;
rapid and rwakable the peath of the Legal General has been
in Atwaliak. r read in the paper this amrng -me doubt you
did too that the population of Caber is now 70,000. It Was
left to my driver to tell methat he had heard also on the side 
that tbat doesn't Incluft the diplomttc ( Laughtmw) * ieh
wasI astonished to issr, an his natZtmbers aad
19,00 in canbra Ay w v wilmit the dplmntia o02W.
I sometimes Wish i o0Lcald iA; St~) bat anyhow w will emit them
forb this porpoese 70,000 people The first t1ws I vaihed aroamd
this pert of Canbai vex in 19-* when I bad ase brtthrough
embdy' mstake, to boe A= tr Y. hIl of A ewlia
thatsa lion time a p. The population was then 61, M~ When
the war ended, thuse had beow of nooesalt' gat restrictions
on ballding and activity of that kind. Sofrs shop I think
I an right In saying, so fresh bvisluss phmse ad " e buit
for a lin, long timel, bet in the last fifteen years, the developsent
in Canbesr he., I think beem quite WoRMs~ ealft And among
other tbInu84 of Ooee the Jevlopuent ar -hoe -in whet I
wiilvl thi elsmriai sectim of Canberra bas been beyond
a~ bol'a belif# if he bad sat dwou to think about itg to
visels it ton years alp*
This is a great and groing and as I
hae Wa occasion to amy before today# It is agreed br the
statisticians# wortby4egsple, that bw 197O excluding the
dipimetc crpasoh doubt IF ttime will hae rison
to~ mhmmlpeprtlemns, the" e will be 100,000 people haee
Sinbody telAiat there would be a quarter of a n31314a at
the tutu of the omtury. There Is in faet hardly any lUnit to
be put to the development of this piace and that's a good tig
Itts a post thing for Austrailitth~ t shold have a gns
sGopeiaatU atios or enttledto eat osiaioWe
I barnddI&amp; grambiing about the soft ofputin Inalkea
x an ' 1"! sthat I aeouse them, and I boe suenas fulr of
having a limited eaepisof what the eapital of what we all
kno will be In dwueqre a vwi poeet ooeutry, ought to boo
And, of oose, the buildings that have pmu
up here, they e cay a mixesd reception bw mep I enitl yot.
I 6oult alvays Il; the amv buildin~ e I an soL~ me very rade
abouat the nw bul'dings bet stranmge emgh, this has no effeat
tnrha t il thst ( laughter) butiI a bound to Sir,
tht ~ iktis watsemI,( oide&amp; A roeu oI da
I taoght, that this had seedistinction and chsaater about i
amd that add" to my pleasur in being present to dealare It open.
I believe that we are 4ping to seemedu
melemntso Wen I leok beok ever this period in Whiab I
have been here,, off and an, man and boyp as you 0h my
eould remember for a longti&amp; e feeling a little afrIdthfat
Canbxv nghttend to be just a city of Politician$ and GIVIl
AMI an the last men to upbraid politicians though
sometimes the ubraid me and me doubt for Vey good reasons.
But a omumity n offisial Gity, In which you have Political
peoples and civil servants and a few ethers who attend to their
mosis too naro a thing ait tends to bosom% as an amusing
friend of sin, one said, inbred. It's a Very bad thing for
a politisian, for eample, 0 to moe areud as oe had to ton
yes ago and be addressed with infinite wespedt q 0110 SITil
sinntafisau another, It Is essential for the sanity of all
of as that we shold have a variety of Po I with a variety
of ' experismoes Including a boathq' paeenCA of people who
Instoad of saying * Good mowning 8iW will stand off and tell
yeu exactly what they think about you and what rubbish it was
Veth Inight befaoe This Is sood and it is
u*/ 3 
whave wreat finlancial institutions now
Os~ b shing tIelvoo The day vill aom Sir I hoe I
mak* mbae nku m et aeina t peCpoanrbqe , v but iitt s wboan&amp;' t obef fiac . b rnoiht wofill
oo to tbe point whm this has b. oom* a g t natioawl
capital that it will brame the sontre not of trade and oomnerce
I 4' t thift it is qit* o eqnppe for that but the eentre of
Laportant fimnal deiona imprtant finanoial asitvitle,
reat intollootual activities in miorsities and in shools
reat selentifle achiwrmess in the varies veeareh establIsh.
nst whiab ame haee a reat Veity of people and &amp; round
a boatifal eatwl ftat", a tbrin of people who will
vat to lie he mot becue tc; are pell eiai ment becau.
ter are civil sw ts, bt butr Use they f3r t aas i vilised
a i plnes in whie their chlidren my p to fine
an" havo all the fteilities and is whhiicbh stwe
of = iversiti* e will be awmlfable to tbo@. This I believe,
is altry with a e g piagpumse The mlyr epdlhveIs
that lealr at I , I think I Vas born twty " etoro soom
beaus. I womd r to be alive in 2000 if : Dra to hav a look
avo and see what'os NSA tfhyou win ml Y fi to
my so, look back a Uttad i; 1 tat li al fiteeme
years, I have perhaps made sm ontribution to its achi-evemnt.
This is quIte a notable ocesion in a notable
pie. I wish both of these pwnie l. I kn they
will have xpeat happimessand mecess in Cnber and I have
the petest plwa. in delacriag the building open* 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 58/ 196-1
R. W. MILLER TANKER
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir
Robert Menzies
" The matter of the conditions on which a
foreign-built ship should or should not be permitted
to be licensed under our Navigation Act to trade on the
Australian coast raises quite a number of difficult
questions including the future of the Australian
shipbuilding industry," Sir Robert Menzies said in
Canberra today. " Several of my colleagues will be
submitting papers to Cabinet on various aspects of
the problem. The formulation of policy will not be an
easy exercise when it is understood that there are such
significant aspects as shipbuilding, foreign exchange,
costs and the overall fuel position to be taken into
consideration. I cannot at present anticipate what
policy will be evolved." 1
" Pending the formulation and announcement
of its policy on these matters, the Government has decided
to allow R, W, Miller Co. Pty. Ltd. to import the oil
tanker MERCHANT KNIGHT under the Customs ( prohibited
Imports) Regulations and to license this ship under the
Navigation Act, on the conditions that the tanker will
be operated on the Australian coast and under Australian
Articles. Having regard to the fact that tankers now
operate from time to time along the Australian coast under
overseas registration and manning conditions, we cannot
reasonably refuse R. W. Miller Coets present application,
which is to import a tanker, register it in Australia,
and operate it under Australian manning conditions."
Sir Robert emphasised that the decision to
allow the import of this tanker should not be regarded
as creating a precedent. No other application to import
a tanker would be considered until the whole position
had been thoroughly examined by the Government.
CANBERRA, 26th July, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 57/ 1961
NUCLEAR TEST AGREEMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir
Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
said today " Without having seen the precise
terms of the document, all that can be said
is that it is an important stop in the right
direction. Great credit must go to the
United Kingdom and the United States for the
patient and persistent manner in which they
have sought a nuclear test ban for years.
Indeed, I recall that the achieving of this
result was placed high in the order of
priorities by the Prime Ministerst Conference
some years ago. It is to be hoped that now
that Mr. Khrushchev has come to this agreement,
the atmosphere of negotiation will be preserved
and tensions lessened."
CANBERRA,
26th July, 1963. 



63/ 0-72
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 52L1963
MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT KENNEDY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, tonight
received the following message from the President of the
United States of America, Mr. Kennedy
" I am pleased and gratified by your
prompt and forthright statement of July 26
in which you called the nuclear test ban
agreement an important stop in tha right
direction. Obviously I share your view.
I also welcome warmly the announcement by
Sir Garfield Barwick thiat your Government
has decided that Australia should become a
party to the treaty. I think it important,
and I am glad that you and your countrym., en do
too, that as many nations as possible take
this ? important step in the right direction'
together and quickly."
CANBERRA, 29th July, 1963.
FOR PRESS : References are P. M. No. 57/ 1963 and
Sir Garfie'ld Barwick Pr. 79 July 26 ( JOIS) 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 60/ 1963
It will be recalled that at Surfers' Paradise
last week ( Thursday), the Prine Minister, Sir Robert
Menzies' node of dress came under criticism from a
speaker at the Federated Clothing Industries Council
Meeting. The Prime Minister has received the following
verses from a Mr. Nornan Munro of Elsternwick, Victoria
" My dear Sir Bob, why don't you choose
Some pointed long and bright red shoes;
Sockettes to match; of radiant hue.
' There's pink and blue and primrrose too.'
Your baggy pants they're quite a fright.
They should, at least, be stovepipe tight,
And show the figure. Make tern hoti
But mind and don't get in a knot.
That tatty coat of sombre hue.
My dear good sir, is not for you.
So chuck away your double breaster.
Wear shirt, tails out, a la fiesta.
Your patriachal locks disdain
For beard and shaggy uncut mane.
A Homburg doesn't bring eclat.
Get TEnery ' Iggins ' at. La, la,
IA woman's best accessory,
A well-dressed man' Or could it be
That nan himself, all taut and tense
Well? Honi soit qui mal y pense,
CANBERRA, July, 1963. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 61/ 1263
Staeebyhe Prie Mi nis ter. tiaeRt Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Th~ e Minister for Customs, Senator Henty,
will act as Minister for Trade during Mr. McEwents absence
overseas, CANBERL, July, 1963. 



OHOI1i4&amp; kTIl GOIJ TUUAh4LT 1963
KMSAOE. or iWtLCO
I offer azetiup and a sincere welome
on bebalf of tkw Austusllan J~ ove2Iumt mid iole
to ali ww will take part in the 1963 CamonveWMItb
Golf Tourneuhnt, This is a facms, event In tiw 0lfins
amlendaw anid one which will armase the wide" Inte~ st,
not only amng than. vw play the pm both well and
indffmwntly but to the * vm-4LuInIs~ din. amp of
nop-1poifers Wmo ak&amp; w. spoxting skill In whatee
aanrr it m~ y be dtmoted.
Owt visitors will fin theslves playing
mbr* phoe. which appreciate skMI olazeatet
and sportmuwhip* ? Tu will be aog friends whose
wish uIll be that the best teen wins. I bop that
they will feel ot home and caMw avoy thepint t
momowre. of a most, susessft event.
31st July, i963. e 



63/ q81
EMBARGO : NOT TO BE BROADCAST OR TELEVISED BEFORE
6 PiM. ON WEDNESDAY 31ST JU LY
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 62/ 1 6
RE-APPOINTMENT OF SIR ERIC HARRISON
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Right Honourable Sir Eric Harrison,
is to be re-appointed as Australian
High Commissioner in Britain for a further term until
October, 1964. Sir Ericts current appointment
is to 25' th October, 1963 and, with his concurrence, the
Government has decided to renew the appointment for a
further period of twelve months. Sir Eric was first
appointed as High Commissioner in 1956.
I am grateful to Sir Eric for his agreement
to serve the Government for this further period.
It is expected that Sir Eric will return
to Australia for consultations with the Government in
October next.
C&amp; ANBERRAI
31st July, 1963. 



63/ 074
DMATE OF H1 J. dWtD
The death of r. Jard removes from iarliament
a man who had von the honour of Cabinet offioe Ie
two Labour Prime KInisters. Io and I were at the
opposite pass politically, but I would like to pq
a tribute to his inoessant inMustry and his stznmi
devotion to the beliefs which he held. The eletors
of Bet Sydney returned his almost oontiaously for
more than thirty years as a strong advooate of their
interests and their political fbith* He wa
= ndoubtedly one of the lively personalities in the
Parliament. I extend my sinoere sympathy to his
widow and family*
CA3rs W9 1963
31tjT4~ Ut, 1963. 



FOR PRESS. P. M. No, 64/ 1963
STATE FUNERAL FOR THE LATE MR. E. J. WARD
Statement by the Prime MinMiesntzeires, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
A State Funeral will be accorded the late Mir.
B. J. ' Hard, A Solemn Requiem Mass will be held at St.
Mary's Cathedral on Saturday morning at 10.30 a. m. after
which the cortege will leave for the Randwick Cemetery.
CANBERRA, 1st August, 1963.
BACKGROUND Further details regarding the funeral arrangements
will be made available to the Press as soon as
they are known. 



63/ 085
TELEVISION INTERVIEW WITH MR. NORMAN BANKS
ON CHANNEL GTV9 MELBOURNE
ON 5TH AUGUT, 1963
MR. BANKS: How do you do ladies and gentlemen. On your behalf,
I would like to extend a cordial welcome home to the
Right Honourable the Prine Minister of Australia,
Sir Robert Menzies. How do you do, Sir Robert?
PRIME
MINISTER: Thank you,
QUESTIONER: I would like to suggest at the very outset of this
programme that we at least keep on the subject of
Robert Gordon Menzies as a person instead of Sir
Robert Menzies, Prime Minister, Could we do that?
P. M. Well, it is not a matter on which I am particularly
well-informed.
QO Sir Robert$ talking of names, have you ever had any
nicknames conferred upon you?
P. M. Oh, one or two.
Q. I remember one unsavoury one,.. but in your earlier days.
PM. In my earlier I remember at the old
Grenville College at Ballarat I acquired the nickname
of " Judkins" because I was even then, as a small boy,
given to making speeches in a shelter shed or somewhere,
There was then a famous social reformer
called Judkins, you know. So I became Juddy to my
particular generation at that time. Once when I got
into a cricket team by accident and caught somebody
in slips by accident and the scorer called out,
" Name of the fieldsman, please" the answer was
" Judkins" and that's how it went down.
Q. And how old were you then when you made that first
public speech in the shelter shed?
P. MO Oh, about thirteen or fourteen. I got over it later on.
Q* What, speechmaking?
P. M, Yes. It only came back on to me again years afterwards.
Q. Do you find it difficult making speeches, preparing
speeches or thinking off the cuff?
P. M. Oh, it's not so difficult thinking about it, but it's
a nerve-racking business because every speech is
another task. People think one has no nerves about
speech-aking. I'm as nervous as a cat before I have
to make an important speech. I get over it. First
hint of opposition and I cheer up.
Q, Of course, people viewing Channel 9 network throughout
Australia will be wondering how you feel about televiskn
appearances&amp;
PM. I detest it.
Q. Yes I thought you did. How do you keep so amazingly
fit? You used to hike, didn't you? 
-2
P. MO Yes, a lot, but I do very little of it now. I think
the reason for my tolerable state of health is that I
selected my parents well, There is no better reason
than that,
Q* We have a picture of Canberra here. You used to be
seen walking around the streets of Canberra quite a
deal even at night. You seem to have given that away
nows
P. M. Well when I first went to Canberra, the population was
6,006 odd and you could walk around the whole place in
two hours, Now it is 70,000 and so it has got beyond
my scope.
Q. And do you fLind people asking you how to get from A to
B and C to D and so on?
POM. Oh, Itve had a bit of fun on thiat in the old days, yes.
Q. I suppose you gave it away partially because of this
re co gnit ion?
PM. Oh, no. When I used to walk in and out of town from
Kew and came out in the dusk as the hotels came out, I
had some very amusing conversations. In fact, I was
wearing a black homburg hat for some reason or other and
I was addressed as " Your Reverence" three times coming
through Victoria Street. A novel experience for me,
Q9 Sir Robert, what is a normal day for you in Canberra?
What time do you rise, for instance?
P. M, Oh, I rise as late as I conveniently can,-I read the
newspapers when I am in bed. I make my first appointment
at about 10 o'clock in the office and I get home, as a
rule, somewhere between 11 o'clock and midnight.
Q9 Do you work when you get home?
P. M, No.
Q. Do you read?
P. M. I read.
Q. And what do you read?
P. M. Oh, a mixture. All the way from detective stories to
the last historical study written by somebody or other,
I do a lot of reading* I read a lot of poetry, Keeps
the m ind in order,
QO Have you any fLavourite poets?
P. M, You mean Australian poets?
Q 4 Yes.
POM, Yes, well, I think my favourite poets are Juditht Wright
and Douglas Stewart and Kenneth Slessor,
QO What about CJ. Dennis? / 3 
-3
P. M, Oh, yes. Oh, well. I was thinking in a different
order, C. J. Dennis, oh yes. It was only the other
day when I went abroad that I took a copy of " The
Sentimental Bloke" with me to give to a friend in
New York.
Q. Do you have time for music?
P. M. You mean as a performer? Noe
Q, Not as a performer but as a listener.
P. M. Very little, but I am very fond of orchestral music.
Chamber music is a little beyond me. I am not musically
educated enough, but I like an orchestra.
Q. Playing what type of music? Opera? Symphony?
P. M" Symphony. Yes.
Q. Sir Robert, do you share Dame Pattie's passion for
camellia s?
P. M, No I like the look of them very much but as she would
tell you if she were here, I am not to be trusted to
distinguish one flower from another. I am pretty
good on roses. I can tell a violet when I see it,
I think I can tell a geranium but sometimes I am wrong,
but really I am not in any sense an expert. When I open
a flower show as I have occasionally, it is a case of
the blind leading the seeing so far as I am concerned,
My wife's a good gardener. She knows all about them.
Q. Do you have any favourite flowers at all? Which would
you prefer in the way of flowers?
P. M. I share her admiration for camellias I assure you.
I think they have beauty and distinchion.
Q6 Looking back on your life, we have two pictures we would
like you to see. One was taken at the age of
POMI Good Heavensl I wasn't bad-looking then.
Q&amp; You've always been very distinguished-looking, Sir
Robert. The other one at 41, You might have noticed
that in each one you are wearing a single-breasted suit.
PIM. I can't tell from here.
QO Well you are. You can take my word for it.
P. M. Well, you must put that down to the eccentricities of
youth.
QO Is this the answer?
POM. D Yes.
Q. But you have been under fire, haven't you., for a
considerable time about your clothing. Only this week
there was a poem written by somebody dedicated to you
about your clothing.
P. M. I thought it was very good.
Q* So did I. I liked the last line particularly. Who does
buy your clothing? Do you always buy it yourself? 
P. M. Yes.
Always?
P. M. Yes.
Q. That tie wasn't bought, of course?
P. M, Ye s.
Q* It's a club tie, isn't it?
P. M. Ye s.
Q Most of your ties are club ties?
P. M. 1 W1
ell, a lot of them. That happens to be an M. C. C, tie
London, of which I am a life member, but when you want
a tie, you don't just go along to the Secretary and
say, " Give me one." You go into Jermyn Street into the
appropriate shop and you buy it.
QO Your son, Ken,' was telling me that you have a talent for
picking clothing for other people and I notice that his
inflexion was rather interesting. He said, for instance,
for his children, you can go into a London store and with
great certainty pick the right colours and the right
size for his little children 12,000 miles away.
PIM. Well, I think I am not bad at it, you know. I have had
some success with it. But it is even more difficult to
buy a frock for your wife or for your daughter, and on
that I think' I have had a lot of successi strangely
enough.
Q. You stayed at Chequers for a weekend, didntt you on
this last trip?
Pam* Yes.
QO I wonder We have a picture of Chequers we would
like you to see you don't need to see it, of course,
to remember what it was like but what is the history
of this building? Did Mr. Harold Macmillan tell you
anything about it or did you know in advance?
Pam*. Oh, I've known a good deal about Chequers for a long
time because the first time I visited Chequers was in
the Prime Ministership of Ramnsay MacDonald and that is
going back a fair way. It is a very early 17th
century house around 1600 you can say and at one
stage it was in the possession of the Cromwell familyt
and up in the big gallery at the back of the house, the
long gallery, they have some very interesting Cromwell
souvenirs, including the original of the famous letter
he wrote do you remember, saying, " The Lord made them
like stutble to our swords." 1 It's there, under a velvet
coveriLng.,
Q. I suppose there are some rather wonderful paintings in
there, too.
P. M. Oh, yes. 
Q. You are interested in art, aren't you?
P. M. Yes, I am,
Q. In fact haven't you, in your private collection at the
Lodge, a picture by Sir Winston Churchill?
P. M. Yes, well to be precise, we have two. One belongs to
me. It took me eight years to get it. And one belongs
to my wife. She got it without asking for it. That's the
difference between feminine persuasion and masculine.
Q@ What's the subject of the one given to you?
PoM. Oft It's painted in the South of France around Cap
d'ntibes or round there. A fishing boat tied up, a
lighthouse in the background, It's been on exhibition
in Australia, Quite gay colours.
QO Sir Winston had time for hobbies, I think he laid a few
bricks in his time.
P. M. Oh yes, there are two or three cottages at Chertwell
built by him. At least he did the brickwork. Some brick
walls he did, He became a member of the BricklayersT
Union and, of course, as a painter, well, he began have
you read his little book about thaZ?
Q. No,
P. M. He began comparatively late in life, He had been a
prominent politician and he was out of office. Sir John
Lavery the President at that time of the Academy said,
" Why dontt you take up painting for a hobby?" As Winston
had said to me, " I'd never been in a gallery, I wasn't
interested in pictures," but he took it up as a hobby, and
he has turned out to be an extraordinarily good painter
and gets great pleasure out of doing it.
Q6 You've never taken on painting as a hobby?
P. M. No nt since I was a very small boy in the country doing
litle watercolour things at the top of the prize homework
book, you know. That kind of thing.
Q, Of course, your friends who know you well qould probably
say you have laid one or two bricks.
P. M* Dropped them, you mean?
Q9 Well, it's the same thing.
P. M. Oh, no. " Laid" is too polite. " Dropped" is the word,
Q. In this Chequers that we were looking at a moment
Incidentally, can you recall any brick that you did drop
that you have laughed about since? Or worried about since?
P. M, Oh, I'm not a great worrier.
Q0 Aren't you? You don't worry at all?
P. Me Very little, a as e / 6 
6
Q9 Thatprobably accounts for your fitness. But in this
collection at Chequers, was there any painting of unusual
interest that impressed you?
P. M. Yes, there is a very large canvas of the Lion and the
Mouse and the Rat, you know. All of heroic proportions,
and here is the lion struggling with the cords. Winston
looked at this for a long time and then finally decided
that there was no sign of a mouse, so he got a stepladder
and painted one in,
Q0 And is it there to this day?
P. M. It is there to this day.
Q. This is hanging in the main gallery of Chequers?
P. M. Yes, in the main central hall,
Q. Was Mr. Macmillan depressed when you were there?
P. M. I think he was and I don't wonder with all this Profumo
business going on. Some of the most hysterical comments
were being made even by normally dull and respectable
newspapers, and he was worried, of course, because he,
himself is a man of the highest integrity, not to be
associated with any dirty business like this other
business, and so he was undoubtedly worried, When be
spoke in the House I was there and I heard him. He was
obviously a little depressed by what had gone on, but
the next weekend at Chequers, talking up in the gallery,
he was in the top of his form. I've never know~ n him
better more vivid, cheerful, full of wit, full of
historical allusionas because he's a very good historian,
And therefore I saw two men one in the House looking
pretty sad, as I think I would have myself and the other
one out of it, bright, frightfully well-informed, all the
qualities that we know Harold Macmillan to possess.
Q. Do you think that this, nevertheless, could have an
untoward effect on his political career, without being
political here because I don't want to talk politics, on
the party itself?
P. M. Well, frankly, I don't think that the effect of this
business will be permanent. In fact, I was quite sure
that so extravagant wore some of the remarks made that
there would be a reaction in Harold Macmillan's favour
and I think there was in a personal sense. But the
Government itself had apparently been losing ground,
politically, before this Profumo affair ever occurred,
I don't think that in the wash-up, as we would say, the
Profumo case will have any permanent result, though
perhaps it might have caused delay in the recovery of their
stocks that the Government might have been hoping for.
But I am an outsider, I don't know.
Q. Yes, I was just asking for a personal opinion there, Sir
Robert. When you were in London, you spoke, I believe,
with Mr. Selwyn Lloyd about the possibility of the
formation of some economic or trade agreement among
Commonwealth nations which hant come out in the press
so far as I can see in the news. Is there anything you
can say about it? 
-7
P. M. Well~ Selwyn came around to see me. He's an old friend
of mine. Hets been very troubled by some of the implications
for the Commonwealth of the Common Market moves and
he had been very impressed by the fact that although
there is an export council operating into America and I
think some form of export council operating into Europe,
there is no body, no export council which is concerned
with improving Commonwealth trade and he told me that this
was the general idea in his mind and did I like it and I
said, " lYes I did", that I would be prepared to encourage
him al~ ong that line. It has to happen in Great Britain,
of course, but the idea of consciously promoting Commonwealth
trade is, of course, a very good one,
Q. Now, we are going to take you up to Edinburgh because
this has been a very rewarding yo~ ar and to my mind, Sir
Robert, there are two highlights from the Australians'
point of view first the admission of you to the Order
of the Thistle and the wonderful honour conferred on you
by the United States of America in inviting you to give
the Jefferson Oration. But can we go to Edinburgh and
see you in the monitor, now Sir Robert? This is how you
were arrayed for the big occasion.
P. M. Gives me a rather sinister appearance, don't you think?
Q. It looks as though you could have been a real Scot. How
did you feel on this occasion? Do you remember the thoughts
that went through your mind? You look pretty grim there.
P. M. Well, you know, I realised for once in my life what it's
like to be somebody who is being looked at on some
ceremonial occasion. ' We don't go in for it much here.
And you go along you are really a mass of self-consciousness.
If you look around and you smile at your friends,
you appear to be smirking you know, taking it all very
lightly. If you go along, looking as no doubt I did , very
grim, people say, " Whatts wrong with the poor fellow?"
It is very difficult but of course, it was an exciting
event, no doubt about that.
Q. Where did you stay in Edinburgh?
P. M* At Holyrood House. The Queen was good enough to invite
my wife and my oldest son and myself to stay there
overnight,
Q. That was very good.
P. M, Yes, particularly for my son who had the op ) ortunity that
otherwise he wouldn't have had of having quite long
conversations with The Queen and with Prince Philip.
Q. He said you were dressed well in advance of the actual
occasion and that you resembled a man padded up, who had
been padded up, for some considerable time to go out to
the batting crease.
P. M. That describes it perfectly, I sympathised with, you
knowr Bill Lawry and people like that. There I was
sitting in the pavilion calling the " pavilion" Holyrood
House, you see all dressed up and nowhere to go,
waiting, wondering whether I would fluff my lines. I
suppose you never have that feeling. e a 9 e 9 / 8 
= 8
Not muchi Sir Robert you went from Holyrood House
then to Signet House. That's alongside the Cathedral
isn't it?
PIM. Yes, Signet Library is across from the front of St. Giles.
You robe there, or you are robed. It's a very complicated
business and each Knight of the Thistle has a man who
robes him and ties all the bows in the right places.
All that kind of thing.
Q, You are trying to make that robe a double-breaster.
P. M* And then you march into the Cathedral where they had
a full house, A lot of school-children singing hymns
as we went into the Chapel of the Thistle which is up
in the far corner, and allowed into the Chapel are The
Queen, of course, the Prince, the Knights of the Thistle,
the Lord Lyon King at Arms who is the great man on these
matters in Scotland, the Green Stick as they ca] 4 himhe's
a very distinguished man the Lean and the.
Minister of St. G. Lles. And when we had gone in there,
the doors were s hut behind us with a clang and the
curtains drawn. Very exclusive, you see. I thought
it was tremendously exclusive until I found out afterwards
that all the proceedings had been broadcast
through the Cathedral. But anyhow, it was a great day,
a great event.
Q. May I ask what was your reaction when you realised that
Hor Majesty The Queen was going to confer this great
honour upon you?
P. M* Well, I don't mind telling you that I didn't know whether
I was coming or going. This was in Canberra. This was
the last thing that I had had in my mind and I probably
wasn't frightfully coherent about it. I know that when
I left her, I struck her Private Secretary in the
corridor and he said to me, it being a suitable time of
day, " Would you like a drink?" I said, " Not only would
I like one, my boy, I need one." That perhaps describes
it.
Q. Did you tell Tho Queen that?
P. M* Oh, yes.
Q4 Did you find her well?
P. M. Very well, I think she is in the top of her form and
that's a great deal.
Q. Well then, you went across the Atlantic and you met
President Kennedy. I think we have a picture of the
President, I felt, looking at the movies that I have
seen on that you were very impressed with this
young President of the United States of America.
P. M. Yes, I am. I know a lot of staunch Republicans in New
York because we do financial business with them, and
therefore I see something of them, but I never make any
secret to them of the fact that I admire President
1Lennedy very much. He's made mistakes, no doubt but he
has learned from them and each time I encounter him, I
find him more and more forthcoming, more and more mature,
clear-minded, not afraid to say what he thinks. I think
this is a very good man. I dont want to appear 0006 001-9 
9-
P. M. patronising about it, He's immeasurably more
( Contd,) significant than any of us, but he is, I think, a
man of' character clear-mrincednoss, conviction sounds.
like an alliteration doesntt it but all those things
are true about him.
Q. Do you think in view of the " winds of change" as Mr.
Macmillan would say, that our destiny maybe is more
with America than the Old Country?
P N. 1 I don't think that's the choice. I can't, myself,
imagine any state of affairs that would produce a
separation botween Australia and the United Kingdom.
Oh no. The blood is too strong for that and feelings
anJ history are too deep for that1 but I am quite
certain that as time goess on, we will become more and
more associated with the United States in matters of
security, in matters of putting out assistance of
various kinds to Asian countries, playing our own
destiny in this part of the world. We will have a
great deal moro and more to do with the United States
but it will be an alliance of friends, not one of those
instinctive, intimate associations that we have with
the Old Country. The two things are not mutually
exclusivee A lot of people seem to make the mistake
of thinking that they are. You can't get on to terms
with the U~ nited States without turning your back on
the Mother Country, they say. Well this is all wrong.
Q, I like to think of the Motherland as the Motherland
and America as a Brotherland,.....
P. M, That's right.
Q. Now, you went to Monticello. This is a tremendous
honour and I am quite sure you felt that way about it
when you gave this oration. Did you keep strictly to
the script which you had prepared in the way of a
speech for this oration?
PGM0 No, I've been struggling for years, Norman, to confine
these special lectures, or whatever they call them,
to about one a year because although I am supposed to
get up and talk out of the top of my head1 I find that
I have to start preparing one of these about three
months ahead and putting in a few hours every now and
then at a weekend in research, in looking up this and
that and in making a few notes, and in the result I
produced this Jefferson Oration as they call it, though
I hate the word. And then when the morning came at
Monticello lovely morning standing on the steps
of Monticello itself and looking at a battery of
microphones.,,.,,
Q6 This is the old Jefferson house?
PM. would interlard my written words by a few
asides you see? Itts an extraordinary thing how
if you look around am audience in broad daylight and
you see half a dozen people you know, they provoke
some observation in your mind and you practically say
something to them immediately between two carefullyprepared
sentences. It brightens it up. I find it
is much better to have an audience laugh occasionally
than sleep all the time. 000 0 .0/ 10 
10
Q You were very impressed, weren't you, with the University
at Charlottesville?
P. M. Tremendously, It is a lovely piece of Palladian architecture
designed, all the old parts, by Jefferson himself.
He was a very remarkable man, Terrific fellow. Architect,
farmer lawyer a very good lawyer a great statesman,
twice hecretary of State under George W~ ashington and Vice-
President, then twice President of the United Statos.
He was a phenomenal man. A bit of an inventor in htig own
way. In fact, I quoted that day something that might
interest you and those who are listening to us. President
Kennedy gave a dinner at the Wdhite House to all the Nobel
Prizewinners and a lot of other high-powered people
great scientists, great humanists a variety of people
in the White House, And he began his speech of wel. come to
them by saying, " Well, gentlemen, I venture to beljeve that
this is the greatest assem~ blage of talent, of human talent
brought together in this room since Thomas Jefferson dined
alone."
Q, Fantastic,
PM. That was a marvellous thing to say. When I had refreshed
my mind about Jefferson about his work I knew a-good
deal but I had to improve on that knowledge I came to
the conclusion that President Kennedy was probably right.
Q. I an sure you did. Sir Robert, it has been wonder fully
kind of you to give us this strictly informal interview
or ya5? n about your recent experiences. I have deliberately
kept off politics and I an sure that met with your approval.
P. M. Well, as a matter of fact, Norman, you see you and I
happen to be old friends. I hope that will do you no harm.
Itts a long time now since you first interviewed me on a
radio station do you remember?
Q. I certainly do. It was actually in Trades Hall,
P. m. Thatts right. Right up in the Trades Hall, but a long time
before the fire.
Q. Well, thank you very much indeed. Ladies and gentlemen
it has been our great privilege and pleasure to talk with
the Right Honourable the Prime Minister, Sir Robert
Menzies, I very nearly said " Mr. Menzies" by force
of habit, 



63/ 082
FOR PRESS: P. M. No0 .6126
Statement by the Prime Ministetr1 the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzie s
It is true that I have been having some
discussions over recent timeswoith my colleague, Mr. McEwen,
over electoral matters. But these have been essentially
explora tory. On redistribution, for example, we have both
been trying to work out what the area of difference may
be so that we may have some ideas to present to Cabinet,
which will then decide the course to follow.
So far as individual electorates are concerned,
all I need say is that in the Liberal Party and, I imagine,
in the Country Party, a decision as to whether or not to
contest a particular seat is a matter for the organisations
and not for the Parliamentary leaders. Though it is true
that over the years we have not infrequently proffered our
opinions and our advice, the final decisions are not ours
to make. Of course we behave, as sensible men, in a
composite government. At the next election we want an
overall victory for the Government, which means the minimum
of electoral friction between the parties. Sometimes threecornered
contests are useful; sometimes they are unavoidable.
Sometimes they are damaging. Mr. McEwen and I, as usual,
would like in the common cause, to confine the areas of
conflict. But we both recognise that ultimately the
decision to contest any electorate is made by our political
organisations. We therefore have no authority to make a
pact, and have not made one.
I h, 7ve consulted Mr. McEwen before issuing this
statement. He completely agrees with it.
CANBERRA, 13th August, 1963. 



M. SiAQ; TO 111L PLOdl&amp; Ji
ON Ti OCCA~.. OZI OF A'SA. TA
all C9" i* T1OJJ
To the Haltom people Wew bava oheaezn
to make their ham In Australiap, I an happ~ y to otffe
codlal gvotlnbs an this national day of their
bravo Island. Malta bas sont many of her eons maW
daughters to us and their industry and Intepity
hacive von vel-deuorved rmzrds. 46 weloom thbm
as f* Uov. ItIzons In the joint task of helping to
build an er Aratr Auatelan nation.
a* '-; II
IMt Augstj, 1963. 



J1WISI Raw VIAR
This date In the Jvish Clendas osn
* emson for oxmmimaton of the jroar pm) and of
We'parotion fb.? thu yasw to am*; an oosmo twa'
asiong am's per sl trIhtion not onlyr to the
mood or the nation to which w alU so proudly heumg,
wat to the wilft or ow, s ftlImo Tte Jowl* people
In Australia have a Proud racard of ucht' servi to
which I an certain they viii add sipifioantly In the
tqs aed. I an gpate fol fbi the oppaxwty to send
awoting to the Autra lian Z3wisI commnitiem as they
mark their ) Iev Y! env Re 0. IGAV&amp; 3X
kbœ 14 bIAWsj4Tk; U
CAlfhk&amp; MtL
AUaut 19, 1963. 



UNVEILING OF STONE OF IONA, ST. SILAS'
NORTH BALWYN, VICTORIA.
I send cordial greetings to the congregation
of St. Silas' and yourself on this significant
occasion. The inter-denominational character of
your ceremony is surely a most worthy recognition of
the Christian heritage we share and of which this
ancient stone will be a permanent symbol.
R. G. MENZIES
PRIMk MINISTER.
CANBERRA, August, 1963. 



GREEK ORTHODOX COMMUNITY, FRANKSTON
I offer sy cordial greetings to the Greek
Orthodox Coauunity of Frankston at the opening of
their new Church of the Epiphany.
Many ties draw the people of Greece and
Australia together, not least their coaon Christian
heritage. I hope that the first services in this
house of worship vill serve to strengthen our bonds.
Ra. MIENZIES
PPL" k MINISTEri.
CANHERRA, August, 1963. 



) U8A&amp; 9 FOlH PIJAt1CATION IN TIMfh TOAMX. GO
JOUtNAL IN A SPM. CIAL W3PK'LW4T TO HAM~ T11K
OPtAIIN4 0OF A UW. œ 100,000 FACTOWC FOR " MlI
BASUhkM MILK e~ itUDCTS LII 4D AT
VICTORIAt ON4 AUCKMi j8TH 1963.
I caagtilat., &amp; outh Rastern 911k fro4taot
L44. fbr arwylu 00 a txedtIm of Ee. than
years In helping to d~ evelop Viatoria's dairying
Ladustry and in uspplyIng the public with dairy
produets of first-class quality.
Promblyu ft people reelise the mott
part ow dairy facoes boe played in owpnislng
I sgo4U11lpeomcdt uiiot anqp prrees~ sIdnigg andid adnicsetr ibanuda tiaodwn isoeef tdooll
pradiasrs In w of Atami~ a Important Ia
Mot onV. have the factories lod the drive for
dairy qu* Isty and Ihygieiwl thiey have enoowagd the
Ume of NmIe rI taolmIques and equipm t an the farm,
with greater effUlenm andi profit to the farmer as
a result. Today I g lad to note that mm of themg
Lacludlag South lasterm Milk Produatsv are pioneering
now Products mob as butter oil and amselm whiob are
helping to diversify the outlets fbr the products of
the fbzms.
elAst Auwtq 1963. 



63/ 084
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 67/ 1963.
DEATH OF LORD NUFFIELD
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
Lord Nuffield was one of the great
constructors in the industrial field. He was one of
those men who, having achieved success, regarded himself
as a trustee of his wealth for good causes in the community,
CANBERRA,
22nd August, 1963. 



MK&amp; 3AOG FOR ADKLAIVI SUNDY MAIL
JUPPLWMINT FO MEATER WiJILDM'
CONUVI4TION TO LIS I1% thW PTL R
a/ 27th, 1963.
The biding ndustry in Australia plays an
aotive and responsible part in the developmat of our
nation. It thwrefore givos m pleasure to send this mnsap
of geeting to all who are attending the national conventiaa
in Adeldide of the Master Builders' Federation of Australia.
Our population tbrough norinl growth and
I= imptio, oontime to expand at a reaarkable rat and
nabody is nore conalomn than I an of the demands which this
uplies fbw husing, sohol, hopitalsq and manufacturing
and omIercial biuldingso The Comionwelth and State
Gornments have taken# ma the financial front, vnrious steps
to help to met these emnds, while in a-itio private
investment is high. Bt the satiafotion of the dmands
in fatq " on the growdt rest&amp; finuly vith the building
in astry. I a o doubt such questions will arise in your crent
delirbations, and I Vill look fbrarrd in dm course to seeing
the results of your isportant discussions PRUIM MIUbI8R.
CANUgst, 16.
23rd Aust, 1963 



DIU= IN 3BOU OF SIR GILLS CHIPPINIDLL
AT MUTL WINMSOX&amp; MLBURM
02 23RD MatJ 1963
I thiat you Ea al that PV* Mte s ines fr1Wthly
WOMu Iyy io nuw swa d Quaab roouts au It aE VO.. iutSiyO I WMl ' t U79. Mvbm. lt
kotalant as Ir * d one ( U~ tw Ihv
sinesMO m to mbwtaa W~~ t CUiPPO It IsJus pasala
tMtsP M" e of NWVt ftMtother ( lau~ itmu) amd Ut Is
* 7 W ea" anl 410ll dte4 to hesuse WVOo aWt him to be
limtI wa me tbln w migt hae a litti. of It in wh off
on is la the PrOM. 1
MW. Other day In chum 1W soetma m ht
of &amp; 1tlvlkrOR WoW f the 10" t offloo, a tele. gm me
461T~ ed o e t woog (&amp; Mmgte') Qm kF gam awe
Vowmvha his hot, m-8a u6ld0the hose Whos It aWlm4d and
a YO~ kgs atobtis ptrawith red hsir put oe toot as the
A . yo km the my It hepposs -adth* elna
ka the thIstle me a mo. ua ma ( Isughtss) but It#* 3pother
idea to hae, a teleps aaqbw ( LUghter) Ilk l s.
sia to thIs q hta" your t= s Do you
ment to be a 1 oyoWu mt to be Direotew-Gtsess?
Do you wat to be afiitr. the Cswi? Do you wat to hae
a km~ ghthea aramd yw nookT And he P134 iM toot U Mt
on tU the bIe * U do oft ho and sold to his wathsm
I talme4 to tXe .1U h* Lo. Roess in" 0 ( ZcW tWr) A1 rot,'
of goua s sOM Aram0( i2lsm1 x ' A proffiessona1 hotein go
am lahmass mast a ewmea Arthum owmoul d oarg m st--tWhaallt oI fa nd ontoht iiqnq atthee alse awfafdl
as all tMLt ( Jauktsz)
It Is a rmm'kab1o disotia of houiisaes that
hew 3mg alps -allpb st years ap, fifty years ap, prehably,
vWmNhe U of ycog M" astaM wmating oMa
liwi who boam telgrUkN meseWs aMin Meulit
tho he FROdoesi the only W* m= 4 * eWMd. h e I omit
MW 16te ther e~ peoMa NNMI t-In of the
~ hof SODtlAm ( 0uheA) I . t a to Noise too
1 31Wk % wa t 6-thM I bo4 a Posts! 4" sl
before cbrle I Vwlds V had boss a telegraphueuswa
Wvef he am toptber I mgnet In tile ~ tbooku"
0" both masherL the* 0 a1. 4tyine~ ( lasoiter) This,
IaicVa ga i~~ nwat be epfoI tVhWea itoty of AuStMlia
heesuft the yeans te3* orpk -4p bee a VWy dlamuile
publie servats or as 19 ayfrsa m oons at ether, miwil
politi= oe assh mo rieaps" aoo mye'trsapito
as. a ' tin. Iw
so 1r, oveMeOK that in , ehrrsy' i viii ritle
a Uetter to the pape Whyaht a idee hiiv I mse after
1W fuMeisi ( TAute ftrpt abot that. It Is a waY
WnstILtigte ma of his abityr of Uis tvNMAD-61
risk Jw anda utter Integrity atmuld hae1 .000*/ 
2.
hiasini bi pie Uve w oldo of POelew sand In S
MA olds of Peutis and I voutwe tooa
= ause r veIinde ea ec A9as kovhoe ; 4a
low this is Jt to apthat cbPwma a sort of
t~ wo. oft~* I hae an a flow poop" e in or ts wirn 0003l
r kwt avet~ wbowt of all vors* That Is not ow frisa&amp;.
holsWw seid the, teeh o uw the Owr
WA us rqim ry fraM tar piAk of VIM of OU pehfiitle
a~ ai teti el rs, boew tOat be he7 bee uterl eta
utterly onlblet utory bemest# tohat my~ of us vul sit
owsad my, OIislp CIppip tell mwhet you tbi* about thstq*
sad~% V kmmta mlsteniagS to v~ se mda ft" m a vise USa.
In faet9 I don't speak fW &amp; W ethor aUia SSte
Mon. vW ow be us, I find it difflmlt to yeembo te ether
sms. (. usetssaI iL ma tolu Is tat ee am * ad tweat
a" ItAOme" l ovwon o = ON that's the th" Ifg to Got but
we wed to -sooasmn d t W o ohv it
Msoae ntI tinat o e* eafw1tUie t AZsMt owknq oU S UDIOe. s-wma e isteh, . ar ilt.
at" b vrm sad t m g hev; S A * 1
U* a flor a gas* fir al t" asm he vas Ma4bekhroo he
was the smest ame ft thwsefy beem It Is ' l-y ft pObli
sbiaitratiea a mtter of l~ mg ISmr ens. a dss'It wed
to be voll tlUstt km th hM of thingV tht Sm~ t
ft W~ t am d cully Is that me knoi aM
therbM yu Wt ths kind of aff~* tI ssay
besans of looking hbr a ma*
Andp gpat I miwt to Say to yes quilto bawitly
that We YUw Slot to that pelat ia this sawalses, covatu
ofoeraet ft" ad yoursef smug dam to a " r Maarw fil".
thlla owofiabw~ tfhteorf. mIt, isa eboabisd ly Weo kea foof r a&amp; oWtbwW t* o010 t
of six sr sews or eihtpple a. 14 em of the edditis In w
time be* boo tbot m we hae had semethia that fit
Into this gamerel pattwr,. Ilv said, ' Veil, boys~ we11 kno
whalt vs mat, Ufs &amp; WOW a no In 1m" amd imUe ot
of Met, they say# as about MOiPt
Now thi Is tmue This is troe and I wmt hin to
km that this is " Ms W on" m thdIs a~ proof, In flet as I
wodrstind It s, alnaiveo p~ I speak aubjeet to the
ammuthr or c0qtr J~ ies k~ telAAt this, to so
is smlus0 Pasef that Chipil ha. a teputathes
with all ma of wdeistanding aa osilavsApiskl
istu a awaof smown opo as-f' 1
warqwa aftlnltrativo julgoat and of the
I thin that we sue toul 0ats Sir? entertainingr
Oa sutp of MW samps in hiS Msomsf s tt a
way great Awtwasa ( hear, bowr and wba I heard that " hi
Dlmr was on ad I ma asd whether I um 6 X an
the rules sad said$ ' Oll, 4 ILa to be % how*. I isuesy ve
esaisllod some-tes. I doloesy somehdinmear isa wa
SIM9 about It. I umlftt erni less.
The Owly oter wo* I mant to hle to you,
lit, n. Lsthi. t las a 0t ew ef yo b 000Ms
hes~~ oUis O -b to am s saw to explefa to us 
hwvvoag ve am and onI soe oasioa, I e0,401y nbme
thea&amp; I t iiiomll It boy righit w M'sIw
9 1 kam wmet of yes and I an tarn to ro tht meet
* f e are MW Mte" and fw a lam long Use. I Speeam
aftsr a. -sVesjWa ht W2 0e6* 0 " byee= enw a Meimndi tae r PuoSf LbeEo imIStOuV emor saom ue wtft01w92le
ofttoem yeaMs I M an eXpevt ab@ t the CITib SGVwies. Yern
owthfelli r apllo. l, iwtle amth, o uo. u tuI idhea eT omh adfl, aayrnte 4t o ldao Awaitsht vatbbl e( aI a180a0waw~)
ainnd a N1: awlviamys t reinv evbisat swal afqtl o" ns $ uo f mtoim me a Amw oI" wkasw qta ioteld eaamraly
the CiLvi Seigiees Wrev a standard of owtIne bebov Mb* u
as Mid~ t amy bU I veprvled this as a zto
bgt.~ wtad ymik. 6 I have Ung sinee esw to sttan4
that it is. tu'mg I Wou have bated to be a EFistp. Onal
wsaimthe tGhiInIg" thabaitp pela imelltlb oawn = f" ereon~ r eol, f f-beat inif vWI vwwaoed Atond do
of OSUM I woud havoo
11a to one of taw oubal eivb Serats of ow
tun and, Intoeostiln-e3a-I mythis to all you tyonoms
you know, lea 3oekint N, t=.( Le&amp; Ughi) ISO its Iaterted,
SmeuS1. You hmOWoNe00%-lYnil Iat elb mus" Iw pmultted
Ureel eas Ictaty wmaiks abotit elvil vewwmnt and
wanaee I'm bees 4. Igkt to fied In y own time that
xm tUse to Unae yoe agarl take am of the and be beesmee
quto algalflean$ In the beelam vwrd, This Is a tibute to
Uno erbracotof the Clvii Seric and 6-es I talk about
the vpper brad* et of the CiLv11 Servlee I talk fr~ eely and vmdy
and aftetiuately about am ma Wa repveets that scr
. inp~ bythan any other main I can UhLM of.
And % horeftweq SW# r= this . ocasion Iro~ e
mistoa Aw~ m Is ping tor up M age. w~ th me as he
UMily ios. bet" sM yak wa -bt = Whs,, hie Is lpig to
pat up end a pewith no beesiie an this matter we are an
asntosabt ndG ood lask8 tatotey 7um mhr and my you lie long 



WEEKLY" INDEX No. 34
Week Ending August 24, 1965
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Cancerra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
John MciEwen
Aug. 19No. 796CANADIAN NATION,', L EXHIBITION
The Treasurer, The Rt, IHon. Harold Holt M. P.
Aug. 23 No. 812 MEETING OF THE NATIONAL DEBT COMMISSION
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon.
Sir William Spooner, M. M.
Aug. 19No. 801
19 Nc, 803 DISCOVERY OF OIL-BEARING SANDSTONE,
ALICE SPRI* NGS DISTPICT.
OCEANBED SEISMIC TESTS TO BE MADE.
The Minister for Defence, The Hcn. Athol Townley, M. P.
Aug. 19 23 No, 800
No. 817
23 No. 819 HIGHER Ni-VAL APPOINTMIENTS
PAKIST.. N LIRVORCE OFFICER TO VISIT
AUSTRALIA
R. A. A. F. P. ARTICIPATON IN COMMONWE ILTH
Mi. RITIME EXERCISE
The Minister for Territories, The Hon. Paul Hasluck
Aug 20 20 No. 805
No. 806 GOVERNMENTAL EXPENDITURE IN 1963-64
THE PETITIOY FROM YIRRKALA
The Minister for Labour and National Service, The Hon. William
McMahon
Aug. 19No. 797REVIEW OF EMPLOYMENT SITUATION JULY 1963
The Postmaster-General, The Hon. C. W. Davidson.
Aug. 21 22 No, 809
No. 810 NATIONAL TELEVISION STATIONS
SIR GILES CHIPPINDALL RETIRES
The Minister for Immipration, The Hon. A. R. Downer.
Aug. 19No, 799 CAMPAIGN TO MAKE NON-BRITISH MIGRANTS
MORE AWARE OF OPPORTUNITIES TO LECOME
AUCTRALIAN CITIZENS.
The Minister for External Affairs, The Hon. Sir Garfield Barwick
Aug. 18 18 No. 795C AUSTRALIAhN GIFT OF FLOUR TO CEYLON
No. 795B A', NTA'RCTIC SEALS
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. P. Adermann
Aug. 22 No. 8lhA NEW iWHEA. T ST,', BILISATION PLAN
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
Aug. 18 21 No, 795D AUSTRALIANS AT AYBCA TALKS
No. 807 INTERVIEWS FOR ARMY APPRENTICES
The Minister for Customs and Excise, Senator the Hon. Denhamn
Henty
Aug. 21 No, 808 STA* TUTORY RULES 1963 No. 79 AMENDS THE
CUSTOMS ( CINEM.' TOGRAIF-H FILMS) REGULATIONS 
2
The Minister for the Interior, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
Aug. 21 No. 809A SENIOR CONSTABLE OF A. C. T. FOLICE FORCE
DISMISSED. SENIOR CONSTABLE KEITH SMITH.
The Minister for the Navy. Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Aug. 18 No. 795 R'. DICxIL CH NGE IN NAVAL TRAINING.
S 20 No, 802 N1, VY PREPAIRES FOR BIG EXERCISE
The Minister for Shipping and Transport, The Hon. Hubert Opperrman
Aug. 20No, 804 TWO SUCCESSFUL TENDERERS FOR NEW LIGHTHOUSE
SUPILY VESSELS FOR DEPT. OF S T.
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
A-ug. 22No, 814OVERSEAS COURSE FOR ANIMAL QUARANTINE
OFFICERS
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
Aug. 23No. 818SPAlCE AGE EXHIBITION IN PiRLIMENT HOUSE
The Minister for Repatriation, The Hon. R. W. C. Swartz
Aug. 22No. 813REPATRIA TION WORKS 1-ROG-RAMME
The Minister for Air, The Hon. David Fairbairn
Aug. 18 23 No. 795A APIOINTMENTS TO SENIOR PLRAF POSTS
No, 816 R. A. A. F. CA'DETS TO VISIT WVTEAONS RESEARCH
ESTABLISHMENT
The Detpartment of Air.
Aug. 22No, 811MAIlJOR-GENERAL SI RHAN DEL'COMBE HA S
ACCEPTED OINTMENT OF HONORARY ZIR
COMvIMCDORE No. 21 ( CITY OF MELBOURiNE)
( AXILIARY) SQUADRON.
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBE1RRA. A. C. T. 



63/ 700
OPENING OF THE R. G. MEilNZIES SCHOOL OF
HUMANITIES MONASH UNIVERSITY MELBOURNE
ON 24TH AUGUST, 1961
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr, Chancellor, Most Potent, Grave and Reverend Seniors
sitting here behind me, and Ladies and Gentlemen
I propose, with your concurrence to institute a
new rule and that is that I don't speak wit; h my hat on,
I can't ( Laughter) I'm very grateful to the Dean of the
Faculty of Arts for having varied the usual form. I always
have to remember when I open anything that apart from uttering
a number of words and if possible saying something I have to
open~ whatever it is and he has given me an alternativo today.
I may either open this School or I may pronounce the benediction
over it. ( Laughter) I now do both,
Mr. Chancellor, your account of how this new movement
in the university world occurred was still interesting to mo
though I had played a part in it. I don't mind telling you
that your broad hints about the future and the slight side
touc~ ios on the same theme by the Dean of the Faculty of Arts
( Laughter) may appear to you to have passed unnoticed by me
because I observed a straight face, but the reason for that
was that looking back in the audience I saw that my colleague,
the Treasurer, was present and so he knows now as much as I do
and if he doesntt know it, I think the Chairman of the
Universities Commission who is also lurking in this audience
will no doubt have made a note of it. And so in due course,
something dreadful will happen, financially, which will be
something very good for the universities of Australia,
You have to do a groat deal of good by stealth.
I offer that piece of gratuitous advice to those who are now
training for some occupation in life. Do it by stealth.
I remember when I had this idea of establish~ ing a committee
with the possibility of getting Keith Murray to come and
preside over it. I didn't care to mention this to the
Treasurer at the time who wasntt Mr. Holt at that timeuntil
it was practically completed. I was in England and I
spoke to Sir Keith Murray and he said, " We lli I would be very
happy. This is the kind of thing that I have had some
experience of, that I would like to do something about, but
I work with the Chancellor of the Exchequer a very happy
arrangement and I will need to have his approval." The
Chancellor of the day was Mr. Harold Macmillan, so I want and
got his approval, Thus the Committee began.
When I had assembled the Committee I then broke the
news to the Treasurer and he said, " Well, ola. man, I know you
are very interested in this kind of thing." I said, I
certainly am", I said, of course, " I warn you, this will c ost
money,"' and he said, " Yes, I had an idea that it would," and I
said, " Any committee of competence that goes into the position
of the universities tremendously pressed as they were at that
time by a vast flood of increase in those requiring university
training well, the cost will be high."
Up to that time, the Commonwealth Government had got
along very quietly with a few special grants of a limited kind-
I think we ran to zabout œ l4in the course of a year but this
060 0 / 2 
-2
one was bound to be in far greater figures than that. And I
must say for my then colleague that he took this very well and
the Committee then got to work and produced its first report,
its first triennial recommendation and it was very large, as it
seemed at that time and once more I adopted what you might be
pleased to describe as rather devious methods.
I knew that if this report were distributed to the
Ministers too far ahead of a Cabinet Meeting too many of them
might get to know too much about it and so I had to circulate
it one day and deal with it the next, And we came out at the
end of the day in Cabinet completely approving of all the recommendations
that had been made and since then, of course, you know
the story. I know some of it,
I know that for the first triennium under the
auspices of the Universities Commission what had seemed large
figuires in the Murray Report turned out to be quite insignificant
and Sir Leslie Martin has developed nowadays almost a habit of
avoiding my eye because he knows and I know that the next
triennium will be such as to lcavc. the second. one looking a
poor relation. Well, this is all good. It may be difficult
it is difficult, but it is incredibly good and I am happy to think
that what has happened in the universities of Australia has been,
in a sense, revolutionary, never suff. Licient the day will never
come when university authorities will say they are content with
what they have. It ca4n't come, This is not a static community,
it is not a static world that we live in. Problems are increasing
and the demand for people with cultivated intelligence is a
growing demand not only here but all over the world and
consequently, I am not here to say, " Well, gentlemen, call it
a day, will you? It is becoming a little uncomfortable,~ I am
quite prepared to say to you that I will wonder what has htappened
to the universities if they ever reach that comfortable position.
This is eatts and a task which any man claiming any
elements of statesmanship at all ought to be delighted to
participate in,
Of course Sir, it is always worth remembering, and
I am sure that you all remember it, that while there are great
f'inancial problems, great problems of building, great problems
of securing equipment and of keeping abreast of the developing
equipment, particularly in the scientific faculties, although
all those present problems, one of the great problems will be to
maintain in a growing university field the high quality of
university staffs. This is a problem which occasions me
although I am not responsible for dealing with it very much
but this occasions me more thought than all these other physical
problems to which I have referred, because we must maintain'the
high standards. If there is one thing we can't afford in this
country7 it is to lower the standards of university training and
to have first-class people, first-class men, first-class women
in the various faculties is net going to be easy. Nor indeed,
Sir can we contemplate that we are going to secure much help
on Zhat front from outside Australia because all countrie-, s feel
the saime pressure, the same urge, the same urgent demand to
maintain standards and to keep up and expand their first-class
teaching population. This is something that I think must inspire
everybody to greater and greater efforts,
And, Sir particularly here, what a marvellous thing
it is, as I said to the Chancellor after lunch, what a marvellous
thing i t is to have the honour of presiding over and contributing
to the growth of a new university, something straight from the
grass roots, not just inheriting somebody else's work but
0 / 3 
-3
creating something on the spot. This is tremendous. You know,
quite recently in America I delivered the Jefferson Oration, as
they are pleased to call it, at Monticello.
I suppose most of you remember that when Jefferson
drafted his own epitaph for his own memorial stone, he wrote
out " Thomas Jefferson" and his dates, " Draftsman of the
Declaration of Independence, Creator of the Virginia Statute for
Religious Toleration, Founder of the Universitly of Virginia."
Not a word about having been an ambassador, not a word about
having been Secretary of State in George Wvashaington's admninistration,
not a word about having been Vice President, not a word
about having been President, for two terms, of the United States
of America just these three simple things. And when he was
asked by one of his relatives, " Why didn't you include these
great matters?", he said, " Wfell, I wanted to have put on my
memorial what I had don3 for the people, not what the people
had done for me." Now this is superb. It's so simple and yet
it's full of that imaginative quality which is required in the
creation of anything, and here with this new University what
a task, what an opportunity for many among you to be able to
look back and say, " WJell, I was one of the creators in the true
sense of the Monash University."
Now, Sir, I just want to say a word, if I may,
about that very great man after whom this Univ( ersity is named.
lie was never involved in politics and therefore, perhaps, he
escaped the barbed tongaes of undergraduates, I am perfectly
certain that nobody would ever havoe dreamed of referring to a
building with which Sir John Monash was associated as " Jack's
Shack" ( Laughter) but I am told that already the ungodly in this
University are referring to this as " Ming's ' ting" ( Laughter)
But, Sir the naming of this university, this was a positive
inspiration. One of the greatest of Australians of all time
wonderful engineer, a famous and tremendous soldier a scholar
in his own right a great expert in many fields of life and'an
advocate, not only an advocate of good causes, but stopping at
the word " ladvocate" 7one of the greatest advocates I ever
listened to in my life; a man who understood the art of
persuasive spoech, the art of clear speech, who used no jargon
but who went clear to the point persuasively to the point, with
effects thpt I had the opportunity of witnessing in my own
political life more than once. And, Sir, because the University
is named after this great and famous man, I feel that a very
great honour, even indifferently earned, has beon conferred upon
me to have my name associated with one school of study in the
University named aftor him. It will always be a source of
immense pleasure and pride to me and to my family and to my
descendonts. Now Sir, before I conclude, I would like to make
one small contribution on the subject of the humanities. In
this century, and particularly perhaps in the lost twenty years
of it, there has been a very great, inevitable and proper
concentration of mind on what I will call, in the natural sense,
scientific studies, not only for prestige purposes and doing
some violence to the moon or something of that kind. No, but
because this world with its explosion of population, with the
urgent demand that exists all over the world to increase the use
of resources, the discovery of resources, the scientific application
of resources in order to meet a growing population, has
become a task of tremendous urgency and of very great international
significance. And therefore it's right that there should be
this attention, but it is wrong to think ns some people do, that
studies which are not related to practical results of that kind
are idlo and useless, 0 
This century hasn't failed either in science
or in technology. It has produced almost the golden age of
science and technology, but in terms of civilisation it has
had failure after failure written up against it and that's
because we have become too fond of the idea that we are clever
people, that we are very, very smart to be able to understand
all the forces of Nature and to harness them, to deal with them,
whereas the truth, of course, is that civilisation I repeat
something that I have said before many times civilisation is
in the heart and mind of people and the task of the humanist the
task of the people who teach and learn in a school of humanities
it not to forget that history for example, is no useless study,
since a man who is ignorant of it will have no sense of proportion,
no benefit of experience in dealing with new problems as they
arise. Languages...... and I throw in with a dying
inflexion a word of classics because a precise understanding
of words and a dislike of jargon will save this world from
many confusions, and as many hostilities have arisen in the
world and in society through misunderstanding as through gross
differences of points of view. Philosophy,... how important
that we should have physics and go beyond it to metaphysics*
that we should understand something about the source and nature
of ideas so that the man who passes through and who is even
lightly touched by these things is forever thereafter a wiser
man, a better-informed man, a better-balanced man. And, of
course, so far as literature is concerned, I don't understand
people who regard the reading of great masters of prose or of
poetry as an irrelevant occupation, exhibiting a slight but
perceptible eccentricity. If I could compel every man sitting
in all the parliaments of Australia to read something of this
kind every night on going back from Parliament House the
standard of debate would rise in the most magnificent fashion.
( Lughter) ( Applause) Sir, I say no more about that. I merely
reiterate that what we want in the world is undoubtedly great
physicists and great chemists and great engineers and what-haveyou
because the world is crying aloud for their work for the
sake of its own problems and its own human beings all over the
world, but it needs even more that wisdom, human understanding,
which produces what I would call an educated tolerance of ideas,
It needs these things far more because wars, disasters of that
kind, bestial repressions here and there the kind of thing we
become accustomed to reading about almost every day in the
newspapers don't arise from mechanical causes they don't arise
because of some jealousy between one scientist and another.
On the contrary, science tends more and more to be international
in its quality, in its thought. These things arise from the
fact that men have inadequately learned to understand men or to
have men understand them, because there is not this quiet,
passionless humanity sufficiently distributed around the world
to make the very thought of some of these events that I have
mentioned impossible. Sir, I repeat, you've done me a very great
honour. I shall remember this occasion but I shall remember even
more the fact that in this new university being pursued as it is
with such vigour, such imagination, having as it most certainly
has, a great future you should have thought fit to associate
my name with a great section of that University; this is, I think,
the greatest honour that any university could pay to any man.
So I give it my blessing and I once more declare it open, 



LAYING OF THE FOUNDATION STONE AT THE
KEW JEWISH CENTRlE, MELBOURNE
ON 25TH AUGST, 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, Sir RoberCt Menzies
Mr. Chairman Your Excellency and Ladies and Gentlemen and
Boys and Girls You notice that I haven't tried to compete with
my predecessors who had the game of naming all the people
who ought to be named to perfection ( Laughter) and as I am
quite an amateur in these matters, I will just begin by
saying Sir" l. It is a very great pleasure for me and for my
wife to be here. I don't need to tell you that. I have had
the privilege in quite a few parts of Australia of attending
the opening of Jewish Community Centres schools, homes and the
like tbut do you know, this is the first tire I was ever asked
to attend one in my own electorate ( Laughter). In factl you
are entitled to gaze on me today with a certain amount of
suspicion ( Laughter). Elsewhere it was quite all right; they
weren't my electors, but this morning, I am exposing myself
to great risk. I lived in Kew for many years. I have a great
ambition to live there again before I die, though of course,
the speed with which I can achieve that result will depend
very largely on what happens to me at the hands of people like
Senator Cohen and Maurice Ashkanasy ( Laughter)
You have just been reminded of the story of so
many of you and so many of your friends. It is one of the
dreadful chapters in European history and in world history,
but it means something to so many of you to have come up out
of the house of bondage and into a free land, because this is
a free land. This indeed, I am happy to say, is a land of
tolerance, It won't mean that you won't meet a few intolerant
people. There are some people who are even intolerant of me.
Very hard to believe ( Laughter). But this, as a land, as a
community, is a place of tolerance.
I just referred to your very distinguished
colleague and office-bearer Maurice Ashkanasy. I don't wanat
to do him any damage but, Sir, he was a pupil of mine when he
went to the Bar. I taught him practically all the law that
he has now forgotten, ( Laughter) And he is a great friend of
mine, We are always delighted to see each other, but I gather
that he is on the opposite side to mine, politically, Now
this is good. We dontt want too many people to be on the
opposite side, but it is a very good thing. It is a very good
thing that we should live in a community, isn't it, in which
political opposition and personal friendship can dwell happily
together. And this is of tremendous importance to the whole
of Australia and particularly, if I may say so, of importance
to you, You are, many of you, so near to the bitterness of
intolerance persecution by intolerant people that it's not
so easy, perhaps, for you to realise the true quality of this
community very quickly, But I say to you these memories will,
I hope, fade. They wontt be hold in a direot sense by children,
0* 0000 / 2 
2
More and more everybody will come to realise that this is a
country in which every community may form part of a greater
community and that a tolerant one.
Now, of course, toleration is a very good thing.
Perhaps it isn't enough. A man may be tolerant because he is
indifferent, because he doesn't care what happens to the other
fellow, and so although it's good, it isn't everything. In
reality what makes a contribution to a nation like Australia
is the service of people who have enthusiasm and faith, who do
believe in something. They are not tolerant because they are
indifferent, They are tolerant because they have a passionate
belief in their hearts. And that's why the religious significance
of this occasion is not to be overlooked, Indeed, this is at
the very centre of it. I don't imagine that anybody in what
I will call for this purpose, the Jewish community woulA wish
that all Jews should live in one place together anA that all
Scotsmen should live in another suburb all together with nobody
else. I dot know how you would get on but I would becor~ e
awfully tired of Scotsmen, No, no. ~ ie don't want this. We
dont want to have a sort of colonial system established and
therefore it is a very good thing that we should be all of us
in our various origins distributed in the community but we
must retain our right to get together from time to time for our
common purposesI not thereby losing our sense of general
obligation as citizens but gathering in the church of our faith,
meeting the people of our faith refreshing ourselves from time
to time at the very fountainheaA of the things that we believe in.
You know, I made a lighthearted reference just
now to Scotsmen, Nov been made an authentic one recently by
being given the Order of the Thistle. Nothing could be more
Scottish than that. Well you know as well as I do that there
are two races in this world who are suspected by ill-informed
outsiders of being moan. ( Laughter) the Jews and the Scots,
the truth of course being that they are both diligent in
business and may therefore stand before kings and that they
are diligent in business, successful perhaps more than most
more than some, and with the greatest capacity for generosity
that can be found anywhere around the world. This is a proud
thing to recall. I always admire immensely whenever I go to
any Jewish establishment as I will call it in Australia how
this family feeling, this instinct, this sense of responsibility
for other people in your community as if they were all members
of your family how this is maintaining itself and what a great
contribution it is making to Australian life,
You know, yesterday afternoon, I had the great
honour of opening a very large building in Monash University
a building which they have named after me, and I said something
about the naming of the University. Every young member of your
community ought to feel inspired by the contribution made by
great, great Australians like Monash and like Isaacs. These'
are outstanding examples of what can be done.
Now, I've said something and I won't say very much
more, I've said something to you about not establishing separate
communities in a physical sense, maintaining your community
relations but contributing to the community in the broad sense,
adding threads to the structure of the community. This I
believe is of tremendous importance. There are a lot o1 people
you will encounter who think that we all ought to be the sqme, 
that there ought to be a species of drab uniformity, that they
all ought to be like meg so to speak, that they all ought to
be like you, so to speak. This passion for uniformity is not
to be encouraged. What we need in Australia is that every
person coming from some particular race or faith who comes into
the Australian community should retain his quality in that sense
but should add it to the qualities of all the other people in
the community so that finally we get a powerful structure, a
self-respecting structure, a community of high ideals and of
clear faith and of generosity and of understanding.
Therefore, be yourselves I say this to the more
newly-arrived be yourselves at all times, but also be
something broader than that, a member of a community to which,
given health and strength, you will make some notable contribution,
I am delighted that this centre is being established
here. I could see at a glance as we came along this morning
that you had established already a pretty considerable command
over the local Council. I saw treble parking in the street
( Laughter) and somebody said~ in my party, " Now, look at that.
That seems remarkable." I said, " Oh, no: Bill Birrell, the
Town Clerk, will be there," ( Laughter)
I won't detain you any longer. This is a very
happy occasion for you and I must say, a very happy occasion
for me. I ask God to bless you in your enterprise. May it
succeed beyond your dreams. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
D SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. Sir ROBERT MENZIES,
D M. P
ON
I DAPPROPRIATION BILL 1963-64.
Second Reading.
( BUDGET DEBATE.)
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 27th August, 1963.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES '( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 8.341.-Mr. Speaker, my
purpose to-night is to deal with the amendment
to the motion for the second reading
of this bill submitted by the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr.' Caiwell), which constitutes
a motion of no confidence in the Government.
After all, as we have already indicated,
that-exposes the Government at once
to the risk of defeat. Therefore, it is proper
that I deal with the matter. In order to
remove any anxieties, perhaps I should make
it quite clear that we-propose to vote against
the amendment. I think that is fair enough.
8444/ 63. I do not propose, Sir, to duplicate what
has been said already-and said very wellby
a number of honorable members on my
side of the House. I would like to begin
quietly, as I hope to continue, by mentioning
that one of the remarkable things about
my distinguished opponent's speech was that
two of the Opposition's earlier cries were
-abandoned. It is worth recording them so
as to accord them, as it were, the proper
o~ bsequies. First of all, we were accustomed
over quite a period to being told by the
Opposition that we had ruined the loan
inarket. , That is very interesting. When the 
loan market was a little sluggish, the Opposition
explained that this was due to want
of confidence in the Government. This
capacity on the part of the Opposition,
driven desperately by so many years in the
wilderness, to have a bit each way fascinates
me. The Opposition said that we had
ruined the loan market. Now, it has to
concede that the loan market was never
heavier, never more successful. Opposition
members said that they would restore the
loan market by lower interest rates. We
did that. We restored the loan market and
then we reduced the long-term bond rate.
And the loan market still was tremendously
healthy. All I can hope is that the subscribers
to Commonwealth loans issued on
behalf of the States will continue to express
their discontent with the Government in the
same fashion.
The second allegation that is worthy of
passing thought, Sir, is that by dropping
import licensing we imperilled our overseas
balances. I remember listening in this
House time after time to Labour leadershonorable
members opposite have never had
fewer than three or four at a time-saying,
Look at the overseas balances you
inherited from us and see how ' they have
fallen When we got rid of import licensing
for all practical purposes, we were told
that we had taken the opportunity to destroy
our overseas balances. At 30th June, the
overseas balances of this country stood at
œ E626,000,000 of gold and foreign exchange,
plus an International Monetary Fund drawing
right of 223,000,000. If this be the
ruination of our overseas funds, we must
have the dictionary re-written.
11 just mention those things very quietly,
Sir, because I think that, in order to observe
continuity in politics, some of those who
were not here at the time ought to know
the kind of things that have been said by
their leaders. I now pass on from that. I
know that some of the things I shall say
have already been said extremely well, but
I just want to make my own speech on this
subject as head of the Government that is
under censure.
Time after time in his speech, the Leader
of the opposition made allegations of dishonesty.
This is one of his favourite words.
When I hear it from him, I take it seriously.
if I heard it from somebody else, I would
ignore it. We heard from the honorable gentleman repeated allegations of dishonesty.
Yet the central allegation that appeared
time after time in his speech was itse'
completely dishonest. That allegation wa.
that my colleague, the Treasurer ( Mr.
Harold Holt), speaking on behalf of the
Government, proposes a deficit of
œ 300,000,000 and that this deficit-he kept
on repeating it-contains the seeds of inifl
tion. That statement was clearly, de,.
liberately, repeatedly and grossly dishonest.
We might as well have the facts out on
this. He is not going to accuse us of dishonesty
and escape from these perfectly
clear statements about his own attack. I
will come back to this in a moment and
demonstrate -it, chapter and verse, but,
before I do that, let me just continue with
these rather agreeable, pleasant rzemarks.
It is only a few months ago that the
Leader of the Opposition was preaching depression
and stagnation. All of us w
were here remember that, do we noFt
spoke about these things so yearningly that
I almost believed he wanted them. Perhaps
he did. He spoke about depression and
stagnation. Now he invents a œ 300,000, OQ.
deficit with, as he pointed out, increase
expenditure but no increased taxation,
he says now-or he did the other daythat
this means a period of boom and bust.
I use his own somewhat sculptural expression.
To meet this, he wants largely increased
expenditure to increase basic
demand. That is what he called it. Apart
from altering the graph of income tax to
increase the burden upon those earning over
œ 1,200 a year, which is the average wage
earning of to-day--will say something
about that in a moment because I want to
keep the best till the last-he wants to reduce
revenues from pay-roll tax, from petrol tax
-1 need not go through the whole listbut
he would increase expenditure on homes,
on education, on defence and on northern
development. This is a curious thing. He
says this is a policy of boom and bust, that
we are in for a deficit of œ 300,000,000,
which he knows is completely untrue and
which the Treasurer made it perfectly clear
was untrue.
Having said that, what does he do about
it? If this contains the seeds of inflation,
then obviously the revenues ought to be up,
and, or, the expenditures ought to be down;
because he finds in a deficit of œ 300,000,000
all the seeds of inflation. What is his cure? 
It is to increase the expenditures and reduce
the revenues. Sir, this is almost incredible.
.\ am perfectly certain . that if all the electors
Australia could hear this statement, and
think about it, they would refuse to entrust
their fortunes to a prospective Prime Minister
with these astonishing ideas.
Before I pass on from that, I want to say
7 word about what he proposes to do about
-defence. He wants more money spent on
defence. I took an extract from his speech,
and I propose to read it out. This is a
puzzle. Even a quiz competitor might be
hard put to it to explain this-
We will not pretend,-
said the honorable gentlemanas
this Government does, that the national interest
is served by a system of down payments on the
instalment plan for weapons and equipment which
may be delivered anything from one to five years
hence and which, when delivered, are obsolete or
obsolescent.
7rihis statement caught my ear at once. I
asked myself: " What does the Leader of
the Opposition mean by that? Has he discovered
some profound means by which
you can go and buy the latest weapons and
"" he latest aircraft off the hook? If he has,
-J would appeal to him as a somewhat
occulting friend of mine to tell me the
secret. Oh," he says, " you must not buy
them on down payments; you must not buy
them on the instalment plan Is he really
innocent enough to think that you can get
a' replacement fighter or a replacement
bomber or a reconnaissance plane by going
along to a shop and buying it? That, I
thought, of all the things he said, was the
most fantastic. Having looked at it, I concluded
that, as he has a rather attractive
sense of humour from time -to time, I must
regard this as a sort of beau geste on his
part. To sum all that up, let us put it in
this way: His cure, and therefore presumably
the cure of his party, for a boom is
to have a bigger one, and the right way to
avoid worrying about a bust is to make it a
stone certainty.
Now let me come back to this famous
œ 300,000,000 deficit. I ask all honorable
members to think about it quite seriously.
If the honorable gentleman knows anything
about these matters-and he should by now
-he knows that the estimated cash deficit
is œ 58,000,000, and he knows that, on all
former occasions, acting on the old system of presenting the accounts in terms of cash
results, this is a substantial deficit, th6ughi
not the biggest one that we have ever
budgeted for. The Treasurer explained this,
I thought, in the simplest terms, and, of
course, the figures establish it.
In past years--and I say this for the oenefit
of anybody who may not have followed
these rather recondite Treasury problems,
although the honorable gentleman opposite,
of course, is familiar with them-revenue
and loan items have been added together,
revenue and loan or capital expenditures
have been added together, we have subtracted
one from the other and a cash result
has been brought out. Under that system
we determined that the cash deficit would
be X or Y or Z. This year, we happen to
have adopted the system which has applied
-I think I am ' right, Mr. Treasurer-for a
long time in Great Britain, where all of
what we call the revenue and expenditure
items are put above -the line and the capital
items below the line. Adopting that
system and assuming that we do not borrow
a shilling on behalf of the States, there is a
deficiency of œ 358,000,000. But because
we know that, on behalf of the States, we
will borrow large sums of money from the
-public on the loan market, we make an
estimate of the amount involved. The
Treasurer estimated it-he cannot be precise
at this stage-at œ 300,000,000. So you
have a deficit of œ 358,000,000. You set off
against that the œ 300,000,000 which you
anticipate borrowing from the public-all
on behalf of the States, mark you-and the
deficit in cash of œ 58,000,000. The Leader of
the Opposition knows that. It was explained
with the utmost clarity in the Budget speech.
Why does he now seek to deceive the public
by talking about a record deficit of
œ 300,000,000? That he has set out to
deceive the public appears from his own
speech. It is sometimes useful to quote
your opponent, so I will weary the House
by reading two or three passages from his
speech. He said-
Thus, we have the spectacle of a Treasurer who
poured ridicule on the Opposition" s policy, in
1961, of running a deficit of œ 100,000,000--
Labour proposed a cash deficit of
œ 100,000,000 in four or five months, which
was equal to œ 300,000,000 in a yearhimself
proposing a deficit of mote than
œ 300,000,000 nearly three years later when, as far 
as he is concerned, the unemployment problem
has been solved.
Here is a deliberate falsification. Here is a
comparison of a cash deficit of œ 100,000,000
and the œ 300,000,000 deficit in this Budget,
which represents a cash deficit of only
œ 58,000,000. The people of Australia
deserve better treatment than that. They
do not deserve to be deceived in this
fashion. Plunging further, the honorable
gentleman went on to say-
In our view, this increase of over œ 200,000,000
represents the cumulative results of the disastrous
policy of too little too late--
The honorable gentleman is a master of the
clichewhic' he has followed ever since he and his
Government destroyed full employment and business
activity in November, 1960.
I hope it is clear to all who are listening
to me that here is a comparison between
two utterly different things. But the honorable
gentleman went on and stated-
And yet, in what is claimed to be a propitious
situation, the estimated budget deficit is the
greatest on record.
He knows that to be untrue, but although
he knows that he says-
Let me repeat. It is three times more than
that contained in Labour's policy speech
If the Treasurer's diagnosis is correct, then he is
being highly irresponsible. He is imperilling price
and cost stability because he lacks the courage--
Let me repeat for the benefit of all concerned
that I am quoting the words of the
Leader of the Labour Partyto
raise taxes to at least match the extra expenditure
he is budgeting for.
I say no more about that. I regard this as
a rather unsavoury episode and I apologize
for having had to take up so much time to
expose it.
I will go on with the author-if he is the
author-of the motion of no confidence in
the Government. He might say that this
will be my last speech as Prime Minister.
No doubt that is the expectation and therefore
I must deal with these matters. He
turned his attention to taxation. He said that
he would reconstruct the income tax system
to help the man receiving less than œ 24 a
week: I imagine from what he said that
he would like to save the man earning less
than œ 24 a week 5s. a week in tax. I point
out to honorable members that even that
saving would increase the tax paid by those
receiving more than œ 24 a week by an average of almost 10 per cent. I do not
think the honorable gentleman, or those
who advise him, has ever worked out th:-'
problem to discover how the break-up L
taxation in Australia occurs. There would
be an average increase of about 10 per cent.
The honorable gentleman might say,
Those who are receiving œ 26, œ 28, œ 30 or
œ 40 a week naturally would be required tI
pay only a nominal increase I wonder
what he would do when he reached those
income brackets upon which we rely so
much for investment and development in
Australia! He has not told us.
Then, hoping to strengthen his imperfect
story-the one on which we are to be
thrown out of office-the honorable gentleman
mentioned direct and indirect taxation.
He set out to convey the impression that
under my Government there was ' a trend to
increase indirect taxes and to reduce direc'
taxes. The honorable gentleman said, ThL
Labour Party when it comes to office" or
" if it comes to office have forgotten
which he said-" will reverse the trend towards
indirect taxes This is a beautiful
old argument. I have heard it all m,
political life. It is said that the hard shell--
tories or whatever we are called are the
boys who want to pile on the indirect taxes
because the ordinary fellow, the wageearner,
has to pay them, and they cut down
direct taxes, income tax ' and the like,
because the silver-tails will -get some benefit.
If the honorable gentleman wants a short
course in political history he might direct
himself to the facts. In 1948-49 he was a
Minister in the last Labour government.
Perhaps I could have said the latest Labour
government, but I will call it the last. At
that time Labour was the master of all it
surveyed. It had a handsome majority in
the House of Representatives and a handsome
majority-at least a large one-in the
Senate. In 1948-49 direct taxes in Australia
were 56.6 per cent. of total taxes. Would
honorable members be good enough to carry
that figure in their minds? When we came
into office-about half-way through the
financial year 1949-50 and after the Budget
had been established-the proportion was
55.2 per cent. In 1961-62 the trend about
which the honorable gentleman ! has complained
had been so reversed under my
Government that the proportion of direct 
taxes had risen from 55.2 per cent, of total
taxes to 59.9 per cent. In the financial year
"' vered by this Budget it is 59.5 per cent.
_ a it be well understood that under this
Liberal-Country Party Administration the
percentage of direct taxation has increased.
It has not fallen. The honorable gentleman,
having thought that he had something
-) complain about, now finds that the boot
ø on the other foot.
I pass from that. The Leader of the
Opposition has a thesis which, with great
respect to him, is self-contradictory. In
one breath he says that the Budget is potentially
inflationary. His own expression was
that it contained the seeds of inflation
because there was a huge deficit. In the
next breath he says that the Budget, although
potentially inflationary, will fail to restore
a strong basic demand. With great respect,
I say that he cannot be right both ways. If
~ is right in thinking that the Budget is
ationary, then, of course, demand will
expand excessively in relation to supply.
But if what he calls basic consumer demand
lags, then there can be no inflation unless,
of course, there is some cost inflation by
raising of costs in spite of the relative
Ability, or the almost absolute stability, of
the consumer price index.
Then he went on to say that nothing has
been done to restore the purchasing power
of ordinary people. This is a time-honoured
argument. I am happy to say that we have
been put into office and kept in office for a
long time by ordinary people-and ordinary
people who are not fools. Let us have a
look at the facts again. I apologize if I am
repeating things infinitely well known to
honorable members, but they deserve to be
brought together. Just now I mentioned
the consumer price index which is the most
modern index of what I will call the cost
of living. -It rose by 0.2 per cent.-that is
a negligible fraction of a fraction-last year.
But the wages and salaries paid in Australia
in this time of terrible depression increased
by œ 210,000,000, or 6 per cent., compared
with 2 per cent. in the previous year. This
is worth noting. In the March quarter
of this year, with a stable consumer price
index figure, average weekly earnings
increased by 2.5 per cent.-in one quarter.
These are not my figures; these are the
figures of the Commonwealth Statistician
who stands outside controversy and outside
bias. The gross national product-rose. in
1962-63-the last financial year which
finished on 30th June-by 8 per cent. The
consumer price index was static. The gross
national expenditure-that is to say, the
total market value of goods and services
bought for use in the Australian economy
-increased by œ 752,000,000,. or 10 per
cent., in a dead year. Remember that I said
the honorable gentleman talked about
restoring consumer demand. Here you
have the gross national expenditure rising by
10 per cent., with the cost-price level
reflected in the consumer price index
remaining stable. Personal consumption
rose by: œ 245,000,000, or 5 per cent. Private
fixed capital expenditure rose by 13 per
cent., including an 8 per cent. increase on
dwellings, and was 4 per cent, higher than
any previous rise in our history. We all
ought to be crying ourselves to sleep when
we contemplate these figures. The number
of houses and flats approved in July this
year was 9,465; in the same month last year
the number was 8,200; and in July the previous
year the number was 7,000. This is
a tremendous symptom of development.
Since honorable gentlemen ' opposite
ohoose to concentrate their fire on the
question of employment of people, I point
out that in the last financial year the total
numbers actively employed in Australia rose
by 100,000. This is where we all are supposed
to get down and weep and persuade
people that misery is on hand, that disaster
is about us and that there is a sluggish
economy. But, of course, I am wrong. I
apologize to the Leader of the Opposition
because, although I have dealt with one of
his remarks-that there is a sluggish
economy-I am bound to say that on the
other hand he had a saving bet on the seeds
of inflation. I leave it to him.
I want to turn away from that and say
something very briefly about northern
development. I would have said more
about this, perhaps, if it were not for the
fact that my colleague, the Minister for
Territories ( Mr. Hasluck), in the course of
this debate, made what I venture to describe
as an extremely brilliant speech on this
matter-a speech which I hope will be read
and circulated very widely in this country.
I gather that the Opposition wants a committee
or a commission. Before we came
into' office, the Labour Party established a 
committee of Ministers from the Commonwealth,
Queensland and Western Australia,
with a committee of officials, to have a look
at these matters. I have noticed that there
has been some controversy on some television
session; but I have made inquiries
from impartial people as to the records in
my own department. I find that the committee
of Ministers last met in 1947 and
that the committee of officials last met in
February, 1948. After all, we did not come
in till 19th December, 1949. What came
of it? They thought it was a good idea. It
might very well have been one. I do not
discuss it. But what came of it, apart from
tax zoning? If I give that in, what came
of it? I do not know.
We have gone about northern development
in a practical way. We have collaborated
with the Queensland and Western
Australian governments and with private
enterprise. By so doing we have helped in
the most spectacular and valuable northern
development in our history. In discussions
of this kind projects have been selected.
They have been selected by governments.
After all, governments have the responsibility
of performance; do not forget that.
These projects have been discussed by
governments as priority matters calculated
to improve Australian commodity trade
balances, to increase exports and to save
imports. It is a pretty practical and effective
system, Sir, which produces in our own
time the great mineral developments, cattle
roads development, water storage, irrigation,
railway works in the north and so on.
I will not bother about giving an
exhaustive list of these things.
Mr. O'Brien.-Oil.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Yes, oil.
Mr. O'Brien.-You put it there, did you?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-No, but we
did what you did not do; we gave material
help in the search for it. All I need to say
because i am not going to repeat what
has been said by my colleague-is: What
do the people want-committees or results?
I want to talk about my last topic with
some particularity because it has been the
subject of a very intensive campaign. The
newspapers of 19th August contained an
advertisement published by the Victorian Teachers Union of 22,000 teachers. It is
very much in line with some of the things
that I have heard from teachers in t)'
House. I would like to read the advertis.
ment. It is always a risk to do these things,
but I will accept the risk. This is a large
and costly advertisement and it contains
explicitly and implicitly allegations which I
propose to deal with and to denounce. I
there be no mistake about this. Tvl
advertisement reads-
In 1945 Mr. R. G. Menzies, speaking in Parliament
on the problems of State schools--
This is 1945 when a Labour government
was in office and I was Leader of the
Oppositionsaid-And I am quoted in bits-
" The Commonwealth must in my opinion give
aid to the States. Whatever State Ministers
of Education may say about what they would,
like to do, there is a sharp limit to tb'
resources." Now, after fourteen years of offi,
Sir Robert Menzies-
I was promoted in the meantimehas
yet to fulfil this promise. The situation in
the State schools has become far more serious,
yet they still do not receive any Federal A'
whatsoever. This aid is essential-to provide a,
quate classrooms, equipment and playgrounds, to
reduce the size of classes and to increase the
number-To increase the number mind youof
trained teachers. Yet Mr. Holt's
Budget gave no direct aid to State primary,
secondary and technical schools.
Leave the Treasurer out of it for the
moment; this is mostly about me-
The schools need more money. Your children's
future depends on it.
That is signed " A public statement in education
week from the Victorian Teachers
Union of 22,000 teachers The reference
to 22,000 teachers has a slight suggestion
of pressure about it. Speaking for myself,
I can resist nothing as well as that kind of
pressure. I hesitate to believe that that advertisement
represented the views of very many
of the Victorian teachers.
Mr. Barnard.-You should have been at
the conference in Melbourne.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I know all
about that. I know that the honorable
member is a teacher. I understand his
point of view. But I am speaking here 
to-night as a man who has done more for
education than any other Prime Minister
the history of this country. The
lctorian Teachers Union advertisement
quoted what I said in 1945-a time when
a . Labour government gave tax reimbursements
to the States amounting in total to
,34,800,000. That same government con-
) ued in office for some years but made
. provision in its budgets to subsidize or
to underwrite State loan raisings, which
were, incidentally, among other things for
school buildings. Not a penny!
Mr. Reynolds.-There was no need to
underwrite them.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-You are talking
about fairly small matters. The tax
reimbursement to the States was
œ 34,800,000 but the fact is-and you cansqueak
your way out of it-that at that
_-Ane and until we came into office not one
shilling was found out of . the Commonwealth
Budget to supplement -loan raisings
for the States'. programmes, including their
programmes of works for education. Also,
was a period in which the Common-
_, ealth Government made no special grants
to the States for universities or teaching
hospitals. What is the position to-day. I want to
say this as one who is supposed to have
forsworn what he said in 1945: The tax
reimbursement to the States, as even honorable
members opposite must know,
materially enables the States to pay their
running education costs because it includes
a calculation for growing population. The
tax reimbursement has increased from
œ 34,800,000 in 1945 to œ 318,400,000. That
is something worth thinking about-an
increase from œ 34,000,000 to œ 318,000,000
under our Government. The tax reimbursement
is now called financial assistance
grant, but it is the same thing. The effect
of this generous treatment of the States in
revenue and loans-it was generous; it went
beyond any formula that had ever been
devised in the time of the Labour Government-
has been that whereas the States
spent on education in 1950-51, just after
we came to power, an amount of
œ 46,000,000, in 1960-61 they spent
œ 184,000,000, and I would think that this
year they will spend something more than œ 200,000,000. That . represents ; an enormous
increase. Sir, it is a very strange performance for
a teachers' -spokesman to assume that . Commonwealth
. payments to the . States : contain
no education aid. All along ,. we : have
exceeded the Chifley formula -by supplementary
grants. In 1959 when -my colleagues
the Deputy Prime Minister ( Mr.
McEwen) and the Treasurer were . at the
Australian Loan Council and the Premiers'
Conference we agreed to a greatly
liberalized formula, and an important factor
in all this was population and, therefore,
school needs. Over the past thirteen years
we have provided something that was aiever
provided before in the time of the Labour
government. ' We have provided . a grand
total of œ 801,000,000 for State loan works
over and above actual loan raisings. In
1945 such assistance was unknown. I
repeat: Over a period of thirteen years we
have provided œ 801,000,000. I say without
any fear whatever that but for those
actions on our part State expenditure on
schools and school equipment would have
been immeasurably less than it was. Yet
I am to be told that we have done nothing.
I can understand some people who are not
fully aware of these matters falling into the
error of repeating that falsehood, but I can
neither understand nor forgive people who
know about them who will repeat it.
Our performance in relation to universities
is well known. I will not rehearse it.
When I originally spoke about this matter
. in the House and -announced that the
Government would adopt the Murray ' com-
ø mittee's report our action was hailed by the
then Leader of the Opposition as munificent
-those were his very words-and indeed,
so it was, and it was proper.-The setting
up of the Murray committee, the adoption
of its report, the application of that report
to the Australian Universities Commission,
the introduction of a system of triennial
grants, the inclusion of teaching hospitals
-a very great development-the establishment
of the tertiary education committee,
which is now sitting and which I hope will
report before long and which includes in
. its scope all tertiary forms of training,
including technological training-all these
things we have done, but according to the
advertisement we have done nothing. I
must have misunderstood English when I
was taught it at school. 
The-Premiers had an extraordinary conference
in February, 1963. On that occasion
the Premier of New South Wales, Mr.
Hefron, a man whose interest in education
and service to its cause I tremendously
admire-he has done a great deal for education-
submitted a proposition once more
that a special grant, not part of the general
grant to -the States, should be earmarked
for education and that a special inquiry
should be held. The Acting Premier of
Victoria, at that conference, said that what
Victoria wanted was general assistance to
the State budget so that-I quote his
words-" we can retain the right to control
education within our own budget".
Mr.. Pizzey, of Queensland, a greatly
respected member of the Queensland Government,
agreed. He said, " We do not
favour a special grant Sir Thomas
Playford agreed. My old friend does not
always agree. But he agreed on this
occasion. The Premier of Western Australia
repeated that whatever provision
there was should be a part of the general
grant. That was the state of mind of
the clear majority of the Premiers.
I have been speaking about the meeting in
February, 1963. Then there was a normal
meeting in June' of this year, when my two
colleagues were present and I was out of
the country-perhaps fortunately, but I
do not know. My colleagues made an
arrangement with the States for substantial
increases in the provision to the States.
Mark you, Mr. Speaker, this was done
after the education discussion in February,
1963, with the Premiers. They had said
then, when this matter was very much in
their minds, " We want a little more on
our general grants so that we can cope
with the problem, of State education"
Later substantial increases were made.
The financial assistance grants to the
States were increased by œ 14,000,000. I
will just give the actual increase. Considering
that these grants had risen before,
this was a big sum. The grants to the
two claimant States went up by œ 200,000.
That is nothing much. The additional
assistance grants, which were special, went up by œ 2,500,000. There was other
assistance of a revenue nature which went
up by œ 1,700,000. The States works a'
housing allocation went up by œ 17,000, L,,,
and other assistance of a capital nature
went up by œ 6,300,000. These two later
items add up to œ 23,300,000 in one year,
and if the first group I gave is added the
total relevant improvement in the positi
of the States in one year was œ 41,700,00i,:
I have not included any federal aid roads
grants or anything of that kind. Some
of this œ 41,700,000 would include provision
for schools and equipment, because
the education votes of the States have
become so large.
The only other thing I want to say is
by way of confirming what I have just
said. Under present arrangements-all
made since my 1945 speech and sinc,
the 1949 election-the States have be,
able to quadruple their expenditure on
education. The proportion of their capital
expenditure devoted to educational purposes,
such as school buildings, rose from
6 per cent. in 1949 to ' 20 per cent. j-
1961-62. It is probably a little mo
now. There was a reference in the'
advertisements to teachers. In 1951, in
government schools, there were 36,000
full-time teachers and there were sixteen
teachers' colleges. In 1961, after this socalled
miserable default of mine in relation
to education, there, were not 36,000
full-time teachers by 63,700. There were
19,000 teachers in training and instead
of sixteen teachers' colleges there were 28.
This, I venture to say, could be better.
Everything could be better. But there is
no case for a condemnation of our
approach. On the contrary, there is conclusive
proof that we have responded
actively to the claims of education-claims
which I profess to understand as well as
any other man in this place.
I conclude by saying that this advertised
propaganda is badly informed, is
inaccurate and, what is worse, is grossly
unfair.
By Authority: A. J. ARTHUR, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra. 



MUM4 FOR MI OMINQ 0F THK SOUT!
PACIFIC QUM, SMJAO ON
MRT AUMSTO 1963
We la Austvlla sand ou eagatulstlam
to all thoe Whoes lmglzmtoa and hard wgk e
bmmubt latebehag thes 1114 Soth PFac ife ammes
This s an mvet of ~ wb2o slpiflence La the
sjoutlag vwrl. It Is the rmt of devoted efforts hr
BMRW % bog~ 113kg-MU the tewwteris of the &amp; rme 9 and
I an heppw that the Austsl~ naa GWwmsnt &amp; S 1k UMbW
of the Souft PtMe ComtsaIns, bas been able to offer
a Mssurs of sup wS
To all empntltous wberovmw they oom frm
1A the South Molfie we send pod visbs and mod Iu*. 6
R* GO )= EZ= E
Paum XIMISTER0 



63/ 199
FOR PRESS P. M. 70/ 63
VISIT OF MR. IKEDA
Statement by the Prime Minister, The Rt. Hon. SilrRobert
Menzies, M. P.
The Prime iinister of Japan, Mr. Haynto IKEDA,
will make an official visit to Australia from September 29
to October 3. His itinerary is cxpected to include
Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne.
Mr. Ikeda will be the guest of the Australian
Government. The Government's invitation to him was extended
personally by Mr. McEwen, Leputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Trade during his visit to Japan early this month.
I very much welcome Mr. Ikeda's visit. It will be
the second official visit to Australia by a Prime Minister
of Japan, the previous one being that of Mr. Nobusuke Kishi
in 1957. A former Prime Minister, Mr. Shigeru Yoshida,
made a private visit in 1959.
CANBERRA
AuFust 30, 1963 



OPENING OF THE HO; ARD FLOREY LABORATORIES
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
AUGUST, 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Deputy Chancellor, Mr. Minister, Mr. Vice-Chancellor,
Sir Howard and Ladies and Gentlemen
I want to confess to you that I meet an initial
difficulty. I came out here innocently, thinking that I wap
going to open this building. I see from the print that I am
to dedicate it. Now this you may say is rather out of a
politician's jurisdiction, although I do remember that on one
occasion in suitable circumstances I was introduced to an
audience as the Right Reverend R. Menzies. ( Laughter) Sir,
in that capacity I dedicate this building ( Laughter). In my
other capacity, I open it. But whichever way it goes doesn't
matter very much because the hero of the day is Sir Howard
Florey himself. This is one of those occasions when we get together
and can say quite truthfully, " Let us now praise famous men"
because here is a famous man. I suppose he little thought when
he was a mere stripling in 1921 that in the course of time he
would be a Nobel Prizewinner and President of the Royal Society,
two of many things in his life that have been referred to today.
And I feel rather uncommonly conscious of the privilege you
give me by allowing me to speak anything here today at all,
I look around here here they are, Fellows of the Royal Society,
distinguished physicians, distinguished surgeons, distinguished
chairmen of broadcasting conmissions ( Laughter) ot hoc genus
omni and what is worse, I must have made about five or six
speeches at university events in the last six months and the
first time, I did rather well, It was all fresh, but the second
time I saw the same people ( Laughter) and again and again and
again I looked down and I saw I won't name them but you know
them. ( Laughter) The same eminent audience. All I hope is that
the next time I make a speech on some occasion, some Providence
will intervene and I will be able to begin by saying, " All,
all are gone, the old familiar faces." ( Laughter)
Sir, you did well, if I may say so, to pay tribute
to the remarkable facts financially associated with this establishment
because they are remarkable. Australia has an
honourable record in the field of private contribution to
universities, but on this occasion, this little group of people
of whom two distinguished citizens have been named7 got together,
found a great deal of money and then having established their
bona fides much more satisfactorily than most people who come
to me and ask for money ( Laughter), they arrived, Dr. Denton
with them ( Applause) and I found myself so enthusiastic about
the work that he was doing and the work that would b\ odone in
this laboratory that I avoided the steely eye of Sir Leslie
Martin ( Laughter), had a talk to the Treasurer instead, and we
found œ 100,000 not just tucked into the triennial payment
but an extra. Very useful extra, ( Applause) I mention that to
you in strict confidence ( Laughter) here this afternoon because
I wouldn't like other representatives of other universities to
think that this constitutes a precedent. ( Laughter) And then
the Rockefeller Foundation and the result is that this
represents, in a sense, a tribute to the scientific work, the
remarkable and brilliant scientific work that has been done and
S000000/ 2 
2
a tribute to this great man, Sir Howard Florey which represents
a combination of private interest and contribution and Government
interest and contribution which I think might well set a pattern
in Australia Now Sir, I am not going to detain you very long
because, like you, I'want to hear from the fountainhead, I want
to hear Sir Howard, You all know about him. You all know of
the nature of the work that he has done modestly, rather selfeffacingly
actively, with tremendous imagination, with a willingness
at all times to take up the most challenging problems and
tackle them and try to solve them, and in the result, there will
be many people who go down into history as having been responsible
for great wars or matters of that kind, there will be some
villains go down in history, there will be some wise men go
down in history, but the people who read about the history will
if they have occasion to remember it realise as to a considerable
proportion of them that they wouldn't bo alive to road the
history if it hadnt been for the work that has been done of the
kind that Sir Howard Florey has done in this world. ( Applause)
So that his work and the work of others like him has been
powerful, constructive work for humanity, and this engages the
attention and gratitude of all of us.
There is just one other thing that I would like to
say, I was recently in America, reminding myself for the
purpose of another speech, of the American Declaration of
Independence, with its fine resounding statement that all men
are born equal and thats true, In a human sense that's true.
In terms of civic rights and human and divine responsibility,
men are born equal, but it is a matter for gratitude that in
terms of talent they are not born equal because what has
contributed to the progress of the world, the progress of
humanity, more than anything else perhaps, is that you get
these peaks in the graph of ability, you get these distinguished
p. ople who not only do remarkable things themselves but who
gather around them other people who are all the better because
they worked with a great man. And the result is that thr'. ljgh
the very inequality of talent that exists in human beings, the
ordinary human being like most of us is able to go along better,
happier, with a better future and a better understanding.
I always feel interested when I encounter some
distinguished physicist for example who will say to me before
our conversation ends, " You know I did some work with
Rutherford." This is a wonderful thingo I don't go as far as
Carlylo, you know, about great men being the stuff of history,
but I go to this extent that I believe that the influence of
a remarkable person, of genius of application, of tremendous
drive of force of mind, is not confined to what he does
himself in hiscwn righto It extends to the way that he perhaps
stimulates an entire generation of people in the work that
they do in his branch of knlowledge. Really, of course in
Australia we are occasionally a bit odd aren't we, to be quite
frank about it. We occasionally think in Victoria that a man
from South Australia can't be quite as good, ( Laughter) though
the people : from Adelaide have for years and years been conscious
of their superiority in all moral qualities to the rest of us.
( Laughter) This is well understood.
But apart from that, we are a little bit inclined,
aren't we, to think that everything unknown is to be taken as
magnificent. Grant people in any branch of life are people / 3 
-3-
who live at a distance, about whom we read in the newispapers
or in the cables. We are not always prepared to recognise,
in their own lifetime, these great men that we have produced,
and today is a very happy proof that here, at any rate, you
don't suffer from that complaint because here we have a man
famous all over the world, so moaest that he has been having
a most ungovernable fit of misery for the last half hour
( Laughter) listening to his praises, But he is entitled
to praise. He is entitled to gratitude because in due course
of time when, as we believe optimistically, things get sorted
out and fall into their proper perspective and proportions, the
name of Howard Florey will be regarded as one of tne absolutely
outstanding names in Australian history.
I am delighted beyond words that this building
which 1 am now authorised by the Deputy Ghancellor to call
a laboratory I have never been too sure how you pronounce
that word rat I am delighted beyond words that this
laboratory should be set up here for all to see to carry out
work of great distinction and utility in his name in my own
university. This is something that gives me especial pleasure
and therefore adds to my satisfaction in dedicating and/ or
opening this building. 



WEEKLY INDEX No.
WEEK ENDING AUGUST 31, 196
COMMONWELLTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Aug. 27No. 826 EXPORT AWARD PROGRAMME ANNOUNCED
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon, Sir
William Spooner, K. C. M. G.
Aug. 26 No. 824
29 No. 838
25 No. 823 NEW CAMERA WILL AID QUEST FOR RESOURCES
COMMENT ON OIL FLOW AT RICHMOND No1l AT ROMA
SEATO MILITARY PLANNING OFFICE BANGKOK
The Minister for Territories, The Hon. Paul Hasluck
Aug. 27 No. 827IMMIGRATION POLICY
The Postmaster-General's Department, The Hon. C. W. Davidson
Aug. 27 No. 828
27 No. 829
28 No. 833 TELEPHONE SERVICE WITH THAILAND
POST OFFICE FOR CANBERRA PHILATELIC
EXHIBITION
SITES FOR NATIONAL TELEVISION STATIONS IN
CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL AREA AND SOUTHERN
AGRICULTURAL AREA OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The Minister for External Affairs, The Hon. Sir Garfield
Barwick.
Aug. 26 No. 824A AUSTRALIAN GOVERNMENT TO BUILD NEW OFFICE
FOR EMBASSY IN WASHINGTON, D. C. U. S. A.
27 No. 830A VISIT OF THAI PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION
28 No. 835A COLOMBO PLAN BADGES
29 No. 839A VISIT BY DR. RAUL PREBISCH.
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
Aug. 28No. 831 MORE AUSTRALIAN DAIRY PRODUCE FOR SOUTH
EAST ASIA
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
No. 822
No. 830
No. 841 NEW INSTRUCTOR FOR ARMY AIR SUPPORT UNIT
MILITARY AIDE FOR N. S. W. GOVERNOR
CHANGES IN ARMY APPOINTMENTS
The Minister for Works, The Hon. Gordon Freeth
No. 821MELBOURNE C'WEALTH CENTRE CONTRAUCT
The Minister for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
Aug. 25No. 820STUDY FOR SAILORS
The Minister for Supply, The Hon. Allen Fairhall
Aug. 29No. 839 œ 400,000 BLANKETS ORDER INCLUDES FIRE
DAMAGED WVOOLLEN MILLS.
The Minister for Reptriation. The Hon. R. W. C. Svartz
Aug. 29 No. 836
29 No. 837
30 No. 840 CANCELLED
REPATRIATION MINISTER TO ADDRESS R. S. L.
RfTi ' 1ION DEPARTMENT TO SPONSOR
ARTIFICIAL LIMBS CONFERENCE. / 2
Aug. it
Aug. 26 
-2-
The Minister for Repatriation The Hen. R. W. C. Swartz. ( Cond)
No,, 44 REPA'ThTIATION MINISTER OPENS A. C. T.
RETUKNED SE. 1' VICEf. I'EN'S LEAGUE ANN\ UAL
CONGRESS.
30 No. 845 WORKT OF LEGCY PRAISED BY REPATTI1d. TION
MINI STER
The Minister for Air, The Hon. David Fairbnirn
Aug. 28 28 No. 832 1UAA'IF ON THE ATTACK IN EXERCISE CARBINE
No. 834 HERCULES TRANSPORTS BUSY AT WEE,-END.
The Department of Primary Industry
No. 843 EXPORT SUGAIR REBATE
The Department cf the Navy
Aug. 26 No. 825 EXERCISE " CARDBINE" COMMUNIQUE
28 No. 835 EXERCISE " CA', RBINE" COIMUITIQUE
No. 842CANCELLED
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CAYBERIUA, A. C. T.
Aug. 30
Aug. 30 



OPENING OF THE KEITH MURRAY BUILDING, LINCOLN COLLEGE
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
ON 1ST SEPTEMBER, 1963
Speech by the Prime Ministerj the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. President, Mr. Premier, Mr. Vice-Chancellor and Ladies and
Gentlemen The Vice-Chancellor is by way of bei. ng a friend of
mine and therefore does me proud, as you might say, but I regret
to tell you that he has omitted some of my academic qualifications
which really entitle me to be here. He has entirely overlooked
the fact that, causa honoris, if for no other reason, I am a
surgeon, a physician, a gynaecologist and obstetrician ( Laughter),
an architect oh, and I forget. And those no doubt give me
spurious qualification for being here, but I don't mind telling
you that my reason for being here, coming over this morning and
going back first thing tomorrow, has a great deal to do not only
with you but with Sir Keith Murray.
This is the Keith Murray Building and I have been
invited I notice with groat interest to name it. Not to open
it or anything of that kind, but to name it, Yesterday afternoon
at the University of Melbourne I found that my task in relation
to the new physiological research building was not to open it but
to dedicate it. Now Sir, this is a task entirely beyond io,
I would have to require it to be performed by others more
ecclesiastically eminent than I am. However, I did it. ( Laughter)
As I told them I remembered that it is only a few years ago that,
speaking at a luncheon of the Presbyterian General Assembly in
Melbourne7 I was introduced by an enthusiastic Moderator-General
as the " Right Reverend R. G. Menzies." ( Laughter) And some of this
aura has no doubt hung about me, so I dedicated a laboratory full
of sheep yesterday and now I am opening a new wing of a college
occupied not by sheep but by..... well, who knows? ( Laughter)
The connection between Sir Keith Murray and yourselves
is a very real one. After all, he was, at the time this College
was established, the head of Lincoln College at Oxford and that
in itself is a very considerable title of honour when you consider
that John Wesley was a Fellow of Lincoln College at Oxford and
remember with pride, as you should, be you Presbyterian like me
or Methodist like Norman Makin that John Wesley was one of the
very great men in the eighteenth century, a century not barren
of great men, not barren of significant people in our history.
Through all its masterly precision, its slight artificiality, its
beautiful craftsmanship, its lovely architecture, there came the
sort of warm pulse of John Wesley, always to be remembered, one
of the immortals of English history. That, I think would be
agreed by everybody. Well here he was, a Fellow of Lincoln.
Keith Murray, the hood of Lincoln.
Back in 1951 1950 or 1951, I've forgotten which
we had I being tremendously keen on university development,
established a sort of ad hoc cormittee to have a look at the
funds and see what needed to be done, and out of this emerged a
grant, a modest enough grant as one sees it now, of about LIM
a year towards the State universities. The very first question
that arose with that co-mittee at quite a late stage in its
deliberations was whether the university colleges, the affiliated
colleges largely church foundations, should in any way at all be
the beneliciaries of any grant that we made, and the cormittee at
that time wasn't very enthusiastic about it. I, myself7 the
most mild-mannered of men, the least qualified to be a dictator, 
-2-
spoke to them with a somewhat dictatorial voice and said that
if they believed that a university could reach its full stature
without its affiliated colleges, they were in bitter disagreement
with myself and I would pay little attention to their
report. And in the result there was a small matter I have
forgotten, œ 20,000 or œ 30,000 out of the particular grant
recommended that went, on some basis or other, to the residential
colleges. That was a beginning.
Then, of course, the next stroke was this other
illuminating idea which came to my mind. I have had very few
bright ideas in my life and therefore I can remember them all
without any difficulty. But it occurred to me that what was
needed was not just a sort of catchpenny idea of making a little
grant something to keep the wolf from the door, but what was
needed was a complete and basic examination of the university
problem. This became all the more important because, let
us all remember, that whereas universities before the war might
have, even in the case of the largest of them, 3,000 or 4,000
students, after the war? the demand for tertiary education grew,
not only at an arithmetical progression, but at a geometrical
progression so that instead of having an estimated demand of
20,000 it suddenly appeared to be 30 000 or 35,000. Instead
of 35,600 itsuddenly appeared to be 5,000. And of course,
it was quite manifest that this presented financial problems
utterly beyond the scope of the State Parliaments and Governments,
that the Commonwealth must cone to this party and come to it
in a big way, and if we wore to do that, then we must have some
examination made by a competent body which would not only nap
out the probable future of the universitius, but also ostinate
their future requirements and try to envisage the ways and
means of their development and what would happen to them and
what faculties would expand more than others.
As the first thing you do after you have had a
bright idea is to find a man or men, that's the greatest
problem in life. Somebody suggested to no, " Well, what about
trying to get Sir K-ith Murray. You are going to England this
year. Why not get him? Ho's the Chairman of the Universities
Grants CoLnission and vastly experienced." So I saw him and
he was quite enthusiastic about this. He was to be the Chairnan.
As you know, we ultimately developed a very strong comi: ittoe
about hin. He said to me, " Well, I would like to do this.
It will take sorao months, of course, and I don't know whether
my Minister would let n'o go." So I said, " Who is your Minister?"
" Well," he said, " the Chancellor of the Exchequer", The
Universities Grants Commission in Australia is rosponsible to
me, but in England the Grants Connmission is responsible to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer which is a very different thing.
So I said at that time " Well of course, that's Harold
Macmillan". " Yes." So I went to Harold Macmillan and with
groat goodwill, he said, " Yes, you may have him." So he came
out, and as you remember, many of you, ho nade, with his
Committee, a long investigation.
He understood perfectly the kind of thing that
I had in my own mind about the affiliated colleges, with the
results that have been spoken of here today. He made an
examination which I believe will remain a classic in the history
of Australian education, so long as Australia exists. It was
a masterly report, and being a mastorly report, it overwhelmed
mo and I, in turn, by giving Cabinet singularly little notice,
overwhelmod the Cabinet. oo** o 
-3-
So all the recommendations were adopted and
since then, as you know, with the Universities Commission, the
position has gone from strength to strength, never so strong
as you would desire, never I hope will it be so good as you
would desire because that would be the end of the road if the
universities of Australia said, " Well, we have all we need,
thank you. We have no fresh worlds to conquer." You always
will, but at the same time I say, and you will agree, that
the position of the Australian universities of today has been,
in a very real sense, revolutionised over the last ten years.
As I am here speaking at a college within the
University of Adelaide, I may tell you, though I hope nobody
will allow this to be known across the border, that Koith
Murray after making all his investigations was having a long
talk with me just before he made his report and I said, " Well,
which university in Australia strikes you as coming closest
to your idea of a university," and he said, " Beyond question,
Adelaide." Now I am not just telling you that for fun.
This is what he said to me. He did.' t mean by that, that in
Adelaide you had the best grounds because you don't, or the
greatest supply of buildings because this doesn't follow, or
that the affiliated colleges live in handsome lawns and on
ancient walls and gardens. No, he didntt mean that at all.
What he meant was that there was a spirit here at the University
that appealed to him. There was an understanding of what a
university was for and, above all, that there was a feeling
down North Terrace and through the city among men of affairs
and men of business that they did have some interest in the
University, that they felt for it that they wanted it to
succeed, that they were prepared lo contribute some of their
own time and talent and effort to its work. In other words,
that there was a community aspect surrounding the Adelaide
University which appealed to him enormously.
Now having tediously recited to you some of his
history but I think it is necessary to do that because this,
after all, is to be the Keith Murray Wing and he is a groat
and good man I'd just like to conclude by saying something to
you about the colleges themselves.
I know that our forefathers, grandfathers, whoever
they might be according to our ago, struck a great blow for
what they were prepared to call free, secular and compulsory
education. Secular..... and, of course if you are going
to have compulsory education and I am sure that, by and large
that has been a wondorful thing for Australia; I daresay that
it is very hard to get away from the fact that it will be in its
nature secular because we are a mixed society, but I have never
been able to believe that that is where we ought to stop.
I have never boon able to believe that we ought to regard the
cultivation of the mind as something entirely detached from
the cultivation of the spirit. It is, in my opinion, a disaster
when education in any country comes to be almost rigidly separated
from religious faith or religious teaching or religious background,
because it becomes a one-sided thing.
And, therefore, I have throughout these modern
developments wanted to see as much done as possible for those
affiliated colleges which in particular are colleges affiliated
with the Churches of Australia because I think that here, in
this college, for example, there may meet together and fuse
ultimately the feelings of pure intellectualism and the feelings
of pure religious learning and faith. Those two things, by
fusing, will produce bigger and better people, better citizens,
00 0a/ 4 
more useful people, people who will increase the existing
minority of people who think first of their duties and only
second of their rights.
And therefore, Sir, I am a tremendous supporter
of the residential colleges. I was delighted when only ten
years ago, eleven years this College was established.
Not an easy matter, not a cheap matter, a matter which will
continue to put big burdens on your community and, of course,
increasing burdens upon the Governments Federal and State who
are contributors to those matters, but that it is worthwhile
I have no doubt whatever. When I say all that I hope that
nobody will suppose I am denouncing State education. I am
not. I am its beneficiary. In a country State school and in
a bigger town State school and on State scholarships and
what-have-you, I know something about what the State provides
and I have been its beneficiary, but I have also grown up
more and more to believe in the significance of these places
of residence which have the characteristics to which I have
referred and I know how much you agree with me and how many
people there are here this afternoon who have put their ninds
and hearts into this enterprise.
Therefore, Sir, I have singular pleasure in
doing what I have been instructed on the paper to do I name
this the Keith Murray Building. I can't declare it open
because it bears every sign of having been opened for some
time. 



63/ 090
REGIONAL CONFERENCE OF THE 4' ORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION
HELD IN NEd GUINEA
Oi 5TH SEPTEMBER. 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir Distinguished Representatives of your various Countries,
Ladies and Gentlemen My colleague, Senator Wade, rather glorifies me
this morning. He attributes my presence entirely to virtue on
my part. I would like to tell you that the last time I was
here though not in this building they did their best to kill
me. ? Laughter) They cooked me, they cooked me, they cooked me,
they ran me around and I agreed to come this time on strict
condition that the weather would be better. ( Laughter) And
so it is. So it is not only a matter of pure virtue but of
personal comfort. Sir, the Constitution of the World Health Organisation
not only contains those splendid words that were quoted by
my colleague, but they also contain a definition of health, and
SI read this with great interest. They describe " health" as a
W state of complete mental, physical and social well-being and not
merely the absence of disease or infirmity. I think most of us
must be rather unhealthy. " A state of complete mental, physical
and social well-being" Well, give those words an extensive
interpretation and they will cover almost all of the material
problems of mankind today and therefore they would tend to defeat
themselves. But what I like about the work of the W. H. 0 is that
it has not lost itself in generalisation it has rather concentrated
its mind upon the proposition that health in the nations
and among the people does not represent merely the absence of
* disease but includes these great activities to which my colleague
has referred. In brief, the World Health Organisation has not
been just academic in its approach to problems. On every occasion,
it has sought to give a practical application to the work of
medical scientists and discoverers and to give that practical
application in particular places for particular purposes.
I was informed before I came', here that 100 health
projects had been'assisted by the World Health Organisation in
the Western Pacific 100 different and specific projects.
N6w', Sir, having said that to indicate that I do understand the
essentially practical purposes that you have, I perhaps ought to
remind those of us who are not medical men that it is a'pretty
modern idea that public health problems are capable of solution,
I don't think that people troubled much about public health
problems, as we understand them, a couple of centuries ago. In
Great Britain the eighteenth century has become known as the
century of good taste, and indeed it was in many ways, but it
must have produced mrany bad tastes in its fashion. because public
health, as we understand it, was entirely unknown and indeed the
practice of medicine in any of its forms was extraordinarily
primitive. Indeed, one has only to go back to the middle of the
nineteenth century a period which'was well remembered by people
like my own parents, so that we are not so far removed from the
middle of the nineteenth century. Up to that time when the Red
Cross was created, when the great figure and genius of Florence
Nightingale became known nursing as we understand it, treatment
of the wounded, as we understand it, was . almost entirely unknown.
For the most'part in the dreadful occurrences of war, the wounded
were left to die; casualties which turned out to be fatal 
2
casualties were enormous compared to what they would be under
similar circumstances today. And it was a good long time after
that before it was realised by the hard economic elements in the
community that disease is economically wasteful, that no country
can afford to have any disease which skill and effort can avert.,
that economically this wastage of the economic contribution made
by the individual is not to be tolerated. That is a very modern
idea, And so we have entered what we are pleased to believe
to be the modern and enlightened era of which the World Health
Organisation is a manifestation, with 115 members and a record of'L
immense vigour and practical quality. But Sir, the health work
of the modern world and the health work of the WJ. H. O. can't be
done in a vacuum, they can't be done extra-territorially. What we
all need to do, what you have shown you understand you must do, is
to get down to cases, not to be too abstract, not to regard any
problem as being capable of being solved in an office or a lab.
somewhere else in the world.
And, therefore, as I understand the W* H its main
function is to stimulate activity in specific areas and to a great
extent in relation to specific diseases of great endemic or
epidemic proportions. Your topic for this Conference is an
illustration of this fact, and when you have a conference you are
not merely engaging in a series of abstract remarks, you are
concentrating your attention on a particular problem and pooling
experience and skill7as it turns out here, from thirteen or fourteen
different countries. Now Sir, you happen to be in Australian territory and
I happen to be by the grace of the electors of Australia, though
only narrowly ILau ghter), the Prime Minister. Now, in these
Territories Papua and New G uinea we in Australia have accepted
great responsibilities responsibilities much too great to be cast
off our shoulders lighZ-heartedly or in a spirit of pure theory.
We have immense responsibilities in these Territories and vie
propose, of course, to discharge them. W4e look forward to the
time when these Territories, the people of these Territories will
be completely politically and economically independent, when they
will be a living vital country controlling their own destiny. : This
is the great objective of intelligent people in the twentieth
century. But in the meantime, we, the Government of Australia
have tremendous responsibilities and we will carry them forwarA to
a conclusion, not slowly, not in a wild hurry, always with the
understanding that the paramount consideration is the welfare of
the people of the Territories and not a mere desire to satisfy
somebody else, Now this is a health organisation conference and
therefore I should tell you that in the pursuit of this duty to
which I have referred, the Administration, while very far from
satisfied none of us can afford to be satisfied; if you were
satisfied about the state of health in the world, you wouldn't
be here; this is something about which you will never get
satisfaction and therefore the Administration is not satisfied,
but I venture to say that it can be very properly proud of what
has been done, remembering always that these Territories embrace
hundreds of different types of peoples, literally hundreds of
different languages, stages of civilisation or of uncivilisation
which-are perhaps not to be found very easily in any other part of
the world, ranging from what you see around you in Port Moresby
to what we naight see if we had the time and took the trouble and
had the endurance to go into some of the maore remote parts of
Papua and New Guinea. This is a tremendously difficult place and
soooe.. 0/ 3 
3-
yet, I repeat, the Administration may be very proud of what has
been done. So far as we have been able to discover, there was
simply no evidence of any established medical system in this great
tract of country until European settlement first occurred. The
indigenous inhabitants, as was not uncommon perhaps at that stage
in the world's history, believed that disease was a product of
somae mysterious force, perhaps a sorcerer, perhaps some form of
witchcraft. There were rather obscure, almost instinctive and
superstitious ideas about how illness came about and how it ought
to be dealt with, In other words there was a state of affairs
here only a decade three, four decades ago, five decades ago
whic&amp; strongly resembled the state of affairs which existed in a
great number of our countries hundreds and hundreds of years ago,
so that the task was a difficult one and had to be concentrated
into a fairly short period of time.
Well, by 1923 that's only forty years ago there
were in these Territories 14 hospitals and 13 medical officers.
No great matter was it? Fourteen hospitals, 13 medical officers
represented an enormous improvement on what had been but it was
still no great matter. Then the progress that followed was
interrupted by war because this country saw war and saw it in a
destructive form. Itve been reminded that the war destroyed every
hospital except those at Port Moresby and at Samarai. Here is a
splendid example, if that is the right word to choose of the
destruction that war can bring about. Only two hospitals left
standing. But of course the war also, by the strange irony of
fate or the not-always-unaerstood wisdom of Providence, brought
great advances in medicine with the anti-malarials and the
insecticides and the anti-biotics and the vaccines. I suppose that
two of the remarkable effects of the war were that in medical
science the discovery of how to fight disease was accelerated
beyond words while, at the same time, in the world of the physicist,
we saw results following upon the splitting of the atom which have,
up to now, rather increased the apprehensions of mankind but may,
in due course, properly understood, add enormously to its resources.
So there was a plus; there was a minus.
Well, Sir when the war was over the Administration
resaunmddh as p ese on with increasing activity ever since.
Great territory-wide campaigns by 195? were being waged against
yaws, against against malaria, leprosy there was an
increasing medical examination of schoolchildren and, after all,
it isntt so long since there were hardly any schoolchildren because
there were hardly any schools. This has been a tremendous
development that I dontt take time to speak of this morning but
there has been, over this period, an increasing medical examination
of schoolchildren and a dental health service,
In 1962/ 63 the last financial year, there was an
extensive procurement ol vaccine against what? Very interesting
to recall the diseases that were being attacked. Against
tetanus, against whooping-cough, which in some of our countries
is regarded sometimes as a sort of juvenile eccentricity, regarded
with indifference by husbands and causing immense trouble for
wives, but still, whooping cough in a country not so well developed
can be a dread disease, and it was attacked. . Diphtheria,
poliomyelitis, smallpox, cholera, T. B all these things being
attacked by the procurement and use of vaccines with tremendous
personal work being done by regular health patrols and, of course,
by the improvement of nutrition,
I said then " by regular health patrols". If you look
at the relief map out in the foyer outside, somewhat exaggerated
0 00 60 00/ 
-4-
no dou'st for purposes of demonstration, you will realise that
this is, in many respects a tremendously mountainous country
with here and there a roe d, with here and there a track, but f'or
the most part presenting the most tremendous difficulties of
access, Therefore, perhaps, cmabling more and more small
communities in small valleys or in remote corners to be suffering
from some disease, to be almost extinguishing themselves without
access from the people who might be able to help them. And if
anybody ought to go down in history here with immense fame, it
is the people who have gone out on patrol, who have put up with
all these hardships, who have reached these inaccessible places
in order to bring medical health and apply medical resources to
the needs of the country. That goes indeed in Papua and New
Guinea for almost all the activities of administration, We are
living in an age in which, to bring the ordinary instruments of
peace and progress and benefit to people, requires immaense
personal courage on the part of hundreds and hundreds of young
men out on the trail.
Now, Sir, I hesitate to speak about money because
I find that sums of money that I think are quite big are regarded
by my opponents as trivial. But I think that I should say that
health services as you all know, are costly. Indeed, it is
because you realise that that you have these regular meetings in
order to produce more and more efficacy in the treatment of
disease, because the more efficient, then the more justified is
the expenditure of money. Now, since 1953, that's ten years ago,
the health services in these countries have cost us œ C33M. I had
forgotten to add up the figures. All I remembered in a hazy way
was that my colleague and friend, Mr. Hasluck who is the Minister
for Territories in my Government has a very Leguiling way of
getting more money for the Territories than the rest of us at
first thought proper and, looking back on it, there it is œ P33M.
In the last financial year which closed only the other day,
on health services that amounts to 501-per head of the population,
and to all that you must add in these Territories, the
immense work, the devoted skilled work of mission medical workers,
. So that you will see, just at a glance, that what
has been done here has really been done generously, enthusiastically,
and of course, when I say that, I am the first one to realise that
what looks like a big figure this year will look like a fairly
small and comfortable one before we are another five years older,
If you add together the work of the Administration
here and the work of the missions and this is the last fact
I want to put before you if you add those two together, and
you have in mind that after this last war there were two hospitals
loft standing a mere handful of medical people immediately
available, and then listen when I tell you that in June of this
year there were 100 Government hospitals 100 and a very large
number which I don't have by me of mission hospitals, there were
5' 28 maternity and child welfare centres, there were 1 693 aid
posts or medical centres 1,693 there were 148 doc~ ors and
there were 41., 400 other medical personnel all this on June
1963 and you will see that you have come here representing all
your talent, devotion, experience to a country which affords a
splendid example of an Administration with the co-operation of
the people, going forward along the lines that you have been so
much concerned with, bringing to the people a new chance of
prolonged life, higher medical standards, better living, a better
future, taking them out of the primitive and superstitious a 0 0 0 
5
darkness before the medical era and giving them the benefit
of the best that the world can provide. This in other
words, is a great experimental area in the world and I am
delighted that you should have come here in order to bring
your minds together on a disease well known in these
Territories so that the sum of knowledge may be added to,
so that the enthusiasm of those on the spot here will be
refreshed, so that our determination to go forward may be
made stronger and it is in that spirit and having in mind
all these things that I welcome you on behalf of the Government
of Australia and I have pleasure in declaring your Conference
open. I 



63 9
BROADCAST BY T~ IE PRIME MINISTER THE, RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT iv NZIES, AT ' r-ORT MERLSY, NEW
GUINEA, AT 7.15 P. m. ON 6TH SEPTEMBER, 1963
Good Evening, Ladies and Gentlemen
I want to say something about the attitude of the
Australian Government to these territories.
We regard ourselves as trustees for Papua-New Guinea.
We are not colonialists in the old and now rejected
sense. We are certainly not exploiters we put into these
territories far more than we get out or perhiaps are ever likely
to get out. This year Australia will provide, by way of direct
grant, over œ-25M towards the cost of developing Papua-New Guinea
per cent, more than last year.
We are not oppressors. On the contrary, our dominant
aim is to raise the material, intellectual, social and political
standards and self-reliance of the indigenous peoples . to a point
at which they may freely and competently choose their own future,
There are some modern fashi., ns of thought that I have
encountered that political independence should precede economic
viability;
that democratic self-government is something that can
be created, artificially, from the top, and that it will
then find its way down to the grass roots; and
that speed is mauch more important than certainty or
security.
Now I think that you will agree that it is important that I should
say something about each of these propositions.
1 say freedom is an inborn right, and not a concession
by povuer. This means equality before the law, a free choice of
occupotion, freedom of association and so on.
But people who are, taken as individuals, free, are
not necessarily taken as members of a commijP, 1.. x ripe for political
independence. In a community sense, genuinely free institutions
of government are essential for the preservation of Indiidual
freedom, Recent years have produced instances we all know
them in which the grant of self-government has led to a form of
dictatorship or oligarchy, government by a few, in which the freedom
of the individual has been suppressed or gravely limited,
" Individual freedom" and " political independence" are
therefore not synonymous. They can, by the careful cultivation of
the various local and national means of organised self-government,
be made to co-exist -individual freedom and political independence
made to co-exist. This is our policy in Papua and New Guinea,
But, when considering political factors, we cannot
sensibly ignore the economic ones. To give a former colony or
territory political independence, while leaving it economically
dependent upon the actions of others, is to expose it to grave risks
soo/ 2 
-2
of " loaded" assistance, undue political pressure from outside
nations or interests, a temptation to barter its freedom of
political action for cash or goods in hand.
That is why we regard the economic development of
Papua and New Guinea along lines which they can successfully
follow when political independence has been granted, as of vital
importance. Wat k nd of economicdevel ~ int do we eznyjq~ age_, and
what are its Drbems? I~ rtwe must carry on, with all thae speed which
humnan and material resources will permit, the basic work of educating
the people, not only for political citizenship, but also for
increased economic capacity; better knowledge of agricultural and
pastoral production, better technical skill, administrative
capacity at all levels.
Second, we must take all steps to make improved
techniques available to what I may call, in the well-known phrase,
the " man on the land". Not trying to convert every small sustjenance
tiller of the soil in some remote valley into a " cs crop"
aproducer; but at the same time increasing the number and capacity
Wof those producing cash crops, not only for improved living at home,
but for exports to earn some of the money needed for imports and
investment. Thrd On the economic side, we have to consider what
WI will call the three Tts Transport, Trade and Tariff.
The marketing capacity of the Territories! producers,
be they agricultural, pastoral, mineral, or processing, will be
profoundly affected by the means of transport. And in this
country, that means roads, air services coastal shipping facilities.
Much has been done; much more must be Aone in the future,
Export trade must be developed. with new markets,
particularly in the countries of the South-West Pacific and South
East Asia. This is tremendously important. The Commonwealth
S Department of Trade is constantly active in this field, but I agree
Wmuch remains to be done.
Trade with Australia, as distinct from these other
countries I've been mentioning, involves Tariff considerations which
are never slimple. Yet they must be solved as must be the problem
of non-Australian markets, if there is to Le industrial development
in Papua and New Guinea. Much thought is to be given to the-pattern
of such development if we are to see a proper economic growth in
these Territories on terms and conditions I want you to mark this
on terms and conditions which will be sustainable by an independent
and self-governing community in due course.
Fourth, we must encourage those settlers who have, over
the years, done so much to help the growth of the New Guinea economy
in production and commerce, Australia herself the mainland
needs and obtains much useful capital investment from overseas.
How much more do these Territories need it. Yet I know that we here
encounter a reluctance which proceeds from a feeling of uncertainty.
Can the man who invests the capital be reasonably sure of a proper
opportunity to secure the fruits of his enterprise? For myself,
I understand these doubts, though I cannot say that I share them in
any substantial sense. Now, why do I say this? You may say it is
easy enough to say it.
Well, I will refer to the defence of the territory
later on, I want to indicate that we, Australia, are not going to
be hurried out. We have a long job ahead of us and you have and
we intend to complete it. One of our great objectives is that when
Independence Day arrives, it will come in a spirit of friendship and
good will, in which the indigenous inhabitants will appreciate the
a* to 9/ 3 
-3
investment and work of what I believe are called the expatriate
settlers, will realise how these have contributed to their social and
economic growth, and will wish to preserve them, Whether concr'ete
guar'antees or supports can be given to investors is, I need hardly
tell. you, a most complex matter. My colleague, Mr. Hasluck, whose
devotion to his difficult office wye all admire so much, has given this
problem a lot of attention. A group of leading businessmen from
Australia recently visited you. It has furnished a valuable report
which, as I saw it just a few hours before coming up here, I have not
yet had time to consider, but I know that it is valuable and suggestive,
The W orld Bank's Mission I hope to see in Canberra not long
after my return. I can tell you that in addressing ourselves to
this problem, we will have in our minds a clear belief that without
morp investment for development and production, these Territories will
just not have an economic strength to sustain political independence;
that it is our duty as a governiment to seek out and apply whatever
practical and reasonable measures can be devised orthodox or novel
to encourage and sustain confidence and growth through willing and
co-operative investment and effort.
In short, we want to work with you. We certainly will not
run away from you,
In spite of superficial critics, who know little or nothing
* of the vast complexities of a country with -a fringe of modern economic
acti~ vity and a deep hinterland of primitive civilisation and activity,
our tasks cannot be performed in a year or two. However great our
activity, it will be a long haul. There are hundreds of tribes and
languages, each with its own pattern of life. The job is not ' to
* destroy those patterns, but to adapt and modify them against the
background of better health and medical services, better education,
better means of transport, better knowledge of production.
Not one of these elements can be dealt with in isolation,
nor can they be forced upon distant and perhaps unreceptive people.
We have, all of us that means you as well as myself a lot to
study and a lot to learn about the ways and means of raising the
standards of primitive people while not blindly or stupidly assuming
that they will ultimately resemble, in social and economic structure,
Australia herself, Democrati. c self-government I now turn to the second
fashion that I referred to the pecular contribution of the Englishspeaking
people to social and political history, took centuries to
develop. With all the benefits of history and experience, such
Sprocesses can of course, nowadays, occur much more rapidly. But it
V is still true that you cannot create effective self-government merely
by setting up, by statute or otherwise, a form of parliament.
Democracy, my friends, is neither artificial nor easy. We have, I
think, been approaching this matter in the right way in the development
of local government and an increasingly representative Legislative
Council. At all stages we maintain contact with informed local
opinion, We are determined ~ o pursue these sensible processes,
" without fear, favour, or affection." We will at all times be ready
to receive advice and assistance in these tasks. But, as. the
paramount consideration, one which it is our absolute duty not to
forget, is the welfare of the people of these Territories, we will
be unwilling to accept orders to take some hasty step which would
cut across that duty. We will, in due course, take the decis4. on of
the people whose trustees we are.
Nothing of course, is more damaging to the growth of
independent institutions than armed attack or invasion. These
Territories have had bitter and devastating experience of that,
Well, on this aspect of the matter I repeat what I said recently
in Canberra, that: " We will defend these Territories as if they
were part of our mainland; there must be no mistaken ideas about
that." In that attitude, my friends, we have, as you know and as
you have recently been reminded, the staunch backing of our ANZUS
partner, the United States of America. 00* 004/ 4. 
Now, it follows from what I have said that, in moving
tdwards self-government, speed is not more important than certainty
or security, This does not mean that we are to have a " go-slow"
policy. I once said that, if and when we reached a point at which
we felt that the people were approaching, getting very very close
to readiness for self-determination, but we were not sure, still
had a lingering hesitation, it would be better to ac-u then too soon
than too late, But we are as yet a long way from that stage, as
the leaders of the indigenous peoples have frequently agreed and as
indeed they have stated to me in the highlands in the last thirtysix
hours, We want a sound feeling about the wishes of the people of
these Territories. We want security for those who are now there, and
for those who are to come.
Meanwhile, nobody but a pure theorist could say that the
pace of progress is too slow, In the field of education, which is
by common consent very important, I will just give some facts you
know them but other people may not.
By 1958 the number of registered and recognised mission
schools was 274, By 1962 this is only four years later this
number had increased almost five-fold. Administration schools have
increased from 44 in 1951 to 431 in 1962, and of course much is being
done in secondary and technical schools. We are also having an
investigation at present about university possibilities. Meanwhile,
there are 88 post-primary and secondary schools, of which 20 are
technical. Here are the proofs of great headway under the helpful
administration of a nation ( our own) which, in the case of Papua and
New Guinea, rates its duty much higher than its rights.
And, I rapeat, it is rujsolutely determined to do its
duty by the whole of the people of the twin territories, indigenous
or otherwise. Now let me end up by saying this to you. In speaking
to you, one of the things I like to remember is that, while I speak
as the head of a Liberal and Country Party Administration with, as
you all know, a narrow majority, the Parliamentary approach to the
future of these Territories is not marked by deep differences. Some
of those who are listening to me tonight may, exercising a proper
privile ge, say " A plague on both your Housesi" l Well, please don't
think tha this sentiment makes you unique. I understand it, and
( if I may make a confidential remark, not to be repeated) have
occasionally thought so myself. But we are all, in a real sense,
and whatever our differences of race or politics, members of the
family. The neighbours cannot and should. not settle our domestic
problems for us. But, with sense and fortitude and understanding
and some imagination we can. I want -all of you to see this
to see our common in~ crests clearly and to serve them faithfully.
For in this way, my friends, we shall come to a happy and prosperous
future, Good night and good luck to you all. 


OPENING OF THE SIRINJIU DAM, NEW GUINEA 7TH SEPTEMBER, 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Your Honours, the Judges, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I remind myself of nothing quite so much as the man in one of' the fables, that my learned friends will remember, of the young junior who was appearing in a case with a leader whose&nbsp; capacity he doubted. This, of course, is not a unique experience and he decided therefore that he would have to follow his leader in the argument and that he would argue I won’t be technical&nbsp; about it Point A and then he would argue Point B and then he&nbsp; would laugh the case out of Court, And fired with these ambitions, he sat there and he listened to the old fellow who after a while,&nbsp; began to receive some very awkward questions from the judges and&nbsp; they seemed to the junior to be very difficult questions.&nbsp; The old boy handled them rather well. As time went on, the&nbsp; junior began abandoning the idea of arguing Point A; he then&nbsp; dropped the idea of arguing Point B; he then decided that it&nbsp; was unnecessary to laugh the case out of Court and when his&nbsp; leader finished he stood up and said in a small voice, " I have&nbsp; nothing to add.' 3 Now my case today is in the converse, I'm the old fellow, I’m the leader so to speak. I have had two juniors operating this morning and, upon my word, I have nothing to add. (Laughter) I would hate to subtract anything from what Paul Hasluck said about me because my wife has been here, she has made a note of it and I will live on this for the rest of my life.
Nor, of course can I emulate my young colleague, Gordon Freeth's familiarity with technical problems. I'm no scientist, I’m not an engineer except of a kind and therefore, most of these things are beyond me. I thought, for example, that this Dam was covered with sheets of steel, I had no idea that they had that other word that Mr. Freeth used about them, But there is one thing that I do clearly understand about this Dam and that is that it will contain a great area of water and quantity of water and when I looked in the bock of words I realised that the water area of what now becomes the lake is&nbsp; 3,000 acres and I haven't read a word about it in any of the provincial dailies of Melbourne or Sydney or any other capital city in Australia. Not a word. And the lake at Canberra is only going to be half the size. (Laughter) Half the size almost exactly, and it receives daily dishonourable mention in almost every newspaper in Australia.
Now I mentioned that to you because, you know, a lot of you must occasionally feel isolated. I ask you to remember that there is some virtue in isolation. You escape a great deal of criticism that you might have otherwise received. Well I don’t know whether you would. I don't know whether you need to bother about criticism, I wonder whether everybody here today looks around and remembers occasionally not in a priggish way, not in a self-satisfied way but remembers that you are here contributing to the development of a remarkable country; that in one sense, in the modern sense, you are pioneering this country, not for yourselves alone though we all want to live but pioneering it for those who are to come for its future. This is, I think, a tremendous reflection, a wonderful thing to have in our minds.
Here we are we are in a place which must have presented the most tremendous problems to people coming in to do engineering work, and yet it has been done, and in days to come people will drive past it or across it, they will have the benefit of the electric power that proceeds from it and proceeds further and further down and I suppose they will get to a stage where they will take it for granted. You know that it can't be taken for granted. You know that this has required and has received effort and imagination. Now that's one aspect of it.
But there is a second point that I would like to put to you. What this country is getting and what it needs is joint enterprise, a feeling of joint enterprise, a feeling of partnership between those who are settlers of European stock, those who are the indigenous inhabitants of the Territory and the people of Australia who between them represent a body of trustees and therefore have the duties of trustees. This is a joint enterprise&nbsp; with all of these three elements bound to work together, bound to respect each other and, I would suggest, bound to believe that&nbsp; the closer their partnership the more permanent it will be. I have a great though inadequate conception of what can be done in this country but I am not unaware of the difficulties that it presents, If we remember all the time that this is a joint enterprise, we would be better off.
For example, as my colleague said to you, don't think of Canberra as being some remote astral body because although remote in terms of distance, it is no more remote in terms of thought than any other place you care to mention. Don’t underestimate the duties, the task of a Minister for Territories.&nbsp; You know, most of us well I'm Prime Minister, I’m the sort of general handyman but most Ministers have a Department to administer. It may be Tariff - right, he deals with tariff problems. It may be Trade - good he deals with problems of trade, and so on. If he's the Attorney-General, he deals with the problems of the law and legal administration. But a Minister for the Territories deals with all of these things, they all come within his jurisdiction. He has divisions under him he doesn't have Ministers under him but in every other respect he is, on a more limited scale, a Prime Minister of a Territory or Territories with the entire complex of administrative machinery of all kinds. This calls for remarkable talent, great patience, great understanding and I've no doubt a great capacity for sustaining criticism because if you just have one job to do, it is pretty easy to criticise a man who has twelve jobs to do. Always have that in mind.
I said just now that this was a joint enterprise, but I mentioned that it was an enterprise in which were involved Australia the Administration and the settlers and the original inhabitants of these Territories. Well, it is a remarkable blend. You have here civil servants; you have here people who are&nbsp; engaged in industries of one kind or another; you have here settlers, planters; you have here hundreds and hundreds of&nbsp; thousands of people going right back to a point of primitive existence which the average person in the rest of the world finds&nbsp; it difficult to imagine and yet, everyone of these elements must&nbsp; work together if we are to achieve here what we all want to achieve,&nbsp; not only enduring results but a permanent social and human&nbsp; structure. This will require the co-operative effort.
You know, I don’t want to quote poetry at you unnecessarily but many of you will remember vividly the famous lines of William Blake -
"I will not cease from mental fight;
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England's green and pleasant land.”
&nbsp;



WEEKLY INDEX No, 36
WEEK ENDING September 7,1963
COMMONVWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
Index of Ministerial Statements Issued in Canberra
The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade, The Rt. Hon.
John McEwen
Sept. 2 No. 850B JAPANESE MARKET FOR AUSTRALIAN FOODSTUFFS
4 No. 858A CODE FOR OVERSEAS INVESTORS
The Minister for National Development, Senator the Hon, Sir
William Spooner, M. M.
Sept. 1 No. 848
4 No. 853 GROWTH OF PETROLEUM REFINING INDUSTRY
SNOWY MEN HOME FROM SOUTH-EAST ASIA
The Minister for Defence, the Hon. Athol Townley.
Sept. 4 No. 857 IMPERIAL DEFENCE COLLEGE 1964 COURSE
5 No. 861A ATTENDANCE OF AUS. OFFICER AT U. S. ARMED FORCES
The Postmaster-General, The Hon. C. W. Davidson STAFF COLLEGE
Sept. 3 No. 852
7 No. 863 NEW POSTAGE STAMPS
OFFICIAL OPENING COMMERCIAL TELEVISION
STATION RTQ, CHANNEL 7, ROCKHAMPTON.
The Minister for Immigration, The Hon. A. R. Downer
Sept. 6 No. 862550 BRITISH MIGRANTS WOULD DISEMBARK
FROM " FAIRSEA" AT ADELAIDE ON SEPTEMBER 7.
The Minister for External Affairs, The Hop. Sir Garfield Barwick
1 No. 849 AUSTRALIAN DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS
1 No. 850 OPERATION PLOUGHSHARE
2 No. 850A UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY 1963
AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION
6 No. 864 SEATO DAY, 1963
6 No. 864B FRENCH PROTECT ON NUCLEAR TESTS
The Minister for Primary Industry, The Hon. C. F. Adermann
No. 860 MEAT PRODUCTION, EXPORTS RISE
No. 861 ALL BULK WHEAT EXPORTS TO BE INSPECTED
The Minister for the Army, The Hon. J. O. Cramer
No. 854 ARMY'S NEW SUMMER DRESS
No. 855 DEAiTH LYING IN THE GRASS
The Minister for the Interior. The Hon. Gordon Freeth
No. 858 AUCTIONS OF A. C. T. RESIDENTIAL LELSES
The Minister. for the Navy, Senator the Hon. J. G. Gorton
No. 859
No. 847
No. 851 TWO NAVY LAUNCHINGS
NEW NAVY CHART FOR HOBART
N. Z. WARSHIP TRAINS WITH R. A. N. / 2
Sept. I, tI, i
Sept. 55
Sept. 44
Sept. 4
Sept. 51
3 
-2-
The Minister for Health, Senator the Hon. Harrie W. Wade
Sept. 1 No. 846 AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION TO W. 1I. O. REGIONAL
COMMITTEE
The Minister for Air, The Hon. David Fairbairn,
Sept. 4 No. 856 AIR FORCE WEEK
The Department of External Affairs
Sept. 6 No. 864A A ROAD TO THE ICE CAP
The Department of the Navy
Sept. 1 No. 847A STORMY PASSAGE FOR " CARBINE" CONVOY
3 No. 852A EXERCISE " CARBINE" COMMUNIQUE
With the Compliments of
The Government Public Relations Office,
Parliament House,
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 


9 September, 1963
Mr. President and Gentlemen
I think I ought to begin by making an apology. I have in fact been away in New Guinea and Papua for five days a lot of travelling, and with the knowledge that steadily, day by day, the files have been accumulating on my desk at Canberra. A very depressing feeling that, all the time you are travelling, and therefore, after I have said a few words and declared this Symposium open, I will have to beat a retreat to the office. I apologise to you, Sir, because I am very ill-informed on these matters as I noticed when I looked at the programme, and I would have enjoyed sitting here for a few days to listen in. But that's not what they pay me for, so I can't stay.
Interestingly enough, I had some reason to think about water only two nights ago when I was up north and staying overnight at a rubber plantation, and without any warning, a cloud came across and the rain fell down. I've never seen anything like it. It fell straight down and it went on for a couple of hours and the host in the morning had to use his Land-Rover to get out of the premises and it turned out we had had two and a half inches of rain, just as we were listening to it. I thought then how much I would like to transfer some of that from time to time to some parts of Australia,
I became conscious of this problem of water conscious of it, not frightfully well-informed about it at a very youthful age. I suppose I am one of the few Australians here this morning who remembers vividly the drought of 1902; that's going back a bit. I lived in the drought-stricken country, being then a very small boy, in the North-West of Victoria, and it was a drought. It wasn't one of those rather agreeable little things that you get in heavy rainfall country whore, at the end of a month without rain, people tell you there is a drought this was a drought as we understand that term.
Two inches of rain fell for the year and they fell all at once at the wrong time. And the result was that there was bare earth and a great empty lake and the most tremendous problems. But that year, one of the farmers who had a property at the bend of the Wimmera River, with a few little sandhills stacked up in the corner of the bend, casually went out in an enterprising spirit one day before the drought began and scattered some vegetable seeds, just like that. It almost looked like the parable of the sower. I used to go to Sunday school you see, and I remember it. And, of course the ' drought happened and nothing happened on these little sandhills at all.
Then, of course, as not uncommonly happens when the drought broke, it broke with heavy rain and a few weeks later, his sandhills were covered with vegetables, the seeds of which had been lying there quietly at rest for the better part of the year, and in the result, I. saw, as a youngster, displayed on the corner of the hotel verandah in the village, the largest vegetables I ever saw in my life. In case you think they merely looked large to a small boy, I assure you they looked large to very big men, because everybody drove in to have a look at them. Tremendous vegetables. And that bit into my mind: &nbsp;What can be done in Australia by water.
I opened my newspaper yesterday and I saw that already there is some hint of an argument going on as to the relative importance of water and other things. I am bound to confess my child-like and uninformed belief that you can't do without water. You can do without most of these other things up to a certain degree. Water is the great provider in this country.
Now why are we interested in pursuing these studies? Why have we set up a Water Resources Council? Why is it that the Academy is today performing one of its great functions, one of the functions for which it was created, the function of bringing together, in conference, the experts, scientific and otherwise from around the world? And the answer is that water, in Australia and we are not the only country is a problem of the first magnitude. Every time I open, for example, a report on some forestry authority and see how many million super feet of timber have been cut, I just say to myself, " That's very good, we need timber. I hope it hasn't involved any loss of acre feet~ t of water." We must constantly, in my opinion, think of forests in Australia from two points of view and the first point of view is the protective forest that is going to continue to assure the sources of water that we now have, and perhaps expand them in the course of time.
Sir, we have a dry country I know that there are very many people periodically on the northern rivers who wouldn't agree with that at all but taking the country by and large it is a relatively dry country. Therefore we need and I hope that a great deal will emerge from this Conference to have some better knowledge than we have of the actual and potential water resources of Australia. We need to have the most active and careful steps to preserve and extend those sources of water and wo need, of course above all, having regard to their very scarcity, to do all that we can to secure their most economic and productive use,
Now, it is easy enough to say all those things. We haven't done perhaps as much about them in the past as we might have. We have had, to an extent, too many cases in which a storage has been established and a suitable reticulation delayed, We have had instances of water being kept for use but not used. I have a very strong feeling' myself that the whole of the storing and use of water requires some mere comprehensive planning and some core detailed and accurate views than we have so far been able to evolve, and I don't say that critically of the people who have had responsibility for some of these things. I say it prospectively having regard to the needs of the country.
I know, Sir, that there is a school of thought which says that we in Australia can, without any discomfort, produce all the food that we require; the products of the land are produicts in abundant supply so far as Australia is concerned. That is very true for the most part, but I constantly find myself starting back a little when I consider the rate of increase in the world's population and the enormous pressure of that population upon the resources of the world, I am no mathematical expert, as my old friend Professor Cherry is, nor am I sufficiently intelligent to be a statistician, but they tell me that by the end of the century the world's population will at least have doubled, perhaps more, and that means that there will be hundreds and thousands of millions more people who need to be fed, clothed, who need, in other words to have made available to them the products of the land and the products of the land to which water is applied. And therefore Australia has a responsibility on this matter, not just a selfish or narrow one to feed herself but to play her part in feeding other people. That means that the study of our water resources, the effective use of those resources when we have finally ascertained them, is not only a matter of domestic advantage but I believe of international obligation. This is a matter of immense importance.
It may be, Sir, that in some countries the study of water supply is of theoretical interest but of no great vital importance to the country in which it occurs because it is by nature a well-watered country. All sorts of things may happen in other places, but I will just conclude by repenting to you that in my own opinion as a man concerned in affairs of State, not as a scientist &nbsp;- because I am a &nbsp;purely honorary one as the President knows I firmly believe thot it is in this problem that you are now proceeding to discuss, in the ascertainment let me repeat of our resources, in the extension of those resources ( because we don't yet know all about them) in their preservation from adverse influences, in their effective direction and their effective use in this country and indeed in other countries these things are, from the Australian point of view not just interesting, they are essential and therefore this conference, which contains so many remarkable minds and experiences will, I believe do something, produce something, stimulate something which will be of enormous advantage to the people of Australia.
And that, of course, is the best, the conclusive reason why even a much-travelled and busy Prime Minister takes great pleasure in coming here and saying to you, in anticipation, on behalf of the Government and on behalf of the people, " Thank you for the work you are about to do."


I am glad to have the opportunity presented by, the publication of this special Issue of the Western Australian “Farmers' Weekly” to pay tribute to the vigour which marks current development in your great State,
It was my privilege not long ago to be with representatives of your energetic State Government at Kununurra on the Ord River In the far north-west. Here we saw the most recent example of progress allied with vision, of drive and imagination combining to open up vast areas of rich farm land under the stimulus of irrigation from. a great agricultural engineering project.
Western Australia, I confidently assert, is on the threshold of great things. The Commonwealth and State Governments, enjoying the most co-operative relationship, are partners in the unification of the railway gauge from, Kalgoorlie, in the construction of beef roads in the north, and in other enterprises designed to realise in the best way possible the full potential of natural resources
I look to. a continuation of this relationship, for the Commonwealth Government, in its strong desire to encourage national export trade, will always examine, with a sympathetic eye proposals of a State character which will further this aim. Thus, we have given support to the organisation. by your State Government of a great iron and steel industry, of bauxite development, and of port development.
The State of Western Australia is, in my belief, at its very beginning of Its greatest period of development in its history.
R. G. MENZIESCANBERRA,9th September, 1963.


No 71/1963
It was officially announced today that the Maharajah of Mysore will make an official visit to Australia from Friday, 20th September to Wednesday, 2nd October and during the visit will be the guest of the Commonwealth Government,
The Maharajah will visit Melbourne, Canberra, Sydney and Brisbane during his fortnight's visit to Australia.
CANBERRA,11th September, 1963.



CHAMBER OF M4ANU3FACTUR~ ES OF NEhJ SOUTH WALLS
ANNUAL DINNER HELD AT THE AUSTRALIA HOTEL
SYDNEY, ON 12T1H SEPTEMBER, 1963.
Speech by the Prm iitr h t ~ oL ~ rRbr eze
Sir, Your Excellency and Gentlemen:
I am in a very difficult position tonight, In the
first place, I am not accustomed to making speeches ( Laughter).
In the second place, I am in the presence of a bunch of fellows
who have almost counted me out on one or two occasions in the
past ( Laughter) which I must say I enjoyed. In the third
place, I Learned at the last moment that the man who has the
great advantage of being the second last speaker who is proposing
the toast of " The Guests" is unhappily not here -John Walker
and his place is being taken by my favourite pupil, John Hurley.
( Laughter) And perhaps, therefore, I ought to begin with John
Hurley, because, last week I think it was, I was in Papua and
Now Guinea and when wve got up into the Highlands of New Guinea,
we saw a great number of people whose garments wore slightly
sketchy. ( Laughter) They looked rather like B~ ondi or Manly,
and as I was taken around, I said to my friends who, I hope,
understood me, I said " You know, John Hurley would do no
business in ths country," ( Laughter) Then as I thought what
might be done if we do our' duty by Papua and New Guinea, I
thought that I would like to be out of office by that time and
take a few shares in Johnts business. ( Laughter) ' dell, I just
leave that to you, you understand these things so much better
than I do. That after all is a minor trouble. I knew that
I was coming down here this week and I knew that my old and
bitter enemy, Bob lieffron, would be here ( Laughter), flushed
with success from an overseas journey ( Laughter) and I opeiqed
my paper you know, you chaps who just go on making profits,
you don't understand this but there is nothing a politician
likes more than to enjoy the misories of other people ( Laughter)
and every now and thcn you encounter a state of affairs in
which the other fellow is able to do something that you canft
do. Now, here am I there's no news, there's no novelty about
this remark I have a majority of one ( Laughter), a state of
affairs to which all of you, in your various ways, contributed.
( Laughter) And I opened my paper -I hesitate to say which
one because they arc all here ( Laoughter)-and I read that my
old and friendly enemy, Bob Heffron has stood up on the floor
of the House and has said to a supporter, a somewhat doubtful
supporter perhaps I don't know ( Laughter) I mean, we all
have those ( Laughter) and with a sweeping gesture has also
said to the Leader of the Opposition, " You can hava him"
( Laughter) I didn't feel too good about this, ( Laughter)
I didn't think I had quite come to the point of living on the
crumbs that fall from the rich man's table ( Laughter), He has
got a majority of X plus Y plus Z; I have a majority of one.
( Laughter) If you wake up some morning and you open your
favourite journal and you see " Menzies said to So-a-nd-so
' Leave and Join the Opposition" then you will know that I
am going to have an election ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Therefore, Mr. Premier, I really felt that in spite
of the happy personal relations that you and I have had that
this was rubbing it in a bit. ( Laughter) Don't you think so?
. oee/ 
2.-
All of those of that opinion say " Aye" ( Voices " Aye") To
the contrary " No" the "~ Ayes" I have it.
Well, of course, this is politics, when you have an
enormous majority as before you got to work, I had ( Laughter)
you assume a rather gloomy attitude. Well, you know, you fear
the worst when you have a majority Of 32, but when you have a
majority of one, you assume a eupeptic appearance. One a
marvellous majorityl Marvellous4 And everybody says, " lIsn~ t
it wonderful to have a majority of one?" Now, I refer this
question, not necessarily to a Royal Commission ( Laughter) but
for some domestic investigat io ntohePmirfNeSuh
Wales the simple question, Doc or, being What does it feel
like to have a majority of one? And when we ore both kicked out,
old boy, if I am still alive, I will write you a little essay
on that matter. Anyhow, that's enough of that kind. of nonsense.
My job tonight is to propose the Toast of Australian
Industry. I must say, gentlemen, that I admire tne skill with
which you use these general tezt. s _ Austral-ian Industry becaluse
if you printit with a capital then, Of course it includes
primary industry, secondary industry, tertiary inaustry, public
industry, private industry, and my task is to propose the toast
of the lot which means, in reality, that I am up here to propose
the toast of Australia and triis, I think, is a very honourable
task, But having mentioned all the capital I might
perhaps be allowed to add a small I also propose the toast
of " personal industry" in Austr3lia because in reality, whon
we have got over all the political arguments, the truth remains7
doesn't it that the future of this country your country, my
country the present and the future both do. pend on hew far the
primary industry, secondary industry, tertiary industry, public
industry private industry and personal industry conspire together
for the luture of the country. This is quite right, because
unless all of thnese things march together then the development
and gr~ owth of Australia will not be what It should be.
Now, of course7 people like to hoar you say what
ought to be done, but a grea~ t deal has been done. I know that in
any country like our own a marvellous country there are
builders and there are " knockers". I make no expression of
disrespect to my old friend whom I have never met, Mr. Whelan the
Wrecker ( Laughter) " Whelan the Wrecker was because
I know a certain amount of wrecking is necessary before a building
goes up. But really, I think we all ought to take a little timie
off occasionally to ask ourselves whether we are " knockers" which
is easy, rather clever, quite simple. I have always been afraid
that when I finally go~ out of my present discontents and can
sit in an armchair in the corner of a club and say, " I dont
understand what these fools are about" well7 I hope I shall
understand how simple it will be to achieve a reputition as a
critic, But what goes on in Australia and what has gone on in
Australia is not to the credit of the " knockers" but to the
credit of the builders to the credit of the co-operators, to
the credit -of the people who have looked forward and who have
done their stuff and have seen a vision of what can occur in
Australia. Somebody on my staff, some faithful chap because
we all have a few faithful chaps reminded me only yesterday
that not long ago I went up to the North-4est of Western
Australia to the Ord River to the opening of the Kununurra Darn,
and this is a fascinating affair. It is still, in a sense,
e @ e eo 6*/ 
-3
experimental. It is experimental on a large scale. Here is a
part of Australia i~ n which a great river which from time to time
becomes rather exuberant can be dammed and can be distributed over
the countryside, over land which normally wouldn't grow very much.
And there you are you can see acres and hundreds of acres and
thousands of acres of land under cotton, under all sorts of
various crops sa-fflowor and so on, and you begin to realise
what hap~ ens in a dramatic way in Australia when water is applied
to an otherwise unpromising soil,
This, I found rather oxciting, and if you will allow
me the rare privilege that I have of quoting myself in my own
favour, T will quote what I said on that occasion, and that was,
and I commend this to everybody that the whole h-istory of
Australia is the history of the impossible becoming the possible,
of the possible becoming the probable and of the probable becoming
a living certainty ( Hear, hear) ( Applause). Whenever I read,
some months afterwards, something that I said, I am not like the
fellow who said " What a genius I had when I wrote those lines."
I usually sa1y, ? Take it away and burn it". But on this occasion,
I repeat it, and this might very well be our text, because her'e
I am proposing the Toast of Industry Industry with particular
reference, of course, to manufacturing industry which has had so
much to do with Australian development and will have more and more
to do in the future. But Industry.
Why do we take so much time off to argue with each
other about matters which are of no great importance when in
reality, what you and I have the groot privilege of engaging in
is the task of building a young country, in terms of population a
small country, in such a fashion, so generously, so ambitiously,
that in a hundred years' time, the people who then live in
Australia and who have a population of 60 to 70 million people
a great nation. a great people, a groat race will look back on
us and say " Well, at any rate, they had imagination. They laid
the foundations. They got together." Whenever I read the
history of another country the United States if you like, and
I have read a great deal of the history of the United States in
my time I am not so much interested in the things they disagreed
about except to identify them as I am about how far their
ideas coalesced to produce an immense result,
You knew, gentlemen the other day by some error on
somebodyts part, I was invited to deliver the Jefferson Lecture
at Monticello in the United States at Charlottosvillel Virginia,
and on behalf of my country, I took this as a compliment because
it is the first time anybody outside the United States has ever
been invited to do it. And so I brushed up my recollection of
he legal history of the early part of the United States and its
general history and it suddenly dawned on me that there was one
singular fact Thomas Jefferson, a very great man by any
measurement, great enough to incur hostility in any quarter today
( Laughter) Thomas Jefferson had been the American Minister
( they didn't have an Embassy in those days) in France. He came
back. He was the Draftsman of the American Declaration of
Independence. He was the First Secretary of State in Washington~ s
administration and, by any measurement George Washington was one
of the great men of modern history, full of courage, fortitude,
understanding and Thomas Jefferson was his Secretary of State.
And then later on he was Vice President of America and then for
two terms, he was President of the United States, When he first
became~ President of the United States, he presided ever a United
States of r5-million people. Please remaerbe r that. Five and a
half million people. 909 69/ 
I, for some reason or another that you may analyse
in my absence, have been Prime Minister of Australia for some
years and today, we have 11 million pc ople. Eleven million
people. We sometimes feel, don't we, that eleven million poople
is a very small number of people. We are a small country.
Compar'e us with the vast masses of people. We are no great shakes
after all. If Jefferson had said that if Jefferson had written
off the United States because it had afmillion people, the whole
history of the world would have been a1tered. Make no mistake
about it. We, in Australia, with 11 million people, with all the
advantages that we have in life, with all the prospects that we
have in the future, have a tremendous opportunity, provided wie
pre prepared as individuals to apply industry to work, to sweat,
not to ask too much for too little 2 but to feel that we , sre building
a nation which will someday be as important in the world as the
United States of America is today. Look, if we could only understand
this, this is something tremendous.
I know thore are a lot of poople who say, " Well, we
live we die we are buried and so what." You know, if we really
all thought that, if we really all thought that, it would be a
pretty dyspeptic sort of life, wouldn't it? Here today and gone
tomorrow. I am not engaging in arguments about theological
matters, whether people believe in a future life or not is their
own business, I do, But it is their own business. But the
greatest disbeliever in a future life in some astral sphere must
still believe that what we are doing today in Australia must have
some effect on what happens in Australia in fifty years' time;
in other words that we have our contribution to make whether we
know about it Irom some other place or we don't, whether we are
recognised for it or we are not. These things dontt matter all
that much, The truth of the matter is that we are doing something,
we are building something for the future. A'nd our great-grandchildren
may net think about us at all except when they go and
see some plaque in my case and say, " Well old great-greatgrandfather,
hr. adafonain tn. Well that doesn.' t
matter very much,, Foundation stones don't matter very much.
I'd like them to feel that you and I, in our generation, had laid
more than foundation stones, that we h( ad done something to build
industrially, in all its aspects, a great country. Then we willj
from wherever we arc you in Heaven., I in Hell ( Laughter) -' we
will, in somne mysterious fashion, perhaps? become conscious of
it. But this requires not only great faith and great energy and
very little narrowness of mzind, very little dwelling on the
particular interest at the moment; this requires a broad mnind
and a constructive sense,
Sir, I was up the other day in Papua and New Guinea
and here is a country which presents us with a challenge. We
have been tremendously assisted in our consideration of our
problems in that country by a group of meon led by Jimr Kirby
( Sir James Kirby) who went up there not long ago and had a look
at it; and only the ether day by a professional group from the
World Bank who went there and will in due course present us with
a report on it.
We can't look at ourselves as if we were in a watertight
compartment. A1re we to look at Australia and say " Well
our groat ambition is to be purely self-contained noboly else
need apply; nobody else need compete" 9 Are we io say that to
Papua and Now Guinea? Are we to say to this country for which
we have accepted the greatest international responsibilities in
a e * 1 
our history a task which is overlooked by people, many of whom
would love to see us fail are we to say, " Well, what happens to
Papua-New Guinea doesn't matter very much. They can grow rubber
they can grow tea" and I think they'll grow more and mora of i
" they can grow coffee, they can grow cocoanuts, copra, they can
grow cattle." Well, all these things are at their very beginning,
but you can never think of the problem of Papua-New Guinea as if
this country were isolated from us, as if we could treat it for all
purposes as if it were a foreign country because it is not a
foreign country, Papua-New Guinea is the greatest responsibility
that this country of ours has ever taken on in the eye of international
judgment. And therefore I was delighted when distinguished
members of your own from Sir James Kirby down went and had a look
at this business, went and made valuable reports on it. Never
lot us get too bedded down on the immediate problems that we have,
although they are important. Of course they are important.
But let us all of us you, I, all the rest of us feel that
the judgment that will be applied to us is not the judgment of
the shareholders at your next general meeting, or the judgment
of the electors at my next general election, but will be the
judgment of people, in the long run, who say, '" Jhat did these
ancestors of ours, what did these predecessors do as builders
not only in Australia but elsewhere,"
Now, the only other thing I want to say to you is this,
Sir. I have spoken too long, but this exercises ny mind or
what passes for my mind. There has been a great deal of hurroosh
I don't know how to spell that word but it sounds all right
( Laughter) about the problem of restrictive practices, of trade
practices. ( Laughter) That's right, this rings a bell. ( Laughter)
And of course all this problem evokes two classes of people who
dont matter. One the people who say, " I'm against it, whatever
it is." Well, that's silly. There are others who say, " I don't
understand what it is but I am in favour of it" and that doesn't
matter. What I have been interested to discover in the last
year, is that very, very few people come along an say, " I'm
against anything." The people who count on this matter are the
people who say, " Well, yes, there are some things that are done
that ought not to be done but a real important problem is to
discover what they are, how sensibly a scheme may be developed
on those matters," and I like those people for the very simple
reason that I think they are very sensible and I would like to
toll you that in the middle of all the hurroosh, we had last week
a discussion no, it was this week, last Monday with representatives
of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council, their
spokesman being Mr. Irish, and we had put to us the most balanced,
sensible and impressive body of ideas on this matter that I have
yet heard and I would like to say that on behalf of the Government
we are very grateful for this.
We are not dogmatic on this matter, we are not
doctrinaire on this matter. Indeed, we are like you. We want
to preserve competition and, so far as we can, with good sense,
eliminate unfairness and injustice. Well, it is easy enough to
say that in the broad. When you come down to the point as to
how you are to do it, you get to a problem which will, in due
course, exercise the Governments of the States who have exactly
the same interest as we have on this matter and whose co-operation
is essential in this field, and all I want to tell you is that
what has been said to me and to ry colleagues in the last few
days has been so constructive and so helpful that I think it may
well determine the future course of action. ( Applause) / 6 
6
Sir, when I was coming here tonight my wife said
to me because she has gone to see somebody else " How
late do you think you will be?" And, I said, " Oh, I don't
know. About half past ten" and the driver, who knows me
of old, said relevantly, though perhaps impertinently, he
said, ' Well Sir, ( one of the great advantages of
life is that the driver calls you " Sir" ( Laughter) he said,
" Sir, the year before last it was a quarter to twelve and
last year it was a quarter past twelve," So I said to my
wife, " All right, my dear. When you have seen as much as
you want to see of Earthy or whatever her name is
( Laughter) you go home. And, therefore, in the meantime Sir,
thanking you for your usual and marvellous hospitality. I
will invite all my temporary collaborators ( Laughter) to
stand up and drink with me the Toast of Australian Industry.
I_ 



63/ 096
P1M. No. 72/ 1963
VISIT OF BER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH
THEI QUEEN MOTHER
tatement ba lthe Prime ainiste the, Rt. lHon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. J. H. Scholtens, Chief Ceremonial
Officer of the Prime Minister's Department, has been
appointed by the Commonwealth Government to be Commonwealth
Director of the arrangements for the visit to Australia
next February/ March by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen
Mother. The Headquarters of the Royal Visit Organisation
will be at Canberra in the Prime Minister's Department.
CANBERRA, 13th September, 1963. 
t 7. 1
I
I 0
0 



FOR PEESS~ P. M. No. r73/ 1961
MALAYS IA
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
" Australia welcomes the new Federation of Malaysia
which comes into being tomorrow. We wish it well in every
way and believe that it will contribute to the welfare and
prosperity of its people. The joining together of the -three
former British territories of Singapore, Sarawak and North
Borneo ( or Sabah as it is now to be called) with the independent
Federation of Malaya to form Malaysia represents a population
increase for the new Federation of 3,000,000 people and the
addition of a wide diversity of economic resources and skills.
Malaya has made great progress since it received independence
in August, 1957 and has shown its ability to build a free and
prosperous nation, I am confident that the accretion of the
three new states will give great scope for development to all
of them. I have attempted to sum up my own views and what
I think are the views of all Australians in the following
message which I am sending to the Prime Minister Designate
of Malaysia, Tunku Abdul Rahman, todaytWe
in Australia have expressed a clear and
continuing conviction that the establishment of
Malaysia would be a welcome and progressive development
in the history of South East Asia. Events of this
magnitude do not take place without frictions and
hazards. You and the other representative leaders
of the constituent elements of Malaysia have
maintained your dedication and belief in what you
believe to be best for your peoples. Now Malaysia
has been brought into existence as a throat to none
and a positive factor for stability and progress.
The contacts and associations between our
Governments and peoples have been many and close,,
They have been marked by feelings of mutual goodwill
and, on our part, by respect for and appreciation of
your achievements in the few short years since
indepondence. The main features which distinguish
the performonce wise and tolerant government,
free institutions and policies of economic growth
and social development provide a good augury for the
future of the new and wider Federation,'
Sir Robert said he also wished to comment on the
report issued by the Secretary-General of the United Nations,
U Thant, on thne findings of his representatives concerning the
wishes of the peoples of Sarawak and Sabah ( North Borneo) with
regard to the inclusion of their territories in Malaysia.
The Prime Minister expressed his satisfaction that
the United Nations Secretary-General had confirmed in such
unmistakable terms what the Australian Government had believed
to be true, namely, that the substantial majority of the peoples
of the territories of Sabah and Sarawak were in favour of Malaysia.
Both in public statemonts and in diplomatic exchanges the Australian
Government had expressed their conviction that this wa-s the case. / 2 
-2-
The Prime Minister recalled how the role of the
United Nations Secretary-General in the affair had originated.
The Foreign Ministers of Indonesia and the Philippines at their
meeting in Manila in June told the Malayan representatives that
" they would welcome the formation of Malaysia provided the
support of the people of the Borneo territories is ascertained
by an independent and impartial authority, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations or his representative." Later the
Heads of Goverrmient of Indonesia, Malaya and the Philippines,
meeting in Manila laid down the torms under which they would
request U Thant o carry out this task of ascertainment.
This task has now been fully discharged.
The Prime Minister went on to say that the
Malayan Government as well as the Governments of Britain and
the Borneo territories had done everything that might reasonably
be expected to gain acceptance of Malaysia by its neighbours.
The Secretary-GeneralTs findings were regarded by the Australian
Government as deciding this question beyond further argument.
It was obvious that his representatives had
discharged their functions with great care and sense of
responsibility and the Australian Government strongly hoped
that the findings would be accepted by the Governments concerned.
The Australian Minister for External Affairs, Sir
Garfield Barwick, had made abundantly clear to Indonesian leaders,
during the last few days, Australia's position on these matters.
CANBERRA, September, 1963. 



6 3/ 097
FOR PRESS: P. M. 24/ 1263
RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES LEGISLATION
Statement-by the Pme Minister. the Rt. Hon, Sir RobertI1enzes
Hysterical statements by the Leader of the
Opposition, Mr. Calwell, such as his comment on my address to
the Dinner of the New South Wales Chamber of Manufactures, serve
only to exhibit his over-excited state of mind.
It was made quite clear, when the first statement
was made on restrictive practices policy in the House of
Representatives, that it was a general description of the kind
of ideas the Government had. That statement was deliberately
designed and timed to give ample opportunity for criticism and
discussion before a bill was drafted for consideration by the
Parliament. Sir Garfield Barwick, the Attorney-Gencral, has
himself carried out this idea with enormous vigour. He has met
organisations and groups of people in every State to 01-icit and
discuss points of criticism, so that the Government might have
them in mind before proceeding to the actual work of precise
dra ftsmans hip. W4hen we recently saw the representatives of the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council which, I should
point out, is a standing body set up by the Government to give
it advice those present for the Governnent were the Minister
for Trade, Mr, McEwen, the Treasurer, Mr. Holt, the Minister
for National Developmenu;, Sir William Spooner, the Att%, orney-
Genra, Sir Garfield Barwick, the Minister for Primary
Industry, Mr. Adermann, and myself, We all thought ti1iat the
views presented on behalf of the M. I. A. C.-on the precise nature
of which neither the Government nor the Council has made any
statement were the most balanced and constructive tihat we
had had presented to us. We will undoubtedly find them of great
advantage to us in considering what the final shape of the
legislation should be, As I said in Sydney, I regard this
kind of consultation as of great value in clarifying issues
and helping to achieve a sound and positive result.
In the light of the foregoing it is quite clear
that Mr. Calwellts strange attempt to suggest that Sir Garfield
Barwick has been in some way rebuffed is the product of pure
imagination; or at any rate of imagination.
All Ministers had a hand in designing the
original general statement and all will have a hand in the final
outcome. I repeat that nobody has done half as much in
this matter as has Sir Garfield in seeking out the points of
criticism and in trying to achieve ultimately a result which
will be sensible and fair to the community as a whole.
CANBERRA September, 1963. 


63/ 099EROADi3T Br Til MMK XIN 18TER THE RT. RON.SIR ROfRT HUIZIS ON RADIO AUITRAIJA ON TIMOCCASION OF VIArAISI DAX ON 16TH SZPMEflR, 1963LAdies and Gentlemen sWith peat plesure I convey my congratulations andbest wishes, to the Laesand peoples of Malaysia an thisvery notable day in their history*The esa. blishument of Malaysia Is of particular interestto Australia and Australians for we have had a close and varmassociation with you in the past and are extremely keen to comeoven closer to you an you develop your now nationhood,I regret to say that I " e hover visited either NorthBorneo or Sarawak butI do of course know the Leaders of Malaysiaand Singapore, Tw~ k% Abftl Rtabman anid Mr, Lee Mun Yew, for eachof Vhe I have greet respect and regard.We in Australia have had a long experience in theformation of a self-gorning federation out of a group of* elf-@ mvrning ooloanie As you perhaps knov, all this happenedin Austalia ust be fore the end of the last century With theresult that Australian Federation somw Into existence in1901. So we have had a good deal of experience in forming afederation and of couse$ we have amw had 60 years of experienceIn making hat federation work* I mention this beaue, althug%today " epresents a splendid begi% 6% ningd I would not like you tothink it represents the and of a road IIt is really the beginningof one, From now on, it is your task to ake the federatimneffective strn cohesive, influential, and I an sure youwil-l so aunt it La that way.Now what I have just said indicates just why we aredeeply Interested in you and are very confident of your success,We have of course some spesial personal eontacts. A numberof your young son and wemen hae come to Australia for educationalor other purposes and I believe ( and I an sure rightly) thatthey have found great friendship awmg the Australian people.Theme eontacts In addition to anl the others I neednot refer to, 0 will no doubt oontime and grow. They havecertainly produced in Australia a preat affection for, anda high degree of understanding of Malaysia and Its specialproblems, We are, of eorse you Malaysia we the IsMAMiatkof Australia -Coonwealth partvers and we AaVe a stron-g Interest,an enduring Interest In peace and in the ecoomic advanowmentof South last Asia* I emphasise this because I 3sgard theMalaysia creation as a great step forward in the forwarding ofpeace and the forwarding of ecoomic development.We must all veyk together think togather., be willingto understanid each other and to help each other. ) y Ministerfor External Affairs, Sir Garfield Barvick, Is personallyrepresenting the Australian Government and Its peple at yourimngeral celebrations and I do not roed to toll you that bebears with his the good wishes of everybody In Australia. 0 .&amp; 00
-2-I an suw that yar no w dty winI briag iIts train the strength that wi oumrm a great fiturefor Malaysias That in ertainly what I vish, that isortainiy what the people of Autralia wish, and thereforeit is the wish we oaL you on this oonsion in your history,rou have the wtmsat exprssions of podvillfree my oouatry and its people*


P.M. No. 75/1963&nbsp;
The Prime Minister said tonight that, since answering the question in the House this afternoon, he had examined his correspondence and found that he had indeed heard from Mrs. Brown of Shenton Park, on 2nd August, and had thanked her in a letter dated 21st August.
The exchange of letters had slipped his memory when the question was asked.
CANBERRA,18th September, 1963.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH. BY
Rt. lion. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.
ON
MALAYSIA DEFENCE.
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 25th September, 1963.]
MALAYSIA DEFENCE.
Ministerial Statement.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister)-by leave-I present to the
House the following papers:-
Malaysia Defence-
Anglo-Malayan Defence Agreement of 1957.
Notes exchanged between Australia and
Malaya in March and April, 1959.
United Kingdom Malaysia Agreement of
July, 1963 ( excluding Annextires).
Notes exchanged between Australia and
-Malaysia in September, 1963.
In reference to the last of these papers,
I point out that in answer to a question
last week, I summarized the effect of these
notes exchanged between Australia and
Malaysia. In substance I then said that
our existing arrangements with Malaya
would now apply to Malaysia.
It may be remembered that so far back as
April, 1955, the Government emphasized
the importance of Malaya to the security of
the zone in which we live, and pointed out
that in consequence, Malayan integrity and
defence were matters from which we could
not and should not stand aloof. Reasons of
this kind, directly affecting us, were of
course, closely allied with the proper
interests of others-who are our friends.
The establishment of the Commonwealth
Strategic Reserve, of Seato-to the functions
of which the Reserve was relevant-the
9633/ 63. negotiations of the Anzus pact, are all in the
same pattern. That is a pattern, not of
aggression, but of defence; not of isolation
in defence, but of -common effort for the
common security.
There has been some suggestion that our
forces in Malaya went there primarily for
purposes of internal security. This is not
so. As I have indicated, they went there
and are there as a part of a strategic reserve
with the United Kingdom and New Zealand
and as a contribution to the defence of the
South-East Asian area. True, we,-quicly
agreed that our forces could be employed
in operations against the Communist terrorists
in Malaya. They were so employed,
with success, and with great credit to themselves
and Australia. The facts were, of
course, that these terrorists were promoted
and supplied by Communist authorities outside
Malaya, and that their activities were
as much acts of war against the territorial
and political integrity of Malaya as would
have been overt military invasion. We think
that the people of Australia have agreed
with these policies and decisions. In all
these arrangements, and in any to be made,
the usual rule will apply that the employment
of' Australian forces remains under the
control of the Australian Government. We
have acted and will continue to act consistently
with the Charter of the United
Nations. 
But Malaysia, the new nation, is here.
The processes of its creation have been
democratic. The United Nations Secretary-
General, having appointed suitable persons
as examiners, reported that the people of
North Borneo and Sarawak desired incorporation
into Malaysia. The Prime Minister
of Singapore, one of the great sponsors of
Malaysia, has just received an overwhelming
endorsement at the polls. We have
publicly and unambiguously said that we
support Malaysia which is, never let it be
forgotten, a Commonwealth country, just as
our own is. Should there be any attempts
to destroy or weaken Malaysia by subversion
or invasion, what should Australia do about
it? -We know that the United Kingdom
accepts, in substance, the position of a
military guarantor. Honorable members
now know the terms of our own recent
exchange of notes.
The Government of Malaysia has said
clearly that this exchange is completely satisfactory
to it. But it has not been the normal
practice of Commonwealth countries to
spell out in detail their sense of mutual
obligation, nor to confine themselves to
legal formulae. For example, our vital
engagements with the United Kingdom are
not written or in any way formalized. Yet
we know and she knows that in this part
of. the world * we look to her, and she looks
to. us. We each apply in a spirit of mutual
confidence a golden rule. of . mutual
obligation. But for the benefit of all concerned,
honorable members would not wish me to
create or permit any ambiguity about Australia's
position in relation to Malaysia. I
therefore, after close deliberation by the
Cabinet, and on its behalf, inform the House
that we are resolved, and have so informed
the Government of Malaysia, and the
Governments of the United Kingdom and
New Zealand and others concerned, that if,
in the circumstances that now exist, and
which may continue for a long time, there
occurs, in relation to Malaysia or any of
its constituent States, armed invasion or subversive
acti v ity-sup ported or directed or
inspired from outside Malaysia-we shall
to the best of our powers and by such means
as shall be agreed upon with the Government
of Malaysia, add our military assistance
to the efforts of Malaysia and the
United Kingdom in the defence of Malaysia's
territorial integrity and political independence.
Inow present the following paper:-
Malaysia Defence-Ministerial Statement,
September, 1963.
Motion ( by Mr. Adermann) proposed-
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate ( on motion by Mr. Calwell)
adjourned. S~ r Robert Menzies.-Perhaps I may be
permitted to say that copies* of what I have
just said and of the documents referred to
will be available at once for a0 honorable
members.
By Authority: A. J1. ARTmuR, Comnmonwealth Government Printer, Canberra. 



FOR PRESS PM Z8/ 1963
NEW AUSTRALIAN CASH LOAN IN LONDON
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister and Chairman of the Australian
Loan Council ( Sir Pobert Menzies) gave details tonight of a new
Australian cash loan which has been negotiated in London by the
Commonwealth Treasurer ( Mr. Harold Holt) with the approval of the
Loan Council. The loan will be for an amount of œ Stg. 20 million
million) and will carry an interest rate of 5j per cent
with an issue price of 98-i-. The loan will mature in April 1981-82.
Sir Robert said that f3tg. 5.7 million (œ CA7.1 million)
of the proceeds will be earmarked for the redemption of an
equivalent amount of Commonwealth securities which mature in
London on 1st January 1964. The remaining œ Stg. 14.3 million
(œ A17.9 million) will be available for the 1963-6+ Commonwealth
and State borrowing programmes approved by the Loan Council.
Sir Robert said that, in view of the difficulties
which Australia may face in borrowing in the United States for
the next few years as a result of the proposed Interest
Equalization Tax on foreign issues in that country, it was
particularly gratifying that the Treasurer had been able to
arrange such a large cash loan in London.
The new loan will be the fourth Australian cash loan
in London since 1958, the three previous loans being for amounts
of either œ Stg. 12 million or œ Stg. 15 million. Each of these was
issued at 5-L per cent, and the most recent loan ( in January 1963)
was for an amount of œ Stg. 12 million and had an issue price of 98.
The new loan will open for subscription in London on
W-Tednesday 2nd October.
CANBERRA. 27th September, 1963. 



63/ 111
LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF HIS EXCELLENCY MR. HAYATO IKEDAI
PRUE~ MINISTER OF JA-PAN
at
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANUBERRA,
ON 30TH SEPTEMBER, 1963
SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES
Sir, You are the Prime Minister of a nation which has such
a great part to play, not only in the Pacific Area, but in the
world, You are, therefore, on that ground alone, welcome in this
country ( Hear, hear) ( Applause), and it is my pleasure, Sir, on
behalf of the Australian Parliament, to express that welcome in
words. It would, Sir, as I am sure you will agree, be idle
to pretend that the war did not leave grievous wounds upon
Australia's feelings towards Japan. It is the basis of friendship
that we should recognise that f~ act. There were and there
are bitter memories in many hearts.
But, Sir, it is in the Australian character not to
prolong hatreds or to live on past events. ( Hear, hoar) ( Applause)
We are essentially a forward-looking people, with a great instinct
for optimism and friendship. We want to live not only in peace,
but in the widest co-operation with other nations. Your
predecessor in your great office, Mr. Kishi, made us a successful
visit a few years ago, I myself hCAve visited your country twice
during my term of office. You have sent us a series of most
distinguished Ambassadors ( Applause), whose work, not only In
the re-establishment of good will, but also in the handlingof
the practical problems of trade and commerce, has been of
immense value to both our countries. Our own Ambassadors to
Japan, I do not doubt I hove one of them here today ( Applause)-
have performed similar services at your end.
Some years after the echoes of the war had died
away, we decided, in this country, as a considered matter of
policy, that security and co-operation in the Pacific should be
preferred to the prolongation of enmity; that we should learn
to live with each other; that we should concentrate upon our
common interests and be aware of our common dangors. In the
achievement of all these great objectives, Japan has shown
herself a willing co-operator. In the world atmosphere of
recent times Japan has resumed her place as a great power, with
remarkable economic development and skill, and with a growing
willingness, I am happy to note, to play an effective part in
the solution of the world's economic problems. Australia herself,
a small nation but a large traer~ has been developing commercial
relations with Japan which, in absolute as well as in relative
terms, have been of great value to both our countries. Our
Trade Treaties with you have marked our close relations with
you. Their efficacy abd I point this out with some sati~ faction
has depended, not only upon the letter of the deal, but upon
genuine good faith. ( Hear, hear) But Sir, trade though
important, is not all. Our contacts with you at all human
levels have been growing. Whatever the torments of an earlier
period, I think we can all agree here today that we can now look
back upon a decade of most civilised association. Wie wanit this
association to continue, and to grow stranger nnd I am sure, Sir,
that you shore this desire, 
2-
Now, Sir may I turn from this to look very, very
briefly at some of the probloms of the present and the future.
We aro all concerned with the expansionary threats of Communist
politics, philosophy destructive philosophy. Neither you nor
we have any aggressive intentions, but we must stand ready to
protect our owm freedoms. This readiness does not simply connote
military preparedness. It involves the establishment, in the
eyes of the world, of the fact that free communities can provide
for their citizons growing living standards and swift nationall
development without the sacrifice of individual freedom in the
interests of a dictatorship or a powerful few. ( Applause)
I'e believe that you, Mr. Prime Minister, and your
nation? share these ideas. We believe if I may say so withQut
impertinence to a welcome and distinguished guest, tha. t Japan
must and will play a great and constructive part in this
historic drama. One of the great causes of tension in the world i.
the economic differences which exist between the great industrial
powers on the one hand, and the relotively underdeveloped
countries which depend upon primary production and therefore
suffer from instability of prices and somue uncertainty of markets.
Those differences, unless a conscious effort is made to reduce
them, will tend to increase, and for the very good reason, or
the very bad reason, that the rate of growth in highly industrialised
countries, thanks to the rapid improvement of technologies
and plant, tends to be faster than it is in countries follow~ Lng
farming and pastoral pursuits.
We believe that these facts call for far-reaching
policies on the part of the great industrial powers designed
not only to assist development in newer countries lut also to
assure reasonable, stable and profitable markets lor the products
of that development. Sir, Japan is one of the great industrial powers.
Aifter a necessary period of re-adjustment, you have made enormous
strides forward, with immnense skill and the most admirable
industry. You have? for us, a special significance in the South-
West Pacific in which your influence, a great and growing one,
can do much toassist political and economic stability and the
elimination of old or new animosities, In short, Mr. Prime
Minister, we bulieve that in this new political and social world,
a world which is in the making, Japan has a now and historic
function and destiny.
Small and remote as we may seem in Australia when
viewed against the world background we have the resources and
the skill and the energy to grow and become a powerful co-operator
in the common cause of humanity. But great or small you great,
we small we all need friends with common interests and comimon
ideals. The world does not need nor should it tolerate or
encourage, the perpetuation of differences. Let us rather build
upon those good things that we have in cor. on. If the nations
arc to be free and prosperous, friendship and co-operation and
mutual understanding must be our common aima.
Mr. Prime Minister, your visit is a powerful contribution,
in itself, to this end. We are delighted that you are
here, both giving and receiving good will. 



63/ 1
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 79/ 196i
JOINT COMMUNIQUE
VISIT OF PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
Mr. Hayato Ikeda, Prime Minister of Japan,
accompanied by Mrs. Ikeda is visiting Australia as the guest
of the Government of the Cormonwealth of Australia from 29th
September to 3rd October, 1963. During his stay in Australia,
Mr. Ikeda will visit Canberra, Sydney and Melbourne, and have
discussions with Sir Robert Menzies and other Cabinet Ministers.
The Prime Ministers of Japan and Australia have had
cordial and valuable talks marked by frank discussions of the
international situation in general, and covering also consideration
of means of promoting still further the friendly relations
between the tw-countries.
In discussing the international situation, the Prime
Ministers established that there was a close identity between
their respective international policies. They lo-ked forward to
close co-operation in the future, through consultations at
various levels with the aim of promoting the interest of the
two countries and of the free world.
The Prime Ministers especially welcomed the r a prtial
nuclear test ban agreement which they hoped would be supported
by all countries, not least of all by countries in the Pacific
or with interests in the Pacific.
Noting that both Australia and Japan had welcomed the
formation of Malaysia, and recognising the common destiny and
responsibility of their two countries in Asia and the Western
Pacific area, the two Prime Ministers expressed their deep
concern for the situation in that area, and agreed that the
two countries should closely co-operate in contributing to the
attainment of peace and economic progress in that part of the
world. They discussed ways in which Australia and Japan might,
through the Colombo Plan and in other ways, co-operate in
furthering economic development in South East Asia.
The Prime Ministers expressed pleasure and satisfaction
at the recent signing of a Trade Agreement between Australia
and Japan, providing for a full GATT relationship between
Australia and Japan and withdrawing the Article 35 reservation.
It was confidently expected that the new agreement would lead
to a further expansion of the mutually beneficial trade relations
already existing between the two countries.
The two Prime Ministers expressed their satisfaction
at the further increase in both personal contacts and cultural
exchanges between the two countries, and agreed that the two
Governments would endeavour to promote these developments by
every possible means.
The two Prime Ministers considered that Prime
Minister Ikeda's visit to Australia was of great significance
to the furtherance of mutual understanding and friendly relations
between the two countries, and agreed that the two Governments
should keep the closest possible contacts with each other both
at the ministerial and official levels.
CANBERRlA Septemraber, 1963. 



63/ 112
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
SIR ROBERT MENZIES PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTP1L1* IA.
AT PARLIAiAMNT HOUS, CANBERR, ON MONDAY,
SEPTEMBER 1963 AT 5 P. M. ON THE OCCASION OF THE
VISIT OF THE PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAiN, MR. H. IKEDA
PRIME MINISTER
QUESTION P. M. Perhaps before questions are put, I just ought to
surmiarise today by saying that I had a little talk
this morning with the Prime Minister. We then went
into the Cabinet room where I had ten or eleven
Ministers to meet him. We had a very interesting
and valuable private discussion with him which I
think we all njoyed very much and this afternoon,
after one or two visits that the Prime Minister
had to make, I have just had an hour and a half
with him again and we finally settled the terms
of a cormzunique which will, no doubt, be distributed
quite soon. All of these discussions were very
useful. I think I would sum them up by saying
that the position of Japan in the Western Pacific
and down here in the South-West Pacific is
increasingly important. Japan is not only a very
powerful country and growing stronger, with
cons idorable economic development and great
talent, but is a free country with a democratic
system of government and I believe, and we
believe, increasingly important in this section
of the world. Quite important anywhere in the
world but particularly important because if you
take the free countries on the eastern littoral
of China, then quite plainly Japan has the
greatest strongth, the greatest influence and,
we think, is approaching all these international
topics in a genuine spirit of goodwill and this
is warmly reciprocated here. This visit has given
us, on both sides, an opportunity of restating
it and being able to say quite honestly that the
relations have grown in strength and in genuinenosa.
( This was translated by Mr. Matsuoko for the
benefit of the Japanese press party who were
present) I represent the Asahi Shinbun and am very grateful
that you are giving us this conference today, Sir.
I have two questions to ask. The first concerns
Malaysia. Prime Minister Ikeda has expressed the
view that a summit conference with the leaders of
Malaysia, Indonesia anxdthe Philippines, could help
stabilise the position. What do you think of the
practicabiJity of this idea?
Well I'd prefer not to say anything very
conclusive on that matter. The Prime Minister
himself developed that notion with us today
very clearly. There are problems, of course.
For example, if there were to be a summit
conference, presumably it would be between
President Macapagal Soekarno and the Tunku.
Would the Tunku be there as the Prime Minister of
Malaysia? Presumably he would. I can't quite
see him attending in any other capacity. If so,
it would seem to me that one advantage of such
a conference would be that it would involve a
recognition on the part of the Philippines and
Indonesia of the existence, the genuine existence
of Malaysia, which would be a step forward. / 2 
-2
P. M.
( Contd.)
QUESTION P. M. But I don't profess to know what the Tunku Abdual
Rahrian has in his mind. I can quite imagine that
he fools that the existence of continued threats
to Malaysia, cither by way of what is called
confrontation or by active incidents along the
frontier, are perhaps rather inconsistent with a
peaceful negotlation around the table. On the other
hand of course, he may very well say, " There is
nothing I'm not prepared to discuss, because I have
no ambitions to serve except to preserve Malays~ a
and encourage it and enable it to go on and be*
prosperous and successful. But we are on the sidelines
here. We don't decide these matters. If you
were to say to me, " I1s it a good thing to sit ar'ound
a table-and have no hostilities outside?", then of
course that would be a very easy one to answer.
What is really needed over the whole of this matter
is that thireats should come to an end and that it
should be recognised that you have new three groups of
people the Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia
all of them anxious to go on with their own business, 7
I hope and to be prosperous and to raise their
economic standards, and all of them I 4r--uld hope,
willing to live in peace with the o hers. So stated,
it is sixiple enough. If a conference can contribute
to such a result, then it is a good thing but I [ lave
had a long experiunce of conferences and I must say
that I usually like to have a bit of work done first
before the conference begins so tUhat it is possible to
discover whether there is a reasonable prospect-of
arriving at some useful conclusion. That doesn't
mean I reject the idea; it merely means that I am
not just automatically putting my stamp on it.
You have said that it is generally acknowledged that
there is a growing goodwill between A'ustralia and
Japan and a great growth in trade. It is recognised
that this should be pursued and expanded. Have you
any positive ideas as to how this right be done in
the future course of development of goodwill and
further expansion?
I think that this will comeo by inevitable circu~ mstances.
We had a little talk about that this morning. -There
is no doubt about it, we are very large traders with
each other today, There is a very substantial
balance of trade in favour of Australia because of
the nature of our exports. We are all ag-reed that
this trade will develop. It will go on expanding.
It will roach greater and greater proportions as
time goes on. This is inevitable because of the
pattern of the trade between us. We produce and
sell things that Japan needs and Japan is going through
a rapid phase of economic development, the national
income is rising, its capacity to buy things that we
produce and sell will rise and, of course, inevitably
there will be some increase of trade both ways. I
don't think that anybody expects that the trade
between Japan and Australia can be brought into
ba~ lance in a hurry if at all because of the nature
of what the trade is. We are sending things to
Japan like wool, wheat, and fo-) dstuffs which Japan
needs and which, to that extent, she is not producing
herself. Japan sends to us manufactured goods and
we are, of course a substantial manufacturing country
Ourselvos, so thaoi the problem is not just a simple
mathematical one. But we all agree the visiting
delegation and ourselves that all the prospects are
that there will be steady increase in the already
substantial voluzro of trade between the two countries, 
-3-
QUESTION P. M.
QUESTION P. M.
QUESTION P. M.
QUESTION P. M.
QUESTION g
P. M. Australia like Japan, is an anti-Communist country.
However Australia has in the past few years exported
a very large quantity of wheat to Communist ChnaDoyouLntend
to contimnr exporting wheat in this volume and do
you consider this has any relation to political attitude
to Communist China and, in particular to the question of
whether Communist China should be admitted to the United
Nations? Well, that is a group of questions. In the first place,
I imagine I think rightly that Japan does not have any
artificial prohibition of trade with Communist China
but, like ourselves, she abstains from exporting
strategic goods. So do we. It is quite true we have
sold, in the last two or three years very large quantities
of wheat to China and we are quite prepared to carry that
on. We grow a lot of wheat and we like to sell it. We
eat some of it inside Australia and we sell the rest.
Yes, we will go on selling wheat to Communist China under
existing circumstances. This doesn't have any effect on
whether we recognise Communist China diplomatically or
not, We don't. It has no bearing on whether we would
support the seating of Communist China in the United
Stations because we have not supported that. We think
that there are very high political reasons for those
policies but they don't in any way cut across ordinary
relations in matters which are not the subject of
strategic importance.
Can you give any indication at this stage of the timetable
for the restricted trade practices legislation?
Well, it is not yet in the form of legislation. As you
know, a genedl description of the ideas was made in
Parliament. It was done deliberately to expose it to
criticism over a considerable period of time. There have
been many criticisms, some destructive and some
constructive. As I said recently, the best ones that
we had, we had recently from the spokesmen of the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and those
matters are now under consideration. But when Cabinet
has given consideration to those ideas, then for the
first time will it be possible to put what proposals
emerge into legislative form. That is not something
t'at may be expected in the matter of a few weeks.
Sir Robert, talking of timetables, could you give us a
timetable of any plans you might have for an early
election?
Well that I am proposing to have an election is beyond
all doubt, but when, I don't know.
Is there any justification for having an early election?
Oh I think I could justify an early one, a medium one,
a ate one. Anyhow, it is all right. There is nothing
hidden that shall not be made known.
Was there any significance behindthedecision to defer
a decision on the choice of the new bomber?
Oh, no. vc have had an evaluation team overseas. It
cane back. It produced a great deal of material
massive material. This matter has then been put into
examination by the Defence Department as a whole and
I expect that the next Cabinet or perhaps the one
afterwards will get the result of that examination.
There is no significance in what you might think 
P. M.
( Contd.) QUESTION P M. to be delay. There was bound to be some tine because
this is a vast matter, running irnto very significant
defence ideas and also into a great deal of money
and therefore we want to feel perfectly certain that
when we muake a decision it will be the right one.
That's all.
Did you discuss defence co-operation with Mr. Ikeda,
Sir? No, 



FOR PRESS: PM&gt; 9/ 1963
NEW CO. MKONWVFALTHT C! ASVF AIUSJ T.
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
A new Commonwealth cash and conversion loan will
open for subscription on Thursday, October
Announcing this today, the Prime : inister and
Chairman of the Australian Loan Council ( Sir Robert Menzies)
said that the target for the cash loan will be œ 60 million.
The securities to be offered in both the cash and conversion
loans will have the same interest rates and maturity dates as
those offered in the July 1963 cash loan but, in line with
S the slight fall in yields which has occurred on the market
since then, the prices at which the securities will be issued
will be slightly higher than in July.
0 The three securities which will be offered in the
cash and conversion loans are as follows:-
4-per cent July 1986 securities issued at par.
4 per cint October 1973 secuirities issued at
œ 99/ 12/ 6 to yield approxinlatJ.. y œ 4.5.11 per cent.
per cent Jul. y 1966 secrLtzcs issued at
œ 99/ 17/ 6 to yi&amp; ld approxij.:-atcly œ 3.16.0 per cent.
Sir Robert noted that the last occasion on which
long-term securities had been issued in a Commonwealth loan with
S a yield of œ 4/ 10/ 0 per cent was in the November 1955 cash and
conversion loan. He recalled that the 1986, 1973 and 1966
securities offered yields of œ 4/ 11/ 1 per cent, œ 4/ 7/ 5 per cent,
and œ 3/ 17/ 8 per cent respectively when they were issued in the
July 1963 cash loan. Subscriptions to that loan totalled
œ 74.5 million. In the case of the July cash loan, the Loan Council
adopted an experiment whoruby the loan remilned open for eight
days only. As this arrangement proved succaessful, and did not
appear to cause any inconvenience to investors, it will be
continued for the new cash loan, which will close on Thursday, 
-2-
October 17. The conversion loan will open on Tuesday,
October Special Bonds Series I, which came on issue on H'. ay
16 last, will continue to be available for subscription until
further notice. Sir Robert invited holders of œ 144.3 million 3-8p1e r
cent securities maturing on October 15 to convert their investments
into the new loan securities or into Special Bonds Series
I. The maturing securities were offered for subscription in
1949, and are widely held throughout the community.
The minimum subscription to the Commonwe~ alth loan and
0 to Special Bonds Series I will be œ 10, and there will be, as
before, a limit of œ, 10,000 on overall holdings by any person or
institution of Special Bonds Series A-I combined.
The usual income tax rebate of in the œ will apply
to interest from the new loan securities and from Special Bonds
Series I included in taxable income. Those and other detailed
terms and conditions for the new loan are set out fully in
prospectuses which are now being circulated to all banks and
0 stockbrokers, and will also be explained further in newspaper
advertisements. Canberra, A. C. T.
1st October, 1963. 



ACTUARIAL SOCILTX OF AUSTh&amp; A ANMD
NSW 7ZAID CONF1LM1CZ A~ T ROTL RKA
AT CANRM A oa21M cCTOg5R, 1963.
I like tm thinge about * owing hb~ em Cb is that
It gives me aon * WStufity of getting into a rather bije
* UeS&amp; of 1UN t an soustomed too ( Lsuhbter) The other
is that you mev kind A whmet you ixvited m to point out
that the opnn pohwas expeeted to oo~ py nt aethan
ton xiatsl xaAthatI twa~ t the mat min ist, . antiment
In fact It was because of that that I said Oft". ( Laughter)
I hovie always been * atexested. la a sort of
theoretleal. way In setumieo I teusmbsz when I vas a youth,
having ~ 1 eMR poine oat to im with a hashed voles and being
told. Oft's a qualifted eatmMwy' Ntapbor~ clomsy we used to
walk around his and look at him, sat the ematomur of the
shall try to disoovau what the anateeall smts might be
that made a man so" k a . mins that he was an actma' Mw I
dou't kam h that vase I still havo a artalm flaw of
estuaries = a owtaInly at that tiactuies. Vae fairly
It Was eStul simee after that that I realised
that the soots had erst Wag to do with this. They bad a pod
deal to do with stafting this motgasial basiness anid m a
Stsa starts aytbing ha is b m to ala the
at any tate, that it Is of sagitrlar disttil-m L-gts'
W6. ll, of aours, it Is a 2ang time slowe I was a
swubtyu t am# 0br1Ln s politisl t thaee masStill
0 -Astm d eof res. I am reember I m~ a in the
Vitevlank -esmuat Smat qusetie arising as to whether
e Sould hav as the w( lfoemut tatist a am Who an st a ? ellw
of the Institute of Astwries. Ad tbero was a very poerftu
&amp; aWeA~ ft put feVVW4r at the tine and that was there Wasu't one
avellabje, fw that see a littleo odd andv I th1mkq w~ too
Tht's, WIW Siwv in W00, uing thMsuh YM stWY9 I have bees
41@ li rlitmdd hew Yom inbes hve amm. iftile the
tmam, 01ly high stanmdards have been Am Gad iwwessedo
Mts I tbi*, q Is a SPlIMM-A MR&amp; g
Amdo~ f auree in thas. do" when psemmm" t
ango ae iginesa '; Zt3. wsisne~ b mes
of a flkmsia] l kind, keg" em insmwsnes or sme othew -sepu's
the duimM the sevis of aet0iea b0008 grOwIngaD
have no doubt will * Mm to Pm#.
Xo% 4 of emoons leok uapon Yawr wlk a shsm
A uS. Spa be to k the yuhave deaapl""
of vwak wall. That IS Of the 4,0004 Of t* Psefeesimlsteard.
Jmt at tha mea. tun e mst feel that in a wider
-, 2SO o N~ mik is Impot mLeesum the awe Sampz the
aWid he ow e ema s meua peolmls bme, the
mi's emplem Is the walk to be &amp; Mi if thlAge a" e ta be kept
with" a peper Iits, parsmsd wift safety and bandle with
* 00**/ 2 
heO Is a peat 61eaiiUeO R the ofinte
of as pastasm thiz is ap~ iall tnt about U081~ s I dmstt
kinv to empg in Sa ru 11m1h TJ zssis oum do
it 1A neft-pote" sil eapmets ' I a dm " gn
amr of youw able to sit do= s In an amhi steeu
a Uw U of a janx 4e' e and 4isPses of intewnatioa
~ lessPOUelil Prvo$ vitk a Orisk Ina m hand van a vmIng
Ihe0br side. 4My dam blm I e. 3y these fr. l.
IMin 1 S
to awV WWO to itilimmt a tazthat
~ si sltw o la slso zzt It Is
a met of ,. l1. ft It Is a Ot O. eps6" P lUmzasto se bto
dispos of the othe mm's poblm In so sOWi a tbahionw
! hesfbw BID" that is a eIti et emuttio
Whisk Is MWIS, iyyeldod to, it isWr Int tht tWhm It
iisto the 9ltw ham It * me to ; Pt Lng tbi~, , inj and
hop to bep them miug and mdf w w" hv o hm
I* W ma'l in to a w e to&amp; I
o b whe epl e itut vs ' t toe spal~ b O4t 00~
the Peise Rom that mava eilable. to you
1 69110n tMot the ear has as laeSiag1 peut to
Ua thes Ut of the momtry and nsee of that I wat lSeA
crnm, a" do4 that the stausof skill amsseaad that
mus b mints~ e4 Waod tho le madev' OdettLOra stigglo
is eAt 00 1atw them Wwb a* SUmep poso to have the so MOP
a" d the" s vhe want It. The Odumat~ aal, strA UImqbi4OFqa
lot of * thw hIng i the stimaW. boff t WheW beu
lsi~ theta=. Mr. so as to * oev m pol hs i
rvaw4 the boe~ tng up of the Stanieds th SAAWvg of the
etaxisuds s oe very ssaim of the koues.
W you are haviag your Conventism haze, I's
&amp; XI Io my* ia this city* r?. sw aseembled topthew a
inbs ofpeople of varying experiense and of et sil.
I'IvV * iOUM ties the preinwht You are met pin" g
to me the . ikt thatYO as ree wl APL to a" ala
pcoblais of ye am~ reoao with a v o i~ sli l c
mI ealtavu and oal those weassn 3it I We ama yrov6
wIe&amp; ara a" e * f the first actUary I eVer Saw WI think hi W&amp; B
SLixed up wiLth taw UtIonal Ilatml 10 r~ t btatr It gas a
ttbi uI ep I littl* thea~ b when I weS pigke that the
time would oem 1 whan I wold beloigat 9D or' 60 or
aeteuafiem and that tbey would 2i 5te" to in mrvi7' ~ t
alga of mepeot. ( 1, au1) tei) SBv you mot got on vift YOW
vefk a" d I mast So baek to Ulm-~ I hay* jM'eit Pieauw Indeed
I&amp; d4aring this Conveation open* 



TO TOYB &amp; A2A2" D SWJ%% U Z 7 PL,: Mwi
I seal yaa nost. eoral aretirp as yot&amp; a
enter upon yOur ia~ ortnt dFicusstons.
x~ btr: s, at ast a tki3 ovn tIM œ Oartwz tx
our patty1 both1 In the Ctats and In tho Qum~ rei,, Ith-j
ox* 1in a. heatfl conit~ ion. tawtborzore, I vti~ t-to
sa-o that w~ e am azPn2tteJla~ a gr$ ital but atewti
tneroaao In the. umpL-rt of t~ a oee-torate# uvrthalms,
we e amot ros4 wfo Lust cozastantly lcot for ncv. I&amp; 2 a,
cWahon nov ontim. asis not 014Vy axtjon&amp; thwo uiahc
Iong h'elpad us t-at , mong tis young oowo rjaso sapgof
rtns evoryth~ 4-, toh our ftture4 Ouars ñ i a dyaazte 1jrty
and zmst romafn c
I am sure that you doli4; watioaua vflU ao
ga~ cti to provide no t!ñ tth tfihmcobes to Ac
probIemrs, andi ' An for us tbh onthI~ aupZ~ tt of thec
3rd 0tcotnr, 1953. 



1 õ ~ 3/ 115
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 81/ 196-1
Background Note
TRANSIT THROUGH SYDNEY BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF JAPAN
The Japan Air Lines DC8 aircraft in which
the Prime Minister of Japan and Mrs. Ikeda are travelling
to Japan from New Zealand, is scheduled to touch down at
Sydney Airport at 11.30 P. m. on Saturday, 5th October, and
to take off at 1.30 a. m. on Sunday, 6th October.
The purpcse of the landing is to enable
the aircraft to be refuelled for the non-stop flight to Tokyo.
Having regard to the time of the stopover,
the Australian Authorities, in agreement with the Embassy of
Japan, will regard Mr. flkeda's stop at Sydney Airport as an
informal occasion and it is not expected that Mr. and Mrs.
Ikeda or any other passengers will alight.
The Ambassador of Japan, His Excellency
Mr. Saburo Ohta, and Mr, A. J. Kenney, of the Prime
Ministerts Department, Canberra, will leave Canberra on
Saturday for Sydney, and will be at the airport.
The Consul-General for Japan in Sydney, Mr.
K. Sato, will also be present at the Airport.
CANBERR~ A,
3rd October, 1963. 



a Tam*--
" vIe. mOVf~ AwO t r
and Ouo4**" RW2toe f
4* ubn UW: 9tAN** Wo awMS.*
-t* 6
frwpt4. v. Pae
playOlfa. sootya" fOMb OUCI7*
-6 Q40v 4 



NEW COMMIIONWEALTH CASH AND CONVERSION LOAN
Broadcast by the Prime Minister, the Rt,
Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
on 9th October, 1963.
Good Evening Ladies and Gentlemen
I am speaking to you in my capacity as Chairman of
the Australian Loan Council. I therefore speak on behalf of the
Commonwealth Government and also on behalf of the six State
Governments, all of whom, of course, have a direct interest in
the success of the new Commonwealth œ-60M cash loan and the
associated conversion loan which will open tomorrow.
Subscriptions to the cash loan will form part of the
1963-64 Loan Council borrowing programme of œ C27214. The largest
single portion of the year's borrowing programme will be spenlt by
the State housing authorities and building societies in providing
new homes for our rapidly expanding pcpulation. Some œ C5014 will
be spent in this way. An amount of the same order will be spent
on schools universities, and the like requirements for education,
The remainaer of the programme will be applied mainly to
hospitals, railways, extensions of town and country electricity,
gas and water supplies, irrigation schemes and sewerage and
drainage works. So you will see that most people have, directly
or indirectly, a stake in the success of the Loan Council programme,
I have been asking you to subscribe to the Loan because
you will thereby help to finance expansion of our economy, but
perhaps I could also point out that the securities offered in the
Loan represent a very sound investment for your savings. You can
obtain yields ranging from per cent, on long-term
securities to about œ E4.6.0 per cent, on medium-term securities
and œ 3.16.6 per cent, on short-term securities. In addition, if
you are a taxpayer9 you will have the advantage of a tax rebate
of in the œ C which of course greatly improves the net yield
from your securities, You may also happen to be one of nearly 100,000 holders
of the œ 144-M 39" per cent. securities which mature next Tuesday.
In that case, you inre invited to convert into the some securities
as we are issuing in the cash loan. I hope you will do this
because in an important sense, conversions are no different from
loan subscriptions. If instead of converting, you redeem your
securities the money paid to you will have to be found by your
Commonwealth or State Governments from their own resources which
are, of course, those of the people, including you.
I would like also to mention the advantages offered
by Special Bonds which are continuously on offer. We devised
these a few years ago, They are specially designed for comparatively
small investors. They give very good returns and they
can be cashed in full at short notice from next April onwards,
For these several reasons, I hope that we will have your support
for the Loan, whether as a cash subscriber or as a converter
of existing securities, This is, I repeat, very much a community
enterprise and one in which your interests both as citizens and
as individuals march together. 



Extract from Hiansard
COMMflON TE. A TH GOVERNME~ NT OFFER TO ASSIST IN
FINANCIUNG OF 100OLi PROMO0TION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
Sir Robert Mvenzies, in the Ho,, se of Representatives
on 10th October, 1963
The Government has decided to assist the wool,
growing industry to finance an expanded wool promotion
campaign. The decision to do this has been taken after
consideration of a request put to the Government by the
Executive Committee of the Australian Wool Industry Conferen~ e,
The Government is willing to match : Ci for ! Zl any additional
funds which wool-growers are prepared to contribute by way
of levy for wool promotion.
Mr. Curtin ( Labour Another band-out,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES This is a serious topic. I wish I could
be allowed to make this statement with-out interruption. This
is a matter of great interest to all wool people, if not so
much to woolly ones. I repeat: The Government is willing to
match Vi for Vi any additional funds which wool-growers are
prepared to contribute by way of levy for wool promotion.
Honourable members will appreciate that this means that if
wool-growers agree to increase their levy for promotion, which
is at present 10/-a brale, the Commonwealth will contribute
an amount equal to the additional funds provided by wool-,
growers as a result of an increase in the levy.
The Government's offer -to match additional funds
contributed by wool-growers for wool promotion will apply for
a period of three years. At the end of that period the.
Government will review its assistance in the light of the
circumstances at that time. The Australian Wool Board will
be asked to report to the Government annually on the operation
of the wool promotion programme.
Although the Executive Committee of the Wool
Industry Conference has also suggested that the Cormmonwealth
should assist in providing additional funds for wool research,
the Government has decided to defer consideration of this
particular request for the time being. In making that
decision, we took account of the fact that substantial reserve
funds are at pru. sent avail. ble for financing wool research.
At the same time, however, we have noted that these reserves
are being depleted and we will review the position after the
Australian Wol Board has taken over the administration of
wool research and has had an opportunity of examining future
financial roquirements. The Commonwealth is at present
contributing the equivalent of a bale for wool research
while wool-gro-wers themselves contribute at the rate of 2/-
a bale. The Commonwealth will, of course, continue to
contribute on this basis.
Mr. Speoker, this has been a major decision by
the Government and it has been taken in the light of the
special circumstances applying to the weol industry and
having regard to its competitive position with other fibres
and its significance to the Australian economy. 



FOR PRESS COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT OFFER TO ASSIST IN
FINANCING OF WOOL PROMOTION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, announced today
that the Commonwealth Government had decided to assist the
woolgrowing industry to finance an expanded wool promotion
campaign. The Government's decision was taken after considering
a request made by the Executive Committee of the Australian Wool
Industry Conference.
Sir Robert said that the Government was willing to match
œ 1 for œ 1 any additional funds which woolgrowers were prepared
to contribute by way of levy for wool promotion. This meant that
if woolgrowers agreed to increas3 their levy for promotion, which
is at present 10/-a bale, the Commonwealth Government would contribute
an amount equal to the additional fundw contributed by
woolgrowers as a result of an increase in the levy.
Sir Robert said that the Government's offer to match on
a œ l for œ l basis any additional funds contributed by woolgrowers
for wool promotion would apply for a period of three years. At
the end of this period, the Government would review its assistance
in the light of the circumstances at that time. The Australian
Wool Board would be asked to report to the Government annually on
the operation of the wool promotion programme.
Although the Executive Committee of the Wool Industry
Conference had also suggested that the Commonwealth Government
should assist in providing additional funds for wool research,
the Government decided to defer the consideration of this
request for the time being. In making this decision, the
Government took acco=. t o-f the fact that substantial reserve
funds are at present available for financing wool research.
However, it noted that these reserves were being
depleted and would review the position after the Australian
Wool Board had taken over the administration of wool research
and had had the opportunity of examining future financial
requirements. The Commonwealth Government is at present contributing
the equivalent of a bale for wool research while
woolgrowers contribute at the rate of a bale.
Sir Robert said that this major decision by the
Government had been taken in the light of special circumstances
applying to the wool industry, its competitive position with
other fibres and its significance to the Australian economy.
CANBERRA. October, 1963.
56/ 63P 


P. M. No. 82/ 1963I deeply regret that illness should&nbsp;have made it necessary for Mr. Macmillan to retire&nbsp;from an office in which he has served his country and&nbsp;the cause of international peace with great devotion&nbsp;and distinction.
A man of rare scholarship, great talent&nbsp;and unchallengeable personal integrity, Harold Macmillan&nbsp;has set a great example of unselfish public service. &nbsp;He must have a secure place in British history.
CANBERRA,13th October, 1963.


Once again wo are being asked by the&nbsp;Australian Council of Churches&nbsp;to give our financial&nbsp;support to the Christmas Bowl&nbsp;of Remembrance
I commend&nbsp;the Appeal which every year&nbsp;for&nbsp;the past fifteen years has brought help to the needy&nbsp;in a wide variety of ways and in many &nbsp;parts of the world.
The hungry, the homeless, the sick have&nbsp;benefited from a warm charity which ignores national&nbsp;boundaries and notes neither colour nor creed.
I feel sure that Australians will respond&nbsp;with their traditional generosity so that this inter-&nbsp;Church project may again&nbsp;meet with adequate finances&nbsp;the responsibilities it has undertaken.
14th October, 1963.
&nbsp;


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.SPEECH BYRt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,M. P.,ONPARLIAMENTARY ARRANGEMENTS.[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 15th October, 1963.]Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-Prime Minister)-by leave-Sir, at the lastgeneral election in December, 1961, theM'Government's majority was reduced towhich meant one after the electionof a Speaker. It is therefore not surprisingthat the Government has, throughoutthe life of the Parliament, been underrepeated pressure by the Opposition to goto an early election. Indeed, Sir, whenthe new Parliament met, a no-confidencemotion was submitted by the Opposition on27th February, 1962, the proceedingstaking the form of a no-confidence amendmentto the motion for the adoption of theAddress-in-Reply to the Governor-General'speech. This amendment was defeated byvotes to 59.Mr. Bryant.-Pretty close!Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Yes, indeed.j) hat is the point. I am glad you followme. On 14th August, 1962, in the Budget10389/ 63. debate, the Opposition moved a motion ofcensure in the normal way by moving," That the first item be reduced by œ 1Had this motion been carried, the Government,would, of course, have been defeated.The motion was defeated by 58 votes to 56,there being at that time a vacancy in theOpposition-held seat of Batman. On 2ndApril, 1963-that is, this year-the Oppositionmoved, " That this Government nolonger possesses the confidence of thisHouse".... Opposition Members.-Hear, hear!Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I amdelighted to hear it. This motion wasdefeated by 59 votes to 58.Mr. Armitage.-How many do you wantto win by?Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-After theelection, Sir, I propose to win by eleven orthirteen votes. I am indebted to my friend.That was a very good question.
Now, to come back to the facts. Themotion was defeated by 59 votes to 58.There was a vacancy in the Opposition-heldseat of Grey, but a Government memberwas absent, unpaired, from the division.On 18th April, 1963, there was yet anothercensure motion, which was defeated by 57votes to 55. On 20th August, 1963-againthis year-the Opposition moved an amendmentto the motion for the second readingof the Appropriation Bill. The amendmentconcluded with the words-and these aresignificant words-" the House is of theopinion-Mr. Calrns.-Are we to have an electionor not?Sir ROBERT MENZIFS.-Restrain yourfears. The amendment concluded with thewords, the House is of the opinion that theGovernment no longer possesses its confidenceor the confidence of the nation.Opposition Members.-Hear, hear!Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-It is wonderfulhow helpful they are on all great occasions!This amendment was defeated by59 votes to 57, there being a vacancy inEast Sydney, an Opposition-held seat.It will thus be seen that already, in somewhatunder two years, the existence of theGovernment has been challenged no fewerthat five times, three times with an increasingnote of urgency in the last six months.Mr. O'Brien.-Shocking!Sir ROBERT MIENZIES.-No; it is wonderful.You are easily shocked. ' You willbe even more shocked in a month' s time.Sir, in each case it must be reasonablyassumed that the Opposition wasserious in its intentions, and that itwould have welcomed success. Any otherassumption would be unwarranted andoffensive. Any such success would havemeant the defeat of the Government and,under established constitutional practice, anelection. Mr. Webb.-What is wrong with that?Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Would youmind listening a little? It will be one of the few times when you will have to listen tome. Mr. Webb.-If you are here.Sir ROBERT MENZ~ IES.--Quite right.You can always listen to me if I am here,but not if you are not here. I repeat thatin each case it must be reasonably assumed-and I gather that this is agreed-thatthe Opposition was serious in its intentions,and it would have welcomed success. Anyother assumption would be unwarrantedand offensive. Any such success wouldhave meant the defeat of the Governmentand, under established constitutionalpractice, an election.The Opposition knows, as I do, that inthe present state of the House of Reprcsentatives,the crossing of the floor by onemember sitting on the Government sidewould bring about the defeat of the Government,as indeed would the inadvertent orvoluntary abstention of two Governmentsupporters from a division. These areelementary mathematics. In short, theOpposition has five times sought to forcean election which would be one for theHouse of Representatives alone.Mr. Cross.-That is right.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-You do notdisagree with that, do you?Mr. Cross.-Not at all.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Of course not!I have it on record now. Five tim es th'Opposition tried to force an election. Donot abandon your leader too quickly, mydear boy. I emphasize this point because Iobserve that it is now being said by theLeader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell) thatan election for the House of Representativesalone, that is, before July, 1964, would bewasteful and improper.Mr. Calwel.-Hear, hear!Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-He says," Hear, hear! and the honorable memberfor Brisbane ( Mr. Cross) does not agre.with him! Harmony breaks out on the'Opposition benches! This is indeed acurious argument for the Leader of theOpposition to employ, having regard to theevents that I have recited. Are we tounderstand that all of his no-confidenc,motions were deliberately designed to fail?
I would be reluctant to make any suchcharge of political insincerity against anopponent whose constant devotion to hisparty I freely recognise. I add to this shorthistory of events that, as honorable memmershave observed, in the last no-confidenceamendment, less than eight weeks ago, thespecial inclusion of the words, " or theconfidence of the nation"' was a directdemand to test the opinion of the nationby a House of Representatives election.Opposition Members.-Hear, hear!Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Thank youvery much. I subnmit that these factsconclusively establish that there can be nolegitimate objection on the part of membersof the Opposition to a dissolution of theHouse of Representatives, a dissolutionwhich they have done their best to secureon five critical occasions.Mr. Speaker, I will now proceed to setout some additional reasons for recommendingthat, without an actual defeat ofthe Government, there should be a dissolutionof the present precariously balancedHouse, and a-new election. There havebeen times in history when peace seemedsecure and when there were no internationalroblems of moment-Mr. SPEAKER ( Hon. Sir John McLeay).-Order! Honorable members will refrainfrom interjecting.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I am sorry,ir, but I must instruct honorable members) apposite. I remind them that there havebeen times in history-does anybody denyit?-when peace seemed secure; when therewere no international problems of moment;when, in any event, there were no materialdifferences between the political parties onforeign affairs; when there was stability ofgovernment; and when circumstances wereconducive to long-range policies. The presentposition of Australia is quite different.Australia is a Commonwealth country, witha significant voice in Commonwealth affairs.has, apart from its vital association withJreat Britain, the United States of America,f-rance, Pakistan, New Zealand, the Philippinesand Thailand, in the South-East AsiaTreaty Organization, an alliance with theUnited States and New Zealand in Anzus.,-Pursuant to these arrangements my Gornmenthas, during the current Parliament,first made an agreement with the United States for the establishment by it, on Australianterritory in the north-west of WesternAustralia, of a naval radio signalling station,the value and significance of which would,of course, be of the greatest urgency andmoment in the event of a war in which theUnited States was engaged. Indeed, withoutits prompt and full use, the operationsof the United States naval forces of all kindswouild be grievously handicapped. My Governmentbelieves that in any foreseeablefuture any such war must be one of defenceagainst Communist aggression and that anysuch aggression would put the security ofAustralia at risk. In short, in such eventsthe United States forces would be defendingAustralia.In our contract with the United States inrespect of this radio installation, therefore,my Government, while providing for generalconsultation and access by Australian navalforces to the signalling facilities, has notrequired or obtained a joint control of thestation. Such joint control would, ofcourse, enable an Australian governmentto veto the American use of the stationin peace or in war, or require an Australiancensorship of the messages transmitted. TheOpposition in Parliament has, I believe,made it clear that should it come into officeit will re-negotiate the treaty and will insistupon joint control; that is, upon a veto byeither party on the activities of the other.Sir, the station is about to be constructedat the cost of many millions of pounds bythe United States. It is, in my submission,important that the inter-party problem inAustralia be resolved. In these internationalengagements, certainly it is essential tosecurity. Secondly, we have also made a clear butunilateral declaration of our attitude to thenew state of Malaysia. This was made byme on behalf of the Government onSeptember, 1963-only the other day, in asense-in the following terms:-But for the benefit of all concerned, honorablemembers would not wish me to create or permitany ambiguity-Mr. Uren.--Are you happy, Jack? Youdo not look at all happy, Jack.Mr. SPEAKER.--Orderl The honorablemember for Reid will restrainhimself. Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Of course hedoes not like Malaysia.
Mr. SPEAKER.-Orderl Honorablemembers will refrain from interjecting.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I do notmind, Sir. I have plenty of time.Mr. Cross.-Time is running out.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Yes, it isrunning out for you, but not for me. Thatis why I say I have plenty of time, andso I repeat what honorable members oppositeappear to dislike-the statement Imade on behalf of this country in thisHouse. I begin my quotation again-But for the benefit of all concerned, honorablemembers would not wish me to create or permitany ambiguity about Australia's position in relationto Malaysia. I therefore, after closedeliberation by the Cabinet, and on its behalf,inform the House that we are resolved, and haveso informed the Government of Malaysia, and theGovernments of the United Kingdom and NewZealand and others concerned, that if, in thecircumstances that now exist, and which may continuefor a long time, there occurs, in relation toMalaysia or any of its constituent States, armedinvasion or subversive activity-supported ordirected or inspired from outside Malaysia-weshall to the best of our powers and by suchmeans as shall be agreed upon with the Governmentof Malaysia, add our military assistance tothe efforts of Malaysia and the United Kingdomin the defence of Malaysia's territorial integrityand political independence.These are words with which all honorablemembers are familiar. Sir, thisdeclaration has attracted wide internatioiialattention, and is clearly of crucial importancein Australian foreign and defencepolicy. It is most important that theother nations concerned should knowwhether it carries the clear backing of theAustralian people. The Opposition, speakingthrough its leader on the same dayin the House of Representatives, hasannounced a view which, while listeningto it, I thought reasonably helpful. Buta close study of the text of the speechmakes it clear that the Opposition's positiondiffers very materially from that ofthe Government. It is true that theLeader of the Opposition said-The Labour Party supports the concept ofMalaysia and welcomes its creation. We believethat this experiment in nationhood should begiven its chance, free from attack or interferencefrom other nations, to prove itself. But, Sir, he went on to say that the continuedpresence of Australian troops inMalaysia-Shall be covered by a treaty clear, open, andif possible, mutual, which gives Australia aneffective voice in the decision of the treatypowers. Mr. Don Cameron.-Is there anythingwrong with that?Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-If you havepatience you will hear -what I have to sayabout it. Whatever this may turn out tomean, since any treaty involves mutuality,it does not mean support for the declarationmade on behalf of the Governmentby me as Prime Minister. I say this fortwo reasons, which I will state as succinctlyas possible.In the first place, Malaya-and this Iam afraid has been overlooked-was not,and Malaysia is not, an alined country.It is a non-alined country or, in the oldvocabulary a neutral country, and becauseof that it is not a party to Seato. It hasbeen, and is, a matter of high policy forMalaya and Malaysia to be regarded as anation jealous of its independence but notas one having, in peace-time at any rate,-mutual contractual military obligation,with any other country. In this respect. jMr. Speaker, it resembles India. True,Great Britain has a defence arrangementwith Malaysia. But this arises from thefact that Great Britain was the colonial"power, and that, in granting independenr 3under a carefully evolved constitution,found it desirable to give effective assurancesto the new nation that its completeindependence would be protected. In short.the British agreement does not run counterto Malaysian non-alinement, but, in effect,helps in a practical way to preserveMalaysian independence.Australia, not having been the colonialpower, stands in a different position. Ifwhat the Opposition wants is, as I understandit, that there should be a mutual-treaty of defence between Australia ajMalaysia under which Malaysia becomes ouially for military purposes in advance of anyarmed attack upon co-operating Australianforces, then the answer is that such a treatywould, in the absence of a revolutionar'.-change in Malaysian policy, be impossible,achievement.
. Again, what Australia does under theGovernment's declaration is to supportGreat Britain in the defence of Malaysia's"-territorial integrity and political independenceThis being so, we believe that disadvantagewould accrue to Australia if weconditioned our help upon the securing of adetailed treaty. , For the reasons I haveindicated, any such treaty could not reasonablybe expected to express any advanceiliitary obligations by Malaysia to us. Thisbeing so-this is the vital question-is itbetter for Australia to have a simple butclear declaration of * intention on our partwhich, in its very nature, preserves our ownjudgment as to the nature, extent and dispositionof Australian forces to be deployed,or for us deliberately to enmesh ourselves ina mass of written detailed rules and regulationswhich would limit our own freedom ofaction while conferring upon us no actualrights to secure reciprocal military obligationson the part of Malaysia? In short,Sir, the Government believes that the Opposition'sproposal is impracticable and wouldbe damaging to the complete authority ofthe Government of Australia over its forcesin the event of an attack upon Malaysian-security or political independence.The problems which exist in our nearneighbourhood are too critical to admit ofuncertainty in our national policy. To dealwith -them, there should be a governmentwith an effective mandate and authority;and the sooner there is one, the better forall concerned.There is another great issue of internationalpolicy which needs to be resolved.I speak about -this with some delicacy. It isthe declared policy of the Australian LabourParty, I understand-I have not heard theoutside voices yet-that Australia shouldnegotiate for and Participate in a nuclearfreezone south of the equator, with anagreed prohibition of the accumulation ordeployment of nuclear weapons in that area.If this came off, as honorable members noSdoubt hope it will, with Australia as a party,our allies under Seato and Anzus could not,except against the will of Australia, usenuclear weapons in the defence of thisregion, including Australia, even thoughpowers north of the equator created andsed them.Mr. Cross.-Nonsensel Sir ROBERT MENZ[ ES.-You mustexplain it to me. The Government, thoughit has, in line with -the unanimous opinionsof the Prime Ministers in conference inLondon, refrained from establishing nuclearmilitary power -itself, would regard theOpposition's policy, if it succeeded, assuicidal-Mr. Pollard.-Bomb-happy Bob!Sir ROBERT MENZTOES.-Now, Reggie,behave yourself! The Government wouldregard the Opposition's policy, if it succeeded,as suicidal, since it would operateto handicap our defending allies who possessnuclear weapons while leaving Communistnuclear powers, who are north of -theequator, completely free to deploy and usenuclear weapons'wherever -they chose. Itis time for this issue to be resolved by thepeople. Opposition Members.--Hear, hear!Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I am delightedto ' find such unanimity about -an election.To sum up, I would say this: Since the1961 election, the Government has, after theelection of -a Speaker, and given completelynormal circumstances, a majority of onlyone in a House of 122 voting members. Itwill, I am sure, be understood that in theexisting circumstances a proportion of thetime of myself and other Ministers has to bedevoted to what I may call the almost dailyproblem of political survival, with all thecumulative strains involved.Mr. Pollard.-What are you here for.anyhow? SIr ROBERT MENZIES.-I am here,apparently, to listen to you. I'have listenedto you from that seat for a long time, andI hope to -listen to you for a long timefurther. However, since you are apparentlyunaware of what is involved in office, I willrepeat what I have said. I do not mind. Itwill, I am sure, be understood that in theexisting circumstances a proportion of thetime of myself and other Ministers has to bedevoted to what I may call ' the almost dailyproblem of political survival, with all thecumulative strains involved-and one of thestrains is listening to the honorable memberfor Newcastle, who is interjecting. And,
Mr. Speaker, -this occurs in a period of Australianhistory in which an Australiangovernment, whatever side it comes fromshould be able to devote the whole of itsenergies to the international, defence,economic and developmental problems ofthe nation. These are growing and frequentlypressing problems of magnitude andcomplexity. Their solution calls for closeand concentrated attention, undistracted bythe parliamentary crises-Mr. Jones.-Why don't you-Mr. SPEAKER-Order! The ' honorablemember for Newcastle Will remain silent.Sir ROBERT MENZIIES.-With greatrespect, Mr. Speaker, he Came here only tomake a noise and he will never make a noiseexcept from the back bench, on whicheverside ' he is.Their solution calls for close and concentratedattention, undistracted by the parliamentarycrises which are inherent in analmost equally divided House. In particular,Australa is increasingly significant inand affected by the political and economicactivities and arrangements of other nations.It therefore needs a government that canspeak and act authoritatively on behalf ofAustralia. The nation is entitled to this, andto choose uinambiguously who shall speakfor it. I repeat that, for the Teasons I stated earlier, the Opposition can-not legitimatelyobject to an election which it hasrepeatedly done its best to secure.I shall -mention times, because there hasbeen some very -funny gossip, stated as -fact,in certain organs of opinion. I thereforeyesterday morning advised His Excellencythe Governor-General -that the House ofRepresentatives should -be dissolved at theclose of the current business on or about31st October, and that an election shouldbe held on 30th November.Opposition Members.-HooraylSir ROBERT MIENZIIES.-I share yourjoy. I had a personal interview with HisExcellency yesterday afternoon. I am sorryto disappoint the prophets. His Excellencyhas to-day accepted this advice in writing onthe usual condition, of course, that beforedissolution the Parliament should have madethe necessary financial provisions for theservices of the country. Well, all honorablemembers understand that. This meansthat the debates on the Appropriation Billsmust be completed before dissolution.There are, of course, Mr. Speaker, otherimportant measures, some of them arisingout of the Budget, which will have to bedisposed of. I expect, particularly in the. 1light of my announcement to-night, that allthe necessary business will be completedby or before the end of this month.TIY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.



MESSAGE TO tUEENSLAND NEdSPAPEi1 LIMITIED FOR
* A SPECIAL SUPPLEMENT T0 BE PULISHED ON
OCTOBER 1963 MARHKINU THEIR MOVE INTO NE
œ 3M PE( ISES AT BOWEN HILLS, BRISBANE
SI congratulate Iueensland Newspapers Limited
on this significant day in their history.
In the pages of your publications in the
case of " The Courier-Mail" for 117 years is the record
of growth of a great State which year by year makes ever
Q greater oontributions to the prosperity of our nation.
The publishers, in this new venture, have
given a tangible expression of their own faith in Queensland's
future and have provided an example of substantial investment
which I hope will encourage others to follow.
I am certain that with the greater efficiency
which this new plant promises, we will see a continuation
of the service which responsible Journalism offers in a
free society. R. G. MEN'? IES
PRIME MINISTER 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 83/ 1963-
COMMON4EALTH GRANTS COMMISSION APPOINTMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies,
announced today that the Government had re-appointed
Mr. P. D. Phillips) as Chairman of the Commonwealth
Grants Commission for a further period of three years from
1st October, 1963, and re-appointed Sir Alexander Reid,
as Member for a further term of two years
from 1st October, 1963.
Mr. Phillips has been Chairman of the Commission
for the past three years. Sir Alexander has been a Member
of the Commission since 1954. The other Member of the
Commission is Professor Wilfred Prest of Melbourne.
The Prime Minister also announced that Mr.
M. O. Jager is to be appointed as Secretary to the Commonwealth
Grants Commission following the death of the late
K. J. McKenzie, O. B. E. Mr. Jager is at present Senior
Lecturer in the Department of Economics and Commerce at
Melbourne University.
CANBERRA, 16th October, 1963. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 8V/ 1963
TEXT OF MESSAGES FROM THE PRIME MINISTER,
TRE NT. HON. SIR ROBET ZIE
To Dr. Erhard: " PleaseQ accept my congratulations upon your
election to the important position of Chancellor of the
Federal Republic of Germany and my best wishes for a long
and successful term of office. I am, confident that you
will boar with groat distinction the heavy responsibility
of dealing with common world problems which confront us,
and I look forward to a further period of closo co-operation
between our two Governments."
To Dr. Adenauer: " As you terminate a long and distinguished
Chancellorship of the Federal Republic, may I offer on behalf
of myself and my Government, an expression of estoem and
sincere good wishes. History will record the role played
by Germany in the political and economic development of
post-war Europe, and tributes will be paid to your outstanding
leadership during these important years0" 1
CANBERRA, 17th October, 1963,
The above messages have been delivered on behaY'
of the Prime Minister by the Australian Ambassador to
the Federal Republic of Germany, Mr. F. J. Blakeney, 



SECOND READING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER
( SIR ROBERT MENZIES)
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
UNIVERSITIES ( FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE) BILL 1963.
Introductory
This Bill and the States Grants ( Universities) Bill,
which will follow immediately, are related and for convenience
and clarity my speech now will refer to both the Universities
( Financial Assistance) Bill and the States Grants ( Universities)
Bill. The report of the Australian Universities Commission
covering the period 1961-66 and the consequent legislation now
introduced into this House are stages in a procedure which has
now become a well-established feature of the relationship
between the Commonwealth Government on the one hand and the
State Governments and State universities on the other.
Honourable members will recall that, having received
the report of the Murray Committee in 1957, Parliament passed
legislation by which grants were made to the States for their
universities in the three years 1958-1960. Similarly, on
receipt of the first report of the Universities Commission in
1960, Parliament agreud to legislation authorizing greatly
increased grants to the States for their universities during
the years 1961-63.
I have now tabled the Universities Commission's
second report and am very pleased to introduce a Bill under
which we will offer financial assistance to the States for
their universities at a higher lovl than ever before.
Though the Commission is now a firmly-established
statutory authority o-the Commonwealth, it is worthwhile
taking a little time to recall the terms of Section 14 of the
Act which set it up. It reads:-
The Commission shall perform its functions with
a view to promoting the balanced development of
universities so that their resources can be used
to the greatest possible advantage of Australia.
2. For the purpose of the performance of its
functions, the Commission shall consult with
universities and with the States upon the matters
on which it is empowered to furnish information
and advice. i'
The Commission's responsibilities, therefore, are
much broader and more significant for educational developments
at the tertiary level than they would be were it merely a body
charged with making financial recommendations in connection
with the universities. From 1959 to 1962, Sir Leslie Martin,
the full-time Chairman of the Co, imission, was assisted by four
part-time Commissioners, but from June of the latter year two
additicnal part-time Commissioners were appointed in recognition
of the Commission's growing responsibilities and fields
of interest. The present membership is 
Sir Leslie Martin
Professor N. S. Bayliss
Mr. K. B. Myer
Professor S. Sunderland
Professor A. D. Trendall
Dr. J. Vernon
Sir Kenneth Wills
To all of these gentlemen, we are greatly indebted for a most
valuable report. It follows from what I have said that the report is
not merely a financial document. It has much to say of the
educatienal problems confronting the universities. The
Commission's conclusions on these are such that it attaches
great importance to the outcome of the painstaking inquiry
currently being undertaken into the future pattern of tertiary
education by a committee of the Commission specially appointed
for that purpose in 1961.
Although not a matter covered by the present Bill,
there arc recommendations in the report for development during
the coming triennium at the Australian National University.
As is customary with this institution, which is wholly a
Commonwealth responsibility, decisions are reached during the
annual debates on the Commonwealth budget. Nevertheless, I
may say at this stage that, in general and subject to normal
annual budgetary provision, my Government accepts the
recommendations of the Commission for the Australian National
University. Some Major Features of the Report.
Students It seems to me appropriate that I should refer first
to the students. In general, the Commission finds that the
1964-66 triennium will bring still greater demands on the
universities to provide more places for more students at both
under-graduate and post-graduate levels. In the words of the
report " an increasing proportion of secondary school students
are staying on at school for the final year, and increasing
numbers are going on to enrol at universities." If we consider
the equivalent full-time enrolments at universities, that is
if we make certain allowances for part-time and external
students, the numbers are expected to rise from about 53,000
in 1963 to about 74,000 in 1966. This is an increase of
21,000 equivalent full-time students, or 40%, in three years.
Staff More students require more staff. The Commission
estimates that about 2,000 additional academic staff will be
needed to cope with this increase if the present staff/
student ratio is maintained. For comparison, it should be
noted that between 1960 and 1963, the increase in equivalent
full-time students was 11,000 2nd in equivalent full-time 
staff 1,000. Demographic factors are such that some
slackening in the rate of increase in student numbers is
predicted from 1966 onward.
Some Achievements Despite the heavy pressures of student numbers on
them and the difficulties they have met in recruiting
sufficient qualified academic staff, the universities have
been able to achieve much since the first effects of the
Murray Report were felt in 1958. They have greatly improved
their buildings and equipment and have been able to provide
for almost all of the students seeking admission, including
the onrolment of large numbers of overseas students nearly
3,500 in 1962. It will be noted with much satisfaction that
graduation rates are significantly better nowadays than they
were a few years ago. Of those who entered our universities
in 1951, some 57% graduated; of those who entered in 1956,
some 70% graduated. It will be remembered that enrolmonts
have greatly increased over this period. Thus not only is
our output of graduates increasing but the percentage of our
young people who graduate is also rising.
Of great significanco for future leadership in
research and teaching is the fact that there were nearly five
times as many higher degree students in 1962 as there were in
1953; and the universities expect this figure to double again
by 1966.
Matters for Anxiety
Points of considerable anxiety remain. The Commission
has doubts whether the universities will find it practicable
to recruit enough qualified academic staff for the coming
triennium. The imposition of quotas has become a feature of
the universities but the Commission reports that except for
all faculties of medicine, other than that of Queensland,
restrictions on entry have been significant only in the four
universities in Sydney and Melbourne. In consequence, therefore,
the Commission recommends additional grants in the
1964-66 triennium beyond those first contemplated to enable
the University of New South Wales and Monach University to
accept students who might otherwise have to be excluded.
Provision is also recommended for greatly increased medical
training facilities at the University of Melbourne and for
the establishment during the trionnium of a faculty of
medicine at the University of Tasmania.
Research Conscious of the national need for greatly increased
attention to research, particularly in the fields of science
and technology, the Commission has recommended greatly
increased expenditure on research and for the provision of
computing facilities at universities.
Student Residences In order that students living outside the centres in
which universities are situated should have a reasonable
opportunity of taking advantage of the greatly increased 
provision for university education, it is essential that
greatly increased provision should be made for student
residences. The Commission has therefore recommended expenditure
for this purpose which should lift the proportion
of the full-time student population in residence from about
14% at the end of 1963 to over 16% at the end of 1966.
Recurrent and Capital Expenditure
As always, of course, the main heads of expenditure
at universities are those for recurrent items, such as
salaries and minor items of equipment and so on, and capital
development. Naturally, with rapidly growing student
numbers and related staff growth, big increases in recurrent
expenditure are inevitable. Further capital expenditure is
also inevitable but it will be noted that if the residential
component is excluded, the cost of buildings recommended by
the Commission for 1964-66 will be not much more thae the
cost of those erected in the present triennium. The House
will be interested to know that the Commission proposes no
change in the relationship between Commonwealth and State
contributions for on the capital side and œ 1 ( Commonwealth)
to œ 1.85 ( State grants plus students' fees) for recurrent
expenditure. Report Necessarily Incomplete
Before giving the House a summary of the financial
implications of the report, I should mention that in two
respects it is incomplete. The introduction of Commonwealth
assistance for teoching hospitals dates only from 1962. Since
the completion of the investigation on which that assistance
was made, the Commission has been fully engaged with its
inquiries into the more firmly established pattern of
assistance and has therefore postponed until next year its
recommendations for assistance to teaching hospitals in the
coming triennium. In the second place, the recommendations
of the Commission are based on Commonwealth support to the
States for recurrent expenditure using the salo scale of
academic salaries as was adopted from December, 1960. This
was based on a standard professorial salary of œ 4250. This
is a matter on which I shall have more to say in a few
minutes. Summary of Financial Recormmndations
Tb sunmarise the financial implications for the
Commonwealth of the Commission's recommendations for assistance
to the States for their universities, I ask honourable
members to note the following figures for 1964-66 and the
comparisons with 1961-63; For general recurrent expenditure:
œ 37.7 m. an increase c'f about œ 12 m. over the provision in
the present trienniu; For buildings and furnishings, other
than student residences; œ 15.7 m. an increase of about
œ 1 For research and computers œ 2.9 m. an increase
of œ 2.4 For building and furnishing halls of residence
and affiliated colleges: œ 3.4 m. an increase of nearly
œ 2 For recurrent expenditure in the halls of residence
and affiliated colleges; œ 700,000 an increase of œ 200,000.
From the figures I have just given, it will be clear
that acceptance of the Commission's present recommendations
would require the Commonwealth to offer to the States over
m. for their universities during the coming triennium. 
This is an increase of nearly œ 16 m. over the Commonwealth
money provided during the present trionnium. To attract
this e. ount, the total of State grants and students' fees
in all of the State universities would need to be over
m. an increase of more than œ 25 n. on the corresponding
amount for State grants and students' fees in the present
trionnium. It is worth noting in this context that universities'
income from students' fees over the coming triennium is
expected to be nearly œ 20 m.
Commonwealth Government Decisions on the Universities
Commission's Report.
Subject to certain matters which I shall mention
shortly, the Government accepts the financial recommendations
of the Commission, and the present Bill is intended to give
legal effect to an offer to the States on that basis.
I have written to the Premiers and told them of the
Government's intentions with regard to the Commission's
financial recommendations. It is appropriate that I should
emphasise that it is the State Governments which have the
major responsibility for the development of universities
within their borders. But it is a source of much satisfaction
to all concerned that the State Governments readily accept the
Universities Commission as an exp rt body to which they can
turn for advice on matters affecting university development.
I have already indicated that provision for teaching
hospitals and for increases in academic salaries above the
levels which have been in effect since the end of 1960 will
add to the total Lmounts rccormmnded in the report and adopted
in this Bill. There is in addition the report shortly to be presented
by the Commission's Comnittee on the Future of Tertiary
Education. The Commission attaches great importance to the
outcome of this investigation into the pattcrn of educational
facilities over the whole filld at the tertiary level. The
Government has no doubt that the problems with which the
Committee is concerned and the recommendations which the
Commission will make in consequence are of great significance
for the provisions to be made in the future for universities.
Honourable members will note that the Commission is
recommending a grant of œ 5 m. on a for basis as between
the Commnonwealth and the States, to support special additional
research activities at the post-graduate level. However, the
Cormission has yet to complete its study of the distribution
of these funds and recommends, in the first instance, a
distribution of œ 1 m. in the proportion shown in Table 60 of
the report. The Comr. onwealth is ready to accept the
Commission's proposals for the initial œ 1 n. on the understanding
that the funds shall not be used, in substitution, to
finance research activity already supported from the general
funds of universities or from other sources and shall not be
used in such a way as to compete with the Commonwealth postgraduate
awards or similar schemes for assisting post-graduate
research students. We have postponed a decision on the
balance of the Comission's research proposals until it has 
completed its study. . o would hope shortly to take an
opportunity to look at the wholo question of Commonwealth
involveennt in research in Australia.
With regard to the reconmendation for affiliated
colloAs and halls of residonce, we accept that there is a
need for additional student residences and we have no quarrel
with the total scale of assistance suggested in the report in
Table 68. However, we do wish to ensurc that, within this
assistanco, affiliated colleges should have access equally
with halls of residence and on a for basis. Our
acceptance of the total amounts shown at Table 68 is on that
basis and I shall be discussing with the Universities
Cormission the practical consequences of this decision. Our
approach on this matter has been influenced by the considcrations
that affiliated colleges are traditionally a part of the
Australian university systoe, have played an outstanding role
over the years and, for each student in residence, nake a
smaller oemand on the public purse.
The Bill to Amend the Existing States
rants ( Univoruities) Act.
Before leaving the subject of affiliated residential
colleges, I take the opportunity to explain to the House why
the Bill to amend the existing States Grants ( Universities)
Act is necessary. The original Act provided for Commonwealth grants
totalling œ 1 n. for affiliated rcsidential colleges and in
Schedule 4 the amount available for colleges at each of the
universitios concerned was specified. As things turned out,
plans for affilinted colleges at the University of Now South
Wales have cone to ncthing in the present trienniiu. Vio are
thereforo left with the choice of scinll the appropriation
lapse or of making it possible to distribute the œ 150,000
involved, according to the judgment of the Commission, among
other affiliated residential colloges which have the necessary
matching funds at their disposal. Vie h-ve thought it profcrable
to mako the money available and the Bill provides
accordingly. Academic Salarics.
I turn now to the probl; i of acdeoic salarios. As
already pointed out, the recurrent grants reconmonded by the
Commission have boon calculated using a scale of academic
salaries based on a standard profossorial ratu of œ 4,250 p. a.
While noting developnrnts affecting acacdonic salaries, the
Comr. lission is unwilling, in present circumstancoo, to suggest
new salary levels. The Cornr ission takes the view that it
should not be the salary fixing body for the universities of
Australia and the Government agrees with this view.
\ 7 have given careful thought to the matter of
salaries. ' 7J are aware of the increases, and claims for
increascs, in acaeonic salaries which have followed the
decision of the New South Ulos Industrial Corlnission. Even
before this, the univcruitics, through their Staff Associations
and Vico-Chancellors, had rprescnted to us that current
salaries should be roviewed and that for this purpose it was
desirable to have soue mnchinory, on an Australin-wide basis,
fitted tc: the particular circu:_ stanccs within the academic 
We fully accopt thn t r3 l-rios plnid in a Strato
unive-rsity nr, no romain, Ultilur,. toly3 a. mattor for tha~ t
univu2r,, ity nn its Stato Govornncant. At thc sarie time,
' rcvision for sninllries is C. -njor cniponent in the rcurre-nt
grants riode by the Corvionilth1 rmd the Sta-tos Cond these
gra nts nust the--refore be calcula1ted. on soonei 1nom scale of
r. c-nc" cic slrs. Inevitably, any scale adopted, for this
purpose wvill be highly releva, nt for a-ctul salarics in the
universitios. Given the fact that _, ala1ry movemeonts are
occurring, the bscence%; cf a re co-mieindtion now by the
Univorsitioes Conn-_, is on on a n. ew salary scale for grnnts
see i-m to us to call for sc. c afction on the pa'rt of
the Corinonwenith WeT hai-? ve the re-f o ru 0cid iG d that the
Cormmoinwea,, lth ough1-t to esta blish : Done-now manchinery to adviso
it on thu scc rof a ca-demic salaries which could be
a-ppro~ pria tely ad'opted by the Univcrcitics Commission for the
purpose of -Clcula tinC r'e current ( grants for ea-ch trionniuni-.
What we have in mind i: 3 that'U ve appoint a person of suitable
Qulific-tions and expcrience to onquire into academic
solaricssistod perha-ps by two assess ors to ropresent
Govcrnmient a-nd univers-ity interests. Althou,-h tho a-ppointee
xvould need to be clcthed with appropriate authority, we
wculd hope to coo proceedings devisedC which wore not too
f olvol. It is our intention to sock an Carr-n~ or'ont along
theseo 1 mo with the object o~ f having; an inquiry to producc
a. detominoation for the 1964-66 trienniuna, effeJctive from 1st
January, 1964. I ha-ve informod the Preiers of our intontion to seeDk
this arrn-ngemelnt as , a1 oano pro-vidin. g gui, 2ance, to the
Cfor,-onvalth on the level of 0snLnrioo o n which its offeor to
the Stnto. s for re current expenditure s; hould be calcula-ted.
When deciding on our plans-for an innuiry, 17e shall take into
considera-tion tho vie ws ) f the Stn-tesl. I would hope thnt we
Y~ ay be able proce'td in the knowled0ge that such arn arranMgei-.
ont woulC comme1. ind itsclf to the Staites, as42b eing to the
ad0vantage) of nL-1 conce rned and tha-t it woculd therefore enjoy
the Staes' full support.
In the eatie being! ' ware tha-t a professorial rate
of' P. 4,250 p. a. is no lon.-er &amp;-enerally a-ccepted, we ha7ve
decde tat, as an interim eaur pendin.-the inquiry, we
should offer to the Sta~ tes, for rccurre-nt expenditure by their
unive-rsities, g-rants ca-lculated' on the basois of a profeOssorial
rateU of œ-' 4,600 p. a. nrc thus ready -to support increase]. s up
to this level in sala'ries in State unive3rsiticns from. the lot
July, 1963 and intend to ccosr res pond ing, increasecs in
the, scales of academuric s--la-rioz; in the Autra-lian N.-tional
University. Our Ccc, ptance) of the, Unive rcitioo ComissiCln's
rccc'menda-tionsj for recurrent expenditure is thus on the basis
that we. shall take, stepz by Wa,-y of am-. cndinE leg-isla-tion to
provide the supplenemnta-ry funds; reqluired. on the Corirmonwealth's
part to support the interi-. levels referred to a-bove and,
subsequently, wihatcuver leve ls for the 1964-66 trienniun are
arrived nt -s a mosult of the inquiry vie propose to cot up.
Cm. ommowel1th Scholarsjhips
I am sure tha-t nil honourabie me--. mbers will be interested
to knmow, although it iu not a ma-tter related to the present Bill,
thant when dealing-with the Corris. jicn': report a7nd. noting-their 
recormtondotions for increased financial asoistance for students,
the Government before it also a rccomenO!. timn from the
CcrElonwe-2lth Schonlars hips Board for n increase in the numbor
of awards under the Cor'' onwer,, l th Scholar, s hip Schema. I ani
plealsed to announco that we have decided that from-. the
beginning of 1964, the number of open entrance awards under the
Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme will be increased from 000 to
9,000 nd' th-. t the nurmber of second and later ycar Lwarcs unler
the same scheme will be increased by 500 fro:-, its present level
of 780. In cominr to this Cucision, we hrivc taken account of
thc prospect that vv : may need further to consider the .'. tter of
assistnce for students in the light of thc rocoimmL_, cendticns
fromi the Comittee on the Future of Tortiary Education.
Mlain Provision of the Bills
The Univritics ( Finncil Assistance) Bill
The trms are simil. r in moot respects to those of
oxisting-legislation in this ficld. As thsec are fa--iliar to
honourable member, I shanll confine myself to pointing out some
of the more significant changes.
It bins been found posciblo to simplify the legislation
in scom imzportant respects. The m. oot important of these is
in Section 3 and the related First Schedule. The C: LeiSsion
has recommended, the a-bolitiion of the system! of first and scond
level grrmnts for cneral recurrent expniture. This system ims
introduced oririnolly to ensure a inimum level of funds for
State universitie s. ' 2e concur in the Comrision's reco= enddation
for its abolition. Vlith the now lon-estCablishol rolationships
betwcon the Com-. onwealth and Statos in university ma! iLttcrs, we
re confident that the-ned fcr such a scf rua rd no longEr exists.
The reforencec;. -to sa laries in Section 4-rer based on the
figurs usc' by tho Co-' mmission whc-n calculating the levels of
recurrent expnditure,, wichh-the Comonwalth should support in
each yea-r of the tricnniuri. As I hCve alredy indicated, the
Gvorn"' ent h'-s decided to support hig-hcr salary lvels ran d
therfcrc rreator recurront expendliture, but has not rooched
finality on the levels it vill support over the trienniu. It
has not been practicable in the tie vonilcable to r calculate
the figures in the Firt Schoed: ule, nor, in view of the arrangcrients
we haive in m-iind was it thoug,, ht worthwhile to do so -t this
stage. In due course, opproprinte2 oning legislation -ill be
introduced. The most uignificant cha, nge in Section 5 and, the
related Second Schedcule dealing, with g-rants for expenditure on
univorsity building projects etc., is thart for each building
project the Sur.-specified contain on appropriate llowance for
furnishing nd equipping the buildlin. The Commission is givcn
the power to op1) provc the, proprtion spe) cnt on the actual building
and on furnishing andl equippin[ g it. It sjhould olso be noted that
provision for conmputing, fa. cilities appears in the Second
Scheulo. As I ha-; lrerOdy me. ntione, Section 6 ande the Third
Schedule 1oling with special pest-grnouo t rssorch activitis
aro tenta-tive in that they alloc,-te only 21 pending a final
decision on the Comision's proposals for resea-) olrch grnts
totalling 5 : o. 
I 9.
Section 7 tlhe Fourth Schcdule Cel with hll1S of
reidecnce anJ OffilitoCC rsi-dential collegecs. The eX-tent of
Comm--onwalth support for alls of resideonce anJ affilitedo
residentia colle. cis io ccbined in the Fourth Schedulo. In
each insta--nce, the provision of Comm__ Y-onwea-'-jlth money within any
one univrcity is conitinal on approval by the Conisicn for
ch amount spent and. the purpo; for which it is spent.
Becausec of the Cif-ficulty in forecasing precisly the
,. ctu-1 need s as betvc-n univrs ities anCd betwen typos of
student residences, this S ; ction provids that thll.; Minioter may
r. srkc certain variaticmn in the amounts provided for rsidences.
Honourable :: cibors will be c; lc6 to not--, that increasedc
provision is 1-. rlade fo-r recurrent expcndlituro incurred by those
c stab. lislr'. c nt s
The Stctes Granto ( Univeritie2s) Bill No. 3 1963.
This is C sim-_, ple c',. o. euro -iving affoct to the decision
that E150,000 of Connulonwcavclth m:: oney originally maCo available
for exponditurc on affilited rintcntial cclleges nt the
Univcrsity of New Scuth 1712ales, ndO not re-quired for that purpose,
is to be d'istributd among other reidelntirl colles on a basis
to be approved,. by the M'initer on the recomi-ndtion of the
Comnic sion. Conclusion.
I rc. % arO the Comm.-ission's report Ln the presont Bill as
i: mportant mlilestoncs rmrkin!-the-route of Comm,. onwelat-h anod Stato
Govrnmont ausistanc for St: te universities. The deomnd for
univrsity educa tion i; grcwing_ not omly by reas on of our
steadily r: rowing population but bcause a steadily increasing
pro-: Drtion of cur young-eople are qualifying-for hiher e ducation
adl are looking; to the universiti. js to providec it. Further, fro-,
theo national point of vie-, w, it is ven mior'. true t-dy than in
1957 when the IMJurray Coyittee rema-rklr dl " The proprtion of
the bpopultian which is calledc upon to ive professional or
technical service rf onc kind . r tnother is incresin-evory
day!;-and the proportion of such cople who have to be grad60. uate s
is increasingf also."
ProDblemsiz r . iain to be solved a-nd it m-ay well be that,
when we hve the Comr:',. i sin'sz r concnc! dtions following completion
of its co;-, mitteec's study of the future of tertiary
ducation in Aurstralia we sha-ll be called on to support ovolopmnt
in the3 torticry field aditionl to those the Conimonwcalth
now supports. In the me. ntime, we are confident of the ncc tco
pledgo-c support for the univerities to the extent provided in
this Bill nd ind icated, at vairious p? oints Curing my remiark.
I warmly comel: ndn the Bill to the House. 



18th October. 1961
Speech by the Prime Ministers th~ Rt. Hon. -Sir Robert&amp; Meze
Well Sir, I am bound to say that this is a
singularly unbalanced audience. If I look at that part of it.
I have to turn my back on the others, so I will address mysell
to a most dubious collection of Parliamentary colleagues in front
of me. I am bound to say that I envy my colleague the Minister.
He has publicly stated that he has a split personality. All I want
to tell him is that that will come in mighty handy if he is ever
charged with ~ pmicide. There is another thing that just struck me since
I arrived and sat down and that is that there is a cunning arrangement
on the 3hop just across the alleyway here. I suppose it was
put there by intelligent anticipation to remind us all that there
is an election coming on because I can see nothing but references
to pies, whether they're in the sky or not I dcnlt know and
cakes, and this, I think, is a stimulating thing for all of us
to see. I am sorry that my Parliamentary colleagues have their
backs to it. The third thing I want to say is that for some
inscrutable reason I have had to open quite a number of buildings
in my time and I have always been warned, " Now be very careful
to declare it open because otherwise it won't be open." Well my
Job today is purely retrospective because it is open, and it Is
in use and they're all working, so I suppose, Gordon, what I do
is to declare it retrospectively open, and so I do.
One of the interesting things about this building
is that up to now a variety of Commonwealth Departments have been
installed in what, 12 or 13 or 11+ different places in the city
and this, of courseg is the largest city in Au-stralia and a
tremendously important one and from the point of view of the
public convenience, of getting in touch with Departments, people
who want to see one Department and perhaps want to see two or three,
it is a wonderful thing to have them concentrated in this fashion
in one building in the very heart of the city and therefore this
is, not only from the point of view of the Commonwealth, but from
the point of view of the citizens of this place, a very'happy
event. It is a formidable addition to the city of Sydney and
St is a formidable addition to the convenience and well-being of
he people who live here. Therefore this is a notable event.
Now my colleague made a glancing reference just
now to " civil servants". I have always got into the habit of
calling them " civil servants" and I am told I ought to say
" iPublic servants". Anyhow I will continue to call them " civil
servants". You knowt I am so 00ld and de crepit a s everybody
knows nowadays, that I can remember a time when it was rather a
point of honour in any club, or places where men meet together,
to make some rather adverse comments on these wretched civil
servants, the bureaucrats, and yet whenever I come to one of these
gatherings where businessmen of great eminence are to be seen, I
see former civil servants who are now most eminent in private
enterprise and in general business very well regarded and much
sought after, and I think it is quite true that all this silly
old prejudice has gone. I remember many years ago an amusing
friend of mine saying to me " You know there is one thing you
must always remember about Lhe civil service, it provides a level,
a level of ability and competence below which no Government can
sensibly fall." Now you think about thatq that has a world of
oeosooeoe/ 2 
-2-
truth in it. It is not the function of the civil service to
govern the country, It is the function of the civil service to
contribute all it has in talent and study and experience in giving
effect to the Policies of the country which are hammered out by
people elected by the electors of the country, and therefore, the
function of tt~ e civil servant is a very high and responsible one,
a very objective one and speaking as one who has been a Minister
for , oh, more years Lhan the locusts have eaten, and Prime
Minister for far more years than one or two of my friends here
would desire, I want to say that nobody could be more indebted
than I am to the high standards of the great work of the civil
service and indeed nobody could be more indebted to them than
the people who engage in production and selling, commerce and
transportation, in this country, because every day they have some
occasion to have some contact with them.
Somebody once coined a phrase; it is now quite
shop-soiled. He said with all the air of novelty " What we want
is more business in Government and less GovernmenZ in business."
This is one of those delightful cliches that is to be regarded
now, as I think, something of a curio, because my experience not
a brief one, has been that for the most part, when people gel
into difficulty, when they have some problem which affects the
future of their own enterprises something happens and some
politician is put in receipt of their views on the matter and
some Government or other is asked -to do something about it. So
that, let's face up to it, w-i have reached a stage of life in
Australia in which the whole essence of life is that there should
be not hostility between public administration and private business
but the utmost of co-operation between the two; the utmost of
mutual Lunderstanding between the two and I assure you that in
dealing with the civil service, and Lhis goes for civil servants
wherever they may' be, Commonwealth or State in Australia, you're
dealing with a mass of people, the ovexwt-L-ming bulk of whom are
honest, objective, public-spirited people and here in this
building we will have concentrated a very great number of them.
The only other thing I would like to say to you
because a lot of men here are very distinguished in private business,
in seats of learning and in other aspects of the community and
it is this: " We have a constant danger of adopting what might be
called " false dichotomy". Everything is black or it is white.
If you are on my side in politics perhaps you think I am pretty
good; nothing to be said against me. Well I say that with
modified rapture. If you're against me then of course, there is
nothing good to be said for me. I am all black. Whereas, of
course, the trouble is that we, most of us, are grey some of us
in the hair but all of us in our attributes and qualifications.
We are neither black nor white, we are just ordinary people and
therefore we have something to be said for us and something to
be said against us. This is fair enough, but one of the choices
that we seem to have been offered in the past is this. It is
said that some expenditures in the country, those administered
by public departments are in the public sector and others are in
the private sector. This is one of those jargon-like phrases that
economists delight to invent it is the public sector or the
private sector, Gentlemen, I venture to say with all my belief in
the expansion of genuine personal and private enterprise in this
country I wnture to say that it just could not happen without
the public expenditure that goes on to a very large extent and
at great expense in this country. What are these things that
are administered by some people in this building and by some
people who are engaged in public affairs the provision of
0 S 0 0 * 0 ./ 3 
3-
water, the provision of power, the provision of light, or roads,
of schools all these things which provide the very foundation
on which normal enterprise may build and be strong, and therefore,
I beg of you, put all these false conflicts on one side. W~ e in
Australia are a very considerable nation* We can be a much more
considerable nation as time goes on. WIe will become that the
more rapidly and the more surely if we understand that is is not
one man against another, it is all men together for this coun~ try,
that co-operation is much more important than hostility. Of
course there will be some hostilities, not necessarily personal
hostilities political hostilities of the first kind arise from
differences in points of view and that is very good. That's the
democratic process but don't line up the ordinary citi: en against
government or ordinary business against the civil service administrators,
because tUhis is the right way to produce the wrong
results. This task that we all have is a task of co-operating,
not dependently, not subserviently, but with full vigour full
capacity to express our own views, but in the long run, t
co-operate for the achievement of the great national result and
therefore don't let us have a feeling that a civil servant Is a
curious fellow, detached and almost monastic, except for his
alleged devotion to idleness. Don't let us fall into the error
of pursuing that kind of idea, and don't let us fall into the
error of thinking that wnaat Governments do in works in development,
in the nation, is irrelevant to what must be Aone by
thousands of other people, to build on those foundations to put
them to effective use and thereby to improve the production, the
distribution the commercial activities of the country, the
tran'sport aciivities of the country, so that we may have more and
more people, more 3nd~ more to do, and more and more real power
in our own country, Ncw, I am sorry to take up your time by getting
rather " into the pulpit" on this matter, but to tell you the
truth, I have looked around here and I have seen so many of you
before, I have tried to remember what I said to you last time
and, mercifully, I can't, and I know anyhow you have all come
along here, not to have a look at me, but to have a talk with
each other, have a crack at both sides in the political contest
and, with a little bit of luck, though I don't trust my Minister,
have a drink at the end.
I retrospectively declare the building open0 



Statemet ~ r th Primo Minister, the Rt.
Iak. Sir Robert Menajes
lord Hi has a remarkable record in offie*.
All of us who had much to do with him when 1w ws
Secretary of State fbr C aminolth Beitions felt sure
that there had never beon a better man in that pot.
We &amp; a1l pt to know is notab1O qualities of integrity,
oourtwte, wulerstanding pentrating intellience and
peat strength of character and decision* These
qua. itioop of course, he brought to the Foreign Qftie
with Immnse distinctioa.
I suppose that it may be said that 3kitish
politics are not my bsiress, but I fel bound to say
that in my opinion Aleo Home is among the very Creat
men it has been my privilege to know.
SYDOcb 19
19th Octoer, 1963e 



63/ 137
SPEECH BY THE PRIM~ E MINISTER THE RT.
HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES, ON IELEVISION
NETWORK TCN, GTV, QTQ NWIS TVW AND TVT
ON SUNDAY) 20TH 6CTOBE'R, 1963
Ladies and Gentlemen:
This is not a policy speech. That, no doubt is
a pleasure to come. What I want to doain this occasion Is to
answer a question which is being fairly widely put as to why
we are to have an election now when the Parliament, theoretically,
has another twelve months to go. I want to answer that
by reminding you of a few things.
Before the last election that was in December,
1961 my Government had a majority of something over
When the last election finished we had a period for about
six or seven days in which noboly quite knew who had won,
It looked at one stage as if the vote would be 61 all and,
of course, that would have meant, inevitably, another election
almost immediately. Well, then, when finally the counts were
completed, it turned out we had 62-60 and by the time a Speaker
had been elected, that meant 61-60 on the floor of the House
a majority of one. A majority of one in a House of 122 I
think it might properly be said, was a pretty narrow ma3ority,
It couldn't be narrower,
And I think that at that time but you can think
for yourselves and remember for yourselves raost people thought
we would be out in a matter of months. The Opposition
certainly thought so because when Parliament met, for the first
time after the election, in February in 1962, the Opposition
at once launched a No-Confidence motion which was defeated
by one vote. Since then as you know because I have mentioned
it publicly we have ha3four other No-Confidence motions,
all designed, no doubt, to bring about the defeat of the
Government. And we have survived mostly by a majority of
one. Now, right through this period it's getting near
two years now we have had to live on the very edge of a
political precipice. Two of my supporters, staying away from
a division, not hearing the division bell or being otherwise
engaged could mean the defeat of the Government; one member
on the 65overnment side feeling very strongly about something,
crossing the floor of the House and the Opposition wins and
the Government is defeated. This is an eminently unsatisfactory
way of conducting the business of the country.
At that time, of course, the Opposition wanted an
election and let me remind you that at all times that would
have been an election for the lower House, not for the Senate,
because under the constitutional arrangements, there can't be
a Senate election before July of 1964+, and therefore had the
Opposition succeeded in any one of these repeated atlacks,
there would have been an election for the lower House only and
we would not have been hearing all this nonsense about the
extravagant waste of money involved in a single House election.
That, after all was what the Opposition wanted. They can
scarcely complain now that they have got it. Well why have
they gone cold on this election? Why is it that people who
wanted to have one so frequently have now taken up an attitude
of protest about having one. Well, the answer is quite simple, 
-2
They were quite certain early in 1962 that if they
could force an election they would win it, I'm a bit inclined
to think they were right because our popularity if I may say
so had fallen very considerably and the 1961 election was
followed by a period of time in which I wouldn't have rated our
chances very high, But of course, today the position is quite
different. The Opposition knows that an election is not likely
to be a successful one for it; knows that the position of the
Government has strengthened; that there is an increasing
realisation in the country of the prosperity that we see around
us, a prosperity which bears out the policy of the Government
for stability and for growth because we have had both in full
measure and therefore the Opposition now finds that it is a
wicked thing to have an election. Well we are going to have
one and you will be the people who will determine whether it is
wicked or not. You will be the people who will decide whether
you want this precarious situation to go on with a Government
devoting quite a bit of its time to preserving itself to
discussions with the Whip, to finding whether the full numbers
are present. All these things take a lot of time and I regard
my duty to you as one to use my time and the time of my
Ministers in attonding to the serious problems of the Government
of the nation. Now why is it, I wonder, that the Opposition has
this fear, apari from what they know about public opinion.
Why do they now fear an election? I think the answer to that
is quite simple, First of all, last year they were talking
vociferously about unemploymenz, whipping up the unemployment
issue magnifying whatever unemployment existed. Today they
know that this has practically disappeared, They know, indeed,
as well as I do and as well as you do that it won't be very long
now before it will become increasingly difficult to find employees
for jobs. We are almost at the point where there are more jobs
than there are people looking for them. And the result is
that the eager cries about unemployment have now faded away and
anyhow -you wouldn't be very much impressed by them if they were
resumed, would you?
In the second place, they know quite well that
people are more conscious than they ever were before that the
issue is not so much between the Government and the Opposition
in Parliament as it is between the Government and those who
control the Opposition in Parliament the thirty-six men, most
of whom you have never heard of who sit on the interstate body
of the Labour Party which lays Aown ironclad rules as to what
policy they are to pursue. That is something that is very well
worth remembering. We have had quite a few instances of it,
haventt we, in the last twelve months*
Again, the Labour Party knows that on matters of
foreign policy, matters of our relationship with the United States
of America a very vital relationship because America is our
ally in this part of the world that on all these problems of
defence on which they now profess to be having second thoughts,
on all of these matters they are extremely vulnerable, and they
are vulnerable because they are ambiguous. Do you know what side
they are on in these matters? You take a simple illustration:
Do they really believe in Malaysia? Just up to our North, lying
there in the path of southward Communist aggression, the
expanding and aggressive activities of China; do you know what
their attitude is? Do they really believe in Malaysia? Do they
believe in it sufficiently to support it? Would they be willing
to carry out the undertaking thiat I have given publicly that if
Malaysia is attacked, then we will join with Great Britain in
helping to defend her? Is that something on which you feel you 
-3
clearly understand what they have in mind? Because I don't.
I know they've said, " We support the concept of Malaysia." Yes,
well, that's right. I may support the concept of a neutral
Sweden. I may support all sorts of concepts around the world,
but the real problem is what are we going to do about it.'
That's the thing, and that is where you are entitled to ask
any any Government where it stands and what it will do. Well,
of course, the reason for the ambiguity that they suffer from
is quite clear. You just remember that it's only a little while
ago that their outside authorities told them that their policy
was to withdraw Australian troops from Malaya, to say nothing of
Malaysia, They have now gone through the form of abandoning
that, so it said, and yet the President of the A. L. P. only the
other day went on public record as saying that that was still
their policy that Malaysians didn't want Australians in and
Australians Aidn't want to be there.
Now, nobody talks lightheartedly about the possibilities
of hostilities but, believe me this country needs over the
next three years a Government that knouswhere it stand-~ that
can speak with authority and can act with authority onlahalf
of Australia. Other countrie3 are entitled to know where we
stand and what we mean to do, and that's fair enough. Therefore,
we must have an election. No Government with a precarious
majority of one can speak with power and authority for our
nation in all these difficult matters that now surround us. And
therefore there's an election. You will decide it. All I can
say is and this is, I think, a rather magnanimous statement
for a politician to make if you are going to put us out well
see that our opponents, whoever they may be and however they
may be controlled, get a real majority and can speak for
Australia and if you are going to save us in office, if you are
going to affirm your belief that we are the most competent
people to speak for Australia in these matters then give us
a decent majority. Let us be able to speak with a plain voice.
You see, the overriding interest in all this matter is the
welfare of Australiao If the electors you, and all your
friends will have that consideration in mind to the exclusion
of all others, then the election will be admirably justified
and if I may say so, I think the result might well turn out
to te pretty satisfactory for you, and of course in a small way,
for me, 



63/ 123
OPENING OF ADDITIONS TO WAVERLEY CHRISTLN
BROTHERS COLLEGE SYDNEY ON
OCTOIER, 1963
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon., Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Chairman, My Lord Bishop, Mr. Headraster, Your Honours,
Ladies and Gentlemen, Boys, and in particular, Captain Bernard
Jones, the Captain of the School
As I am constantly being warned that the habit of
speech grows on a man as he gets older and that he therefore
sometimes forgets I at once declare these building additions
open. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
The next thing that I want to say to you is that
my friend, Mr. Robson, so justly described as one of the great
headmasters, has expressed some embarrassment at being with
me speechmaking for the fourth time. I can assure him that the
embarrassment is reciprocal. ( Laughter) We are joint brothers
in misery: He has listened to i: 2e four times and I have had to
listen to him. The only difference between us is that he is
usually present because he has persuaded a great number of
businessmen to get rid of a great deal of money in a good cause
and I an here in my dubious, ambiguous capacity as a politician
who, from time to time, is the enemy of all mankind. ( Laughter)
But, Sir it must be said for me and I would like
to say particularly to the boys that, contrary to all your
expectation after my npny years in public affiars I still
retain a considerable trace of Christian spirit because I
have been sitting here on the dais next to an old boy of St.
Patrick's College in Ballarat. St. Patrick's College in
Ballarat a school which, when I was in the football team
a kind of football you don't understand ( Laughter) for another
school much smaller, inflicted on us the greatest thrashing in
the history of football in my State. I hesitate to tell you
what they scored, All I know is that we didn't score at all.
( Laughter) And every time I meet a distinguished old boy of
St. Patrick's College, I find myself looking at him and saying
" Should I be nice to this chap, or shouldn't and the fact
that I am says something for me that you might not have supposed
to exist. Now, Sir I of course, as you have been reminded,
have a tremendous interest in education in Australia, I,
myself, am the half-etc-cated product of a series of scholastic
institutions. I began my life learning if you may so describe
it in a little country State school with about thirty or
forty children in it. I then went to a much larger one in a
much larger town and then I went to a secondary school which was,
in effect, privately conducted, and then I went to what you call
a great public school in Melbourne and then to a university.
So that I may claim to have seen the educational process at
various levels and in various ways and out of it all, I have
come, firmly persuaded, as His Lordship the Bishop has just
stated to you as his own view, that there is no greater
superstition in the world than the idea that all education
has to be uniform and uniformly conducted.
One of our dangers in a democracy is this passion
for everything being uniform. We must all be the same as the
next man. I am all for us all having the same rights as the
next man but I am not a bit in favour of being the same as the
o e 
-2
next man. Heaven forbid that we should all be exactly the same
type of people with the sane body of ideas, with the same formal
educational equipment in our own minds as if in some sense this
would mean that we would all think the same. If anybody in
Australia thinks that everybody thinks the same because everybody
is in a democracy, he'll have a great disillusionment on November
( Laughter) Now, Sir, this is, I think, the basic truth: We
must not get into this deplorable habit of thinking that there
is virtue in uniformity for its own sake, This is not to
criticise the State forms of education. I am, of all people,
their beneficiary. But this is merely to say that the greater
the variety that we have, the greater the versatility of our
educational system, the more people are encouraged to choose
the school that they want for their children, the better for
all of us. ( Applause) Of course, Mr. Chairman, this is something
that goes deep. We have heard. today, very properly, words about
science, the importance of science in the world. Of course,
tremendously important increasingly important, but it would be
a strange world wouldn't it in which we were all scientists,
a strange world in which we had forgotten that, after all, the
proper study of mankind is man, the relations between man and
nan, the relations between man and his Maker. All these great
humane studies which, of course, could co-exist with science, are
not to be forgotten. Education is, in its nature, an all-round
business. The humanists must learn more about science and, if
I may say so, the scientists must learn more about the humanities,
otherwise we may get to the stage, of course, of becoming so
scientific, so knowledgeable on God's creations that we begin
to think we know all about God. This is a cardinal error,
Now, a school like this, a school like the one I
went to in Melbourne; other schools the school that Mro Robson
conducted with such distinction such schools have a double
aim. Those aims should produce the highest level of education,
meaning by that not only the acquiring of knowledge vastly
important as that is, not only the acquiring of accurate habits
of thought, rare and splendid as they may be, not only the
acquiring of habits of courtesy and tolerance and understanding,
but also realising all through that we are not here today and
gone tomorrow we are not a mere dusty phenomenon that will be
blown away but that we have solme of the stuff of immortality in
us0 When I say that I don't mean just reputation or something
of that kind, but some of the stuff of the spirit, something that
is based upon the whole religious feeling that we have and the
religious background against which we do our work. This is
tremendously important. Sir, if you didn't believe this, this
school wouldn't be here0 If other people didn't believe it,
other great and famous schools would not be here. These schools
do not, this great school does not exist just in order to
indicate that it is a bit superior to the firm next door. Not
at all. It is here because the parents who send their boys here
want something more than ordinary lay education. ( Applause)
They want some background.
Sir, I must tell you and perhaps Mr. Robson has
heard me say this before I hope he has a faulty memory but
when the war ended, I was at that time in that strange place they
call politically, " the wilderness". You may know what it means.
But I had one idea in my mind which turned out to be utterly
wrong. I thought that with all the tremendous rates of taxation
that then existed, necessarily so for the conduct of the war, 000/ 3 
3-
with all thlat, wouldn't it be terribly difficult for people to
send their children to schools where they have to pay fees for
them and make some sacrifice for them; wouldntt this mean that
the great number of schools n-) w well knoinwould feel the pinch
and tend to disappear? I couldn't have been more wrong. It is
one of the most astonishing things in post-war history in
AUstralia that these schools, about whose future I was nervous,
before long had waiting lists, before long began to expand and
expand. Why, I noticed on the back of the programme today a
very very interesting figure ' Waverley College was opened in
January, 1903 with a roll call of twentytwo pupils, Twentytwo
and it now has 1,420 and so magnetic obviously has been the work
that it has done thal a distinguished Judge is able to get up
and announce the completion of an enterprise running into
what did he say? œ C390,000. This, I think, is one of the
great phenomena of the post-war era, a wonderful thing, I have
had a good deal to do with it on the university side as you
know, and a little to do with taxation remissions ana~ so on,
on donations to schools, but the whole essence of this thing
has been that people have been able and willing and when I
say able, I know what sacr'ifices are involved in this to give
to their children that form of education which they regard as
best here and best in eternity. This is something tremendou~ s,
I am proud of a country that has done it. I am proud of peqple
who can work to produce a result like this. ( Applause)
Sir, I have a singular pleasure in being here.
I am sorry my wife is not haere but as you may have heard by
countesy of the press we now have a tenth grandchild. ( Applause)
I thought for a raomenz a little earlier that somiebody wanted'
mie to adopt an eleventh. ( Laughter) If you know my wife as
well as I do, you will know that she is a tremendous grandmother
and so for a variety of reasons, my daughter coming back~ last
evening from hospital, she decided she couldn't come but her
heart is with me. She shares rmy views on these matters
( Applause) and therefore it is a great thing, a pleasant thing
for me to have been able to declare open this building and
express my hope that it will for many many years to come serve
both God and man in this city. 



MEsBAUB TO HATIORIA CUIRIdNTION IN
CASERHA OF TID9 AUSThA-iAll JUNIOR
CHAEnLR OF COMMERC ON OLCTO8R 209
1963
1 aend oordial greetings to delepmte
to the National Convention of the Australian Junior
Chmber of Cowre.. It is fitting that you he e chosen
to met in the National Capital and 1 trust that
your discussions wii be most fruitful,
kRIt** HINiSTUR4 



'-63/ 125
PRESS CONFER~ ENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES, 9 AT PAR3LIAIENT
HOUSE, CANBERRA, ON TUESDAY, 22ND OCTOBER, 1963
QUESTION-. Any plans for your election policy speech, Sir?
PRIME
MINISTER: November 12th I have in mind.
Q. Have you got any details of your itinerary thereafter?
P. M. No. I think perhaps when I say the 12th November, I ought
to explain to you what I have in mind. You see, we are
living in a new world nowadays. WIe have meetings, we have
television, we have broadcasting all of these, of course,
I will have to employ very actively in all States. I am
proposing this time to do something quite novel. I am
proposing to do my policy speech on television. I know what
that means. That means that I will have to do it telerecord
it, or whatever the words are two or three days
before because, of course it wjill be necessary for it to
be seen and heard in all htates at the same time with of
course simultaneous broadcasting. I have given a lo of
thoughz to this and I think that witn all these new means
available to people of seeing and hearing, it is a modern
thing to say, very well, the policy speech I will this time
do on television so that some I don't know how many two
or three million people will have the opportunity of hearing
and seeing, if that gives them any satisfaction.
Q6 It will be broadcast as well?
P. M. It will be simultaneously broadcast. Yes. That would go
over all round Australia on the 12th November and then on
the 13th I would propose to have my usual large meeting in
my own electorate. You know, in the orthodox way, not just
repeating the policy speech but making a major speech to
my own constituents..... questions.... all the usual business.
Q. Could I ask, Sir, whether that will be in Canterbury or Kew
Town Hall?
P. M. I haven't soon the details of the itinerary, but I do know
that by meetings, by broadcasting of course I always have
to do a number of those a number of televisions, a series
of meetings, I'll go into every State and, I think I am
right in saying, twice into Victoria, New South Wales and
Queensland. So it will be a pretty strenuous business with
a lot of travelling and covering a lot of ground.
Q. Will your policy speech take a. full hour, Sir?
P. M. Oh, I don't know yet. I haven't yot gone through the pangs
of giving birth to it. A lot of work to be done on that yet.
I haven't really got cracking on it, and we have to have
of course, Cabinet discussions, and a lot of work to be lone
on that. I couldn't undertake to say the length of it.
All I know is that in the past when I Love had to sit down
only one man can write a policy speech. Of course lots of
people put their ideas into the pool, but when it comes to
the point, somebody has to write it. I usually start off
by producing cbout 15,000 words and getting it down to
12,000 and then, following the advice Johnson
wasn't it? crossing out all the passages that seemed to / 2 
-2-
P. M. be uncommonly fine and ultimately you get down to 6,000
( Contd.) words. That is in a normal course. I don't know how
long this time. I suppose in one sense, one might say, that
the longest a television audience can be expected to survive.
Q. I take it, Sir, that you will try for a complete national
hook-up?
P. M. Yes.
Q. By that I mean that you would use commercial stations.......
P. M. Oh, I am hoping so. Yes Kew Town Hall, November 13th, I
have just been given. That is the night after this policy
speech. By the way, I don't know whether you knew it, but
after I had come to this conclusion, I found that in the
last West Australian election both policy speeches were put
on T. V. Any of you hear that? Im told that was quite
successful. People appreciated it.
Q. I recall, Sir, that Mr. Chifley did one policy speech over
the radio.
P. M. Yes. That was by broadcasting, there being no T. V. at that
time. Anyhow, T. V. will give people an opportunity of
looking and listening.
Q. Can you tell us, Sir, whether you will be going largely on
the Government's record or will you be breaking a fair amount
of new ground?
P. M. Oh, don't ask me that. I haven't written the policy speech,
my dear fellow. All that will emerge.
Q. Is there any significance, Sir, in that you have to go twice
to Queensland, Victoria and New South Wales?
P. M. Well, I can answer that quite frankly. It is in those
States that we I think7 have the more critical things. Of
course, in West Australia we lost a couple of seats narrowly
and I am going to West Australia, naturally but it would be
pretence to say that Queensland and New South Wales are not
uncommonly important to the Government. They are.
Q. Would you like to give us your forecast, Sir, seat by seat?
Mr. Calwell did it for us last week.
P. M. I know. Mr. Calwell has a faculty for prophecy, and a
taste for it that I have never sought to imitate. All I
know is that by midnight on November 30th, we will have a
pretty good idea.
Q. He is prophesying that you are giving Mr. Holt an armchair
ride into the Prime Ministership.
P. M. Yes, I have noticed this. He seems to keep on repeating
this. Very interesting. Let's see. It is interesting
for two reasons, One is, of course, in saying thathe
assumes that I am going to win the election, which is a
rather agreeable assumption because, of course, if I lose
the election, we will all have an armchair ride to the
Opposition benches, so obviously Mr. Calwell and he has
made that clear anyhow doesn't expect to win the election;
doesn't want it; doesn't expect to win it and is therefore
afraid, so he says, that Mr. Holt will get an armchair ride.
S. ./ 3 
-3
P. M. Unlike me, unlike any of his predecessors, he is to have an
( Contd.) armchair ride, Well, that assumes that I am going to
win. I think that is not a bad assumption. In the second
place, Mr. Caiwell knows as well as I do that if the day
came when I suppose in the course of Nature it will come
some time when I go out, presuming that I am in office, the
succession to me in the leadership of the Liberal Party will
be determined by the members of the Parliamentary Liberal
Party in both Houses. They will make their own choice, not
I, not Mr. Colwell.
Q. Sir, his assumption apparently is that having won the
election, you will then retire somewhere about next June.
P. M. Ah, I see. Well, just to finish that other one. Nobody
gets an armchair ride. People have to be elected and the
parties decide that on my side just as much as on the other.
So the only interesting thing about the prophecy is its
implicit assumption that we are going to win. Well, as to
what happens to me..... Really, one of these days if I ever
get round to writing some memoirs, I will have to set down,
election after election, what the prophecies were. Three
times now Vote for Menzies, and before you can say
" knife", he w-1ill be in the House of Lords. You wontt be
happy, some of you cha-, ps until you make some wretched
thing like an Earl or a L3scount out of me. Doar mae, I
have no ambitions whatever in that direction. Sorry to
disappoint you, None whatever. Then having made me a
peer of some kind, two and three times, now I am going to
resign out of hand. Well, I am feoling pretty well, thank
you. I have heard this sort of story about people
I remember years ago when Mr. Lyons I think it was in
1931; the end of 1931 when ho had become the leader of
what was then the United Australia Party. Everybody said:
Ah, you wait. Of course if they win the election, he won't
be Prime Minister for more than a month or two. One of the
other fellows.... I think it was Sir John Lathara on that
occasion... he was going to be Prime Minister. W4e11, it
didn't happen. Joe Lyons was Prime Minister for seven years
and I am not putting a terminal date on to my tern of office.
The electors-may, if they think fit on November
But I Im not.
Q. Sir, can we take it that you have got no intentions at this
stage of retiring......
P. M. I haven't got it in contemplation at all.
Q* Sir, there is one other thing about the November
election. Mr, Bob Holt, on the day after you made your
announcem., ent of November 30th, the State President of the
A. L. P. in Victoria, said he welcomed the election. Mr.
Calwell now says that the A. L. P. doesn't want the election
on November 30. Have you any thoughts as to why?
P. M, Well I didn't knew tha-t Mr. Halt wanted one. R. 94. Halt
is il? I knew that Mr. Colwell didn't want one because
having been very eager to have one far a long timae in this
Parliament, he has devoted the la-st five or six weeks to
explaining what a terrible thing it is and I understand
the other night he said he doesn't wont one. Of course
he doesn't want one. If I thought I was going to lose the
election, I wouldn't want one either. It's just as simple
as that. Politics is a renl business. 0 0 0 0/ 4 
Q. Well, Sir, what about his other charge that having got
back on November 30, you will immediately put in some sort
of a credit squeeze. In other words, he talks about a
snap election and a snap credit squeeze.
P. M. Oh yes, I read that. Very clever phrases these are. He has
got to say something. This is a mere figment of his
imagination about a credit squeeze. After all I sympathise
with my friend Mr. Calwell. For the last eighteen months,
he has been talking about nothing but unemployment and now
it is disappearing out of the window in fact, completely
gone well, you have to get on to something else. I have
been an Opposition Leader, I know what it is like. Credit
squeeze, gometimes these fellows ought to make up their
minds as to what they really do believe. In one breath
they say the country is in a terrible state of depression
and misery, and in the next breath, they say there is such
a boom that you fellows will impose a credit squeeze. They
can't be right both ways.
Q. Sir, in Queensland which seats do you plan to concentrate on?
P. M. Oh, I don't know. I haven't seen the itinerary, but your
guess is as good as mine. You know the seats we lost. Of
course nowadays with so many ways of addressing the electors,
you can occasionally cover a couple of seats from one place.
I haven't worked out this itinerary yet. All my fellows are
wcrking on that.
Q. Do you, Sir, intend to use television much more extensively
this is for personal interview than you have done in the
past?
P. M. Well, I hale forgotten how much I used last time, but I think
it runs something like this: that I am proposing to televise
the policy speech for obvious reasons and this is a modern
matter. Then I think that I may do a couple more much
shorter television pieces you know, under the allocation
that is made for purposes of the election. I know that I am
taking part in two or three or four party television setups
you know, the kind of thing that happened last time.
So I daresay I will have to gaze into the camera into that
wretched unresponsive lens, what? Half a dozen times.
Perhaps more. Then I think I am up for about half a dozen
five-minute broadcasts and perhaps a final broadcast which
takes longer. Butapart from that, I will be on the platform
and having meetings in the orthodox way and no doubt
receiving the compliments from the boys at the back of the
hall. But I enjoy that.
Q. Will you be making any statements, Sir, before the House
rises, on the timetable or the proposed form of the restrictive
trade practices?
P. M. Oh, don't ask me this. Look now you're asking me to say
what is going to be in my policy speech. Oh, no.
Q. In Western Australia, Sir, will you -a ve time to gat to
Gora ldton?
P. M. I would doubt it. I'm not sure. You see7 the trouble is,
within the limited period of time, there is a limiit to how far
you can go. I will have to travel many thousands of miles
anyhow. .000* 0 
Q. Do you recall that trip last time to Gcraldton?
P. M. I do. I do very much. Anyhow we cane back with some
Dongara crays. Did you ret any? I wondered what was wrong
with you.
Q. Moving away from elections in a way, has the Government
provisionally chosen the bomber, or will the bomber to be
chosen depend on the outcome of Mr. Townley's discussions?
P. M. Look, all I can say about that problem is that Mr. Townley
went over especially on this matter. He is extremely well
acquainted with the Secretary for Defence, Mr. McNamara
in America. They are on very close terms. He is at
this moment engaging in discussions with him. I can't say
any more than that at the present time, but when I can,
I will. 



MRSAGIo FOR PU1, LC FAR963,, IN JYD1; Y
o OCTOBER 24 1963 TO COIanISoSKIi
Fr. I. COLTT3S &amp; NEMULEC OF Tr1T
SAIVATIO;; Aui. Y
Salvationists and their friends hate reason
to be proud ol the election of Comssionor ( outts
tothe international 1eoadrsbip of the Army.
It is a recogaition of his great worth.
Perhaps it is also a recognition or the advantaos
conferred on bin both by his Soottish birth and the
six ye, rx he has spent in Australia.
I ofrr him my conntulations and my best
vishes in his nev field or endeavor. R. G. MENZIES
PRIME H41Sik 



At j
QUEEN ELIZABETH II FELLOWSHIPS
On the occasion of the visit of Her Majesty earlier this year,
the Commonwealth Government announced its decision to commemorate the
Royal Visit by the foundation in perpetuity of post-doctoral Fellowships
in the physical and biological sciences. With Her Majesty's consent,
these Fellowships will be known as the Queen Elizabeth II Fellowships.
Physical and biological sciences have an increasingly vital
role in national growth and welfare and the Government wishes the present
foundation to make a worthy contribution to scientific progress in this
country and to the professional resources of our universities and
scientific institutions. It is proposed that ten Fellowships may be
awarded each year. They will be tenable in Australian universities
or approved scientific institutions and will be open to Australian and
U. K. citizens. The Government's intention is that these Fellowships will be
awarded only to applicants of quite exceptional merit, young scientists
who have demonstrated outstanding promise and capacity for original work.
Fellowships will normally be tenable for a period of two years in an
Australian university or approved scientific institution. In exceptional
circumstances, a Fellowship may be extended for an additional year.
A Standing Committee to be known as the Queen Elizabeth
Fellowships Committee will be established to consider applications and to
administer awards. The Committee will be appointed by the EBrime Minister
and will comprise principally representatives of the Australian scientific
body drawn from a panel nominated by the Council of the Australian Academy
of Science. The Committee may, asx it sees fit, establish sub-committees
or make other arrangements to assist it in the performance of its functions.
A Secretariat will be provided by the Prime Minister's Department.
Awards will be announced by the Prime Minister on the
recommendation of the Standing Committee.
Apt) ica tions.:
1. Applications will be invited by the Committee from
Australian or U. K. citizens who have completed a
Ph. D., or have obtained equivalent qualifications,
in one of the physical or biological sciences. For
the award of the Fellowships, physical and biological
sciences will be deemed to include mathematics and
the scientific aspects of statistics, engineering,
metallurgy, agriculture and medicine.
2. Applicants should be not more than 30 years of age.
( In exceptional circumstances, an older applicant may
be considered.)
3. Normally an applicant should be sponsored by his
university and his application submitted by that
university on his behalf. An applicant should
therefore submit his application to the Registrar
of the University at which his higher qualifications
were obtained. If the university elects to sponsor
the application, it will forward it to the Queen
Elizabeth II Fellowships Committee with appropriate
endorsement. If in any case it is appropriate for
the application to be sponsored by a scientific
institution at which he has undertaken research, the
application may be made through that institution. 
-2
4. An application should state the general nature and scope
of the research which the applicant wishes to undertake
and may be supported by copies of scientific or other
papers which the applicant has published or which are in
the course of publication.
Where an applicant indicates the Australian university
or scientific institution at which he wishes the Fellowship
to be tenable, the Queen Elizabeth Fellowships
Committee will require an indication on the part of the
university or institution that in the event of an award it
will be ready to accommodate the Fellow and accept
responsibility for such supervision of hfis projected work
as is necessary and for disbursing, on behalf of the
Commonwealth, stipend and other payments associated with
the Fellowship. The Committee will stand ready to help
where necessary to secure suitable placement for successful
applicants.
6. The applicant shall arrange for three referees to furnish
statements to the Committee in support of his application.
7. Applica-tions should be lodged with the Secretary of the
Queen Elizabeth Fellowships Committee, Prime Minister's
Department, Canberra. Dates for the lodging of applications
and for the announcement of awards will be determined from
time to time by the Standing Committee,
8. Each successful applicant will be required to sign an
u~ dertaking to accept and observe the conditions on which
his Fellowship is to be held.
Conditions: 1. For the time being, Fellowships will carry a stipend at
the rate of œ 22,500 per annum. In special cases where the
post-graduate experience of a Fellow would justify it, the
Fellowships Committee may approve a higher stipend up to a
maximum rate of œ E3.000 per annum. Dependants' allowances
will also be paid on the basis of œ. 250 per annum for a wife
and œ 2100 per annum in respect of each child under 16 years
of age.
2. Where a Fellowship is awarded to an overseas resident, the
Commonwealth will meet the cost of tourist air fares, including
an agreed luggage allowance, for the Fellow and his family to
Australia and return on completion of the Llowship. In the
case of an award to an Australian resident, the Commonwealth
will meet any reasonable transfer expenses for the Fellow and
his family which may be involved in undertaking the Fellowship.
3. An allowance at the rate of œ. 500 per annum will be paid to
the University or scientific institution where a Fellowship
is tenable in recognition of expenses which may be incurred
by the University or scientific institution incidental to a
Fellow's research work. Any reimbursement of expenses to a
Fellow underthis head will be at the discretion of the
institution in which the Fellow is working.
4. The Commonwealth will make a contribution of up to 10% A of the
annual stipend towards a Fellow's superannuation provisions
under F. S. S. U. or equivalent arrangements.
A Fellow will normally be expected to take up duty within six
months of the announcement of the award and will be entitled
to payment of stipend and allowances as from the date on which
he takes up duty. 
3
6 A Fellow shall devote his whole time to the specified
research and may not accept any additional appointment
or emolument without the approval of the Standing
Committee and the University or scientific institution
concerned. A limited amount of time, however, may with
the approval of the Committee be spent in delivering an
advanced course of lectures.
7. At the end of his first year's research, a Fellow will be
required to report to the Standing Committee as to the
progress of his work. The Committee will also receive a
report from the Head of the Department in which the Fellow
is working. If the Committee is of the opinion that the
Fellow has not made good use of his opportunities, it may
at its absolute discretion terminate the Fellowship.
8. At the end of the tenure of a Fellowship, a Fellow will
submit to the Committee a complete report on the research
carried out.
9. A Fellow will be expected to conform to such of the
regulations ( including disciplinary provisions) of the
University or scientific institution in which he is
holding the Fellowship as are applicable to him and the
Committee may terminate his Fellowship if he fails to
conform.
A Fellow shall not be entitled to relinquish his Fellowship
except on and subject to such conditions as are determined
by the Committee.
Prime Minister's Office,
CANBERRA. A. C. T. 



EMBARGO: NOT TO BE CABLED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE
6 P. M. E. S. T. FRIDAY, 25TH OCTOBER, 1963
FOR PRESS P2M. o. 85/ 1963
VISIT OF HElR MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH THE
QUEEN MOTHER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister announced in Canberra today
that Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother had accepted
the following itinerary for her visit to Australia next year
which is primarily for the purpose of opening the Third
Adelaide Festival of Arts
Friday, 28th February Afternoon
Tuesday, 3rd March
Morning
Thursday, 5th March
Afternoon:
Saturday, 7th March
Morning
Monday, 16th March
After Dinner Arrive at Canberra by air
from New Zealand
Engagements in Canberra.
Leave Canberra by air for Hobart.
Engagements in Tasmania
Leave Burnie by H. M. Y. BRITANNIA
for Adelaide
Arrive at Port Adelaide
Engagements in South Australia.
Leave Port Adelaide by H. M. Y.
BRITANNIA for journey to
Fremantle.
En route to Fremantle H. M. Y. BRITANNIA will
anchor off Esperance, Albany and Bunbury to
enable Her Majesty to make brief calls ashore.
Monday, 23rd March
Morning
Wednesdayq 25th March
Afternoon Arrive at Fremantle
Engagements in Perth
Depart from Perth by air for
London.
The Prime Minister also said that a programme of
engagements is now being prepared for Queen Elizabeth's
Australian visit and that an announcement of these details
would have to wait until the proposals have been referred to
and accepted by Her Majesty.
CANB ERRA, October, 1963. 



63/ 138
TELEVISION INTERVIEW ON ATN-7 BETWEEN THE
PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT
MENZIES AND MR. RICHAIRD CROLL, ON SUNDAY,
27TH OCTOBER, 1963
MR. CROLL Sir Robert, coming right down to tin tacks, you are
having an election now, are you not, because you feel you
will win?
SIR ROBERT Well, I hope I'll win. That's not the only reason
for having an election, but it is a very good one,
MR. CROLL You said last week that you thought you might lose
eighteen months ago. Do you feel possibly you might have lost
in a year's time?
SIR ROBERT Well, nobody can look ahead for a year. All sorts
of things can happen in a year with a Government that has a
majority of one,
MR. CROLL Would one of the things that might happen, Sir, in
the year be a credit squeeze?
SIR ROBERT I don't think so. In fact, I'm quite sure it won't.
* MR. CROLL A number of economists and Mr, Calwell as well have
said they feel it will happen, Do you feel that there are
boom conditions at present?
SIR ROBERT No, but I think the conditions are good, that they
are improving. I don't expect them to reach boom conditions
at all. After all, we have all learned a good deal from past
experience.
MR. CROLL This is suppositional, Sir~: If they did, would you
hesitate in putting a credit squeeze on again?
WSIR ROBERT I don't answer hypothetical questions of that kind
because of course, you see, the moment I said " Yes" and I
don't say " Yes It would be said: " There you are". I don't
contemplate that there is any real possibility of anything
that could be called a credit squeeze. It sorry to hear
that Mr. Calwell keeps on repeating this because the right
way to create uncertainty in the country is to make that kind
of statement.
MR. CROLL Now, Sir, idoubtedly the employment position is
much better and the economy is more buoyant. You said last
week this was due to your wise considerations, but do you
feel since it took three years this is likely to have occurred
automa tically?
PRIME MINISTER I dont think so. I think that all policies
take a long time to work out. In fact, you have put your
finger right on the spot. If a Government wants to have
long-term policies and see their working-out for the good
of the country, it must have a proper majority. That's why
I have said so far as I am concerned in this election, I want
a good working majority myself or I want to see the Labour
Party have one. I don't want to see any Government in
Australia moving along carefully on a precipice because that
is inconsistent with long-term planning and long-term policy. / 2 
2-
MR. CROLL Sir, you said that your Government's activities
brought the country back to a state of prosperity that it
now enjoys.
SIR R0OBERT I didn't say that was the only thing.
MR. CROTLL-Would you say that some of these policies, Sir, were
Labour policies that you put into effect?
SIR ROBERT W~ ell, don't ask me to define what is a Labour
policy, because I must tell you, as you know, that the Labour
policy over the last five years has included everything in
heaven or on earth. They've had a go at all things. They've
been on every band wagon and so who am I to say that some
policy of mine isntt some policy that at some time they have
advocated. I wouldntt dream of it. I'm too busy attending
to my owm.
MR. CROLL Becoming more specific, Sir, some of the Labour
policies put forward in the 1961 election.
SIR ROBERT No, I think there has been a great misapprehension
about that, I don't think there is any real comparison, to
say the policies they put forward in 1961 were the policies
we were adopting in 1962. They had a superficial resemblance.
They are quite different in fact,
0 MR. CROLL In February, 1962, you decided on special State
unemployment grants9 housing grants, increased Government
spending, extra endowment tax rebates, motor vehicle sales
tax reductions. Now wouldn't you say, Sir, that they do
follow the 1961 election policies put frward by the Labour
Party?
SIR ROBERT I don't think so. As I tell you, who am I to pick
out from Labour policies what is the policy and what isn't.
Why the other day I think Mr, Calwell was saying very heartily
that the Labour Party would increase the Defence expenditure.
This is marvellous. This has all the charm of novelty. But
I have only to go back to Dr. Evatt to find that he wanted to
reduce the then Defence vote by œ C1+ OM. So what?
MR. CROLL But, Sir didn't you say yourself to Mr, Calwell
W the other day " Let's not go back to 1956." 1
SIR ROBERT Did I?
MR. CROLL I believe so. You were reported as saying that,
SIR ROBERT Thatts a different thing. I think he asked me
whether I remembered some particular statement in 1956. 1
dont undertake to remember everything I said.
MR. CROLL Sir, coming to what Mr. Calwell said about Malaysia
in last week's interview on this station. Last Sunday, Mr,
Calwell said he would defend Malaysia under an emergency
situation but in long terms they wanted an agreement, a
treaty. Do you feel that this is unfair?
SIR ROBERT I feel that this is, of course, a complete change
of front on his part.
MR. CROLL But do you feel it is unfair, Sir?
SIR ROBERT No what he's doing there is, in the first place,
lining up for the first time with what I said, that if
Malaysia were attacked so that its independence was threatened,
we would join with Great Britain in defending Malaysia. 
-3
SIR ROBERT
( Contd.)
MR. CROLL
treaty arHe didn't say " yes" to that when I made the statement
in the House, I gather from you that he has now said
" Yes" to it. If so, thatts a groat advance in his
thinking. The second thing that he said in the House
that he has now repeated is that he wants a treaty, a
mutual treaty. Now, what does that mean? A treaty
with Malaysia, under which we help Malaysia and
Malaysia helps us, presumably a military alliance,
He knows as well as I do and as well as you do that
Malaysia will not make a military alliance-it
insists upon being an unaligned country, Its attitude
in that respect is just like the attitude of India.
It is no use asking an unaligned country to abandon its
most important national policy just to make a treaty
with us.
On the other hand, Sir, if Malaysia would make a
with you, would you accept it?
SIR ROBERT Yes. I regard that of all the academic questions
I have ever heard, the most acaaemic because Malqsia won't*
MR. CROLL But is there any reason why we should commit troops
to Malaysia if she won't make a treaty with us?
SIR ROBERT Every reason because the existence of Malaysia is,
I think, of very great importance to us. Very great. The
defence of Australia for a start, is not to be conducted on
the Australian coastline, It is very important tltat there
should be a strong, powerful, independent country lying across
that part of the world. Very important.
MR. CROLL So drawing these threads together it means then
that both parties would go to the help of Malaysia in an
emergency-both parties would accept a treaty if it were
offered the only difference being that you feel Malaysia
wouldn't offer a treaty whereas Mr. Oalwell would like to
push for a treaty.
SIR ROBERT Well I am sorry to have to correct a great deal
of that, You tell me now that both parties will go to the
defence of Malaysia that has never been said in the House
either by Mr. Calwell or any of his members. That's point
No. 1.
MR. CROLL Did he not say it in his speech in September, Sir?
SIR ROBERT No he did not. Point No. 2 I say I am not
going to ask Malaysia for a treaty because I am not going to
ask for the impossi~ le. I know a great deal about the Malaysian
policy. I know the views of the Tunkn and I know that it is
just not on, and to say we are prepared to make a treaty when
you can't get one is, I think, misleading. So that our
positions are not identical. Mr. Calwell in the House said,
" The condition of our going to the help of Malaysia is a
treaty." That's a very different matter.
MR. CROLL I thought that Mr. Calwell in the House, Sir, said
that he would go to the help of Malaysia in an emergency
They thought it was a very important thing, However, the~ y had
amended their election platform as it
SIR ROBERT He said this to you last week. He didn't say it
in the House. .11+ 
MR* CROLL I was merely thinking of my reading through of his
remarks in the House on that date.
SIR ROBERT I read them through with loving cadre to find out
whether he had ever said that. No.
MR. CROLL Sire passing on to the Naval Communications Base.
Mr. Caiwell said that the Labour Government wants joint
control. Now, would you say this is unfair?
SIR ROBERT I would say that this is wrong. First of all, the
United States of America would not have agreed to establish
this base at its own cost and it is a very very expensive
one, running into scores of millions. The United States would
nthave been prepared to do that if it had if it had been at
the price of joint control; that is to say, not consultationbecause
we have always agreed about that, but a joint control
in the sense that both parties would have to consult each
other before messages should be sent out in time of war.
For all I know, both parties should be able to have a censorship
of the kind of message sent out. Now this, of course,
is unworkable,
MR. CROLL And yet Mr, Calwell says that in his talks in
America, the Defence chiefs are quite willing to renegotiate
the treaty,
SIR ROBERT Well, I understood that he said that. I have no
evidence of it.
MR. CROLL You disbelieve his words, do you?
SIR ROB3ERT Well I do, quite frankly. You first of all, of
course, have to define " Defence chiefs". I've known people
who have had an earnest yarn with a serjeant-major dox-m the
street and who then can. give you the military view. We deal
with the American Administration.
MR. CROLL If the American Administration did grant joint
control, would you accept it?
SIR ROBERT Certainly,
MR. CROLL Then, you feel it would be better for us to have
joint control?
SIR ROBERT No, I do not.
MR. CROLL W-lell,
SIR ROBERT I do not. If they want it, wetll have it, but
what you have got to get into your mind is if that had been
the condition, we wouldn't have this state. Neither would
I offer joint control in their place. They are using this
as a signalling station. They are spending a vast mass of
money on it. They are the people who are the sheet anchor
of our defence in the event of a war, Why should they put
themselves at the mercy of a veto by an Australian Government?
MR. CRL-Why then, Sir, was not all this put in the agreement?
SIR ROBERT All what put in the agreement?
MR. CROLL That they want sole control, 015 
SIR ROBERT But this is in the agreement.
MR. CROLL -~ Sole control?
SIR ROBERT Yes. The whole terms of' the agreement are quite
elaborate.
MR. CROLL The whole terms of' the agreement do they not say
that there is no necessity for sole control. In fact, do they
not say that.....
SIR ROBERT My dear boy, an agreement is not an argument. It
is a document, a legal document, and the agreement excludes
joint control, and there it is. If the Opposition comes in
and wants to renegotiate this contract, very well, it will.
MR. CROLL This is once again a case in which Mr. Calwell was
not telling the truth in a statement in the House?
SIR ROBERT Look I don't use language of' that kind, I am not
here to call anytody a liar, I am just stating what I know
because I deal at the administrative level, not with some
vague person described as a Defence authority or something
O moefn tt haatn d sober t.. n g Tihna tO piposs itthei ond. ifference between being in Govern-
MR. CROLL Your statement is at variance then with Mr, Calwell's?
SIR ROB3ERT Definitely.
MR. CROLL Passing on to defence, Sir and the new bombers
that have just been ordered, why is it that they took so long
when Mr. Osborne, your Air Minister in 1960, said that they
were of immediate importance then?
SIR ROB3ERT Well, could I answer that question by putting
this to you. There is a great argument going on at present
in some quarters that we should hove taken the TSR-2, whereas
we have in fact taken the TFX. If we had dealt with this
matter in 1960, it wouldn't have accelerated the result because
both the TSR-2 and the TFX are still on the drawing board and
0 have been for a considerable period of time, What would we
have got in 1960? You dontt go along and buy aircraft ( I
only wish you could) off the shelf good ones, up-to-date
ones,
MR. CROLL Sir, it has been said that the Canberra has been
obsolete since 194+ 9 Surely we could have got something that
was a little more up to date&amp;
SIR ROBERT I can see you are a great reader of Mr. Calwell
or perhaps of Mr. Whitlam. Let me tell you and tell everybody
else that the Canberra couldn't have been obsolete in 191+ 9
because the Canberra prototype flew for the first time in 1951
and I was in England and they asked me to go out to Biggin Hill
and christen it " Canberra". That was the first Canberra
1951. Now I might think that you are obsolete at the age
of one, but I wouldn't have thought you were obsolete at the
age of minus two or three years.
MR. CROLL Sir, might I make an amendment to that. Firstly,
I have been reading Mr. Colwell because this is a reply to
what Mr. Colwell said last week and secondly that was my
mistake because 194+ 9 should have read 1959 and Mr, Osborne
made his remarks in 1960. e / 6 
6-
SIR ROBERT Oh but you share the mistake because Mr. Caiwell
himself said tUat the Canberra was obsolete in 194+ 9, If the
position is that he made a trifling error of ten years, well
thatts a great weight off my mind,
MR. CROLL Sir, it doesn't make any difference to the fact
however, that three years have elapsed since it was decides.
that it should be of immediate importance and it is only weeks
before the election before something was done.
SIR ROBERT Wiell, I dontt agree with you that it is three
years since it was decided that it was of immediate importance.
A great discussion has been going on about this and expert
advice has changed from time to time. For a long period of
time we were told that Priority No. 1 should be the fighter
and we now, of course, find ourselves coming into possession
of the Mirage which is the best fighter, by common consent
in the world. Then we began some time ago to investigate Zhe
possibility of an ultimate replacement for the Canberra.
People talk about the Canberra as if it were obsolete. It
isn't. It is in a great deal of use in many countries of
the world but we said, " W4ell, now, we will consider whether
we can get a reconnaissance bomber which will be an effective
modern replacement, supersonic for the Canberra and we sent
a mission around the world monihs ago I announced it months
ago to make an evaluation, and as a matter of fact, I
brought with me this morning, by a piece of intelligent
anticipation*
MR. CROLL Sir I wonder if I might interrupt there because
the programme its nearly over.
SIR ROBERT ie-l l, I won't quote it.
MR. CROLL One fina), question and that is how much will the
new American bomber cost us?
SIR ROBERT The new American bomber will cost very very
considerably less than the TSR-2, on any modified terms
would have cost. The difference I am not at present allowed
to say the precise figure. I'll have to discuss with
Mr. Townliey when he comes back next week, but I can say
this, that the difference between the cost of the one and
the cost of the other so much favours the TFX with its much
bigger orders of course, that they give in America so
much favours It that no government could have accepted the
responsibility of spending the taidpayersl money except in
the purchase of the TFX.
MR. CROLL Thank you very much indeed, Sir Robert Menzies. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 86/ 1963
ELECTION CAMPAIGN ITINERARY 1963
Statement by the Prime Minister, Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister ( Sir Robert Menzies) today
released his itinerary for the forthcoming Election Campaign.
It is as follows
November
Tuesday, 12thPolicy Speech T. V. and Radio
All States 8.30 p. m.
Wednesday, 13th Kew City Hall Public Meeting
Thursday, 14th
Friday, 15th
Saturday, 16th
Sunday, 17th
Monday. 18th
Tuesday, 19th
Thursday, 21st
Friday, 22nd
Saturday, 23rd
Sunday, 24th
Monday, 25th Festival Hall,
Brisbane Public Meeting
Ashfield Town Public Meeting
' Hall 8 p. m.
8 p. m.
-8p. m.
Leave Sydney for Perth
In Perth
Forrest Place, Public Meeting
Perth Town Hall,
Adelaide Hobart Essendon
Dandenong Town Hall Public Meeting
Public Meeting
Women's Rally
Public Meeting
St. Charles Hall
Waverley7 NSWWomen's Rally 1 p. m.
1 p. m.
8 p. m.
3 p. m.
8 p. m.
2.30 p. m.
Sydney Brisbane City Youth Rally
Hall
Rockhampton
Tuesday, 26th Public Meeting
Oakleigh ( Vic.)
Town Hall Public Meeting
Wednesday, 27th Hall
Hornsby
Thursday, 28th Moonee Ponds
Town Hall Public Meeting
Public Meeting 1 p. m.
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
8 p. m.
Friday, 29thMelbourne
Saturday, 30th Melbourne( Polling Day)
In addition to the above items, the Prime Minister will make
a number of television appearances and radio broadcasts
throughout Australia.
CANBERRA, October, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P. M. Noo 8211963
AUST11ALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY COUNCIL o
Statement by the Prime-Minister, the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister announced in Canberra today the
names of members who have been appointed to serve on the
Council of' the Australian National University, In accordance
with the Australian National University Act appointments are
for a period of three years. The Act provides that twelve
members may be appointed to the Council by the Governor-General,
Those appointed are
Mr. Norman Cowper, CBE, Chairman, Angus and Robertson Ltd.
of Sydney.
Mr. John Evens, CBE, Commonwealth Parliamentary Draftsman,
of Canberra.
Mr, Warwick Fairfax, Chairman of John Fairfax Ltd.
of Sydney.
Mr. Herbert Goodes, CIE, Secretary of the Department of
Social Services, of Melbourne
Mr. Brian Hone, Headmaster, Church of England Grammar
School, Melbourne,
Mr. Peter Lawler, First Assistant Secretary, Prime
Minister's Department, Canberra.
Mr. Warren McDonald, CBE Chairman, Commonwealth Banking
6orporation, of Canberra,
Mr. Charles McGrath, Chairman and Managing Director of
Aepco Ltd., of Melbourne
Professor. Alexander Mitchell Deputy Vice-Chancellor of
the &amp;~ iversity of Sydney,
Sir Frank Richardson, Chairman and Managinf Director of
Cox Bros, ( Au st.) td., Melbourne.
Mr. Arthur Shakespeare, Managing Editor, " Canberra Times".
Sir Frederick White, Chairman, Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation, of Canberra.
CANBERRA, 31st October, 1963. 



EMBARGO : NOT TO EE PUBLISHED, BROADCA\ ST OR TELECAST BEFORE
6 P. M. EST, FRIDAY, 1ST NOVEMBER, 1963.
FOR PRESS: PaML No. 89/ 1963.
APPOINTMENT OF AUJSTRALIANI SECRETARY TO THE QUEEN
Statement by the Prime Minister? the Rt. Hon, Sir Robert Menzies
The following statement was released today in London
from Buckingham Palace
" IT IS ANNOUNCED FROM BUCKINGHAM PALACE THAT THE
QUEEN HAS APPOINTED VICE-ADMIRAL SIR ROY D04ILING AS
AUSTRALIAN SECRETARY TO THE QUEEN AND TO BE A MEMBER
OF HER MAJ-ESTYIS HOUSEHOLD."
Sir Roy Dowlingts appointment tns X Australian
Secretary to The Queen was welcomed in Canberra today by the
Prime Minister, The Prime Minister said that the appointment
was one of significance for Australia and would help to maintain
the close association that already existed between all the
members of the Royal Family and Australia. The appointment was
Her Majesty's own idea and he was delighted to fall in with it.
The Prime Minister congratulated Sir Roy on his appointment.
It was one which would give Sir Roy personal satisfaction following
on his similar appointment as Australian Secretary to The
Queen during the period of Her Majesty's last visit to Australia.
The Prime Minister said he expected Sir Roy's appointment
to be the forerunner of successive appointments of a
similar nature, In genoral, the appointments would be for
two-year periods. Sir Roy's appointment is for two years with
effect from 1st November, 1963. The Australian Secretary to
The Queen will be atVtached to the Governor-General's Household
and will maintain close contact with the Governor-General,
The main work of the Australian Secretary to The Queen
will be in connection with visits by Her Majesty or other mdembers
of the Royal Family to Australia. The Australian Secretary will
be brought into the planning of visits and may accompany any of
the Royal visitors during their visit. He will also be available
to assist the Governor-General in other matters which from time
to time the Governor-General may suggest.
The Prime Minister emphasised that the position of
Australian Secretary to The Queen does not have any formal place
in the constitutional arrongements as between The Queen, the
Governor-General and the Australian Government, and official
matters normally handled by the Governor-General's Office will
continue to be dealt with in this way. On the other hand, it
would be of great assistance to have the advice of the Australian
Secretary to Thoe Queen available to the Government on matters
affecting visits by members of the Royal Family,
Biographical note
Vice-Adiiiral Sir Roy Dowling, KCVQ, KBE, CD, DSO, retired
as Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee in 1961, having held
the position for two years. Prior to that he was First Naval
Member and Chief of the Naval Staff from 1955-1959, 
-2
Sir Roy was appointed as Australian Secretary to
The Queen for the period of Her Majesty's visit to Australia
in 1963 and was Director of the Royal Visit,
Sir Roy, now retired, and living in Canberra,
continues an active interest in Red Cross. He is at present
Chairman of the LA. C. T. Division of Red Cross.
CANBERRA, 1st November, 1963. 



FOREWJORD FOR SPECIAL JUBILEE ISSUE OF " IMPETUS",
MAGAZINE OF THE CHAMBER OF 11ANU1FACTUBES OF N~ EW
SOUTH WALES.
The strength of Its manufacturing industry is one
of the yardsticks by which a nation measures its progress
and in this respect Australia can count itself fortunate,
for per capita we are one of the world's most higrhly
industrialised countries.
Growing up beside the great primary indutries
which laid the first foundations of national development,
the manufacturing industries have added a rich diversity
to our society ; Ai have given invaluable balance to the
economy, The wide spread of employment which they give and
the range and volume of their output make us less vuirarable
to overseas market fluctuations than we used to be. A
nation's strength and stability depend upon such things.
The Associated Chambers of Manufactures of
Australia have had an effective hand in this gro-Ath for
they have not only sought to stimulate it, but to give it
purpose and direction. I am pleased therefore, on the
occasion of your 60th birthd1ay, to ofler my congratulations
on past achievements and to express good wishes for the
future. R. G. MENZIES
PiilIE MINIOTER
CANBERRA, 1st November, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 88/ 1063
JUBILEE OF ANZAC
Statement by the Prime Minister,-the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menizies
The Commonwealth Government has decided to mark
the Jubilee of the landing at Gallipoli on April 25th, 1915,
by the inauguration of a ceremonial way leading from a point
near the shores of Lake Burley Griffin up to the Australian
War Memorial in Canberra.
" I believe all Australians and certainly the
ex-service organizations in each State will wish to emphasise
this outstanding event in our history," said Sir Robert,
" but I am sure the Australian people would wish the Commonwealth
Government to make a special gesture worthy of the
occasion. The Returned Servicemen's League had suggested
that Anzac Parade should be developed for this purpose, and
the Government had come to the conclusion that this was a
highly suitable idea."
The Prime Minister said that in the long-term
planning of Canberra~ an opportunity had been provided for
the development at the right time of a coremonialvay of
high quality. The Government believes it is now appropriate
to go forward with the construction of this feature, which
will provide the setting for important processions, remembrance
marches and other ceremonies which from time to time will be
associated with facets of Australian history, and particularly
our military history.
Planning for the ceremonial way will call for
the substantial re-development of the existing landscape, With
provision for Australian trees of selected species, with some
representative flora from New Zealand, The ceremonial way
will be paved and can be ornarmented subsequently by statuary
and other sculptural works. Tie total landscape will form
part of the design of the central axis arourdwhich the central
areas of the nationa,. l capital have been planned, and will
finally establish the character of these areas. The monumental
way would stand and be developed over generations as a memorial
of enduring quality. It is proposed that all development works establishing
the character of this ceremonial way will have been completed
by the 50th Anniversary of the landing at Gallipoli in April,
1965. CANBERRA, 1st November, 1963. 



OR PRESS, P. M. 2o/ 1963
FURTHER PAYMENT OF œ 16.10.0 TO FOR~ MER PRISONERS
OF WAR OF THE JAPANESE
Statement by the-Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzie õ
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies today
announced that a final payment of V16.10.0 each would be paid
to former Australian prisoners of war of the Japanese from the
proceeds of realisation of Japanese assets in accordance with
the Peace Treaty with Japan.
In 1952, the Government decided that the proceeds
of realisation of Japanese assets in Australia should be
distributed equally among former prisoners of war of the Japanese,
and a distribution of œ-32 was made, During 1955, the Japanese
Government, in settlement of its obligations under Article 16
of the Peace Treaty paid the sum of Iv sterling to the
International Commi~ tee of the Red Cross in Geneva. Australials
share of these moneys together with the proceeds of the sale of
the Burma-Siam railway and minor amounts from other sources
enabled a second distribution of œ C54 to each ex-prisoner of war
to be made in 1956-7.
A further and final payment has now been received
from the International Committee of the Red Cross and we have
decided that this together with the remainder of the moneys
expected to become available from the realisation of Japanese
assets in Australia, should also be distributed equally between
former prisoners of war, The amount of this distribution will
be œ 16.10.0 per person.
As in the case of former distributions, where a.
prisoner of war has died, either during captivity or since his
release, payment will be made to a dependant or where there is
no dependant to such other person as is entitled toit because
of a particular relationship with the deceased.
A letter containing particulars regarding payment
and a form for completion and return will be sent to the last
recorded address of persons who shared in the previous
distributions or to any new address as may be notified to the
appropriate service Department, Those who have not participated
in previous distributions but consider themselves eligible to
share in the current distribution should contact the relevant
service Department. It is hoped that most of the payments will be made
before Christmas 1963, but this will be possible only if forms
are completed ani returned promptly.
CANBERRA, November, 1963. 


Archbishop Mannix, as I met him and knew him, was a most remarkable man. He had great intellectual power, marked courage, and a power of persuasive speech which I have never known surpassed. He had become a dignified and almost legendary figure, not only in his own community, but among the people generally.
He will be greatly missed, and his memory will be deeply respected.
CANBERRA,6th November, 1963,


The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, will&nbsp;record his policy speech for television and radio at GTV&nbsp;Channel 9 studios tonight.
Pre-recording will, for the first time in&nbsp;Australian political history, permit voters simultaneously&nbsp;throughout Australia to&nbsp;see or hear a leader delivering his&nbsp;party's policy. It will be the first Australian-wide TV programme of any kind.
The Prime Minister will address an audience&nbsp;of some 300 of his supporters from the electorate of Kooyong&nbsp;and at least 12 members of the Federal Ministry, including&nbsp;the Leader of the Country Party, Mr McEwen, and the Federal Treasurer, Mr. Holt.
Admission by invitation to the recording session is designed to preserve the necessary secrecy of the policy speeceh until it has been distributed to all States for transmission by television and radio stations at 8.30 p.m. on Tuesday, November 12.
The decision to pre-record the policy speech, made soon after the announcement of the election date reflects the Prime Minister's wish that&nbsp;T.V. viewers from Townville round to Perth should have equal opportunity with viewers in New South Wales and Victoria to hear at first hand his Government's proposals for the future.
Thirteen national TV stations in city and country areas and 20 commercial stations in all States will carry the telecast. In addition., the ABC No. 1 network of metropolitan radio stations and the No. 3 network of regional stations and practically all metropolitan and country commercial radio stations will also participate. National short wave stations in Australia and the Port Moresby local and short wave stations will also broadcast the speech.
Estimates by television and broadcasting authorities&nbsp;place the possible viewing and listening audience at upwards&nbsp;of five million people.
The Prime Minister's speech which was completed&nbsp;in Canberra on Wednesday after having&nbsp;been considered by the&nbsp;Federal Ministry on Monday, will take forty minutes&nbsp;to deliver.
MELBOURNE,8th November, 1963.
&nbsp;


Federal Election, 1963
Policy Speech of the Prime Minister (the Right Hon.Sir Robert Menzies, K.T., C.H., Q.C., M.P.), delivered in Melbourne on November 12, 1963.
FULL TEXT OF THE SPEECH
This is no ordinary election. It comes at a time when the Government has precariously and unexpectedly survived by one vote for two years. It comes at a tune when turbulence and international tension exist nearer to our frontiers than ever before except during the last war; when strength is needed in the voice of Australia; when our country cannot afford to compel its Government to spend a lot of time, week by week, on the problem of domestic political survival.
Why did I seek a dissolution? I have already given you the greatest reason. Nobody knows quite as well as I do how incredibly difficult living on a knife-edge is, but, any-how, there will be a poll on November 30th and on that day you will vote about who is to be in government, and not about whether your choice should have been postponed for some months. -The Opposition has, in these last two precarious years, five times tried, in Parliament, to defeat us and force an election, and has each time failed narrowly. It can scarcely complain now at having an election which it so eagerly sought.
We address you with pride in the achievements of the past fourteen years and with confidence in the future. We recall how marvellously this nation has progressed; what great structures have been built, or are in the building, upon a firm foundation.
That no government can live on its past record is true. Yet our future growth is largely determined by the quality of what has already been done. A good future cannot easily be the projection of a bad or incompetent past. Any employer has good reason to examine the record of a prospective employee. At an election, you are the employers!
There have, as in all other countries, been fluctuations in our fortunes; but the strong general trend has been upwards. Those who seek to make your flesh creep with foolish and false talk of another "credit squeeze" must assume that there is such a violent upsurge in economic activity as will produce an inflationary boom.
We do not anticipate any such state of affairs.
As a non-Socialist Government, we do not think that all good causes can be served only by Government orders and controls. We believe that the highest good for the nation can be achieved by wise co-operation between Gov-ernment and people. With that co-operation, booms can be avoided and extraordinary measures be unnecessary.
The choice at this election is particularly important for those of you who are under 35. You have, as voters, never known a Socialist Labour Government at Canberra, and some of you may therefore be tempted to fall for the old cry — "It's time for a change!" — even though it would be a change back to the very people who were dismissed in 1949.
Now, change is a good thing, so long as it is a change for the better! Those who recall the Labour Party Socialist era of restrictions, attempted nationalisation, and the dis-couragement of enterprise which ended in December, 1949, will not need to be reminded that a Liberal-Country Party&nbsp; Government at Canberra has helped to create a revolutionary change in the economic climate, in production, in the growth of trade with the world, in living standards, in social ser-vices, in provisions for health, in the free choice of employ-ment — and large and growing employment at that in population growth, in large savings and large industrial investment, in increasing educational opportunities, in national development credit, and security. To compare Australia today, under a free enterprise Government, with the Australia of fourteen years ago is to pinpoint the most dramatic change and growth to be recorded anywhere in the world.
As electors you have a great chance to make a change, not by turning away from a sound and growing prosperity to new and almost hysterical experiments carried out under the close control of Labour's outside executive —not elected by you but by giving to the Government a working majority. That is the electoral change that is needed. An almost equally divided National Parliament is no proper foundation for a stable and positive and authoritative Gov-ernment.
When I say "authoritative", we are not seeking some dictatorial authority over you. Heaven forbid. We leave that to the Socialists, whose whole doctrine subordinates the individual to the State. Socialism is, in fact, both re-pressive and reactionary. "Authority" in an Australian Government is what it needs to have when it is negotiating with other countries, whether on political arrangements, or trade, or military alliances, or arrangements for the common security. It can derive that authority only from you.
And, speaking of trade, don't forget that, under Trade Treaties negotiated by us, Japan . has become an immense customer for our primary exports. Our rural industries would have been in great difficulties otherwise. Yet Labour voted to a man against the Japanese Trade Treaty.
&nbsp;
FOREIGN POLICY
We want growth and progress and security at home. For that purpose we need security abroad. We want friends and a defence policy which gets us strength and a true willingness and capacity to co-operate with our friends in the defence of the common security.
It was my Government which negotiated the ANZUS pact with the U.S.A. and New Zealand. It is of vital im-portance. To take an example, we have made it clear that we will defend Papua-New Guinea against attack, as if it were part of the Australian mainland. That promise of ours is, as a result of ANZUS, completely backed by the United States.
Yet the A.L.P. has never been enthusiastic about ANZUS. Its left-wingers, who have to be placated and compromised with, and who might very well dominate it in the next three years, are very uncritical of "Communist Imperialism", which the world knows to be a threatening reality.
We helped to negotiate SEATO.
We sent Australian forces to Malaya as part of a Commonwealth Strategic Reserve under SEATO. The Opposition front-seat spokesmen in Parliament and the out-side back-seat drivers—the 36 men—were opposed to having our troops in Malaya. Mr. Calwell now says, I think, that he does not object; but all he says is subject to his outside Federal Executive, whose orders bind him, and whose President has recently re-affirmed Labour's objec-tions. Now that Malaya has expanded into Malaysia, what do we find? My Government has made an express state-ment that we will join with Great Britain and Malaysia herself to resist armed attack upon the political independence and national integrity of Malaysia. Labour in Parliament guardedly supported "the concept" of Malaysia, but pro-ceeded to attach terms to any military support which they know to be unacceptable to Malaysia.
The pledge we have given has already had a marked effect among our neighbours and our allies. It is essential that they should know, as a result of this election, whether the Australian people stand behind our clear-cut statement, or prefer the ambiguous, uncertain, equivocating, fluctuating and almost mumbling attitude of our opponents.
There is a similar conflict about the establishment of the American Naval Signalling Station at North West Cape in Western Australia. When Labour's outside governing body, the 36, (whom you are being asked to vote into power on polling day) met at Canberra to consider this matter, it went within two votes of opposing the American pro-posal outright. The switch of one vote would have warned the Americans off. Finally, a grudging approval was given, but on terms as to control which, as is well known, the Americans were not prepared to accept. You must resolve these issues. It is vital that Australia's foreign policy and relations with foreign powers should be clear and steady, and that the world should know that they are managed by a government which has a clear mandate from the Australian people.
That is what we are asking for. That, above all, is why we are having an election.
There is another grave matter. Labour proposes to negotiate a nuclear-free zone South of the Equator, with a prohibition of the storing or deployment of nuclear weapons in that area. This is a suicidal proposal. If adopted in the absence of a general world disarmament which effectively included the Communist powers, it would certainly imperil the existence of both SEATO and ANZUS. Great Britain and the U.S.A. are our allies in SEATO, and the U.S.A. in ANZUS. Each is a nuclear power. The capacity of the United States, in particular, to use nuclear weapons has suc-cessfully deterred the Communist aggressors in the past, and has thereby saved the free world. The Soviet Union has great nuclear power: we may be sure that Communist China will have it before long. Both are North of the Equator; but nowadays nuclear weapons could be delivered anywhere in the world. It follows that Labour's proposals, if suc-cessful, would seek to prevent our two nuclear-powered allies from firing nuclear weapons from any point South of the Equator, while leaving the Communists free to fire into this zone without resistance!
I was one of the Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London who declared for the ending of nuclear-testing, and carried a resolution against the extension of nuclear weapon capacity to nations not then possessing them. We do not want to increase the area of risk, or entrust great weapons of destruction to small minds or small hands. But if the Communists strike and world war comes, it will, for as far ahead as we can reasonably see, come with nuclear weapons. Australia's security would be at stake.
Would you wish us, now, to contract ourselves out of nuclear counter-attack from the Indian Ocean or South West Pacific, or for that matter from Australian territory? To do so would be cruelly to handicap our allies and disas-trously to aid and abet our enemies. Do you seriously think that any nuclear power would wish to continue to be our ally on such terms? That is why, clearly looked at, Labour policy is clearly one of suicide, and a lonely suicide at that.
DEFENCE
We present to you a notable Defence record. Our latest air force decision rounds off the largest and most ambitious re-equipment programme in the peace-time history, of Australia.
Our policy is — (a) to provide highly mobile, modern, and well-equipped forces for our defence;
(b)
to maintain those forces, in both quality and quan-tity, in such shape as to enable us to co-operate with our SEATO and ANZUS partners, to theji satisfaction and our own;
(c) to provide, in Australia, at Woomera and in Supply scientific and technical and production backing.
We know that, in a war for survival, we would not be fight-ing alone. We have alliances with great powers. But, equally, we are not so self-centred as to think that these alliances confer on us rights, but no duties. We must stand by our allies if they are to stand by us.
Australia is ready and able to meet its international commitments.
I will not burden you with a detailed account of our greatly extended defence programme. But, in case our opponents, who have suddenly discovered an interest in Defence for purposes of this election, have tempted you to believe that our defences are inadequate or obsolete, I mention just a few highlights.
The Royal Australian Navy is in process of securing three of the most modern missile-carrying destroyers in the world, plus a submarine force, to be added to an aircraft carrier, a converted troop-carrier, and the normal escort andanti-submarine destroyers and smaller craft.
The Army has been re-organised and is being expanded for mobility, speedy availability, and modem equipment, including Army co-operation aircraft of the very latest type. The valuable work of the C.M.F. will have our special attention.
In the Air Force, we had previously made and put into service the Canberra reconnaissance-bomber which is still in good service in many other parts of the free world. We adapted, produced, and put into service the Sabre jet fighter, still engaged in many places. These aircraft are far from obsolete. But the Government has actively followed the stream of events. We already have, to make the mobility of our forces a reality, the world's best transport plane, the Hercules. We have, for seaward reconnaissance, the best plane of its type, the Neptune. We are re-equipping our fighter squadrons with a large number of Mirage fighters.
Our advice is that they are superior to any world competitor. And now we have arranged, on most favourable terms of cost and delivery, to obtain the American TFX recon-naissance bomber, which our Air Force experts, after extended investigations overseas, declared to be "the ideal choice for the R.A.A.F."
' i.e. the best for our purposes, our
security, and the men who will fly them.
We can look our allies in the face with justice, and have no temptation to appease our enemies.
ECONOMIC POLICY
The objectives of the Government's Economic Policy are a high rate of economic and population growth with full employment, increasing productivity, rising standards of living, external solvency, and stability of costs and prices.
They are being successfully achieved.
Indeed, our opponents have realised that their prophecies of a depression, unemployment and gloom have been proved false.
Having realised that they cannot frighten you, they have now decided to try, rather offensively, to buy you.
They have made a series of irresponsible bids which would add hundreds of millions to the money in circulation without in. any way increasing or cheapening production or 10
supply. In short, they are offering you an inflationary boom
of unprecedented virulence.
Tonight I will announce some valuable items of policy affecting both metropolitan and rural people. They are all practical. Unlike the Opposition, we know, from much information and experience, what we can perform, with ad-
vantage to the people and without hindering the perform-ance of that general policy.
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
Under us, the process of development is getting faster and faster as time goes on. In the last three years, develop-mental expenditure by the Commonwealth in the States and Territories was about double what it was in the three years which ended in 1958. This is the story of progress building
on progress.
The contributing factors in Australian growth have been the achievement of remarkable stability in prices and costs, a high national credit at home and abroad, a buoyant loan market, high and rising employment, a growing pro-gramme of immigration, great business and manufacturing expansion, a remarkable increase in rural production, the vital facts that Australians believe in themselves, and that
the rest of the world believes in us too.
The rate of development is progressive; greater at the end of our fourteen years of office than ever before. Having achieved a long period of stabilised prices and costs, we want to avoid any new cost-price spiral. But we will press
on with growth in no timid or faint-hearted way. We believe, and confidently expect that over the next five years, given good government, growth should at least equal
a total increase of 25% in the Gross National Product, in terms of constant prices.
11
r -
Growth in all its forms, in public resources, in private
business development, in rural production, in the promotion of the export trade, in widening opportunities for indi-viduals, is the prime objective of our policies.
In the very hey-day of our progress, the Australian Labour Party asks you to dismiss us; to commit the national fortunes to the hands of its Members of Parliament and the famous outside body, thirty-six "faceless men", whose quali-fications are unknown, who have no elected responsibility to
you. Do you feel tempted? Why?
Would you really believe that a Calwell Government would raise the credit of government at home or abroad? Or that Mr. Calwell's astronomical promises of hundreds of millions added to the existing supply can be performed
without raising the levels of prices and costs and taxes? Or that the Socialists will encourage the growth of corn-petitive free enterprise? Or that the enhanced bureaucracy of a Socialist Administration will stimulate production at a
bearable cost level? Or improve that standing and relation-ship with the great free powers which means so much to our external security and therefore to our peaceful domestic growth?
If you admit that you cannot believe these things, you must agree that our opponents are, by offering you everything that anybody has ever asked for, trying to per-suade you to gamble recklessly with the prosperity and pro-
gress and safety of a splendidly growing nation.
NORTHERN DEVELOPMENT
The development of Northern Australia is of great im-portance to all of us. Four authorities are directly in-volved — the States of Queensland and Western Australia, the Northern Territory Administration, and the Common-
12
wealth. Between them, a great deal has been done, with
very heavy Commonwealth subsidies. From irrigation schemes on the Ord River, beef roads and harbour works in Western Australia, to great mineral developments, beef roads, Mt. Isa railway reconstruction, and the commence-
ment of the close use of the Brigalow country in Queens-land, there is a buzz of activity. We are entering a phase of northern development more exciting than ever before.
How should this growth be promoted?
It has been proposed by some thoughtful people that some special commission or authority should be established and that it should, so to speak, have the problem handed over to it. There have been suggestions about using the famous Snowy Mountains Authority.
What these proposals overlook is that all government development work costs money — much money and that Governments are accountable to the taxpayers for the money they spend. It follows that no government can, by giving authority to some outside body, abandon control over
its own budget. That expert bodies can do great work in carrying out works approved by governments and parlia-ments is clear; the record of the Snowy Mountains Authority, a brilliantly competent executive body, working under a
specific vote out of the Commonwealth Budget, shows this.
The method we have employed in recent years has been to confer with the State concerned, to discuss the value and priority of some development work, and then to make Commonwealth-State agreements for the carrying out of
specific undertakings. This method has undoubtedly worked very well in practice. Under it, my own Government is find-ing millions of pounds for matters now proceeding in the two States and the Territory. We have no doubt that this
practice, of considering individual projects on their own merits, and then deciding whether there is a national signifi-cance which should attract Commonwealth aid, could 'con-13
tinue to serve this nation very well. After all, a similar
practical approach has already, further South, created the Snowy Mountains Scheme, completed rail standardisation from Sydney to Melbourne, and has put into construction the great rail standardisation schemes in Western Australia
and South Australia, the vast Chowilla Dam in South Aus-tralia, the long-deferred Blowering Dam in New South Wales, newly-equipped Coal Ports, and many other enter-prises, to be found in every State.
The present methods have worked, and the speed of their operation will be accelerated as time goes on and knowledge increases.
To make the examination of northern projects — an examination made, of course, in consultation with Com-monwealth and State Ministers, and with expert advice — needs to be in the first instance the special responsibility of
one Commonwealth Minister.
To this end we will establish a special Northern Division of the Department of National Development. should add two observations. One is that private enterprise has a major part to play in Northern Development, has
already done a great deal and needs encouragement. The other is that we learn that the Premiers of Quensland and Western Australia are preparing proposals for presentation to us. When we receive them, they will be studied sympa-
thetically. But clearly this cannot be done effectively in the middle of an election campaign.
There are two special problems.
The first is Water Storage and use. The second is the matter of freights; the cost of transport of materials and plant to the North is one of the greatest burdens upon Northern Development by Governments and citizens alike.
The Water Resources Council, â¢ which in our 1961 Policy Speech we undertook to establish, is now functioning 14
and has taken for its first task the measurement and assess-
ment of Australia's water resources. We will support the Council vigorously, financially and otherwise. The infor-mation gathered will be of particular significance for Northern Development. We have, in such cases as the
Chowilla Dam and the Blowering Darn, and flood mitigation works on the Northern Rivers of New South Wales, shown a readiness to support thoroughly-examined and prepared
State proposals. The work of the Water Resources Council should assist greatly in discovering and evaluating the possibilities of water schemes in the North of Australia.
When we consider the great increases, and sometimes multiplication of costs in the Northern Territory, the North of Western Australia, and parts of the North of Queensland caused by the costs of transportation, we see that we have
here a practical problem of great magnitude.
Before anybody offers to say how this Northern freight problem should be tackled, it is necessary to have a thorough and authoritative examination of the facts, and the feasibility of various methods of dealing with the problems disclosed.
We propose to establish a competent Committee of Investigation to conduct this examination and report to the Government.
PETROL PRICES
Among the elements which place burdens upon rural costs, particularly in more remote areas, is the increase in the price of petroleum products as the distance grows be-tween the metropolitan areas and those further out. We propose to do something about this. We will bring about
a change in the price of petroleum products (other than fuel oil) so that nowhere in Australia will the normal price be 15
more than four pence a gallon above the level of capital city
prices.
We propose to effect this by arrangement with petrol companies, and by arranging with the States for the Com-monwealth to make grants to the States (under Section 96 of the Constitution) to enable them to pay the appropriate compensation to those companies. City prices and those at present with a fourpence or smaller ifferential will not be
affected.
DECENTRALISATION
have already referred to our petrol price proposal. I should add that a great deal of our current policy is designed to aid the country areas and to add to the attrac-tiveness of rural industry. Our measures range from special taxation allowances, special depreciation allowances, sub-
sidies, stabilisation schemes, and such items as the Super-phosphates Bounty, the encouragement of mining and mineral exploration, and a host of other provisions which
are well and favourably known to the man on the land. Practical measures to assist the decentralisation of industry in Australia will, with renewed emphasis, be re-garded as an important policy objective.
OIL SEARCH
We will extend the oil search subsidy scheme for three years from June 30th, 1964, and will also extend for the same period the tax benefits granted by Section 77A of the Income Tax Act. The Commonwealth Government subsidy has already increased the total amount of money spent in exploration by roughly one-third and is materially assisting progress. Complete success would revolutionise the Australian economy.
16
EXTENSION SERVICES
Much valuable raearch work is being done in Aus-tralia by C.S.I.R.O, and other organisations, in aid of both primary and secondary industry. Much more will be done in future.
But we believe that the results of research do not go into practical application quickly enough. This is particu-larly true in rural production, where increased productivity and efficiency are essential to combat pressures on the cost level. We are prepared to work with State Governments, which have major responsibilities in this field, and to con-sider in a helpful way the need and scope for further Com-monwealth assistance to Agricultural Extension Services. We regard the whole matter of extension services as of
major importance to higher production and lower costs.
ROADS
We have enormously increased Commonwealth aid for roads from £8,767,000, when we came in, to 08M. In addition, we are providing this year E 10M., for Northern beef roads, roads in the Territories, and so on. Already the Commonwealth, without a primary responsibility, finds
more than a third of the total expenditure on Australian roads.
We are working on a new scheme to take the place of the existing legislation which expires in the middle of 1964. Proposals will be put before the States early next year. Under the current legislation a total of £250M. has been granted to the States for roads over a five-year period. We intend that over the next five years our contribution will be
not less than £350M.
Many people and organisations have advocated the establishment of a national roads authority to provide a 17
focal point for the planning and development of a compre-
hensive system and to help in co-ordinating the activities of Commonwealth and State Governments in the roads field. Our own study suggests that this is de§irable. We will help-fully discuss with the States the desirability of establishing such an authority.
â¢ The nation would benefit from a thorough-going survey, and appraisal of the existing roads system and of foreseeable road requirements.
TRADE
My colleague, the Minister for Trade, can tell you an exciting story of the growth of exports including manu-factured exports and of our increasing activities, through Trade Commissioner Services and Trade Missions, all
around the world. What I want to do is to refer to a criticism sometimes made, that while there is a Department of Primary Industry, there is none of Secondary Industry. The Trade Department is in fact concerned with Tariff Policies, with Trade Treaties, and with the promotion of
exports of secondary products, and maintains close contact with manufacturers. To make this clear, we propose to alter the name of the Department from "Trade" to "Trade and Industry", and to create in it a special Secondary
Industry Section under a very senior and responsible official, working immediately under the Minister and the Secretary to the Department.
EDUCATION
I claim that we have a unique and rapidly-growing record in the field of education. As briefly as possible,
18
I want to put this matter straight by stating the relevant
facts quite baldly.
We initiated block grants to the States for their Universities in 1951.
We established the Murray Committee in 1956, and completely adopted its report. A series of massive grants for the Universities began.
In 1959 we established the Australian Universities Commission.
Over the next three calendar years, we will find £60M. for the State Universities, and £21M. for the Australian National University.
Greatly assisted by this new and very substantial Commonwealth aid, there are now 69,000 under-graduates, as compared with 32,000 in 1949.
We have initiated large aid to the teaching hos-pitals. This will substantially increase as from next year.
We have established a special and widely repre-sentative Committee to examine ` .`the whole field of post-secondary education in Australia." I am informed that this Committee expects to report by the end of the year. Its report is bound to have great
significance both educationally and financially not only for the Universities but in such areas as senior techni-cal education, teacher training, and agricultural educa-tion.
The Commonwealth Scholarship Scheme . we established in 1951. Under an announcement I made a few weeks ago, there will be as from next year 5,000 open entrance scholarships, 1,280 second and later year awards, and up to 225 post-graduate awards. '
19
We have provided special taxation allowances of
two kinds, of great value to family people—
Education expenses of children up to the age of 21â to a maximum of £150 per year each;
£91 for each dependent child between 16 and 21 who is receiving full-time education.
I ask you to take note of the fact that every item in this remarkable list was introduced by my Government for the first time. Labour had done nothing about them. And note also that the financial pace, so far from slowing
down, is increasing rapidly every year!
On top of all this, we have not overlooked the educa-tional responsibilities of the States in the fields of primary and secondary education. The size of the school population is a large factor in determining the amount of the Common-wealth grants to the States. These have increased from
£165M. in 1951-52 to £469M. in 1963-4!
On the capital side—which brings in school buildings —we provided, between 1951 and 1963—assistance to the States' programmes, over and above the yield of the Loan Market, 30% of what the States spent on works.
Considering these facts, it is not surprising, though it is vastly pleasing, to know that State Governments have been able to increase their expenditure on education from £60M. in 1951-52 to £201M. last year! This year they
are all spending more, and spending it well. Most Premiers agree that we have, recognising how big a factor in their Budgets is Education, treated them in no parsimonious fashion.
In short, the story that the Commonwealth ignores the claim of primary and secondary education is demonstrably false.
20
In research, so growingly important for a growing
nation, we have adopted and are pursuing most encouraging measures, with an outlay which already exceeds £25M., as against something a little over £3M. when we came into office.
I now want to announce some new and, I think you will agree, valuable items of policy.
First, there are many good pupils in secondary schools who would benefit if they were helped to have the final two school years which they might otherwise miss, through family circumstances. Those two years will make them much
better equipped, whatever they do thereafter. There are many undergoing technical training. Any scheme which assists a student to carry through a course of technical study for an additional two years would have great national value
in these times.
We propose to create special Commonwealth Scholar-ships, to be awarded competitively, at standards to be worked out with the States.
There will be in the case of secondary schools 10,000 such scholarships per year, tenable at a secondary school for two years. They will cover each year payments for fees and books up to £100 per annum, and a further maintenance
allowance to the parents of £100 per annum. They will be open to students of all secondary schools, State or inde-pendent, without discrimination.
There will also be 2,500 scholarships carrying the same benefits, open to students at technical schools.
Second, having in mind the urgency of increasing technical school facilities, we will offer to the States an annual grant of £.5M. towards the building and equipment costs of technical schools.
21
Third, there is a special need for improved science
teaching in the secondary schools, if we are to keep in step with the march of science.
As some recognition of this need, we will make avail-able E5M, per annum for the provision of building and equipment facilities for science teaching in secondary schools. The amount will be distributed on a school popu-
lation basis, and will be available to all secondary schools, Government or independent, without discrimination.
CHILD ENDOWMENT
Child endowment will be raised to 15/- per week for third and subsequent children. Having in mind the educa-tional responsibilities of parents, 15/- per week endowment will be paid in respect of all full-time student children from
16 to 21.
HOUSING
Housing is a constant problem in a growing country. Work is, however, going on apace. The current year should see a record programme.
We are making a large contribution, direct and indirect, to this construction rite of something like 100,000 dwellings a year. Indeed, of all the dwellings in Australia, 36% have been built during the term of office of the present Govern-ment, while 76% of Australian homes are owned or in pro-
cess of ownership by the occupiers.
But there are two special problems which we propose to help to solve.
First, there is a special difficulty experienced by young married people, particularly in the age group up to 35, in financing the purchase of a dwelling. We will provide a
22
Commonwealth subsidy of El for every £3 which a person
in this age group deposits or shall have deposited, over a period of at least three years in an identifiable account at an approved institution, to be released, upon or after mar-riage, for home building or purchasing purposes. The maximum subsidy for one house will be £250. Thus by the Commonwealth subsidy, £750 saved in this age group for a home after marriage will be increased to £1,000. For obvious reasons, this will not extend to the purchase of
State houses, or for the purchase of house and land costing more than £7,000.
Second, there is the problem, which bears heavily upon many people, of filling, frequently on oppressive terms of borrowing, the gap between available housing loans, and the buying need of the purchaser. Among these people are many—sometimes overlooked—who want a house which is in size or quality better than the average. We must not encourage too much uniformity of dwellings in a refreshingly individualistic country."
To meet this problem, we will assist the obtaining of low deposit loans related to the income and reasonable credit-worthiness of the borrower. We will do this by a system of insurance by a National Housing Insurance Cor-poration.
Loans, the subject of the guarantee, would extend to something like three times the borrower's established income, with some reasonable total ceiling. The Government will, up to a high percentage of valuation, ranging up to 95% in appropriate cases, insure the repayment of such loans by approved lenders at approved rates of interest, which, under guarantee, should be reasonable.
MEDICAL BENEFITS
In view of the medical profession's assurances regard-ing stabilization of fees, we will increase Commonwealth 23
medical benefits by 331%. This means that the gap which
has to be met by the patient will be reduced by at least 20% All contributors to medical benefits insurance funds will be entitled to this increase, without being required to make any increase in their weekly contribution to the fund.
MENTAL HEALTH
The Commonwealth has already, under a limit of E 10M., made grants exceeding OM. on the basis of El for each E2 expended by the States on the building or equipping of mental health treatment centres. That limit will not apply for the next three years. This is of particu-lar importance to those States which have spent up to their
share of the existing limit.
REDISTRIBUTION
The Statistician, in dividing the electorate quota into the population of each State, to determine how many seats in the House of Representatives that State is to have, is at present bound to find that if the division leaves a fraction less than one half, the State does not get a seat for that fraction. This means, at present, that growing States, like
Queensland and Western Australia, and even New South Wales, stand to lose a seat. This is, we think, wrong. We therefore propose to amend the Representation Act to pro-vide that any surplus fraction will equal one seat. In con-sequence, no State will lose a seat.
Again, we will amend the Electoral Act by making it clear to the Redistribution Commissioners that, in exercising their discretion to vary the normal electoral quota up or down, to allow for some variation between compact metro-politan seats and very much larger rural areas, they shall specifically take into account, community of economic,
24
social and regional interests, difficulties of communication,
remoteness or distance, the trend of population changes, physical features, and the relative areas of proposed Divi-sions. We do not propose any fixed quota differential, but we do propose by the Statute to emphasise the factors to which I have referred.
RESTRICTIVE TRADE PRACTICES
It is of the essence of competitive enterprise that there should be real competition, and that the road to advance-ment in any business should be open to all. This system we wish to protect.
Privately imposed restraints which are against the pub-lic interest or submit the small trader to oppressive limita-tions should be eliminated.
After the publication of a broad statement of policy in general terms, the Government has held many discussions and has received many criticisms and suggestions.
I now announce that we will, after the election, assisted by these and any further discussions and sugges-tions, prepare and introduce into the new Parliament, a Bill to deal with restrictive practices and to protect the small trader. After its preparation and introduction, it will be open for public scrutiny for a reasonable time before the
second reading debate is resumed.
INVESTMENT FROM OVERSEAS
Investment from overseas countries has taken an important place in our economy. Over the last fifteen years it has amounted to over £1,500M.
This investment has produced great advantages, but under some circumstances produces problems which need 25
to be handled with care and understanding. As, from a
national Australian point of view, we would wish to see new capital from overseas employed for the great purpose of developing new industries or extending existing ones with
all the benefit of overseas skills and experience, we will always have a particularly warm welcome for new capital designed to these ends. We also believe that fears and mis-understandings are least where there is an Australian parti-cipation in shareholding and management, and most when there is no more than a mere change of ownership without more. There is, we believe, a growing recognition of this in the minds of intending investors.
The Terms of Reference to the Committee of Econo-mic Enquiry include "Overseas investment in Australia (including likely sources and trends and an assessment of its significance to the Australian economy)". The Committee's findings will be of great value and interest.
BUSINESS CO-OPERATION
Governments may easily be misled by statistics which are, in their nature, somewhat out of date. We have, there-fore, in the last two years, developed the practice of periodical consultation with representatives of the primary, secondary and tertiary business community in order to elicit their practical day to day experience and views.
This practice has proved to be of great value, and we will continue it.
As a non-socialist Government, which values the great contribution which private enterprise makes to national growth, we subscribe heartily to the principle that, in a free and growing country like our own, Socialism, or State
authority and control, is not the answer. Socialism is, in fact, both repressive and reactionary. The true answer is 26
to be found in co-operation; government doing, as in the
public works field, what private enterprise cannot reasonably be expected to do, and private enterprise doing, with the incentive of profit and advancement, what no Government Department could hope to do either successfully or at all. We express our indebtedness to those who have, at a sacrir flee of their private time, given us the benefit of their experience and their ideas. We have a real belief that, in the national interest, this association will go on.
OLD PEOPLE'S WELFARE
We have been greatly impressed by the old people's welfare work which is being done by voluntary organisa-tions. They have directed attention to human problems which are above and beyond the provision by Government of pensions, aged persons' homes, and such general benefits.
We strongly support what such organisations are attempting to do to meet individual problems which cannot be dealt with by either complex or uniform legislative pro-visions. We will confer with the State Premiers to see what can be done to assist this valuable work.
IMMIGRATION
A large and sustained programme of immigration is a very important element in national growth. It sustains confidence for the future, and is of great assistance to for-ward business planning.
This year we are increasing our overall target by 10,000 to 135,000. All the signs are, judging by last year's experience, that this target will be exceeded. We will con-tinue our programmes into future years with vigour and imagination.
27
PAPUA AND NEW GUINEA
Recently, at Port Moresby, I took the opportunity of broadcasting a statement on our policy and intentions for the future of Papua and New Guinea. All I need do now is to summarise what I then said.
We will press on with education, not only for political citizenship but for technical and administrative skill.
We will do all possible to improve rural production, both for consumption and export. We will develop mar-kets, improve transport facilities. We will encourage capital investment, without which progress will be slow. We will, by the creation of local governing bodies and by means of a largely elective Legislative Council, help the indigenous inhabitants to /earn the art and science of self-government, so that when the time comes for them to make a choice, they will do so freely and with knowledge.
Meanwhile, we will continue to provide growing finan-cial support and, as I have repeatedly said, we will defend Papua and New Guinea as if they were part of the Aus-tralian mainland,
FINAL
I end, as I began, with a reference to the vital issues. We are asking for a Mandate. There are times in a good-natured country like our own, when people are tempted to say, "Well, things are good; we can take a chance. And if it turns out wrong, we can easily send for the others."
Forget it. The choice you make this time will decide the political and economic future of Australia for ten years. If it endangers our great alliances, repair will be difficult and slow. If it initiates a great burst of inflation and rising
28
prices and costs, the answer will be difficult and slow,
and the economic casualties high. If, to pay for hundreds of millions of added expenditure, a Labour Government increased taxes commensurately by increasing personal income tax and company tax steeply, or invented new taxes, or inflated the currency, with reduced true incomes, it will be too late to say, "We didn't know it was loaded!"
You will not be able to indulge in the luxury of second thoughts, or of an early and successful repentance. Put the A.L.P. into power this time, and you will suffer the consequences for long after my time, or that of some of my most experienced colleagues. Our alliances broken, our export industries defeated by inflated costs, the Communists encouraged and active, our country will find that it has abandoned the substance for the shadow, National Security through alliances for a species of impotent isolation, and a steady growth for a spectacular decline.
Australia is at the cross-roads. Which road will you take?
29
Authorised by J. R. Willoughby, Director, Pederal
Secretariat, Liberal Party a Australia, industry House, Canberra, A.C.T., and printed by The Land Printing House, 57-59 Regent St., Sydney.


In my Policy Speech I&nbsp;announced, amongst other Government Proposals, a decision to give a&nbsp;subsidy to young people under the age of 35 of £1 for every £3&nbsp;saved towards home building&nbsp;or purchase.
Questions of detailed administration in respect of the proposed subsidy have been and are being brought&nbsp;to my attention,
These are matters similar to those which always arise&nbsp;when new and imaginative&nbsp;Government proposals are brought forward. At this stage I say this
"The Government's&nbsp;proposal will&nbsp;be administered sympathtically and&nbsp;liberally. Our idea at all. times will be to help&nbsp;rather than hinder,&nbsp;to include people in the benefits rather than hinder than to exclude them&nbsp;",
14th&nbsp;November, 1963.


63/ 132EMBARGO NOT TO BE PU3LISHED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE7.15 P. M. ON THJRIDAY, iiOV" MBE 14.BROADCAST NO. 1BROADCAST BY TE-2 PRIME 1iNISTER THE RT. HON. SIRROBERT MENZTES OVER NATIONAL S-AIONS AT 7.15 P.-i.THURSDY, NOVEMB 14, 1963Already I have been encountering a whispering campaignwhich is also being shouted aloud by Mr. Cawell.The story is that, having won the next election,I will then " hand over" the Prime Ministership to Mr. Holt,giving him what is described as an " arm-chair" ride intooffice. This story is not only a silly and malicious story,but it is also the greatest confession of weakness that Mr.Calwell has made. Where did Mr. Calwell get the idea that afterbeing re-elected I would move out? The fact is that, if thepeople of Austral a wish me to continue as their PrimeMinister, I will continue to do so so long as I have healthand vigour. So far as I know, I am in full possession of both.You have heard this kind of story before. Overthe last fourteen years my opponents have promoted me, inanticipation, to the House of Lords. Now they seem to havegiven up the idea of the House of Lords.Where did they get this idea of someone havingan " arm-chair" ride into the Prime Ministership? I did nothave one. Mr. Calwell will not have one. How did Mr. Calwellbecome Leader of the Labour Party? By the votes of themembers of his Parliamentary Party. How did I become theLeader of my Party and Prime Minister? By the votes of membersof vy Party at Canberra. If and when the day came that, beingstill in office, I decided that the time had come to make way( and I am not contemplating this event) who will choose mysuccessor in the leadership of my Party? I wontt. TheParliamentary Members of the Party will make the choice andthey will do so with complete freedom. Is that an " arm-chair"ride?0I said that this story was malicious. I will tellyou why. My distinguished colleague, Mr. Holt, is theTreasurer. Three years ago, on behalf of the Cabinet as awhole, he produced a eries of special financial measures.Even Mr. Calwell should know that a Federal Treasurer does notact on his own without regard to Cabinet opinion. Well, the1960 measures were as we felt they would be, unpopular forthe time being. So Mr. Holt got the blame. It is in humannature that we should like to blame someone in particular. Soinstead of blaming me or my colleagues, as they were entitledto, some people blamed Mr. Holt. So what does Mr. Calwell do?He says, " Now, I must cash in. I do not think that if theissue is between Calwell and Menzies the people will chooseCalwell. If I can persuade them that the issue is Calwellversus Holt, and that Menzies is not in the picture at all, Imight snare a few people."I take a poor view of such tactics. But I emphasiseto you that this is on amazing public confession on the part ofMr. Calwell that in a fair fight he would not expect to beat me,or the Government. After all, if he really believed that hecould defeat us in a general election which involved a contestof leadership, he would not have found it necessary to resortto this rather nasty manoeuvre designed to persuade people thatfor purposes of this election I am a more figurehead, to beset on one side when the eloction is over.



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBKRT MENZIiS
The Prime Minister* Sir Robert Menzies, said
today that his Goverment regarded the defence issue as one
of the most important in the current election campaign.
The Government's defence planning based on the
advice of the senior officers of the three defence services,
envisaged the highest possible degree of mobility for the
forces. With this in view the Royal Australian Air Force
was now equipped with the Aercules, the finest transport
aircraft in service anywhere in the world, which was capable
of shifting well-equipped army units to any threatened area
within a few hours.
Mobility of forces, the Prime Minister said,
answered Australia's special problems of area and distance far
better than the sort of static defene, with small units
scattered all over the continent, which was the essence of
Mr. CalwllIs thinking.
The government was also providing the RAF with the
Mirage fighter and the TFX bomber each the best of its kind
in the world and each eapable of reaching any part of Australia
in a few hours. Guided missile destroyers which would come into
service before very long and a submarine force would help to
make the Royal Australian Navy the most modern and effective
for its size in the world.
Sir Robert Menzies said that in an attempt to
" buy" votes in the New South Wales electorate of Cowper, which
Labour unexpectedly won in 1961, Mr. Calwell had last week
promised to station a battle aroup in the town of Grafton.
Perhaps it was the same battle group he had already promised
to Western Australia. In any case, It was the sort of
irresponsible promise which carried to its logical conclusion,
would result in the ineffectual dispersal of our forces all
around Australia, particularly in doubtful electorates and
an inability to concentrate our strength where it might be
most needed. The splitting of our forces into small widely
separated groups destroyed completely the concept of concentrated
training and quick movement on which the whole of the planning
of our military experts depended.
Mobility, on the other hand, would allow us to
bring to bear In the minimum of time considerable concentrated
power at a point of attack. It also would allow us to move
our forces to points outside Australia. It seemed to be the
labour Party's view that any war should preferably be fought
on Australian soil. This was not the present Government's idea.
The Labour Party's amxlety for power had led it
into making many promises which in defence matters especially,
ran counter to oxpert advice, It was strange, for example,
to read Mr. Calwell's proposal to build a naval base in
Western Australia in the same speech in which he declared his
intention to " re-negotiate" the agreement with the United States
for a naval communications station at North West Cape. / 2 
2.
Re-negotiation on Mr. Calvell's terms could
well lead to United States withdrawal from the area just
as Dr. Evatt's " r-negotiation" over Manus Island after the
last war had led to United States abandonment of plans to
establish a base there which could have made a tremendous
difference to Australia's security. Withdrawal of the United
States fro the North. West Cawp could administer to Australian
defence plans an irreparable setback.
The present Government's friendly co-operation
with our United States ally in the North West Cape agreement
was the best assurunce of the defence of the western and
north-western areas of Australia. The Government would stand
firm on its agreement beoause it meant so much to our future
security. PERTH, 17th November, 1963. 


OPENING OF KINGSWOOD COLLEGE UNIVERSITYOF WESTERN AUSTRALIA ON SUNIAY, 17THNOVEMBER, 1 363Speech by the Prime Minister, ' the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert MenziesMr. Chairman, Mr. Chancellor, Your Grace and Ladies andGentlemen I think I ought to begin by giving you a short butpowerful talk on the warming qualities of wool. ( Laughter)I went around earlier among my gaily caparisoned colleagueson the bench here and fingered their robes. I am the onlyone who is all wool and a yard wide. ( Laughter) Anyhow, thatwill have one great advantage and that is, it will shorten myspeech, because it is a warm day.Now, Sir, I am over here, of course as everybodyknows, on certain illicit occasions. This is a day off. Thisis my one unquestionably respectable day in the period of threeor four weeks, and I was delighted to find that I could stillaccept the invitation to open this College, this new extension,this building, because, as I don't need to tell you, I have avery profound belief in places like this and it has been myvery great privilege to make some contribution to the developmentof university education and of residential colleges over thelast ten years. Coming across yesterday in the plane and bereft ofall books of reference, I was trying to remember something thathad provoked a thought in my mind. I hope I remember itaccurately. Many of you will recall it. Wordsworth in " ThePrelude" has a marvellous description of the statue ofNewton " Newton with his prism and silent face,The marble index of a mind for everVoyaging through strange seas of Thought alone."Those lines have always stuck in my mind "' voyaging throughstrange seas of Thought alone." Well, perhaps some of is mayoccasionally be tempted to feel that we are explorers of thesame fashion, but most of us are not. It may very well be thatsome man of soaring genius to use the word in its propersense like Newton like Einstein, may indeed go throughstrange seas, all alone, perhaps without the need of company orcompanionship, or fellow workers. I don't know. But nodoubt, every now and then in the history of the world there issomebody who achieves something tremendous, adds somethingtremendous to the sum of human knowledge and who does it as anindividual, exploring a problem, lonely, complete in himself,just as there may well be in the history of the world greatthinkers who were in effect hermits who shut themselves awayfrom the world. iAut for most of us, for the overwhelmingmajority of people in this world, work cannot be done justalone. Education cannot be regarded as a purely individualmatter. That's why we have universities. Thatts why we haveresidential colleges, because what we are seeking to do is toextend the boundaries of knowledge in a mass of people, workingtogether, getting to know each other, learning from each other,the whole matter being part of the process of producing civilisedpeople. And, of course, by definition originallyI suppose,a " 1civilised person' was a person who lived in a city. He was/ 2
2by definition, a man who lived among others, who learned fromothers, the result being that in the total there was a degree.of knowledge, a degree of genuine instruction, a degree ofgenuine understanding which amounted to what we call civilisededucation. Now, Sir, we occasionally forget it, The worldoccasionally forgets it, but what we all are looking for is acivilised life, civilised relations between the nations of theworld, civilised relations between the people who live in ourown country, and a civilised life is a life lived in a humansociety. That's the first thing that we must remember. Notlived in the abstract but lived in a human society. And thereforeif education is devoted to the task, as I believe it is ofequipping us for civilised life, then I venture to say thateducation is at all times best considered when achieved in asocial setting, and when I say social setting, I am not referrimgto that word " social" with a capital ' IS" that you read in thegossip columns. A social setting, a setting among human beings.I was just saying to myself, " Suppose a man couldn'tgo to a university, suppose he couldn't go and live in a residentialcollege, suppose he lived out somewhere in the middle of adesert but was able in some mysterious fashion to have a correspondencecourse of instruction this would be a good thing, ofcourse but it wouldn't be that kind of education which you andI in this place, and many others understand and benefit from.It would be a lonely kind of inst; ruction; it would be aninstruction from books from documents not an instructiongathered in the general rough and tumble and shoulder-rubbingof a student community.I remember when I first set up a committee not thefamous Murray Committee but an earlier one to give me a littleadvice on what grants migh-,' be made for the lime being to theuniversities, one member of the Committee, when I spoke to himabout residential colleges, said, " Oh, no, no. Residentialcolleges?" I remember his words I made a note of it yesterdayhesaid, " Residential colleges are luxuries for those who canafford them", and I have never had the same opinion of that mansince. I thought what an utterly uncivilised conception that wasthat colleges are luxuries for those who can afford them, and Iremember with some satisfaction the reply I made to him, I said," This Committee will make a recommendation for residentialcolleges or the Committee will be a luxury that I can't afford."( Laughter) And so it came about and from there on it has grownin strength as time has gone on.But just to come back to theibbing of shoulders, tothe community significance of education. I don't know how peoplecan fail to understand it. One man goes to the university andhe is determined as I was in my time to be a lawyer, usingthat term in its broadest sense, but determined at any rate tobecome a lawyer. There is another man who is in the same collegeo? ro oidn ththine g satmhea t gtrhoueyp wshhoo uilsd dgeette rtmo inkendow toe acbhec oomteh ear dqoucitteo r. e arVlye. ryLaughter) If contact at the university between medical studentsand law studants had been made compulsory, I don't think I couldhave cross-examined so many medical men so successfully in mylater life, There is something to learn each way.You know, I regret to tell you this but in my time atthe university if somebody were pointed out who had a rathermelancholy cast of countenance, you would be told that he was / 3
" 3a 1theolog" ( Laughter). Yes. All I can say is that I thinknothing better could be imagined -than for theological studentsand arrant sinners to be thrown together at a university-( Laughter) ( Applause) the sinners being helped by contact withsomething a little better at the right time and the " theolog"being immeasurably improved by making the first of all greatdiscoveries, that he is a sinner as well as the others. ( Laughter)This is the kind of contact that goes on. It was magnificentlydescribed, if you will allow me to say so in his presence by thePresident-General in a sermon he preached this morning, onefragment only of which I venture to steal with acknowledgment,That was when he said that really in this business of acquiringknowledge what we all need to do is every now and then to lookover the other mants shoulder and see the problem with theother man's eyes. Now you see how profoundly true this is,It is so easy to become narrow-minded; it is so easy to becomedogmatic; it's so easy to say, " Well, I am so objective in myapproach to this matter that I forget that I am being completelysubjective. It is only my mind, my view, my general atmosphere,my general background that concern me in studying that particularproblem," What we must learn to do and the world needs itdes erately badly is to understand something about the otherman s mind and the other man's approach and how things look tohim from his angle viewed from which the problem, the subject,may look an entirely different shape. This is I think,tremendously important and this is why residen~ ial colleges aretremendously important because they get away from the idea thata man having attended his lecture, having gone to the library andchecked up his references, having done some reading of his own,then disappears, so to speak, into outer darkness until the nextappearance in a lecture. For men to be living in a com~ munity,a community of good minds some better than others of coursebut of good minds, a community in which brains can be anticipatedfrom any particular quarter, in which they can discuss thingswith each other in which the man who is doing humanities ofone kind or another gets to know something about the sciencestudent and what goes on in his mind and what is even moreimportant, the sicence student gets to know something about thehumanities. This is tremendously important.It is this subdivision of learning into separatecompartments which produces so much danger for the worldthe nuclear scientist so bemjused by the brilliance of his own,discoveries that he will shrug his shoulders and say, " Well, whathappens to all this is, of course, not my business". In a sense,I suppose, it isn't, but I imagine that he would be no worse asa scientist and so much better as a citizen if all the time hehad the contemplation of the impact of these things on humanityand how people thought about them, In other words Ifscientists and the humanists really got together and rubbed offa little of their gold on to each other, this would be, I amsure, a very good thing for the world, and it is best achievedwhere people live together and play together and argue together.They have a very good chance of coming out not only admiirablegraduated students, in a variety of disciplines but vastlyimproved human beings designed to live in a civilised societybecause they will broaden their miinds they will know enoughabout what other people do and what o~ her people think topreserve them from the excesses of the utterly narrow intellectualspecialist, And so, Sir, believing those things, as you knowI do, I have great pleasure in being here and, woollen robes orno woollen robes, I go through with my task and I declare thisplace open.


EMBARGO NOT TO PE PUBLISHED BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE8 PM. ON MONDAY, NOEMEI 18.BROADCAST NO, 2BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. SIRROBERT MENZIES OVER ABC NATIONAL STATIONS AT 8 PM.ON MONDA, NOVEMBER 18, 1963In an earlier broadcast, I disposed of the campaignbeing conducted by my opponent, in a mixture of shouting andwhispering, about my alleged imminent retirement from officeafter the election.But Mr. Calwell's tactics do not end there,Clearly in a straight-out conflict of policies, havingin mind the record growth of Australia in the last ton years,and having in mind also the vital importance of a clear andunequivocal Australian foreign policy and Australian relationswith our allies, Mr. Calwoll has no groat faith in victory.That is why he is busy raising these side-issues on which he* thinks he can secure votes either by fomenting animosities orby creating fears in the public mind.The one I want to mention briefly on this occasion ishis statement that if my Government is re-elected, it will imposeanother far-reaching " credit squeeze", presumably out of aspirit of sheer hardheartedness. I don't like this because, asall my colleagues know, I am not a hardhearted person. Now,if Mr. Calwell knows anything about public finance, he mustknow that severe economic restrictive measures can be needed orproduced only in order to chock or defeat an inflationary boom.He knows, or should know that a prosperous economy in which theextravagances of speculation have been checked, as theyundoubtedly have been in the last two years, an economy in whicheffort is concentraded upon production and supply and in pushingforward works and national development, both public and private,is not an economy which invites extreme measures at all.We have had the benefit of a great deal of experiencein these matters in recent times. For myself and for theGovernment, I see no reason why continued economic growth shouldS not continue to be associated with stability of costs and prices.' we will do all in our power to avoid a cost-price spiral becausewe know that inflation, the fall in the value of money, hitsordinary citizens far more than it hits a well-to-do minority.But did you hear or read Mr. Calwellis Policy Speech? I hopeyou did. It contained the longest and most extravagant andexpensive series of bids for your votes that have marked anyelection in my time. Really, it treated you as if you had yourvote for sale! In his eagerness to achieve office ( because Isuppose that for him this may well be the last chance), heproposed to add to the supply of money in this country on suchan astronomical scale that he has left hirself, in the event ofvictory, with the choice of two evils. One is to have aninflationary boom so violent that even a Labour Government wouldbe compelled to take the most stringent measures to counteractit, or alternatively, such an enormous increase in taxation,including no doubt new forms of taxation, as would be wellcalculated to destroy business confidence and lead to an acutedepression. Mr. Calwell tries to make your flesh creep with imaginaryfears of which we would do. I would strongly advise you to getout of this realm of fiction and do some hard thinking about theprice that you would have to pay one way or the other for thepolicy on which he csks you to elect him.I


63/ 134EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED BROADCAST OR TELEC-AST BEFOBE 7,15 PMON TUESDAY, HVEM3ER 19.BROADCAST NO. 3BROADCAST 3Y TT-E PRIME MINISTERo THE RT. HON.SIR ROBERT MENZIES, OVER ABC NA. IIONAL STATIONSAT 7.15 PM ON TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 1963here does labour stand on Australia's alliances andmutual security arrangements? This is a tremendously importantquestion, for we are living in a very dangerous world, and weneed friends if we are to survive.The Labour Party's policy and I must keep onemphasising this is not made by Mr. Calwell and his Parliamentarycolleagues. It is made for them by an outside group six fromeach State not elected by the people, and not responsible tothem. Yet what a majority of the 36 decide to be labour policyabsolutely binds Mr. Calwell and his colleagues, whatever theysay or promise during an election. Cast your minds back only afew months to the time when the 36 were meeting behind closeddoors at Canberra to decide whetiier Labour should oppose theestablishment of an American Naval Communications Station at NorthWest Cape-a station whose work could be absolutely vital toAustralia s security in the event of war.You remember the picture: Mr. Calwell and Mr. ihitlam,the aspiring Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister of Australia,wAtig outside in the cold, waiting for their orders. The leftwingersinside, no lovers of America, were just beaten by thenarrowest of majorities (: Thich could of course quite easily bereversed next time!) and an instruction came out to these so-calledleaders that they could approve, on unacceptable terms.Neither my colleagues nor I speaking for Australia atinternational conferences and in direct discussions with PrimeMinisters and Presidents, have over had to cable for instructionsfrom a body of men, not in Cabinet or Parliament, to whom we owedobedience. Do you think that the new order would strengthenAustralia's voice and authority abroad? Do you think that it willstrengthen our alliances, our understandings and our security?Labourts outside law-makin; body has a curious history,in practice. Only a feui years ago it was opposed to increaseddefence, it was demanding the recall of our troops from Malaya itwas following the very left-wing line internationally. Recently,and quite obviously for purposes of this election, it switched;but in a curiously ambiguous way. It will support Malaysia, butonly on terms which it knows to be impossible. It will supportdefence? but only at the expense of setting aside the modernconception of very mobile and heavily armed forces available whorethey are needed, and reverting to a curious and antiquated notionof defending Australia along its coastline; a sort of Maginot lineconception. At the same time, it wishes to deprive our nuclear alliesof any right to defend us rith nuclear weapons South of theEquator against a Comaunist nuclear attack from North of theEquatorl / 2
-2The truth is that the though Mr. Calwellis no more a Communist than I am, must compromise with theleft wing to survive.I can't discover that the Labour Party has plansto make any new friends internationally unless it is by votingto install Communist China in the Security Council and giveit a crushing diplomatic victory all over South-East Asia.But I have observed that Mr. Calwell is pledged to do twothings in relation to the United States. One is to ' e-negotiate"the North West Cape Agreement, which has already been signedand ratified. The other is ( if I understand him) to cancelour most valuable agreement about the TFX bomber:Is this what you want in the voice of Australia?a nation which, to live must command the respect and confidenceof the outside free world?You will make your answer on November 30th, Therewill be no useful second thoughts thereafter.


EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBJISHD 3RO, 0DCAST OR TEL'L AST BEFORE]7.15 PM ON THUASDAYL NOfi4BER 21ST.BROADCAST NO. 4BROADCAST BY ' TL Pi. IME MINISTER ' HE RT. HON.SIR ROBERT K. NZIES, OVER ABC NATIONAL STATIONSAT 7.15 PM 0 THURSDaY, NOVE113" R 21ST, 1963
Our housing policy has been very successful,&nbsp;Of all the dwellings in Australia today, no less than 36% o&nbsp;have been built during our term of office, i. e. since 19&nbsp;But there are two special problems.
The first concerns young married people up to&nbsp;years of age. They save up for a deposit on a home; but&nbsp;they find it difficult. Yet homes are the very foundation&nbsp;of tie nation. ' ell, our proposal is this. Somebody in thisage group decides to save for a home. He, or she, makesdeposits in some identifiable account at an approved institution,e. g. a Trading Bank, a Savings Bank, a Building Society, orwhatever the institution may be. Jhen, in that account, thereshall have been deposited, over a period of at least threeyears, a total of œ 750, we liill, by subsidy, make that œ lO00Maximum subsidy for one house Z250 Rate of subsidy œ 1for œ 600 saved; subsidy œ 200.In the purchase of non-State houses costing upto œ 7000 for house and land, this will be of tremendous value.The second problem concerns those who can findthe deposit, but, not being able to borrow the whole of therest on first mortgage, are compelled very frequently to fillthe gap at exorbitant rates of interest. This large groupincludes many who -Jant a somewhat better or different house.Nobody wants to see a uniformity of houses carried to adepressing extent. To meet this problem, we will establish a NationalHousing Insurance Corporation, to insure the repayment ofhousing loans made by approved lenders at approved andreasonable rates of interest. This will be a flexible scheme,designed to help the borrower according to his income. Thus,suppose an intending home buyer or builder has a taxable incomeof œ 1500 a year. He should be able to borrow, say, œ 4500 ( orthree years income) and to borrow it up to a high percentageof valuation, up to 95% in appropriate cases.These two plans, when they go into operation earlyin the new Parliament, will greatly encourage and assist homeownership, both for the young and younger married and for themany thousands of others.It has been and is our policy to create a homeowningdemocracy. It may have escaped your notice that,lorgely assisted by our own policies, the position todayis that 76% of all Australian homes are owned, or in processof becoming owned, by the occupiers.I doubt "+ rhether this record can be approached byany other country in the world. As I have shown, we intend toimprove on it. Before I conclude, could I nail once again thesilly statement that the Government is slowing down. Sofoolish is this story that I have only to make one morereference to housing. The current rate of housing constructionin Australia, in the fourteenth year of our office, is 100,000&nbsp;dwellings a year. This is a record. If I please the&nbsp;statisticians by ttaking the average population of a homeas 3M persons, ( or should I, as a grandfather of twins,say 47) the effect is that at the present rate 350,000persons are going into newly built homes every year!
This isas good a testimonial as I, for one,would wish to take with me if you decided to dismiss uson polling day.



FOR PRESS ROYAL VISIT 1964
It was announced in Canberra today that Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother had been pleased to approve
the appointment of Mr. M. R. Lamshed, Assistant
Editor of the Adelaide " Advertiser", as the Commonwealth
Public Relations Director for her visit to Australia next
year. BACKGROUND NOTE:
Mr. Maxwell Robert Lamshed was born in 1902 at
Mt. Gambier, South Australia. He received kks education
at the Mt. Gambier High School and later at the University
of Adelaide. Mr. Lamshed was Chairman of the Press, Radio and
, Yewsreel Committee in Adelaide for the visit of Her Majesty
The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh to
South Australia in 1954, and also when Her Majesty Queen
Elinabeth The Queen Mother visited Adelaide in 1958.
Earlier this year Mr. Lamshed was the South Audtralian
' O--Danisation's Public Relations Officer for the
visit of Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke
of Edinburgh to Adelaide.
He is married with two sons and two daughters.
Prime Minister's Department,
Canberra, 22nd November, 1963. 


This is a shocking tragedy. A personal tragedy for Mrs. Kennedy; a national tragedy for the United States of America; and for the rest of us a world calamity.
President Kennedy had great courage, ability and personal attraction. He had already made a notable mark on world events and on the relations between the Soviet Union and the Western World. His decisiveness and success over the withdrawal of Soviet Forces and weapons from Cuba was, I believe, one of the crucial events of the last three years.
The President was extremely friendly to Australia and at all times anxious to be helpful. I fear that this horrible affair and the loss of a man with such capacity for leadership will for a time at least increase the dangers of world tension.
SYDNEY,23rd November, 1963.


The present Government is a composite one LIBERAL PARTY, COUNTRY PARTY.
We represent town and country. We recognise that Australia's export income still depends primarily on our successful export of wool and meat and wheat and sugar and canned and dried fruits, and of butter and cheese, and so on.
Now export depends on holding the cost level. If world prices stood still, and local costs rose, primary exporting industries would be crippled.
In an industrialised country, rising wages would mean higher costs, unless there was a greater technical or managerial efficiency, or skill and productivity.
Apply this to rural industry. We are providing a subsidy on superphosphates, to increase production and reduce costs. We are, on top of many valuable tax concessions to the farmer, allowing as a special tax allowance a special rate of concession on the installation of modern plant used on farms and stations.
We are also doing our best to make available to the farmer the results of scientific research by C. S. I. R. O. and other Federal and State research organisations. When we came back into office, Commonwealth Labour was spending £ 3M. a year on research. Today, we are spending £ 25M
And, of course, with our great educational programme, this research work will grow.
But we are still not satisfied that the results of scientific research come quickly enough to the man on the farm. The speed of application is not fast enough. The problem is not one primarily for the Commonwealth for agricultural and pastoral activities are State matters. What we, as a Commonwealth, can do must be done in collaboration with the Departments and exports of the State Governments, whose work we would wish to assist, not to overrule.
I therefore say that we, the Commonwealth Government, are prepared to work with the State Governments and to consider, in a financially helpful way, the need and scope for further Commonwealth assistance to State Agricultural Extension Services.
It is for similar reasons that we have made a substantial offer to assist the promotion of wool sales around the world. Rising sales are an answer to rising costs. Having regard to a rumour I heard recently I want to say that there are no strings on our contribution, it will not be repaid to us by any levy. It is a nett contribution to the success of the greatest competitive industry in Australia.


EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE8 P. M. ON TUESDAY, k~ VZ'-BER 26.BROADCAST NO. 6BROADCAST BY THE PRIS MINISTER TIE RT. HON.SIR ROBERT PINZIES OVER ABC NAIIONAL STATIONSAT 8 P.* 11. ON TUESHiLY, NOVEMBER 26, 1963.D E F E 11 C EThe purpose of a foreign policy is to enter intoarrangements for friendship and the common defence of freedomand security; to keep the peace without surrender of vitalprinciples, without appeasement or retreat.In this world, bedevilled by governments which usethreats of violence defence has for democratic countries,ceased to be a purely local affair. Australian defence cannotbe secured by coastline conceptions. Here, Labour policies aredangerous. The Leader of the Opposition, struggling to hold achance 1961 victory in Cowper, normally a Country Party strongholdsaid, at Grafton, that he would station portion of abattle-group of the Australian Regular Army at or near Gre ftonlHis advice on this matter was not military. If suchpromises wore pursued in all doubtf'ul seats, the whole concept ofAustralian military preparations would be destroyed.Our policy is based upon two considerations. First,we must equip ourselves for close co-operation with our alliesin this part of the world, where dangers are groat, and commonaction is essential, We must have their help in times ofdifficulty, and they must have ours. To prepare to defendAustralia purely on Australian territory, would assume that ourallies had been defeated.The second consideration is that, having regard tothe first, we should create and equip for ces, quickly a~ tailable,possessed of great fire power and rapid mobility, and of thehighest quality. This is why wre are creating a navy which, while withinour capacity will be modern, mobile and effective; with themissile-bearing destroyers, submarines, carriers, aircraft, andescort vessels. IIn the Army, we aim at high training, modern equipment,adequate air support, with a first-class scientific backing.In the Air Force, we already have the best transportplanes in the world, the Mirage fighter, the best in the worldand a Bomber replacement for the Canberra which, at a relativelyearly date, will give us, in world terms, unsurpassed strike andreconnaissance power,Wie cannot equal the great powers. But we can aim atpossessing forces of the highest quality and capable of co-operatingeffectively with our friends.No party political considerations can be allowed tostand in the -jay of giving effect to this realistic policy.You will decide, for a vital period of time whetheryou support this concept, and this essential national policy.


27th NOVEMBER, 1963.
Well, ladies and gentlemen, this time I think perhaps&nbsp;you ought to feel a little sorry for me because I have to try to&nbsp;sum up an election camapaign in four and a half minutes and that's&nbsp;pretty difficult.
But I would like to say this to you that I tiaink that&nbsp;three issues at least have been disclosed in the course of this&nbsp;campaign,
The first of them concerns our relations with other &nbsp;countries and that means, of course, from our point of view therelations between our leaders and the leaders of other countries,&nbsp;and this brings up the problem of leadership who is to speak for&nbsp;you and in what sort of a voice, clear or ambiguous. Now you knowin this election you have had presented to you your choice on the&nbsp;side of leadership. I don't just mean Mr. Calwell and myself butI mean the top men in my Government and the top men in a prospective Labour Governmunt. Now, would you feel very happy about having your&nbsp;external relations with the world handled by people with greatrespect to them like Mr, Haylen and Dr. Cairns and people of that&nbsp;kind who are by concession on the Left " ing of the Labour Party,&nbsp;W with all that that involvas What do you suppose happens to theRight Wing people, the moderate people in the Labour Party whenthey come to form a Government? Well, it is quite clear that they&nbsp;have tVo compromise with the Left Wing or the bird won't fly at all.Now this is a big choice, It concerns the external security and&nbsp;tatus of Australia. Now, that is one issue.
There is a second issue. The second issue is: How&nbsp;should we create and carry out a defence policy for Australia?You know what we have had to say about this, all perfectly true, all perfectly well known. We have set out, by saying first of all, well, how we have friends overseas; we have the UNited STates, the &nbsp;United Kingdom, the countries in the South East Asian Treaty, andthese are friends upon whom we think, we can rely for help in time&nbsp;of trouble and if we are to do that, of course they have to beable to rely on us to play our part. Therefore, our conception of&nbsp;W defence is, in a sense, an international one, We want forces that&nbsp;are mobile both Army, Navy Air Force modern, frightfully well&nbsp;equipped but able to be moved here and there as needed, in order to&nbsp;co-operate with our Allies, to keep war out of Australia. I hope&nbsp;we are not going to orginise our policies on the ground that it isonly when war comes inside Australia that we pay any attention to&nbsp;it, because if it comes inside we are gone because our Allies will&nbsp;have gone. Now, the Labour Party offers you a purely localconception of defence putting forces here and here and here,&nbsp;particularly I gather, in doubtful seats, and, therefore, there isa great)-conilict between us as to the conception of defence&nbsp;the international conception or the purely local and defensive,
And, of course, &nbsp;the third issues concern the domestic&nbsp;problems of Australia and on these you have heard our case you have&nbsp;heard our policy speech I have had no occasion to retract one word&nbsp;of it. I believe that we have, in performance and in prospect,&nbsp;magnificent policies in relation to housing, in relation to&nbsp;education and, what's more, every one of them can be performed&nbsp;without doing what my opponent would do with his promises create&nbsp;an inflationary boom and inflict very large disasters on the&nbsp;Australian people.
There are the three issues and you know how I would&nbsp;like you to vote on them,


63/ 143FINAL BROADCAST: BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT.HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES, OVER NATIONALSTATIONS AT 7.15 P. M. ON WEDNESDAY, 27thNOVEMBER, 1963.This campaign began with contests in the fieldsof foreign affairs and defence, contests which continue in fullvigour and political significance. We then moved into domesticproblems particularly housing and education about whichI will say something. But, quite late in the campaign, Mr. Calwell hasproduced a brand-new item of policy, of tremendous importance.Labour, if elected, will abolish preferential voting for theHouse of Representatives, a voting system which has operatedin Australia for 4+ 5 years, unchallenged by either Party, Itswhole purpose is to ensure that no man may be elected a Memberif most of his electors don't want him. Take a simple example:Suppose there is a country seat which is being contested byLabour, Liberal and Country Party candidates. Both Liberal andCountry Party candidates support the Government. The realquestion is: " Which of the two Government parties should wina clearly Government seat? Let the people decide,"Now, under preferential voting, suppose the countof first preferences showed Labour 18,000Liberal 16,000Country Party 11,000The second preferences of the Country Party candidate, if theywent only 80 per cent. to the Liberal and 20 per cent. to Labour,would produce a final count ofLiberal 24+, 800Labour 20,200This would be a proper result, since clearly most voters did notwant Labour. Mr. Calwell now promises to abolish this votingsystem by reverting to " first past the post". This would meanthat Labour would win the seat with 18,000 votes out of 1+ 5100.I hope you will clearly understand what Mr, Calwellis after. He would destroy all minority parties, such as theDLP and other groups, by making their votes virtually votes forLabour. In short, if Labour wins this election, it will" rig" the voting system so as to make Labour undefeatable for along time. There are curious aspects of this matter, It wasMr. Calwell in the Chifley Government, who was the architectof the new genate voting system proportional representation.Up to that time, Senate voting was " first pest the post", whichleft minorities in a State with no representation at all.
2-Mr. Calwell proposes to keep the new Senate system, since inevery State it assures Tabour of some Senators. He is all forproportional representation to keep control, or near-control, ofthe Senate, and now all for " first past the post" for the Houseof Representatives to keep control of that House,But the matter does not end there. Labour wants" first past the post" for the House of Representatives. Butit chooses its own candidates for Parliament by the preferentialvoting systemi And how does it choose its Parliamentary leader andthe members of its Parliamentary Exeoutive? By exhaustive ballotnotby " first past the post". Let's say that there areLabour Senators and Members meeting to choose a leader. Andlet's suppose that four offer themselves for election. On thefirst vote, A gets 30 votes, B 25 votes, C 20 votes and D 5 votes.So the chairman of the meeting strikes out D, and another vote istaken, and so on until somebody has 41 votes, or an absolutemajority. As you will see, the purpose is the same as inpreferential voting. Yet, under the system Mr. Calwell nowadvocates for the House of Representatives, A would instantlywin, with 30 votes out of 801I urge you to beware of this recently-disclosedLabour Policy. It is designed to destroy minorities and togive Labour perpetual power. And who will exercise Lhis power?Not the people you send to Parliament, but the outside Executive,the 36 men who owe you no responsibility at all, but whosedecisions and orders a Calwell government would be bound implicitlyto obeyl Our housing and education programmes, to which I madea brief reference earlier have been attracting great attentionamong younger voters, This has been manifest in -each State andat all my meetings, These voters acknowledge generously whatwe have achieved in both fields; but they are looking forward tomarriage, to home building, to children and to the education of' those children to be good citizens, good builders of a growingnation. In effect, what they are saying to us is " What can youdo to help us to help ourselves and our children and the nation?"Now, this is no selfish attitude. It is a constructive andimaginative attitude. We have tried to meet it in our policy.Thus our scheme for subsidising a saved deposit on a home at therate of V1 for œ 3 for married people in the " under 35 age group"with a maximum subsidy ( that is, a gift not repayable) of œ E250,will give great encouragement to those who ineed it at the righttime and in the right way. For most ambitious young miarriedcouples want to have a hone of their own. This indeed is theideal of genuinely civilised democracy. The ownership of a homeis the kind of security which naturally attracts them because itrepresents a measure of independence. I understand the Oppositionnow questions the validity of our proposal. Mr. Calwell will besurprised to see how valid it is.Similarly, in our new education proposals, we havebeen looking in a practical w33 to the future. The parents offamilies want their children to have the best education they canafford. They want this education to enable their child to advancein life, in character, in skill and in reward. The best parents,I have no doubt, want their children to be trained to be goodcitizens and good contributors to the advancement of the nation.e / 3
-3Recognising this, We have put forward threeCompletely new propositions.The first concerns the encouraging of secondarySchool students to put in some extra time on their secondarystudies SO that they may be better qualified thereafter, andthe encouraging of their parents to persuade themi to taetiextra time. This is frequently a matter of great failydifficulty. To facilitate extra training for bright boys andgirls at secondary schools we will award each year 10 000scholarships, tenable for Lhe two later years at seconaaryschools; each scholarship will be worth up to œ-100 a year forfees and books, and œ 100 a year for maintenance. Secondaryschools will include those which are public and those which areindependent. Second, the provision of 2 ,500 technici1 schoolscholarships will be made on the samae terms and for similarpurposes. The demand in Australia for-technically skilledpeople is growing, Indeed, the supply of competent techniciansvery frequently deteroines the extent to which any enterprisecan employ unskilled labour. To assist in this field, we areproposing to find each year a non-repayable grant of œ C5M. ayear to the States for the building and equipment of technicalschool facilities, Third, it is essential that provision for scienceteaching in the secondary schools should be modern and adequateif we are to draw from -them into the universities and intopost-graduate and research work the scientists and technologistswe will increasingly need, We are therefore proposing todistribute fœ 5M. a year among secondary schools, again withoutdiscrimination, for the building and equipment of sciencelaboratories and, in this way, the encouragement of scienceteaching. It has been clearly observed by large audiences ofyounger electors whora I have addressed that these practicalproposals, well-considered, not extravagant but most valuable,will open up new avenues in life for many thousands of youngerpeople who might otherwise fail to enter them.Finally, I go back to wihere I began to foreignaffairs and defence to the vital matter of national security,without which no domestic progress can be achieved. When yourecall how much the present Government has strengthened ouralliances on a basis of co-operation, diplomatically andmilitarily for the common security against Communist aggression,do you really feel tempted to entrust our relations with theUnited Kingdom, the United States, and our other friends, tothe left-wingers and the compromisers who make up the greatmajority of ILabourts non-elected Parliament? It is becausewe think that such dangerous nonsense will never be entertainedby a majority of our Australian people that we ask you withconfidence for a sweeping victory on Saturday.



63/ 19
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 23Z196_ 3
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, made the
final bid of his campaign at Geelong today when he addressed two
lunch-hour meetings of employees of the Ford works at Geelong.
These two meetings have been a feature of every
election since 1949 when the Minister for Shipping and Transport
won the Corio seat from Labour. He has held it ever since.
Sir Robert Menzies' campaign has taken him into
every State, including two trips each to Queensland and New South
Wdales and four separate visits to Victoria. Accompanied by Dame
Pattie Menzies he has travelled some 10,250 miles in nearly
hours' flying time spread over three weeks.
In that time he has addressed 17 public meetings:
He has written and recorded six 5-minute national broadcasts and
one 15-minute broadcast. He has written and tele-recorded his
policy speech, which was itself a compressed version
of the 7,000 word speech released to the newspapers.
The Prime Minister also prepared personally and
tele-recorded four 15-minute T. V. programmes and five
programmes. Two of his public meetiniwere telecast live
Oakleigh Hall ( Victoria) for 30 minutes and 1-iornsby ( New South
Wales) for 45 minutes.
Apart from his policy speech which was telecast and
broadcast throughout Australia simultaneously in all States,
local broadcasts have been made of a number of his addresses at
public meetings. During the campaign the Prime Minister has also
attended in his official capacity, five functions of a non.
political character and has continued to attend daily to the
urgent business of he Commonwealth Government, dealing with
overseas Embassy reports and a large volume of correspondence.
The Prime Minister will visit polling booths in his
electorate of Kooyong throughout tomorrow. Tomorrow night he
will preside over the St. Andrew's Day dinner of the Melbourne
Scots. He will probably return to Canberra on Monday.
CANBERRA, 29th November, 1963. i 



NEW ENGLAND GIRLS' SCHOOL, ARMIDALE. N. S. W.
Speech by the Prime Ministe_ the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Well, my Lord Bishcp, I want to begin with a personal
explanation as we say, I have been misrepresented, I have
been in Armidale before. I even suspect that I made a speech,
but I know it was a long time ago, Long forgotten and, I hope,
long forgiven. ( Laughter)
The second sort of personal explanation I want to
make is that when the Headmistress was reading her report, I
misheard one word. Let me see I must look it up. I
thought she said " the second" when referring to Miss Young.
" The second is our Treasurer", I thought she said. ( Laughter)
And when everybody applauded, applauded and applauded I knew
there must be a mistake, because no Treasurer ever gets applause.
( Laughter) And then I saw it was " our treasure".
The next thing I want to say of a minor kind is that
I am greatly indebted to whoever it was who drew the thistle,
and had it put ( gesturing) ( Laughter) ( Applause).
Fortunately, it is only a dxawingo( Laughter) I suppose if it
hadn't been a drawing one of you well-behaved girls would have
arranged to have put it on the seat itself. ( Laughter)
I am grateful to the headmistress for having mentioned
me in conjunction with Sir Alec Home, the Prime Minister of
Great Britain because as it happens, he is the second-last
Knight of the Thistle to be created and I am the last and we
walked one behind the other to the Chapel of the Thistle and I
am sure that my Scots friend on the platform will be delighted
to know that when The Queen said to me, " How do you pronounce
your name?" L because she has to says " I demand or " I require
that So-and-so ( mentioning my name" be installed, I said,
" Mingies, Your Majesty, Mingies. It is only in Australia that
I am calied ! Menziess" 0 That's not quite true. ( Laughter)
That's a political approximation. Anyhow, Mingies I was in the
Chapel of the Thistle, and, for better or for Worseq I regard
that as rather an authentic thing.
The third preliminary remark I want to make is that I
was very interested to hear the school sing, " Let us now praise
famous men." which I had not heard before put to music, Then
later on when I heard all these splendid and warm remarks about
the staff, it occurred to me to suggest that your musical
composer whoever she may be ought to cast up a tune for Kipling's
version " Let us now praise famous men
Men of little showing
For their work continueth,
And their work continueth,
Broad and deep continueth,
Greater than their knowingi"
You remember? His " Schoolteachers". His " Let us now praise
famous men" was all about schoolteachers and there it was about
men teachers, of course because they " laid on us with whips,
laid on us with many whips" and, of course, you don't do that
here I imagine. ( Laughter) ./ 2 
-2
Now, the Lord Bishop of Armidale . who, until a few
minutes ago, was na sque radip g rs P. friend of mine, has stolen
half my speech, or rather yesterdnhy I made a speech to a girls'
school and one of my chiel. themes was the impact of beauty and
the function of beauty in education. Well, he must have read
that in the paper ( Laughter), It's perfectly true, Even bishops
are capable of reading a sermon, ( Lauga-ter) Therefore, I w1~ nft
say much about it, but I do crave the privilege of repeating it
because I believe tremendously in the function of beauty in life.
The world has gone through a terrible century so far,
full of hatred, full of scandalous attacks by man on man, Dall
of ugliness and yet, you know, there is so much beauty in the
world and ii' people could learn to breathe it in to take it in
particularly when they are at school and carry il with them
through life, distilling a little of it for other people, letting
it colour their views of other people, making them more tolerant,
more anxious to look for tl-ie good than to seek out the evil I am
sure the world would do much better than it has because ugliness
has disfigured it,
But there is another thing that has gone on in this
century, All of us who are grown up are very familiar with it
and that is that we seem to have got cast adrift from our moorings,
from our intellectual moorings, from our spiritual moorings9
from our sense of values. It has been a very strange century so
far and you will all have some part to play in making it better
before it finishes. It is really, of course, completely true
that in this century, the developments of science and the developments
of tech~ nology, the developments of technical skill have
all gone on apace, This, I suppose, is the golden century of
science, why I can tell you girls looking at me with this
feigned respec'z with which you are now looking at me ( Laughter)-
that I can remember the first motor vehicle that ever came into
my part of Victoria, It was a gruesome thing called a motor
buggy ( Laughter). It had good old-fashioned buggy wheels and
so on and the driver sat up perched aloft. I can remember seeing
the first movie isn't this incredible that a man so young should
remember so far back ( Laughter), It seems only yesterday that
I was sitting in some open-air place because nobody could afford
to build picture theatres for a start. Now they can't afford
to keep thom open. I saw a film called " The Great American
Train Robbery". Everybody jerked like that. Fortunately there
were no voices and therefore even at that time of my life I found
it relatively easy to have a nap while the picture was on.
( Laughter) Aircraft this is all in our time, Wireless
television, all these things that we now take for grantea, of
course, have come in this century or for all practical purposes,
in this century. So that the other day, I could pick up a
telephone in Sydney and have a talk to Alec Home in London over
a telephone circuit through a submarine cable, just as if he
were in the next room.
Now, all these things have happened and they are all
marvellous aren't they? One thing wrong with them is that they
dontt have much to do with people's character or tolerance or
understanding of human beings* In short, they dontt have much
to do with civilisation, They can be used as an aid to
civilisation, They can, of course, be used as the enemies of
civilisation. Aircraft yes, for a great and good purpose like
bringing me here ( Laughter); or for the purposes of destruction
of people. This is the great feature about this period of our
aea*. e/ 2 
M3
history. All this tremendous devx Lopment in science, j_ applied
science, in understand-, ig o2 l' thin-gs as things, biut '-iow much
understanding of them as th.. iUs to be used and used for some
purpose? Now this has a great bearing on the school. This
has a great bearing on the attitude that-parents have towards
their children at school. There is a bit of a disposition, I
think I am right in saying, to want some early kind of specialisation,
to say, " Well, Rutia or whatever her name mighit be she
wants to do a particular thing in, life that is going to be a very
profitable thing to do. Let her concentrate on that," I hiope
not too soon. I am one of those people who believe that unless
the basis of education is right, unless up to a certain stage
people are really studying what I will call the human things in
education they can become narrow specialists, They can become
detached lIrom the values of civilisation, they can become indeed
a positive menace, becauso an irresponSible scientific expert
may be a great scientific expert but whether his contribution
to life is a good one or a bad one will, if he be a narrowminded
man, be something that will. have to be determined by
other people less narrow minded and more wise, and that means
that the whole process of education is a process of developing
individual people, developing them in a balanced way,
lowr on earth could we possibly have any sense of
judgment about contemporary events if we knew nothing about what
had happened in the past. I just don't understand how anybody
can profess to be educated, though he or she may have all the
degress in the world unless they know something of the history
of the past, unless they have some basis of judgment some
understanding that men and women are remembered for their impact
on life and that you will find this impact specifically or.
generally described in history. y_--t can _ g in history the errors
that have been made and the results that have come from them,
And now the study of English. I had something to
say about this in another place yesterday but I must say that
I am constantly astonished at the number of people who, when
they open their mouths to have a conversation or make a speech
or whatever it may be, think that anything will do. I have met
a number of boys out of good schools I say nothing about
girls; I'm not game to but I have met lots and lots of young
men out of good schools whose vocabulary was hopelessly
inadequate and who spoke a species of Hottentot ( Laughter) as
far as I was concerned, on the great principle that "' Anyhow,
you know what I mean" and anything will do or even Zhe famous
Australian slogan " It's good enough".
Now it's not good enough. There is nothing good
enough for the language that we speak. Nobody could ever be
perfect at it, but we can all try, we can all be conscious of
the fact that it's a wonderful language and a flexible language
and that it is not all long words but that the best words in it
are short words, clear-cut words, I don't know whether this
is a classical school, I know that Greek has disappeared from
the face of the earth, I think much to the misfortune of the
earth, but Latin staggers on. It used to be compulsory for a
number of courses at the university; now I think it isn't,
I don't know. But if people could even learn a little Latin and
remember it, they would understand their own language a lot
better and would misuse it less villainously.
Now, all this is quite consistent with doing physics
and chemistry, all these scientific matters. They are of 
p tremendous importance. The sec'ond hal:' of this century wiLl
need more and more of e., lt. o cientific work than did
the first half and I i -rew . re get 1 0c greater civil,
ordinary, peaceful benefit fvero : Lt Dut a scientist who doesn't
know these other things, who . asnlt really taken time to get into
a line of communication with otrier human beings, learning from
them, sub-consciously, getting to. unde: cstand them, that scientist
will always be less than a great man, whereas the humanist, as
we say, who has studied all these other things, who has thriven
on history and philosophy and all these great exercises o: f the
mind, will be something less than academic if he fails to know
something about the problem of the scientist and fails to learn
something about the nature of the world about which he is
speculating. Now, that is all I want to say to you. It sounds
singularly like a bit of a sermon, but you know, I must say
that when I was going to speech days or speech nights and
sometimes getting a prize ( Laughter), we used to sit Aown there
and they always had some old politician on the platform
( Laughter); he was always a very distinguished old boy and he
always bored us stiff ( Laughter) and I took a vow later on
that I would never put myself . nto that position. I must say
it for myself I do it as seldom as I can. But I am a bit
lucky today because all I can tell you is whether it is the
superior nature of girls over the nature of boys I don't know....
if you had been I111 try it out this afternoon
( Laughter) but if you had been boys half of you would have
been yawning in my face by now. All I can say is that you are
the best I don't know about those others further back who
pay the fees ( Laughter). They are, in a sense, beyond redemption
( Laughter). What I have had to say to you is really wasted
on them. I am getting in early with you, on your minds, and I am
delighted to have had the opportunity of standing here and
looking at you, and if I may repeat before I sit down, ono
improper remark I made when I walkea into the chapel this
morning, my Lord Bishop not realising for a moment that I
was in he chapel and so I spoke to a couple of the girls in
the front row as I went by. Do you know what I said to them
and looking around I repeat it with emphasis I have never seen
such admirable hair-dos in a girls' school before. ( Laughter) 



63/ 1501
EMBARGO NOT TO BE TELECAST, BROADCAST OR PUBLISHED BEFORE
7 PM ( EST) ON TUESDAY, 17TH DECEMBER, 1963.
FOR PRESS P. M W1963
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Statement b he Minister the Rt Hon, Sir Robel-t Menzies
His Excellency the Governor-General has authoris, d me
to make a statement this evening about the new Cabinet arrangements.
I propose to ask Parliament when it meets to amend
the Ministers of State Act to permit of the appointment of three
additional Ministers. This will make the total number
instead of 22 as at present, lhen this has been done, the
full list and portfolics of Ministers will be as follows
1. PRIME MINISTER
2. MINISTER FOR TRADE AND
INDUSTRY
3. TREASUFER
4. MINISTER FOR NATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT VICEPRESIDENT
OF EXECUTIVE
COUNCIL
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE
6. MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND
NATIONAL SERVICE
7. MINISTER FOR EXTERNAL
AFFAIRS
8. MINISTER FOR PRIMARY
INDUSTRY
9. MINISTER FOR CIVIL
AVIATION
MINISTER FOR HEALTH
11. MINISTER FOR SUPPLY
12. MINISTER FOR CUSTOMS The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT IMENZIES,
KT, CH, QC, MP.
The Rt. Hon. J. McE!: EN, M. P.
The Rt. Hon. H. E. HOLT, MP,
Senator the Hon, SIR WILLTAM
SPOONER, KCMG, M i.
The Hon, Paul HASLUCK, Me?.
The Hono W. McMAHON, M. Po
The Hon:, Sir GARFIELD ARl" ICK,
QC, MP
The Hon, C, F. ADERMAdNN, MP.
Senator the Hon. Shane PALTRIDGE
Senator the Hon. Harrie WADE
The Hon. Allen FAIRHALL, P.
Senator the Hon. N. H. D. HENTY
13, MINISTER FOR WORKS, and
assisting the Prime Minister
in Commonwealth activities
in relation to research and
education which fall within
the Prime Minister's
Department
14, MINISTER FOR SHIPPING AND
TRANSPORT Senator the Hon. J. G. GORTON
The Hon. Gordon FREETH, M. P.
/ 2 
-2
POSTIMA STER-GEI'ERA L
16. MINISTER FO1. R
IMI3" 1I1 ' kT 10ON
17. MINISTER FOR
SOCIAL i3ERVICEoS The Hon. A. S. HUUIE
The Hon. THubert OPPE~ dh47AN,
OBE) 111-.
ThLe Hon. H. S. ROBERTON, M. P.
18. MINISTER FOR
Y d, ' A T! 11A T TION11 The Hon. R., IC. . STJA1TZ,
VIBL, ED, P1
19. MINISTER FOR AIR
AT'IORN. EYGENiJERIAL
21. MINISTER FOR
TERW'lTORIES
22. MINI31? E-FOR
23, V4INI-STYF FOR T1-1 A BI4Y,
and1 assisting the-
T. zea surer?
2 11. NITISTER FRTHE
_ N41zhI OR
r-12N11CTER FOR THE
NAVY The Hon, D. E. FAIREPIRY. DFCMP.
The Hon. B. 1M. S_' 2FDD N2 11. P.
The lion, C. E. BARITNE S, Vi.
TI-e 1-Tna0 LI1. E BURY, I~ P
The Hon, A FORBESHl.,-NP
The Hon,, J. D, ANTIH1 O1Y7 P.
Th. e lion. F. C. CTL:{ ANEY_, r AM! P
Until the Ministers of State Act has been aineuded
SENATOR GORTON will be ivinister for Interior and ' orks9
th. e zppointnient of 1MR. AN~ THONY to Interior being
defe-rre d intil thne amendment.
SIP, GARYIELD BL-R. WICK wil~ l be AtraC'ne: 2. and il1inister
for Ex ternal h'ffairs, the--n ooi~ C2n
MR~..% FDE~ ias Attorney... enero-l beoingdcfrel
until the amendmhent,
i'W RBES will lie Minister for the Ar: m. y and Nrthe
appo-; h. trent of IMP.. C HA. NE!'~ i~ d erA
aft'er thie amendiment0
T ppop ose ta,. t to-( Cirroir Mr. Anthony, Mr.* Snedden and
Mr,, Chan~ ey , houl. d be 3; i-. rn as Executive Councillors,
~ 1 Toun',,.-7y, who has been so e-ffectiv e as &gt; rnse
for Defence anid whose 11ll-ness we all deeply re,-2et, ~ 2
confidently anticipate, be flly recovere-d in time to tale p an
a ppo intmeon I as Austra licn 11mba ssa dor to '. Ta schington.
Sir Howord Beale's term expires in March, after a
very notable period of so~ rvL'ce by him to Alustralia in the United
States, At teexp.,_ a--ion of Sir Eric Harrison's currently
extended tery., Iir, Di-jna r wi. Ll be come Aus ta lrian High Comrnis si oner
in London,, li-i order to evoid another iini st e rLa I change l1ate; cr on,
Mr, Downer inciJcated to me that he would not desire to be
o* c / 3 
-3-
re-appointed as a Minister, though he will of course for the
time being continue to be a Menrber of the House, This was
a most helpful proposal on his part, since I know that he is
deeply attached to the work of the Immi. gration Department,
a Department in which he has been markedly successful.
Mr, Cramer, who has had a long and valuable term
of office as a Minister, placed himself at my disposal, knowing
that in current circumsances I might wish to bring some
younger men in. His generous action is much appreciated by
mee CAN BEPLP
17th December, 1963 



P. M. No. 95/ 1961
DEATH OF SIR JACK HOBBS
Statment by the Prine Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Jack Hobbs was of course famous as a great
cricketer. There has never been a player with better
technical equipment or temperament. Good wickets or
bad wiokets seemed to come all alike to him.
He was also a very fine fieldsman in the covers
where he never appeared to hurry yet always seemed to
get to the ball sooner than the batsman expected.
But apart from that, he was a charming and
modest man who enjoyed the personal affection of many
thousands of people.
I saw a good deal of hil on visits to England
and in Australia and was proud to claim him as a friend.
CANBERRA, 22nd December, 1963. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 97/ 1961
APPOINTMENT OF GOVERNMENT WHIP AND
ASSISTANT GOVERNMENT WHIP
The Prime Minister announced today that
Mr. Peter Howson has been appointed Government Whip
and Mr. W. Aston Assistant Government Whip.
Mr. Howson was Assistant Governiment Whip
to Mr. F. Chaney in the last Parliament.
CANBERRA, 22nd December, 1963. 



P. M. Now 96
THE LATE MR TOWNLEY
Tribute By The Prime Minister. Sir Robert Menziesq
This is a grievous blow to me, to my colleagues, and
to Australia. Athol Townley was a man of marked ability and
of notable and unselfish service to his country. But, above
all, he was a man of great spirit and honour, a warm-hearted
friend and a trusted companion.
I feel more distressed than I can say, for my own
loss is a sad one. His wife and son will be in all our hearts
and minds, for theirs, in a personal sense, is the greatest
loss. I hope they will be consoled by the recollection of
Atholts service tt Australia.
CANBERRA
24th Docomber, 1963. 



63/ 154
PA6 aam. 2811961
iklml 19&amp; I l MAdo iaa&amp; h = Ib~
3nd Myself, I inxtendtkw eystybdy good wishes Dir
task ofC every Aiwtztian in the no; yeair
we are outorial Iii u) s tO oanVti -ue to bL1. il on the fimi
foundatifts thbare~ been * sta~ lUsod~ not our
&amp; PnraL io aIuto~ aut by tho a t.'. earted eopio wt
ploneerod, our ountry sand their dascendant.
Sfoel suare that In 19) 61+ and after veca
look furvurd tv-,. robpe'ouu deeaxot ' do both
Goverrswsxt and poueoe sat no be matietiel ' ith vhiat w
have or what do hava Acme. The"~ are oballJnz-ss to be
doelt vith and to at! ir ve prWo a driving force
wtiioh will 1rIz-f-ustwr! 1ia to peatness.
CA iiiq
31st Doemuazrs 1963. 



6 4/ Ofl?
THE VISIT OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH THE QUEEN MOTHER
TO AUSTRALIA, 1964.
DISPLAY OF ROYAL PORTRAITS AND ROYAL EMBLEMS
It is officially announced that consideration has been given
to the policy regarding the use of Royal Portraits and Royal Emblems
and the Arms of Australia in connection with souvenirs, mementos,
displays, etc., commemorating Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen
Mother's Visit to Australia in Feb) ruary/ March 1964.
2. For these purposes, an article would be regarded as a
" Souvenir" if it contained all or any of the portraits of Her Majesty
Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, Her Majesty The Queen, His Royal
Highness The Duke of Edinburgh or the AustralianCoat of Arms, the
Australian Flag or any words or Symbols which have or could have any
reference to the Royal Visit or the dates of the Royal Visit.
3. No objection will be raised to the reproduction of portraits
of Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, The queen and The Duke of
. Edinburgh, t he Royal Arms, formal representations of the Royal Crowns
and the Arms of Australia in the design of articles, subject to the
following provisos:-
The article concerned must
Conform to good taste.
Give some indication that it is linked with Queen
Elizabeth The Queen Mother's Visit words such
as " Royal Visit 1964" or " Australia 1964"
Be free from advertisement, other than the name of
the manufacturer or seller, and be free from any
implication that the firm has received royal custom
or patronage, or that the article has been purchased
by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, The Queen or
The Duke of Edinburgh. This particularly applies to
schemes of decoration and displays in shop windows.
Not be used as a premium or selling aid.
4. Souvenirs may be sold at any time before the Visit, during
the Visit and for a period of three months after the date of the
conclusion of the Visit.
Portraits of The Prince of !. ales, The Prince Andrew and The
Princess Anne may not be used for commercial purposes or be incorporated
in the design of souvenirs. They may, however, be sold as portraits or
postcards P'nd be reproduced on calendars and greeting cards,
6. Royal Portraits, Royal Emblems and the Arms of Australia may
not be used for advertisement purposes.
7. The copyright in a portrait, picture or photograph qnd the
ownership of a design are not affected by the foregoing, and any question
in connection therewith should be settled with the owner of the copyright
or design.
8. These rules do not extend to the use of Her Majesty's Standard
which is Her Majesty's personal Standard and may not be used or flown
by any other person.
9. Printed cloths and textiles, al though not classified as
souvenirs of the Royal Visit, must conform to these regulations, with the
exception of paragraph 3( b) and paragraph 4. Proposed designs must be
submitted for approval. 
If any cases of doubt arise as to the interpretation of the
above rules, enquiries should be addressed to " The Secretary, Prime
Minister's Department, Canberra"; or, in the United Kingdom, to
" The Comptroller, Lord Chamberlain's Office, St. James's Palace,
London, S. W. 1."
Prime Minister's Department,
January, 1964. 



64/ 003
OR PRESS P. M, No, 1/ 1964
DENISON BYELECTION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that
the writ for the byelection for the Division of
Denison to fill the vacancy caused by the death of the
Hon. Athol Townley Mill issue on Wednesday next,
January, 1964. Nominations will close on 30th January and
polling day will be on Saturday, 1 5th February,
CANBERRA, January, 1964. 



poft ]" fla ft f
Pu Na ft id m Uahown ht iinS
Is UN&amp; ast* m Uwaf tsh lbi
ymt~ in lbh" ilqpm a t b vg Yolm.
thko ~ Urmh. h M i i
eppeuO~ t lb t f* ghgiS f"
Im 1mf el tm t WAL abto pmta t " Nna e
ouM, am" Idat AW WIdto. o wtftpu
some V1 thr l-t me@ atue
aw Ubm. bIsn wdbhdm Isv w ba Isnin1
SWI gn od winftahr . of ow yawl b bp-p
in hsm. oteI mt gtm fog ursw
in* t ise Us&amp; I to~ be Itw -dl go1s2o atS
* sot~ Stu.. a" m to sLim~ tom
thewt a isq Phu bmitt = Ad withh
' ustisp ewt e bi el wi gi bd
mIltoa dd ils p. 3 mob 1 losea 



FOP. PiS: REVIE'J OF' CGAINET BUSINESS
STAT~ JT iY TI-Q PRIM, MINISTER
FLOI\ I S TR ROTE. RT ,, Eivj ZTE S T C, tC, . P
Cabi. aet has now concluded its fi. r -t full
meeting since the election, A great deal of ground hrs
been covered. Apa ft from our eXcv. nuins tion of the r 1ign
situation as it relates to Malaysiww, e were anxious to
put in tr-: sin various po1licy promises we made, ari; d -to be
ready to meet the new Parliament with a series of positive
legislative ieasuresa In this statement, I propose, as briefly
as possible, to review the Cabinet-bjusiness of the last
two days. 
2
MALAYSIA
The Government has had the military and political
situation between Indone sia sar. IMalaysia under constant attention.
A full review of the current situation., including various
activities in Sarawak and Sabah, was given to Cabinet by the
Minister for External Affairs.
Our Australian military advisers have thoroughly
examined the military situation and have given the Government
their assessment as to the adequacy of the military for.-ae, already
available to Malaysia, Having considered this assessment, the
Government earlier concluded, and still concludes, that tLiere is
no immediate need for further Australian assistance, This assessment
is shared by Malaysian and British authorities,
Australian forces of all arms already are, and have
for some considerable time been, in Malaysia placed there for,
among other things, the defence of that country, which comprises
not only Sarawak and Sabah but ( it should be remembered) Malaya
and Singapore. Australian naval vessels stationed in Malaysia
are already available for patrol and escort work, and RA, A. AF.
fighter squadrons are berin kept at a s; oto of operational
readiness for use in Malaysian air defence.
The Australian Government is maintaining close and most
harmonious consultation with the Malaysian and British Governments
concerning the military situation and concerning the need for any
further assistance from Australian forces. In addition to this,
the Government is consulting with the Malaysian Government to see
what it can do to contribute to the development of Malaysia's
own defence effort.
The Government believes that there has been and is
considerable scope in the diplomatic field to try to end border
incidents and to maintain peace in the area, We have boon most
active in these matters, We have, in particular, made our position
abundantly clear to the Indonesian Government, emphasising that,
although we sincerely desire friendly relations with Indonesia,
which it regards as important for both countries we also stand
firmly for the political and territorial intogrity of Malaysia
and have given definite militcry undertakings in support of it.
We have informed Indonesia that we disapprove of Indonesias
rcfusl! to recognise Malaysia, and its threat to crush Malaysia,
and that my statemont of 25th September, 1963, that Australia
would assist Malaysian and British forces to defend Malaysia
against external attock or externally inspirsi od . sbvo:. si C, ro. ins
unaltered. The Government welcomes the forthcoming conversations
between President Sukarno and the United States Attorney-Goneral,
Mr. Robert Kennedy, We are most hopeful that the discussions
will load to a clearer understanding on the part of President
Sukarno of the seriousness with which the United States and her
allies regard present developments on the Indonesian-Malaysian
border in Borneo, 
3-
HOUI TNG
We gave a groat deal of attention to tho conrlx
problems which are involved in cottling the-dotails of the
Housing Subsidy Scheme,
As will be understood, many marginal questions
arise about the eligibility of persons for subsidy the
nature of the savings which will attract subsidy., he rdato
of operation of the scheme, and so one We are dterm . neTd
to settle all those matters of detail in time to present
the necessary legislation early in the new Session,
We arranged for a Committee of Ministers and
officers to work out the matters of detail in the light
of the Cabinet discussions. When the scheme has taken its
final statutory forn, it will be cacted to operate as
from the 2nd December, 1963, the first working day
after the elections had authorised us to proceed. This
means that when eligibility has been finally determined,
contracts entered into on or after December 2, 1963, by
eligible persons who satisfy the conditions, will qualify
for purposes of subsidy,
The new Commonwealth Department of Housing has been
established under the Ministerial control of Mr, Bury.
We have appointed the Secretary of the new Department.
He is Mr. JoF, Nimmo, who has in recent years
been Deputy Secretary in the Prime Minister's Department,
Prior to that, Mr. Nimno was First Assistnt Secretary in
charge of the Banking, Trade and Industry Division of the
Treasuryo I have referred to the Housing Subsidy Scheme The
other housing proposals in the Policy Speech are being
closely examined by the new Minister and Depart mnt, I will
hope that at a fairly early date, steps towards the-; putting
into effect of the Housing Insurtnce proposals can. be
announced. 
4
CHILI) ENDOWMENT
In the Policy Speech I said
" Child Endownont will be raised to
per week for the third and subsequent
children Having in mind the educational
responsibilities of parents, 15/-per week
endow eont will be paid in respect of all
full-tino student children fron 16 to 21."
Cabinet has decided that the new rate of
endowment and also the entitlorent of student children
will connmence as fron the 14th January, 1964.
The Minister for Social Services will
announce further details, including the description of
those student children who are to be regarded as
" full tine", 
FDUCATION
We discussed arrangements for Commonwealth
Secondary and Technical Scholarships and for assistance
to science buildings and equipment for secondary schools.
Senator Gorton as Minister assisting me in
Commonwealth activities in relation to Research and
Education will be in touch with State Ministers of Education
and independent school authorities in relation to the
scholarships and also in relation to science buildings
and equipment. Obviously there will be many important
administrative arrangements to be made,
It is not practicable, having regard to the
fact that examinations for scholarships cannot be usefully
organised when the school year is about to begin, to make
the scholarship scheme effective until the 1965 year
It will clearly, having regard to the divergent practices
in various States, take some little time to organise a
system of awarding scholarships by competitive examination.
However? arrangements for grants for science buildings
and equipment will be put into effect as soon as possible
after my colleague has had the necessary conferences.
The Commonwealthts Committee which is enquiring
into the future of tertiary education is expected to make
its report in March. It would, we thinl4 be wise to have
the benefit of this report before we fix the final machinery
for the Technical Scholarships and the grants for Technical
Schools to which I referred in my Policy Speech, There
will be no avoidable delay. We want to see the whole of
our educational proposals going into effect as soon as
possible. 
6
NOT THERN DEVELOPENT
We discussed and approved the constitution
of the Division of Northern Development in the Department
of National Development. It will be assisted by the
appropriate inter-dopartmental committees drawn from
those Commonwealth Departments and Organisations which
have special knowledge, agreed upon the following
statement of functions In conjunction with other Departments
or Government organizations possessing
special knowledge or facilities to
keep under review the natural resources
of northern Australia,
To examine broad questions of policy
which need special consideration in the
interests of fostering northern
development.
To advise on northern development including
any proposals submitted to the Commonwealth
by the Governments of Western Australia
and Queensland.
To ensure that basic mapping ans surveys
of resources are maintained and
co-ordinated with developmental
requirements.
To publish maps, reports and other data
relevant to the resources of northern
Australia and their development, 
WATER PE, S OUML
The Australian Water Resources Council wnich
we established has put in hand the preparation of
estimates of the requirements of the States and the
Commonwealth Territories so that the rate of measurement
of surface water and the investigation of underground
water resources should be acceleratede
The Standing Committee of the Council will
meet on January 29 and 30 to formulate recommendations
to the Council of Ministers which we are endeavouring
to arrange for February, After that Council has met,
we anticipate that firm proposals for an expedited
programme of water resources measurement will come before
the Cabinet. 
We considered the Agreement which has been
made between Hamersley Iron Pty. Ltd. and the State
Government of Western Australia. The company concerned
is in substance a partnership between Conzinc Rio Tinto
( Aust.) Ltd. and the Kaiser Steel Corporation.
The agreement contemplates development of
the immense deposits of iron ore which occur in the
Hamersley Range area; first by straight-out export
of iron ore, and later by the organisation of a secondary
processing plant and the ultimate establishment of an
integrated iron and steel plant. Much large capital
investment is involved, for the work to be done will,
in addition to mining facilities, include roads, water,
town establishment, a railway line and a harbour.
Cabinet decided to approve the export of
200m. tons of iron ore pursuant to this contract over a
period which is estimated to be 21 years. Our export
approval is subject to the use of good mining practices
and approval of price as being reasonable, having regard
to the overall national interests. 
9
MEAT EXPORTS
The Minister for Trade explained in
detail the nature of the negotiations now being
conducted overseas by a Mission headed by Sir Alan
Westerraan. Weo approved of the lines being followed.
It is, of course, for obvious reasons, not desirable
to say what proposals are being exchanged but there was
complete agreement upon the way in which the negotiations
for Australia were being conducted.
VARIOUS
A number of other matters were exaninodo
Some of them gave rise to decisions which are suitable
for administrative action, while others gave rise to
further enquiries, the result of which will no doubt load
to future decisions.
CANBERRA, 16th January, 1964. 



P 0 ] SIIZI3G OPPICLAL OPIMING
SPEECH BY THE RIGHT HONUA SIR ROflRT KkNZIESS K. T. 4 Cd.. C. hP
Sir and Mrs. Bass wAn % entlemms
Would those who were present the last time I opened a building
near here please show their hwAmd? 1.11, thank heavens for that,
because I complained as we came up that I've fallen into the habit
of openirW buildings and each time I appear to see the same people
and each time I've tried to say something fresh, aud each time I ve
tried to get a laugh Am occasionally. And the next time I
can't remember what I said and I can only hope that they don't. But
today as far as you are concerned, you are all clean skins, because
only five or six people held their bonds up, so I'm free. I like
tkat reference that wae made to my previou. s enterpripes in this
a~ ea, becaLse during the last election a thing of which you may have
heard I was very interested to discover how many younger people
attended meetings and shoved interest in what went on and I always
try to keep up to date arA therefore I've become familiar with the
new language of the young and it appeare that I am a ' square'an
here I am today, the livirng proof of it the fourth corrierl
Talking atbcut elections, Sir, I don't want to make a political
Wspeech here, of course, but talking about the election, some of you
Will rememiber that when I decided to have one, quite a few of you
thought I ought to be examined. But now, of course, everybody knows
it was the right thing to do. But may I tell you that I used to say
to my colleaguaes, whom I'd plunged into this vortex of politics, at
an election,-' Don't worry, if I win all will be forgiven, if I lose
I'm goinrg to catch the earliest and slowest ship to the furthest
corners of the earth'. In fact I was prepared to nominate, if such
a thing had been available bere, a slow banana ship, becauzse I
understand that that kind of ship would suit so very well. Now, of
ccurs, thfs was a lighthearted remark in a sense for me to be making
tc them because 1 must say I didn't entertain many doubts about having
catch ai ban~ aa ship, but I stan here as a fellow wr~ o's opened the
, ar. tas buildinf, well of course Hudson ? ysh, ( is Hudson here today?)
Hudson owns kantas a" we pay for it, and therefore I bave a certain
SInterest and so have the members of the Government, In Qantas, and
Wwhenever I travel by air I go to great pains to travel ' by Qantas, for
the best reasons In the world. But my great ambition don't use this
against me my great ambition when I finally do get heaved out of
politics, is to retain eniough health and strength to travel thereafter
* bNy sea and in. no other fashion, and that's why I'm delighted at the
end, at tn-is fourth expedition in this area, to come back to the sea
but of course In Australia when we talk about travelling by sea we have
poor nemorles If we don't suddenly _ find ourselves reuem~ erinq P 0 and
Orient. I know there are other shipping lines down below I asked for
R~ booking on one of them to see wbat reaction I would get and it was
apuropriate! But travelling by sea I know that it's alwmys easy jo
say that the rotne goes out of travel it does In a sonse; I
* iareeay that when the men who sailed the seas under sail found smoky
steamers frequenting the sea lane they said ' This is a stop backwards,
this is terrible, this is monstrous' and, every stop forward that occuri
produces some reaction. But I was remembering today, ecoing down here,
that remarkable little poem of Kipling's, do you remember, in which he
is talking about this kind of thing and the dying away of romance and
then says sddenly ' komanoe brought up the 9.15'. Now this Is true
thie, business of travel can be a romantic thing in a prosaic life, it
can1 be Rt neesearv exerc~ se in a busy one. And, of course, we all wt-. c
ire c,) nr,-rned with affairs in this country, like to imagine that we are 
extremely busy and that every minute counts and that's w~ w nowaidoys
they are always devising some means of travelling faster and. faster.
~ Y successor, Heaven help him, will have to fly supersonically; he'll
be in London before he leaves here, or worts to that effect, and if
mW experience counts for anything the faster you go, the more weary
you are at the end of the journey; but still, time, they say, is
m~ oney, and I understand this and I don't resist it, a" as a follow
who may have been carted around now about a million miles in the air,
I practice it. But the sea, the sea, when time doesn't matter all
that much and when you reall1y want to ame something of the world and
when you want realy to relax, when you want to be able to arrive at
your destination in fins shape for whaatev er it is that you want to do,
provided you're not in too much of a hurry, this is the way to travel;
this is the way to see foreign ports, this is the to have a glance
at foreign people, at now people, at now climates. ' ye found in
travel by sea the most exciting of all experiences and its exciting
for a* because it isn't exciting in the sense that so maq other
things one has to do are exciting. And therefore I'm a great man for
travelling by sea and one of these days as I said, I'm gon to gratify
myself, I'm going to glut my low tastes, I will be at sea all the time
I'll be at sea so much ( my opponents, of course, know that I have
been in one sense, for a long time) but I will physically be at mea so
much that I'll be able to go along to Donald Anderson and say ' Donald,
Wmy boy, I'm a very good customer, could I have a slight discount on My
next fare?' WAn whn that time comes you'll know that I have achieved
paradise. Now there's one other thing that I would like to say about this
Wfamous Company or Group of companies we talk about the Victorian
era, to a certain extent with disrespect. We're so much cleverer than
they were * in the 19th Century, we're so much wiser, we understand so
much better how to make war and causee trouble in the world we are
rather superi or to the 19th Centuzy. Very interestin that the
Peninsular Company began in the ver7 year that Queen Victori a came
to the throne, and terribly interesting to discover as I did when I
read the notes, that one of the two partners who projected this
enterprise wsa an Anderson. And then, of course, later on, the Orient
Line very interesting to realise that when the Orient Line first
Sbegan to see the possibilities of travel to the Bast, travpl to India,
V they not only went around the Cape, but they went through a phase that
preceded the Bues Canal, in which rasnweesr e disembarked at
Alexandria and went across to Bues by Camel tralla. Well, of course,
travelling on a Canel was all-right if you had boen travelling by sea
Sin those days no doubt passenger* hardly noticed any breach of
V continuity. But isn't It interestig that tod@ y there should be so
closely associated with us, so fanilar in the mouths of so mawy
hundreds of thousands of Australians, a Compaqy, which has in these,
various phases, been associated with, or at any rate, contemporary
with, very remarkable historic evests. thereto another aspect that
I realise~ tor the first tine when I was looking Into this matter, and
that is that after the war,-half of the fleet of each CompaxV had gon
they came out with I think Ion right In sowing " 0 in the cae
of the Orient, " 0 in the case of the P 0. Now this meant, of course,
in a sense, starting from scratch,. It must have presented a challenge,,.
it mast have produced in the first Instance a certain feeling of sorrowthat
such blows should have been struck. But in the result, the
opportunity was &amp; aimed of making all things modern, and in the result
the great fleets of this Compam or Gru fCaniet. getfet
today are, if I may say so, the last woz. ' yve occasonally had the
satisfaction of going across the Atlantic in one of the Veat ships of
the world quite frankly, Sir Donald, without buttering you up in any
way, I would sooner travel aboard one of yours. We have an onorsous
service. Down below they have om the doors as you cam in the swring
glass doors a couple of symbls, did you notice themp instead of
.18 
door handles, one that looks like throe penguins standing side by
side indicates the passenger ships it's symbolic; and the other
one which is all covered with squiares, oddly enough -it represents
the cargo aspect of the business. Wel# of oourset I was at great
pains to come through the passenger entrance beeause both as Prime
Minister mid asLR. l enzies I can speak In the highest possible
tors of the pasenger transport activities of this Company. But
when It comes to cargos I always have to speak subject to the
Department of Trade anid subject to the Department of Primary
Industry, you know what I mean; just as I'm about to become
enthusiastic they sq ' Now wait a moment old boy, we're trying to
got the freights down' and so we'll reserve judgement on that. But
Sir, we live in a time in which comuaications In the world have
developed out of all sight it's only the other day I was present
at the opening of the first conversations on the Compac the now
submarine cable for telephone purposes. We've had all thes
experiences I've said something about flying, television all
tlkene matters have opened up a now world of communications
tremendously important, provided that we use the instruments in
that world with wisdom. But shipping, travelling by sea, retains
one thing which none of these otboe can aspire to, because it gives
to a lot of people the opportunity of greater speed than their
grandfathers ever thought of, but at the same time of leisure,
happineess a sense of explorationg a ense of discovery after
exploration.
San AtWtohrenne yI-( Gfiernsetr alw, eonft aAt usthtrea lieax peton sea ttoefn dth ea ctaoxnpfearyeenrcs e, t o thEensgel anwde reas
wonderful days may I just mention them, quite nostagioally? We
wernt by sea, we travelled by an Orient ship, we took a long time
five and a half weeks. We sometimes in an exuberant moment, or at
one tiae A twice, I think got off at the South of France and
travelled up through Parts. We arrived in London, we were met by a
Minister, who didn't ask us any questions except whether we found
ourselves suitably arranged for at a hotel and we found It wasn't a
bad hotel some cheap dump'lik* the Savoy, or something of that type.
And then we were left alone for about throe days MAn then we were
. eagdievern a handsome lunoheon, where speeches were mode, but as only the
of the Delegation spoke I me on ' the free list. Az4 then
days later, we had the first comference and the Lasder of the
Australian delegation put a powerful case, ( I hope) end the President
O Tohf omtahse, Bhoea rdw ouolf d Trsaayd e ' oWer lwl htoheivse r iist v emriyg hti nhtaevree stbienegn aonrd thvea lulaatbel e, J imwmeie
would like to consider this. When would it be convenient for you to
resume?' And it finally appered that Tuesday week would be a suitable
time. ( I wouldn't want this to go beyond this room you know, but still
it's a long time ago all claims against me are now statute barred).
Then you went up to Scotland, or If you felt that way disposed you
went over to Ireland some reckless characters nipped over to Paris
and on Tuesday week you resumed and the other man made a powerful
speech and this was very good; it was leisurely at the end of
eight weeks we usually got an agreement by the simple process of
threateninpa to catch the next ship unless we got it, and we got it,
but it was a good agreement and. it was kept. Now what happens?
You catch the ' Plane, you put your head on one side, you put your head
on the other, you go uV9 you go down, seventeen hours flying time,
whatever it is and you re in London, you hop out, as well as you can
after a long period of time in which you really haven't slept. You're
ushered into the presence of all tbese camera boys and television
people and press reporters, where you have to give a celebrated
imitation of being extraordinarily intelligent and disposing of
international problems almost with a witty aid* you know, which is
.14 
4.
usually quoted against you for the next twelve moaths. And then you
get into the hotel, you take a bath, you bhange your linen and the
conference begins at half past two the same day and then it goes on
every morning, every afternoon, every night with a reception, same
people, different place. And at the end of ten days you hurtle out
a&amp; gain. Now you ask me to cast a single first past the post vote as
to which system I prefer and in my doddering old age I will tell you
that the earlier one had much to be said for it. And Sir, nobody
contributed more profoundly to this happy state of affairs than the
Orient sl. irpinr Company arid the P 0 shipping Company at that time.
T: is wae the beginning of my affection for them, an affection that
, ae never faded away. And therefore you can see that I have many
reasons, some of them public, many of them private and personal for
being delighted to be here and most honoured to be asked to declare
the building open. .* 7 



FOR PRESS: DUKE OF EDINBURGH TO BE PATRON
Statement by Sir Ian McLenanhairman ofLhe Executive Committee
of the Ian Cu :; cxs Momjoiial Foundation
His Royal Highness, the Duke of Edinburgh has accepted
the invitation of the Ian Clunies Ross Memorial Foundation to
become its Patron.
The Ian Clunies Ross Memorial Foundation was established
in 1959 as a non-profit organisation to honour the memory of the
late Sir Ian Clunies Ross, D. VoSco, Honorary LLODo
( Melbourne), FoA. A. who was Chairman of the C. SJI. RoO. from 1949
until his death in June, 1959.
His life had been one of outstanding service to Australia,
The first project of the Foundation is the building of
a National Science Centre in Melbourne, This will provide office
accommodation for the scientific and technological societies, a
number of which have their national headquarters in Melbourne. It
will also provide an auditorium and smaller meeting rooms for
lectures exhibitions, committee meetings and other gatherings
of scientists, By supporting the work of the societies in this
way, it is hoped to strengthen considerably the Australian
scientific community.
A site at 187-195 Royal Parade, Parkville ( Melbourne)
has been purchased for a sum of œ 50,000. This is admirably suited
to the purposes of the Foundation since it is close to the city,
opposite the University of Melbourne and in an area where there are
a number of other scientific and technological bodies, It is also
in an area where car parking will not present difficulties. The
Governors have appointed Messrs. Godfrey Spowers, Hughes, Mewton
and Lobb, as architects for Clunies Ross Housu, and have given their
general approval to preliminary sketch plans for a building. The
ground floor will be devoted to auditorium and meeting rooms and
the upper floors to the societies' offices.
As a result of a campaign for funds conducted on a
national basis, a sum of œ 242,000 has so far been received and a
further sum of œ 42,000 promised. The Governors of the Foundation
are confident that it will be possible to raise more money for the
purposes of the Foundation and negotiations are at present being
undertaken with several possible sources of fuuids. Final details
of the building will not be decided until the Foundationts
financial resources are more accurately known, but it is hoped
that it will be possible to call tenders and start building
operations during 1964,
Although the Foundation's first project is the establishment
of the National Science Centre in Melbourne, it plans to work
in all States. At present negotiations are in hand for opening an
office of the Foundation in Brisbane.
CANBERRA, 23rd January, 1964.
Further information may be obtained from
Mr. G. B. Uresford, Secretary of the Ian Clunies Ross Memorial
Foundation, 314 Albert Street, East Melbourne. Telephone 41.6611.
( Private Telephone 24.5399) 



^ y'ñ-ALIA DAY
Message By The Pre Mister e Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Australia Day is for both memory and decision.
What great events have moved across the face of Australia since
January 26, 1788.' We can look back with pride on what has been
achieved in almost every field of life. In this sense we are
the inheritors of the work of the past. But this does not mean
that we can be content merely to live on our inheritance. We must
add to it, so that future generations will look back on what we
have done with a pride similar to that with which we regard the
work of our predecessors. In this sense, Australia Day is
an occasion for renewing our determination to build soundly on
the existing foundations, to develop new resources, to build up
a wider and fuller civilisation. In short, we must see ourselves
as the present pioneers of an even botter Australian future.
Particularly in times of great prosperity, we may be tempted to
regard ourselves as beneficiaries -nd to forget that we must
be contributors as well. I have no doubt whatever that the
national character will continue to rise to the challenge of the
future, not ignoring difficulties or pretending they don't exist,
but with complete confidence in our capacity to overcome threm and
to play our part in what should ho c notable national growuli in
the years to come.
CANBERRA. January, 1963. 



64/ 007
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. '/ 1963
COMM4ONWEALTH CONTRIBUTION FOR CLEANING OF
sT.-AK-J IS, 3 LONDON
Statement by the Prime Minister9 the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzieos
The Prime Minister said today that the Commonwealth
Government had decided to contribute fœ 5 000 to the appeal
for œ 150,000 sterling to complete the c.. eaning of the
outside of St. Paulfs Cathedral, London. A request had been
made by the Lord Mayor of London through Sir Eric Harrison,
Australian High Commissioner in the United Kingdom.
The West Front of the Cathedral, including the
famous Bell and Clock Towers had already been cleaned
thanks to the generosity of ? he Ionian Bank of London.
As the Lord Mayor said in his request to Sir Eric " This
good work has not only revealed beauties in Sir Christopher
Wren's design and in the craftsmanship of his stonemasons
which had been concealed for generations by incrustations
of grime, but has brought to light such hidden features as
the Marble surround to the groat West Doors, the Frioze of
of the main Cornice over the Portico, and many other details
of absorbing interest."
The Prime Minister emphasised that St. Paul's
housed in its crypt the Chapel of the Order of the British
Empire and thus had a special significance for the whole
Commonwealth of Nations.
CANBERRA, 28th January, 1964. 



64/ 008
FOR PRESS No. 6/ 1964
Statement by the MISSION TO KUALA LUiJPUR
Prime Minister_, tho Rt. Hon.
Menzi os Sir Robert
I indicated in my statement after the Cabinet
meeting of January 16 that the Government was consulting
with the Malaysian Government to seo what it could do to
contribute to the development of Malaysia's own defence
effort. Pursuant to this, the Cabinet today gave further
consideration to the question of assistance to Malaysia in
the development and expansion of its own forces.
The Government has been given to understand by
the Malaysian authorities that certain assistance in the
form of material and training would be useful, and accordingly
it is proposed to send a mission to Kuala Lumpur to discuss
and assess what items, within Australia's capacity to supply,
may be needed.
MELBOULNE, 28th January, 1964. 



FOR PRESS: 4
P. M. No. 8/ 1263
TEACHING HOSPITALS COKMflITTEE APPOINTME~ NT OF
NEW MEMBERS
Statement by the PriMe Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today the appointment
of two members to the Universities Commission's Committee on
the Teaching Costs of Medical Hospitals, to replace the
late Professor J. G. Hayden and the late Sir Herbert Schlink.
The two new members are Dr. H, Selle Chairman
of the Hospitals Commission of New South Wales and former
General Superintendent of the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital,
and Professor FR. Magarey, Professor of Pathology and Dean
of the Medical Faculty, University of Sydney.
Certain help for teaching hospitals for the
1961-63 triennium had already been given by the Commonwealth,
on the basis of recommendations by the Committee to the
Universities Commission and so to the Government. Tho
Committee was now investigating the needs of the teaching
hospitals for the 1964+-66 triennium and it was expected that
its findings would be conveyed to the Government some time
before the end of the current financial year.
CANBERRA,
2nd February, 1964o 



FOR PRESS : For Release 7 a~ m. Tuesday, February.
( Simultaneously with London). P. M. No. 9/ 1964+
CANCELLATION OF VISIT BY QUEEN MOTHER
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother,
is entering hospital for an appendix operation. Her
Majesty will be unable therefore to proceed with her visit
to Australia planned for this month and next for the
occasion of the Adelaide Festival of Arts.
We all greatly regret this news. It is our wish
and confident expectation that Her Majesty will have a
full and quick recovery.
Her Majesty has asked me to eXpress her own deep
regret at the cancellation of t'Uhe visit to which she had
been looking forward with such genuine pleasure.
CANBERRA,
4th February, 1964. 



64/ 015
P E S S S T A E P E M E T R IX 9 2 A U 3 9 0 6
THE FOLL1OVING i'iE: 5SAG) r BA2-j. 2: kI]:: IJn ii; lv BY THE PIRIiUf2, MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. SIR FOflERi' VU. E. ZEz3, R FRCM T'HE ,2W. 2 MINI' 6ER OF
NEW ZEALAD~ D, THE. ~ RI. HfiN*,. K. IIIHLOIK~
I have been dee-: iy shoed and distr-essod to ealn of
the disaster at Jervis Bay involINing vessels of' the Royal
Australian Navy. May I offer you mny very sincere sympathy and
regret that Australia and tiie Roy,. i hustrali. an Navy should have
suffered such a blow. On bshalf of the Government and people
of New Zealand I extend sincere sympathiy to the relatives of all
those involved.
CANAML 11th e~ lrarys 


PM No 10/1964
&nbsp;My colleague, the Minister for the Navy, is making a statement about the sinking of the " VOYAGER" and the great loss of life which has occurred.
It is a shocking disaster unparalleled in the eace-time history of Australia. The Government and the Naval Board extend their very deep sympathy to the bereaved families who have sustained so sudden and tragic a loss.
I want to announce at once that there will be a prompt and thorough investigation into this tragedy. I have decided that the normal machinery for Naval investigations is inadeauate for the present purposes. There will therefore be a full public investigation conducted by a judge. I cannot, of course, yet say who the judge will be. I will also discuss with my colleagues whether hc should be assisted by Naval experts acting as assessors. But the main thing I want to make clear at this early stage is that the investigation is to be prompt, thorough, public and conducted by a judge.
CANBERRA,11th February, 1964.



OPENING CF NEW SCIENCE BUILDING AT GEELONG COLLEGE
GEELONG,, VICORIA
1i2i1iao.,. ar 196
SpReech by the Prime Minister,~ the Rt. Hong Sir Robert Menzies
Sir Arthur, Moderator and Ladies and Gentlemen
This seems to be my golden opportunity for making
a record short speech before~ the rain comes down heavily, I was
told just now by Sir Arthur Coles I was questioned by him
did I believe in miracles? He then began to describe a few of
which he was aware, How ridiculous to ask me whether I believed
in miracles. When I look back on the last seven Federal elections,
I know that they happen. ( Laughter) I am a convinced believer.
( Applause) Now, just in case we get washed out, I must recall
at once that it is my duty to open the building in the name of
Sir Arthur Coles, to open one of the two labs* in it, to name it
after the late Mr. Roper and to name the other one after a
celebrated character of whom I used to hear a great deal when
my boys were here Tammy Henderson. ( Applause) I think it is
a concession to Presbyterian respectability that the lab, to be
named after him is the ' IT. Henderson Laboratory". It should
have been " Tammy Henderson Laboratory." However, I merely throw
that suggestion out.
Now I want to tell my old friend and competitor,
Mr. Robson, something. I called him a competitor because this
is about the seventh or eighth time that I have attended the
opening of a science lab, partly built by the funds of the
Industrial Fund. Each time he listens carefully to what I say,
the next time he uses it all himself. ( Laughter) This man has
literally left me with not a feather to fly with time after time
and yet I forgive him because if it is any comfort to him and to
the gentlemen with whom he works in this imaginative Industrial
Fund, I would like to say that the idea put forward by me and
now in course of being carried out owes not a little to the
existence of the Industrial Fund and its imaginative suggestions
which entered my mind and the minds of my colleagues. And so I
would like to say an additional " thankyou" l to him for this.
Now, it is quite right that this building is partly
the Fund, but it is also, in a very large degree, the result of
two remarkable private benefactions -from Sir Arthur Coles and
Mrs. Roper. ( Applause) And you know ladies and gentlemen, there
is a certain symbolism about this, hope that whatever governments
may do and my own does what it can in these fields we will
never reach the point at which private citizens feel that their
own obligations end with the payment of their taxes. That, I think,
would be the defeat of humanity. I don't want governments to be
responsible for all those things in a school like this or elsewhere
which appear to be good things. And that is why it is a splendid
thing for our country that we should have people like th~ e two
to whom I have made reference, and there are many others here whom
I recall in other fields who have shown that they have a sense of
personal obligation achieving personal satisfaction in doing something
of this kind and I hope that that will go on whatever may
be done by governments, * 0 0 0 / 2 
-2
Now perha T might sysp s orethng about what is
being done. I have no idea ho mu~ ch money the Industrial F'und
has raised or spends0 A-1-I 1_* o is it seemed to me as I went
from one place to another to amount to a very groat deal, but when
I announced our proposals that we would take what is, In terms of
a Federal Government, a revolutionary step of' providing œ% 1M a year
' in aid of buildings and equipmen~ t for scientific teaching in
secondary schools, I don't know that everybody realised how enormous
a thing this was fœ 5M. a year not œ C5146 spread over some long
period and if one estimates that the independent schools
represent a quartor, contain a quarter of those who aro engaged in
secondary education'which I think is a fairly accurate estimate,
this means that a maillion and a quarter a year will find its way
into purposes of this kind. And I hope that in the doing of this
work, we will take the fullest advantage of the enormous experience
that Mr. Robson has had and those associated with him have had.
We do want to feel that all this money will go to the right spots
at the right time and to achieve the right purpose,
Now there is one other thing that I would like to
say to you. I have had the great pleasure of being associated
with an enormous development in the university world in Australia,
but one of the things that disturbs me, aond I think disturbs
other people, is the relatively high failure rate in the universities
in their first year. Great experts have commented on this and
many have been prepared to say, and no doubt with some truth,
that something ought to be done to improve the standard of
qualification the student has before he is thrown into the waters
of the university. Well yucan do that, we thought, in two ways.
It is very important to JIo it.
One is so to improve the scientific equipment in
the secondary schools as to give every boy or girl who has a
scientific bent an opportunity to be much better trained, much
further forward, much more accustomed to the handling of new
techniques and new equipment than ever before and I am sure that
this is going to pay enormous dividends in the development of the
universities, in the development of science and, therefore, in
the development of Australia.
And, of course, associated with ta, letme remind
you, we have in hand proposals for the creation of a very large
number of special scholarships not from primary schools to
secondary not from secondary to the university; we already have
a lot of ihose but in the secondary schools themselves, to enable
a student to have an extra year or two years so as to improve his
sixth form, his honours standing. I am perfectly certain that
Mr. Robson will agree that this is a splendid idea. It isn't
always easy to say to a boy or girl " Well, you ought to have
another year at school; you ought Lo take another year of honours." 1
In this mercantile world, we are all a little bit inclined to
think, " No, no. The sooner they are out the better. The sooner
they are earning some money the better," I think myself that if
we could bring about a state of affairs in which a few thousand
students at secondary schools, who otherwise would have left school,
stay on and do an honours course, stay on for a year, for two years,
so that they then develop the urge for learning and go to a
university not as prospective failures but as prospective successes,
this would be a wonderful thing for Australia.
We are a rather comfortable democracy. We are a
well-paid democracy. We must become a highly-trained and intelligent
democracy. We must make learning fashionable. We must make it
rather the correct thing to be tremendously good at some branch
of knowledge and, of course, I as you have been reminded, have
had a couple of entirely unscientific sons at this school. I dont 
3
think they ever learned a. nything about physics, Sorry0 I know
that they were well ta-7dil; 0 Al~ l I . f : c-meinber about it is that
action and reaction are equal and opposite -a principle that
has guided me in politics for a long time. ( Laughter)
But, really, l1adies and gentlemen, when I was a
schoolboy if you can imagine so remote a period of time
the scientific equipment was deplorable; a few bum~ en burners,
a few scales a few test tubes. Nothing. And this was regarded
as a rather depraved form of witohcraft which healthy schoolboys
would hardly be associated with0 Now, each time I go through
one of these new school wings, I, the most unscientific of
people, find myself fully persua ded that if they had had that
in my time, I would now be a scientist, and that would have,
of course, given immense credit to one of your most distinguished
old boys, a very famous scientist, who was unkind enough to say,
only a year or two ago in my presence on some public occasion
that he thought it essential that every Cabinet Minister should
have a scientific degree, to which I hasten to assure you I
replied that if that ever happened, that would be the end of the
world for the scientists, No scientists in a department would
ever have any hope of survival if his Minister thought that ho
knew more than his expert adviser, So on the whole, it is a good
thing to have as Ministers ordinary fellows like me wbo are not
scientists, but who have our lucid intervals in which we are
perfectly capable of understanding what other people are saying to
us. I musn't ramble on. I have really talked the rain
away you must concede that point. I am delighted about all
this. I am sorry that Frank Rolland can't be here. This would
be a great vision for him, but I am delighted. I have seen this
school grow over a long period of years, grow in strength and
grow in beauty and now adding to itself something which I hope
will make a powerful contribution to scientific training.
Might I just say one thing before I conclude. I
thought, what with all the sputniks and what-have-you, that there
would be a complete run on science courses in the universities.
This happens not to be true. The Monash University was created
and expressly stated to be one that would have a bent in the
direction of engineering and science. It is their engineering
and science faculties that are half filled; it is the humanities
side that is overcrowded. Maybe therefore, that with al. l these
improved facilities in this rapidly-changing world of science
teaching and experiment, that with all this, we will find that
we are helping to solve that problem by producing a much higher
percentage of those who look on science not just as a possible
job but as something that they can't live without. And you know,
ladies and gentlemen, that is true of anything you are to do,
Unless you feel you couldn't live without doing that particular
thing, then you won't be very much good at it. But give me the
man who is enthusiastic, who has a devotion, who has a sense of
vocation in any occupation and I will show you the man or woman
who is going to make easily the most effective contribution.
And so, Sir, I have great pleasure great honour in
naming this building after Sir Arthur Colas and. in naming the
two labs in the sense I have described. I want to say that my
pleasure on this occasion is equalled only by the pleasure of
my wife who got to know this place very well over a period of
years and who is delighted like me to see what great strides
the school made when the Menzies left, 



64/ 014
FOR PRESS The following cable has been received to-day by the
Prime Minister, through His Excellency the Governor-General:-
I was so very distressed to hear of the
tragic loss of " Voyager".
My thoughts and sympathy are very much
with the relatives of those who have lost their
lives, Elizabeth Queen Mother"
12th February, 1964: 



FOR PRESS P. M, No 12/ 1964
NAVAL DISASTER
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Incuiry into the loss of HMAS " VOYAGER" will
be by Royal Commission.
TLe Royal Commissioner will be Mr. Justice
Spicer, Chief Judge in the Industrial Court.
The Terms of Reference will be announced as soon
as possible. They are at present under close discussion.
CANBERRA, 13th February, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No 30 / 9L6' 1
ROYAL C( OMiIS io, ON NAVAL DISASTER
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Hon_ S. ir Robert Menzies
We have decided that the investigation of the
" VOYAGER" tragedy should be conducted by a judicial Commissioner
appointed under the Royal Commission Act, thQ Hon.
The Commissioner will be/ Sir John Spicer the
Chief Judge of the Industrial Court: There is no provision
under the Royal Commission Act for the appointment of assessors.
The Commissioner will be assisted by Counsel who will, of course,
be assisted in their turn by technical experts. The function of
Counsel will be to help in the most thorough-going examination
of all relevant circumstances, My colleague, the Minister for the Navy, is
discussing with the Naval Board the appointment of Counsel to
represent the Board. Should any other applications be made for
representation, the Commissioner will decide them,
A good deal of preliminary work will, of course,
be necessary, but there will be no avoidable loss of time.
The Terms of Reference will be as follows
" To inquire into and report on
the cause or causes of the collision that occurred
on the tenth day of February, One thousand
nine hundred and sixty-four, between the ships of
our Australian Navy, " MelbTourne" and :' Voyager"
and the resulting loss of " Voyager" and of the
lives of persons on board " Voyager";
the facts and circumstances leading up to,
contributing to or otherwise relating to the
collision and the loss, including, so far as
relevant to the cause of the collision, the
nature of the exercise on which the ships were
engaged and the suitability and preparedness
of the ships and of their equipment and crows
for that exercise; and
the facts and circumstances relating to the
rescue and treatment of survivors."
These terms should enable a speedy but
thorough judicial investigation to be made. No effort will be
spared to bring all the facts to light so far as they relate to
this most tragic event.
CANBERRA 13th February, 1964. 



FOR PRESS. 1 L19
TRADE P} 3ACTIGES DEPUTATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
This afternoon, pursuant to the Government~ s
general invitation to industry to offer its views, a deputation
representing the Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia the
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia the Australian
Council of Retailers and the Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries met a Committee of Commonwealth Government Ministers
and discussed with them a joint sutmission on behalf of those
organisations in relation to trade practices and monopolies, and
the protection of small traders.
The discussions were presided over by the Prime
Minister, who was accompanied by the Attorney-General the
Attorney-General Designate, the Minister for Trade and Industry,
the Treasurer the Minister for National Development and the
Minister for Labour and National Servicea
At the conclusion of the discussions, the Prime
Minister thanked the deputation for apprising the Government of
the views of the organisations represented at the discussions,
and said that, in framing legislation, the Government would take
these views into account, together with other views that had been
put to it. The Prime Minister added that when the legislation is
introduced there will be a further opportunity for public comment
before the debate in the Parliament proceeds.
CANBERRA, 17th February, 1964o
Representatives were
Mr. T. M. Ramsay ( President) Associated Chamber of
Mr. RoW. C. Anderson ( Director) Manufactures of Australia.
Mr. L. Atkinson ( President) Associated Chambers of
Mr. R. Pelham-Thorman ( Director) Commerce of Australia
Mr. W. D. Ferguson ( President) Federal Chamber of Automotive
Mr. W. W. D. Daunt ( Director) Industries
Mr. Theo Kelly ( President) Australian Council of
Mr. J. B. Griffin ( Secretary) Retailers. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 12/ 1964+
ECON OMIC CONSUILTATITONS
Statement by the Prime erTh 1-1 Hon. Q3. i-r Robert Menzies
This afternoon the Prime Minister and a committee
of Ministers held a general discussion of the econom'ic situation
with representatives of national organisations. The Prime
Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, said that this had been a further
meeting in the series held over the past two years under a
practice which the Government intended to continue.
Today's meeting had been arranged by the Government
to give Ministers an opportunity early in the year to obtain the
up-to-date views of those concerned with the day-to-day workings
of commerce and industry. Ministers had found the talks most
useful and informative. Representatives who attended the meeting were:
Mr. R. V. Allison, President, Associated Chambeisof
Manufactures of Australia
Mr. L. Atkinson, President, Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia
Mr. Theo Kelly, President, Australian Council of Retailers
Mr. R. J. Abercrombie, Chairman, Australian Bankers' Association
Mr. A. F. Havard, President, National Farmers' Union
Mr, JP, Heffernan, President, Australian Primary Producers' Union
Mr. T. L. Bull, President, Australian Woolgrowerst and
Graziers' Council
Mr. L. Heaslip, President, Australian Wool and Meat
Producers' Federation
Mr. WeDe Ferguson, President, Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries
Mr, KG, Hooker, President, Master Builders' Federation of
Australia.
The Australian Council of Trade Unions was also
invited to the meeting, but because of its other commitments,
arrangements have been made for the Council to talk with Ministers
on Thursday, 27th February.
Tomorrow afternoon tho committee of Ministers will
have further discussions on the economic situation, first with
the representatives of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council and then with representatives of the Export Development
Council. CANBERRA 18th February, 1964+. 



64/ 020
FOR PRESS LETTER FROM MRS. J. F. KENNEDY
The Prime Minister has received the following
letter from the widow of President Kennedy: January 31, 1964+
" Dear Sir Robert-,
My children and I arc extremely grateful
for the kindness and understanding which you and
the people of Australia displayed in the messages
and other manifestations of sympathy which we
received after the death of my husband. The
generosity and openhearted sincerity of Australians,
acting individually and in groups, helped to provide
us with strength when strength was most needed and
remains a memory of friendship unselfishly offered
at a time of tragedy.
The people of your country showed they
shared with Americans everywhere a feeling of
common loss. I know that this realization has also
affected large numbers of Americans who have become
aware of this selfless spirit of Australian
participation in their time of sorrow.
Mr, Prime Minister, I thank you and your
fellow citizens for your comforting expressions of
sympathy and for showing us so convincingly how
close in spirit our people are. Nothing could have
pleased my husband more. Sincerely, JACQUELINE KENNEDY.
CANBERRA, 18th February, 1964+ 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 16/ 1964
PREMIERS I CONFERENCE
Statement by th~ e Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies.
announced today th-at a Premiers? Conference will be hield
in Canberra on 12th and 13th March.
The principal. business of th-e Conference will
be a discussion of Commonwealth proposals for Commonwealth-
State financial arrangements concerning roads, to replace
the existing arrangements which expire on 30th June.
CANBERRA, February, 1964. 



FOR PRESS PoM. No. 17/ 1964
BRITISH EXHIBIT: ON IN SYDNEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
I am delighted to have been invited to act
jointly with Sir Alec Douglas-Home as President of the
British Exhibition. Aust'alia 1964+, and I am looking forward
to opening the Exhibition in Sydney in September. My colleague,
the Minister for Trade and Industry, has agreed to be Vice-
President jointly with Mr. Edward Heath and Mr. Duncan Sandys.
This will be the first British Exhibition to be
held in any Commonwealth country and it will be the most
ambitious British venture of its kind ever attempted anywhere.
This is very gratifying.
The objectives of the Exhibition, and its
associated activities are to demonstrate and strengthen the
close ties which exist between Australia and Britain, Those
are indeed worthy objectives which I warmly commend9 I wish
the Exhibition every success,
CANBERRA, 23rd February, 1964. 



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE.
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER.
VISIT OF HER ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCESS MARINA,
DUCHESS OF KENT.
The Prime Minister announced in Canberra tonight
that the following statement had been issued from Kensington
Palace Quote Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent, has been
invited by the Government of the Commonwealth
of Australia to visit Australia in the autumn,
and has accepted this invitation with great
pleasure. The Princess will arrive in Australia towards
the end of September, undertake a short visit
to Canberra, and later stay for a few days in
Sydney, where she will visit the British
Exhibition. Unquote.
The Prime Minister said that all Australians would
warmly welcome the news of the proposed visit by Princess
Marina. Princess Marina has had a place in the affections of
the Australian people for many years. Australia had looked
forward to welcoming her in 1938 as the wife of our Governor-
General, but the war and the tragic death of the late Duke of
Kent on active service intervened. The Prime Minister said
that he, personally, knew that Australia and Australian affairs
have been ondt of Her Royal Highness' interests for many years
and, with the memorahle visit to Australia in 1959 of her
daughter, Princess Alexandra, this interest greatly increased.
Princess Marina would be assured of a very warm and sincere
welcome. a .1/ 2. 
A 2.
The Prime Minister said he was pleased that
Princess Marina would be able to visit the British Exhibition
in Sydney while she was in Australia.
This will be a comparatively short visit and
Princess Marina will be unable to visit States other than
New South Wales. As is well known, the Prime Minister added,
we have been aimine at short and limited Royal visits so that
they may be more frequent.
Consultations will take place to suggest an
appropriate itinerary for Princess Marina's visit.
CANBERRA. February, 1964. 



EMBARGO : NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, BRC_ DCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE
6.30 P. M4. ON SUNDAY, 1ST MARCH, 1964
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 18/ 1264
PRIME~ MINISTERtS LETTER-U0i SOVIET PREMIER
The following letter has been sent to the Soviet
Premier, Mr. N. S. Khrushchaev, by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert
Menzies, in reply to a New Year letter from Mr. Khrushchev:
" Dear Mr. Chairman,
I have given careful and close attention to your
message of 31st December, 1963, -the receipt of which I
acknowledged in my last brief message to you. I should
like to say at the outset that, while I am unable to agree
with some of what you say in the course of expounding your
argument and although you introduce qualificacions which
I could not concede I welccme your clear statement of
belief in the need L renounce the use of force in relation
to disputes between states over territorial claims and
question-o of boundaries. Such disputes are, of course,
only one' category, and, in the way you limit them, a
relatively small category, of the differences whi~ h arise
in international relations: the principle of avoidance
of the use of force, subject to the right of individual
and collective self-defence, is fundamental to the
Australian Government's attitude -towards all international
disputes. Indeed, the general obligation to seek the pacific
settlement of disputes is placed upon all those states which
have subscribed to the Charter of the United Nations. As
members of the United Nations, Australia and the U. S. S. R.
have both accepted this obligation, together with the
obligation stated in Article 2.4 of the % Charter that * all
members shall refrain in their international relations from
the -threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any state.'
I believe, Mr, Chairman, that it is necessary for
us both to strive to live up to these obligations ourselves,
and also to do what we can to secure their universal
acceptance and application by all governments and regimes,
whether or not they are members of the United Nations.
For the Charter provides a code of international conduct
which, if consistently accepted and honoured by all, would
enable problems arising between states, including territorial
disputes, to be settled justly and by peaceful means.
I agree with your observation that methods of
settling disputes peacefully have been improved, and
with particular reference to territorial disputes that
experience shows that peaceful means of settlement are
feasible. The United Nations, despite its imperfections,
has shown itself capable of useful work in this respect;
and I believe that our best course lies in seeking to
make it more effective both in performing its functions of
mediation and conciliahion, and also in its peacekeeping
activities. evo ./ 2 
2
" The first necessity is that member Stbates should
fully accept and live up to the principles and obligations
of the Charter. Then, it is essential, if the United Nations
is to carry out its functions, that it should be on a sound
financial footing, which means that all members should
contribute their proper share of its expenses. Also it is
clearly most desirable that meons of peaeeful settlement in
accordance with the Charter shou. d be respected and observed:
that when, for example, procedures of ascertainment of the
wishes of the people of particular territories have taken
place through the United Nations in accordance with the
principle of self-determination, all members of the United
Nations should accept and support the outcome of those
procedures. The problem of territorial disputes is but one aspect
of the wider problem of creating an international comnmunity
that will learn to live in peace and without mutual interference,
whether ideological or physical, and to settle its disputes
by agreed peaceful procedures according to principles that must,
if they are to have any real moaning, bo universally applicable
to all. In this rospcct as I have said I cannot agree with
the various exceptions to the principle of peaceful settlement
that you appear to be stating in parts of your letter in
suggesting that in certain cases the use of force is justified
whilo in others it is not. Nor, incidentally can I accept your
description of certain countries ( the Republics of Viot Nam,
Korea and China) as being ' under foreign occupationt; nor, in
the face of such problems as that of Germany and Berlin, your
reference to the ? postwar settlements' as apparently being
excluded from the realm of unresolved questions in international
affairs. In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I wish to reaffirm that
the Australian Government accepts and will continue to abide
by the principle of peaceful settlement of all disputes,
including those arising out of territorial or border claims.
I welcome the Soviet Governmentts apparent acceptance of the
same view, and I hope that the Soviet Government will use its
influence in all cases where border troubles are now causing
tension, or may do so in future, towards a peaceful settlement,
in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter
and with accepted international procedures.
Yours sincerely,
( Sgd.) R. G. MENZIES
Primo Minister
His Excellency Nikita S. Khrushchev,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of
the U. S. S. R.,
MOSCOW. CANBERRA,
1st March, 1964. 



IL A. 1
Pacific Area Travel Association
13th Annual Conference
March 2-6, 1964 KEYNOTE ADDRESS
by The Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies, M. P.,
Prime Minister of the Common-ealth of Australia.
Well, Sir, Ladies and Gentlemen, they say that confession is good
for the soul. I wiant'to admit at once that I don't know just what
a " Keynote Address" is. I think this is an importation from the
United States of America, but I don't mind declaring the Conference
open. There I amn on the home ground as you might say. Of course,
it is a very pleasant occasion for me because when I look around
and I remember all the notes I have read and everything that the
Trade Department has told me, I realise that I ari looking at a
group of people, mary of whom might be regarded as invisible
exports, and I like this very much.
Since 1957, apart from the fact that I have been re-elected a
couple of times once rather faintly the most exciting thing
is that in 1957 the estimate of income earned in Australia from
tourist trade was œ 6 million, that is to say external money coming
in, and today it is œ 27 million. Now, of course, to some of you
who may come from larger countries that may not be any great matter,
but I venture to say that in 1957, wie were hardly contemplating
although you, Mr. Bates, were always the greatest of optimists such
a great expansion in this period of time. Of course, this is just
the beginning of it. I wonder why our figure was so small in 1957,
and of course very much smaller before that almost non-ezistent.
WThy was it? Was it because Australia had nothing to show? ' VIell,
no Australian w--ill admit that. You know that this is a land of
infinite variety. You have already experienced the glittering
sunshine of Melbourne and now you are experiencing the overcast
inftry skies of Sydney, so wie are a land of infinite variety.
17o have so much to show. Scenery, yes, masses of it, an immnense
variety. Every country is different from c-very other one and we do
not always realise there is some particular attraction for people
who come from the green landscapes of some of the counties of the
Old Country or Nev Zealand quite a pleasant change for them to see
the rather burnt, dry, yellow;, pastel shaded sweeps of country that
you find in many parts of Australia.
Variety is literally, from that point of view, the spice of life.
But I do not believe th. a: t the only thing to see, to meet, to
encounter, is the scenery. Primarily it is the people, and what
they are like, and what they do. And wie are all different people.
Many of us speak English, of a kind. And many of us do not. But
the differences of language, I think, tend to fall away a little
and people do manage to get to know each other. And I think if I
may offer a complete truism that nothing could be more remarkable
than the impact on the ordinary mind, of a visit to another country and
of moving around even for a few days or a few weeks, among other
people, sensing the atmosphere of the place, getting an impression of
what people are really likie, and above all, discovering that they
are all human beings.
This century of ours has been disfigured by prejudice and hatred
more than any other century, I believe, en record, far exceeding
in these things the iorst period of the Midile Ages. There is no
cure for prejudice half as good as getting to know the person or
race, or commnunity about which you have been prejudiced. / Now 
II. A. 2
CONFERENCE
THE PT. HON. SIR ROBERT 1NZIES. M. P.
Now, Mr. Bates, the Chairman of this Conference, is of oourse the
embodiment of the tourist industry. He has been the head of the
Australian National Travol Association to which I assure him I came
well prepared to pay the warmest tribute. Indeed vie have been
paying tribute to him for years. I would be saying far less than I
should if I did not say that, in my opinion, and in the opinion of
the Government, the Australian National Travel Association is doing
magnificent wiork, and very glad I am to say that although only a
few years ago a lot of business people in Australia who I would have
expected to have 1anoun something of the significance of tourism
were rather indifferent to the needs, some conspicuous. But I am
delighted to find that since 1957, the number of private contributors
to tho travel association here has increased five times.
This is something that we are all in. There is a bit of a disposition
in my ovm country I knoi-w it doesn't exist in any of yours to t. ake
things to the Government in prayer, and say well why doesn't the
Government do something about it, and there are many things about
which the Governm-ent ought to do a great deal, but a motter of this
kind requires, in the highest degree, the co-operation of Government
and private industry, and for one very great reason. This is :. n
industry. This is a commonplace remark, but it is almost
revolutionary in my country to regard the tourist trade as an industry.
I have to go around Australia a good deal and rcceive requests of
one kind or another, and you would be surprised to kniow how frequently
one finds that people, ahen they speak of wanting an industry in their
State or in their community, wiant something that has a factory
connected with it, something that has chimney stacks, something that
has great lorries running round taking in materials and taking out
the finished product. This is the popular idea of what an industry
is, yet here we have an industry -, hich at present produces in real
terms from my own country as invisible exports the ninth largest
amount among the major export industries. It will stand very much
higher in the list as more and more iwe get to understand the
tremendous importcence of it.
There are areas in Australia w.-here the tourist trade, if it were
even more understood than it is now, could be a very great industry
and that trade could be developed out of sight, by better roads
and accommodation.
All this, I believe, is improving. But it will need to go on
improving and it will go on improving so long as the people who
provide accommodation a. nd facilities and transport in the receiving
country understand that this is one of the great national industries,
and that they must contribute to it by skill and good management,
and good capital provision, just as much as they would when they
established some modern factory to produce electronics or some other
modemn device. This is a matter of broad understanding, and so of
course you have a Conference of this kind, magnificently representative
of the countries around the Pacific, and you are here to encourage
tourism, to encourage it in every direction, particularly in your
area. I hope that nobody will fall to the comfortable and social
temptation, to be ever-polite to each other in a Conference of this
kind. The developments of tourism in the world, and particularly
in these newer parts of the world, as vie see ourselves, is dependent
upon hearty criticism. / Let us 
II. A. 3
CONFERENCE
THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES, M. P.
Let us, in Australia let all the people who exe here who are
Australians who have some contact with some aspect of' the tourist
business understand what is wrong. They will tell you vha-t is
right. You need not worry about tha~ t. But you must tell them %-. hat
is wirong. Because there was a good deal wrong once; there is a
good deal wrong now, but it would be a miracle if there were not
still plenty of' ways in which we could improve our capacity to
roceive and deal with and entertain tourists.
When people go around the world, eaither on business, which I believe
some do, or on pleasure, which I believe some do, or on business
and pleasure, which I am sure a great number of' people do, they
are consciously or unconsciously doing something much needed in this
century. First of' all, they are extending the boundaries of' their
o,: m knowledge of' other people. I have said something about that,
and by extending those boundaries, they are breaking dovam some of' the
prejudcies and hatreds that have disfigured our tine. And in the second
place, they are extending the borders of economic co-operation with
other countries. W.. hen somebody from Japan comes over here to buy wool,
or somebody from Australia goes to Japan to buy some textiles, they
would bhoth think it rather pompous to be told they were extending the
boundaries of' economic co-operation between the tw,, o countries.
One says, " I em here to buy wool", and the other says, " Well, I am~
here to buy textiles". But as they are intelligent people, and
I assume that they are, they will realise tha t what they are doing
is dealing with one facet of a whole complex of' an economic co-operation
between two nations two-way trade. All the economic and financial
considerations that are involved, in two-way trade, and this of' course
is a tremendously valuable thing where people have business dealings
together, where everything has become completely normal in their
context, where they have learned to trust each other, and have had
years of' honourable dealing with each other, the chances of'
hostilities between them, I believe, are sensibly diminished
and therefore this trade which I shall call the tourist trade for this
purpose is of' tremendous importance as a. remover of sources of
international friction. Similarly, on the political side, suppose
you have somebody who visits another country in the Pacific area,
with all sorts of preconceived ideas. He may be there purely on a
holiday but he has time to move around to see people, to do a Little
reading about what goes on if he has the language of the country
that he goes to to acquire some friendships, to find out wrhat the
local man thinks about the local man which is always so important
and he comes backc even after a relatively brief' journey with his
mind enriched. There is one thing that must be said about all of
as when we travel ( unless it is exclusively on business) one thing to
be said about us when wie get homie vie are not silent about where rie
have been. I have yet to meet a taciturn tourist, and now that we all
have expensive cameras, the tourist goes and he sees and records
and he comes back ( and in this case " he" includes " she") and in due course
we tell our neighbours and vie tell our friends about it so
incessantly that run serious risks of' losing their friendship.
This is a secondary effect of travel. Not only does the tourist
himself' learn something and have something to remember, but other
people through them will learn something and will want to go and want
to see for themselves.
Now this is in our time, I believe, a. magnificent social international
revolution. Nothing better could be going on, socially, politically,
economically. All this travel that you are encouraging for which
so many of your constituent members are providing all of' this is
I believe one of' the civilising influences in the modern world.
Allen I 
II. A. 4
CONFERENCE THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT TENWZIES, M. P.
V. hen I was a snail boy it was considered a phenomnnal thing for
anybody to move into another state on a visit. V. e were parochial,
but today with all the facilities of transport, with all the
revolution that has gone on, assuming we can pay the fare, we have
no excuse for riot travelling. The average man and woman today is
immeasureably better able to pay for some travel than their
grandparents ever thought of being. Therefore there is opportunity,
Pand in the case of our ovm country, thousands and thousands of
people coming in, and thousands and thousands of people going out,
all engaged, whether they realise it or not, in this ameliorative
work in relation to our contacts with other countries.
This is a Conference of enormous importance. The industry will
continue more and more to produce these great results if there is
more and more and more co-operation between all those particular
segments which go to make up this complex or to serve it-, and
governmcnts, more and more co-operation, more and more understanding,
and ( above all) more and more completely frank criticism of what
we see . nd what goes on.
I hope that from this Conference as from all the others you have
had you will, on the basis of a riost frank examination of
what goes wrong here or there, come out with an improved organisation,
with an improved prospect of serving the people, because first
and last let it be remembered that this is not just a source of pleasure,
Sir, in declaring the Conference open. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH By
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZI ES,
M. P.
ON
PRO VISION OF SCIENCE BUILDINGS
AND EQUIPMENT IN SECONDARY
SCHOOLS
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT.
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 5th March, 1964] 1
Ministerial Statement.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister)-by leave-At the last
Federal elections the Government placed
ef oe the people of Australia plans to
sst the provision and equipment of
scibnce teaching laboratories in secondary
schools. It was made clear that the assistance
to be provided for such purposes would
be available to all schools with a complete
-bsence of any discrimination. Procedures
) achieve this end have now been discussed
with all of the States-naturally this
has taken some little timne-and there is
agreement that they raise no special
problem for any State, although the
Tasmanian Minister for Education has
indicated that he would prefer the distribution
to the States to be on the basis
of secondary school enrolments rather than
State Populations as we intend. Where
necessary, all States will co-operate with
the Commonwealth in the carrying out of
the scheme.
The amount for the purpose is œ E5,000,000
annually and it is intended to divide the
amount each year between Government
schools and non-Government schools. The
division will be made by obtaining the numbers
of secondary school pupils enrolled
2929/ 64. in Government schools and the numbers
of secondary school pupils enrolled in non-
Government schools and dividing the total
amount of money available in proportion
to those numbers as certified by the Coinmionwealth
Statistician. This will be done
on an Australia-wide basis and would at
present result in a sum of the order of
œ 3,750,000 being available for Government
secpndary -schools throughout Australia and
a sum of the order of œ 1,250,000 being
available for non-Government schools
throughout Australia. The sum available
for Government schools will then be allotted
to the various State Governments in proportion
to the population of the States as
certified by the Commonwealth Statistician.
Allotment will be made by way of a
grant under Section 96 of the Constitution
and the recipient State will be entirely
responsible for spending the sum allotted
it in ways which, in its opinion, best suit
the requirements of education in that State.
The grant will, however, be made subject
to the conditions that it can only be spent
on the provision of science teaching laboratories
in secondary schools or the provision
of capital equipment for such laboratories.
and it will be subject to the further condition
that the items on which it is spent,
and the source of the funds so spent, are 
clearly identifiable in the State Budget. The
Commonwealth has made it clear to the
States that it expects the sums so provided
to be regarded as supplementary and additional
to sums which the State would
normally provide for education. Money
for these purposes will be made available
in the 1964-65 Budget, that is to say, in the
financial year beginning on 1st July, 1964.
The States have been made aware of this
and are no doubt in process of preparing
their plans for the expenditure of the money
to be available to them for these purposes.
In the case of non-Government schools,
the Commonwealth will be solely responsible
for deciding grants. To do so it will adopt
the following procedures: First, it will allot
the amount available for non-Government
schools among the States having regard to
the population of each State, though in
later years it may be necessary not to be
too strictly bound in this regard, because
some States may be rather more advanced
than others in this field. The amount
available for each State will then be
divided into two parts. I am talking now
about the non-Government schools. One
part will be for assistance to non-Catholic
schools within the boundaries of that State
and the other part for assistance to Catholic
schools within the boundaries of that State.
I have used that expression as these are
rather awkward phrases. There are some
non-Catholic schools which are under
church foundation and some which are not.
For example, as some of my colleagues
know, there is the Sydney Grammar School.
This division will be made by obtaining the
number of secondary school pupils enrolled
in non-Catholic schools and the number
of secondary school pupils enrolled in
Catholic schools and dividing the sum avail-
: able in proportion to those numbers as
certified by the Commonwealth Statistician.
The Government will preserve some flexibility
in this procedure so that the division
may, as necessary, be adapted to the needs
of schools for science buildings and equipm.
ent as the scheme develops. There will
thus be for non-Government schools within
the boundaries of each State a sum for
assistance to non-Catholic schools and a
: sum for assistance to Catholic schools.
All secondary schools, whether boys'
schools, girls' schools or co-educational
schools are eligible to receive assistance, and any science teaching laboratory the
construction' of which began after 1st
December, 1963-that is the day after the
election-is a building eligible to be considered
for assistance. No such building
which was constructed before 1st December,
1963, or which was in course of construction
at that date, will however, ' be
considered as eligible to receive assistance.
A school is, however, eligible to apply for
assistance for capital equipment bought after
1st December, 1963. Money for these
purposes will be made available in the
1964-65 Commonwealth Budget; that
during the financial year beginning Ist July,
1964. Schools which are eligible for
assistance and which seek assistance should
therefore make application for such assistance
as soon as possible. Applications
should be made to the Minister in Charg
of Commonwealth Activities in Education,-"
Prime Minister's Department, East Block,
Canberra. It is clear that very many independent
schools will be seeking assistance and that
the Commonwealth will not in the first years
of the scheme-at least in its early yearsand
despite the funds available, as one might
say, in one stroke, be able to assist all
schools that are eligible. It is intended
therefore to select in each State schools to
be regarded as those which fall into
category meriting first consideration fo
assistance. This selection will be done bvythe
Commonwealth having regard to the
number of secondary school pupils at a
school, the number of such students doing
science courses, the teaching facilitie'
already available and similar criteria. Ever
so, all schools falling within this category
will not be able to be assisted initially and
it will be necessary to allot priorities to such
schools within each State's boundaries.
For this purpose, the Commonwealth
hopes to create, within each State's
boundaries, two advisory bodies. One body,
drawn from those responsible for non-
Catholic schools, will be asked to suggest
priorities for such schools and, subject to
the standards proposed being acceptable to
the Commonwealth, to advise on the
amount of assistance extended to each
school. The other body, drawn from those
responsible for Catholic schools, will be
asked to do the same for such schools.
I may say that my colleague, Senator 
Gorton, who has been doing a great deal
of work on this, has already discussed this
matter considerably with these representative
groups. When grants are decided by the
Commonwealth they will be made to a
State under section 96 of the Constitution.
I am now talking about non-State secondary
schools. The State concerned would act
as agent for the Commonwealth for the
purposes of payment and would not itself
accept any responsibility for making such
grants. I should, perhaps, emphasize that
these advisory bodies have not yet been set
and . it will be my colleague's next task
-o conduct talks for the purpose of setting
them up. He has already had quite a few
of these. But, in the meantime, so that
honorable members may know the lines on
-which the Commonwealth is proceeding and
) that schools which require assistance may
m-lake application without dela'y, I believe
it appropriate to make this statement in
this place.
I might add that the question of the
standard to which a laboratory ought to
be built, or at least the standard for which
Commonwealth funds should be supplied,
is one that ' has received our attention. For
advice on this matter we are setting up a
small committee which we have asked Mr.
L. C. Robson to chair. Mr. Robson is a
-former headmaster of Sydney Church of
S" gland Grammar School. He is a very
-camous headmaster, with a scientific background,
who has had much experience of
these matters in his capacity of Chairman
of the Committee of Advice of the
-1ndustrial Fund, of which most honorable
jembers will have heard, which has been
engaged for some years in assisting independent
schools to build science teaching laboratories. This committee will be available
to give advice, when asked, to schools
planning to build science laboratories and
will be responsible for advising the
Commonwealth as to suitable and
reasonable standards for laboratories for
particular numbers of students and
Commonwealth assistance will be limited to
providing, or assisting to provide, funds
necessary to build to that standard. This
is the situation regarding this matter at this
moment. I shall keep honorable members
informed of progress in the setting up in
each State of -the advisory bodies to which
I have referred.
In conclusion-this is, I think, a most
interesting and just experiment-there are
a number of different procedures which
could be adopted for making the various
divisions between State Governments
referred to in what I have said. The one
set out earlier appears to the Commonwealth
to meet requirements most nearly
and has been agreed to by five of the
States. It will be the basis used for the
first year of operation. But this is a new
scheme. It must be tested in operation.
In subsequent years it may develop that the
State Governments would -prefer the
Commonwealth to consider some other
system of division between them. If they
do agree that some other system is
preferable in the future, and provided
that the Commonwealth is satisfied
that an agreed proposal is just to all, the
Commonwealth will always be prepared to
listen to suggestions designed to make the
scheme operate harmoniously and to the
greatest benefit of the greatest number of
Australian students.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER. CANBERRA. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
' SPEECH : BY
Rt. Hon. Sir ROBERT MENZIES, M. P.
. ON
ADDRESS-IN-REPLY TO THE
GOVERNOR-GENERAL'S SPEECH
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 5th March, 1964.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES .( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) am grateful to
the House for giving , me 40 minutes. ' I
hope I will notneed to employ it all. However,
there are some things : that I would
like . to say in the -course . of this debate on
Im otion for the adoption. of the Addresseply
to the . Governor* General's
Speech. In particular, I want to refer to
a few observations made by the Leader . of
the Qpposition ( Mr. Calwell) and by some
, f his supporters. I will come to them in
. time.
, Imust say,. if I. may do so without. giving
offence,. that nothing. that the Leader of the
Opposition said in this debate varied . from
what he had said many times in the course
of the election campaign. In other words,
he gave us a'brief retrospective resume of
his election speeches. The one thing ' that
went . wrong : about them . was . that they did
not succeed. : I understand the : position ! of
the honorable gentleman; -I have been
through these experiences myself. He has
been through deep waters and shallow
waters. Most of us who ' have had long
service in politics ' have : had the experience
of defeat and of victory. I was very
interested to learn how the'honorable gentleman
would -feel after two or three months
of reflection. ' But there is no doubt about
2057/ 64. him. I take off my hat to him. He does
not bother to learn much from painful
experiences. He came up with all the old
cliches. He even permitted himself to say
that I secured an election prematurely,
which I did, in. a panic. This is a fascinating
observation. ' He suggests that I was in a
panic. -I suppose that is why I entered
upon an election. This is quite a curious
form of reasoning.
Mr. Kelly.-Jt is a curious form of panic.
, Sir &gt; ROBERT ' MENZIES.-I , thank . my
friend for his observation. It ! is a curious
form of panic. The suggestion . of . the
Leader of theOpposition that I secured . the
election prematurely in . a panic really,
astonishes me. JI say this for the: record;
it. is no. longer of very much public interest.
The -honorable , gentleman had on three or
four occasions challenged me to have an
election. xUnless his performances on
behalf of , the , Opposition were arrant
humbug-that, of course, would be an
unparliamentary . expression-he . must have
thought that, the Government having a
majority of one, he might defeat us in . a
chance melee in. the House and produce an
election. " I am bound to say that the only
panic ever exhibited was. his when I finally
accepted the invitation. That was when 
the panic began. Of course, his present
panic arises from the fact that the people
supported us at the ' election.
Up to the last week of the election campaign,
the Leader of the Opposition had
persuaded himself-he is not without talents
in self-persuasion-that bhe would win.
Indeed, he did what inexperienced fellows
like me never do; he named the seats that
he would win. Up to the last week of the
campaign, we were pitiable objects. We
had tumbled by sheer stupidity into an
election. But in the last week we had the
panic. Let honorable members recall it.
The panic was in the last week. It was
then that the Leader of the Opposition
began to make the most astonishing series
of extravagant and offensive allegations I
have ever heard in a political campaign.
I am not sure that he did not accuse me of
obscenity-I have forgotten-but he certainly
accused me of all the most remarkable
things. This was at a time when I
was saying to myself in the still watches of
the night-if there are any still watches of
the night for a politician or a prime
minister-that my own boys were a little
worried because I was, as an old colleague
of ours used to say, rather too much of a
little Lord Fauntleroy. In the last week it
was really fabulous to be able to open the
newspaper in the morning and read of the
things that I had never said but which I
was accused of saying..
The honorable gentleman is responsible
for his own tactics. He cannot blame us
for those, unless he admits that in some way
we applied pressure and forced him into
these tactical errors. The honorable gentleman
had begun his campaign with the most
luscious collection of promises a week or
eight days before I delivered my policy
speech. He was going around the country
talking about an Army group at Grafton,
which was very important, and about the
abolition of preferental voting. I must say
that in almost 30 years in this Parliament I
had never heard any member of the Australian
Labour Party advocate the abolition
of preferential voting, but, of course, I am
open to correction. Will anybody correct
me? No? In 30 years not a hint of this
has ' been given but in the last week of the
election campaign the honorable gentleman, being himself in a state of panic and
apparently a little worried about the state
of the parties in the electorates, said, " We
will abolish preferential voting He did
not say it in his policy speech, but he said
it then. Happily his statement received
wide publicity.
All this time in the last week he was, if I
may use the expression with the great conversatism
so characteristic of me, screeching
abuse about his opponents. Of course,
when all this happened in the last week of
the campaign, I, who had always believthat
we would win, became completely coAiV
fident of success, because these were the
marks of panic and the marks of defeat.
The honorable gentleman wants a little
history and I am giving it to him. Thwe
the gallup poll, that sacred thing, was pu
lished on the Friday before the election.
This revived his hopes, but they were
dashed within 36 hours. By the following
Monday he had revealed -himself-I say
this to him as a old friend and an old
political opponent-as the worst loser in the
-history of Commonwealth politics. I am
not engaging in a post mortem; I am engaging
in a post vitam-a very different matter.
I leave the post mortems to my opponents.
ourI dop onliocty , r ealtlhye feeilm cmaleldedia teolny to orpeehreaatris2e?-.
aspects of which are referred to in thed
Governor-General's Speech, because the
simple truth is that the people have
approved of our policy and we are putting
it into operation. Therefore, I will dej.
very lightly with matters that have exerciso&gt; J
the Opposition in this new session of Parliament.
I will refer to just a few matters.
I would need not 40 minutes but three
hours to expose all the weaknesses in the
Opposition's position so I will deal with
just a few of them.
The Leader of the Opposition spoke about
Malaysia. That was a bold exercise on his
part. I quote these words from his speechwe
support the creation of Malaysia to
the extent that it will promote the welfare of its
people and the stability of South-East Asia and
will strengthen the area-that is, our area-against
Chinese aggression or Communist imperialism.
Honorable members-at least those on this
side of the House-will realize that that is
a statement that we might have welcomed 
very much at the time when Malaysia was
under discussion. But the honorable gentleman
then went on to say-
But Indonesia's policy of confrontation cuts
across those objectives and raises new and
important issues. We need an anti-Communist
Malaysia, but we also need an anti-Communist
Indonesia. That was the end of the statement of
policy. What does it mean? Does Indonesia's
policy of confrontation cut across
our support for Malaysia? We do not think
so. When we made our statement in this
', puse, we were not unaware of the Indo-
,, sian tendency to confront, to threaten
and to raise issues. Indonesia's policy of
confrontation does not cut across our support
for Malaysia.
But the honorable gentleman, in effect,
._ hts this question to himself: Does this cut
across our support for Malaysia or does it
strengthen our support for Malaysia? If
the honorable gentleman was asking, " Does
this policy of confrontation, which is being
conducted by a country with which we all
want to live in a state of peace and harmony
and which is directed at a country
which we are pledged to support and whose
political integrity we are pledged to support,
introduce new problems? he should have
told us what those problems were. I
1" Nonder how Malaysia-at this moment the
 jreatened country, the country across
whose borders forays and infiltrations are
occurring-would regard these Australian
Labour Party ambiguities. There is no
ambiguity about our position. We have
ated it; we have repeated it; we will
d-' dhere to it.
The Leader of the Opposition described
my statement about Malaysia on behalf of
this Government and on behalf of this
country-a statement now completely
reinforced by the electoral decision of the
people-as vague and unsatisfactory. From
the master of ambiguity, that is indeed a
tremendous charge.
When the honorable gentleman had said
what he wanted to say on that matter, he
took a side swipe at me-I believe that is
the expression. I seem to be rather
a disagreeable person, not enjoying as much
favour with my opponents as I should. The
honorable gentleman permitted himself, as
he not infrequently does, to rewrite modem history. Let me occupy the time of the
House for a few minutes on these matters.
He said-
When President Nasser nationalized the Suez
Canal the Prime Minister, with his limited
imagination-I admit that part; I have never had enough
imagination to imagine what members of the
Opposition would do about any mattertried
to adjust the facts to fit his
favourite formula. It was all a Communist plot
as far as he was concerned.
I did not know that such a question had
ever been raised over the Suez Canal matter
and my association with it. The Leader of
the Opposition went on to say-
Of course, he failed to get his view accepted
because the United States itself saw the folly and
danger of the course being pursued by the British
Conservative Government.
This is becoming the stock-in-trade of a
number-I except some-of honorable
gentlemen opposite: That I rushed in; that
I was wrong; that in some mysterious
fashion I persuaded eighteen large nations
and small nations to agree with me-in an
aside sort of way, rather a compliment. I
was the actor in the drama.
The honorable gentleman knows, or
ought to know if he reads anything other
than propaganda, that when President
Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal I was
on my way back to Austraila and that when
I was in the United States I was told about
it and was told that a conference of 22
nations was to be convened at once in
London. I telephoned my Acting Prime
Minister in Australia and said: " What do
you think? Perhaps I ought to go back,"
because we in Australia have a lively interest
in the Suez Canal and its future. I was
told, " Yes, you ought to go back". I
went to the conference. I do not need to
elaborate this matter. All I can tell you,
Mr. Speaker, is that after two or three days
in that conference a scheme of proposals
was produced and those proposals were put
up to President Nasser. They were drafted
by Mr. John Foster Dulles, the Secretary
of State of the United States. They were
American proposals. I thought they were
very good ones, and so did the representatives
of seventeen other nations. A resolution
was carried that those proposalseminently
reasonable, sensible and fair proposals-
should be presented to President 
Nasser, although not with very much hope
of their being, accepted. But intrinsically
they were pretty good.
One night I was telephoned at my hotel
just as I was about to come back to Australia,
and I was invited to go up to the
American Embassy. This is very interesting,
having regard to this falsification of
history. I arrived at the embassy at about
2 o'clock in the morning, and there people
were discussing this business. There had
been a proposal that a committee should be
appointed to present and explain these resolutions
to President Nasser. There and then
these people who, according to the Leader
of the Opposition, regarded me with complete
contempt, urged me to become chairman
of the committee and to go to Cairo
to put these matters to President Nasser.
I did not want to go. I had been a long
way from home for a long time. I had
problems to attend to in Australia. But
when. the Prime Minister of Australia is
invited by representatives of eighteen
nations, including the major nations in the
non-Communist world, to do a job, however
difficult and hopeless it may seem, I
-do not believe it is any part of his responsibilities
-to say, " No, thank you; I would
sooner go home So I went and' put the
-case and, of course, we did not succeed.
I am free to admit that I did not ever think
we would succeed; but we argued our case.
I was the spokesman. Having received
what I. rather thought was something in the
nature of a compliment from eighteen
nations, I returned home to, find that the
-Labour Party in Australia regarded : this as
a ridiculous exercise. Very well. Time
does not . permit me to re-write history for
the Leader of -the -Opposition, but if he
wants to know whether I look back on that
painful and. difficult exercise with. shame I
say at once that I do not; I look back on it
with. a certain amount of self-respect.
Having fired a few shots on that matter
-not for the ' first time; and indeed this
ist. h e first time I have -ever bothered about
them-the honorable gentleman went to
1960. He has never got over 1960.
Neither have I. It was the only time . I
ever went to the General Assembly of the
United Nations. A number of honorable
members have been there, and I went there
in October,. 1960. I had some discussions and moved an amendment to a, resolution.
The amendment was-defeated. My. speech
was never reported in. this country. Other
speeches were. The honorable gentleman,
who prefers second-hand sources of
information, said the other night-
In 1960 President Eisenhower and Mr.
Macmillan, being shrewd judges of men, saw that
the Prime Ministerthat
is mewould
risk almost anything for the sake of an
hour or two of international limelight.
This is it. What the honorable gentleman
does not know-if he does know it, he
suppressed it-is that at that meeting ) 1
the United Nations a motion was submitted
by some nations the effect of which was
for President Eisenhower to have a conference
with Chairman Khrushchev-not with
the United Kingdom and not with Fran",
a sort of half-summit meeting. What t.-
honorable gentleman has forgotten is that
President Eisenhower had already made it
clear that he would not have a bi-lateral
talk. Honorable members will remember,
I hope, that in that year everything was
lined up for a summit conference in Paris,
, and then the incident of the U2 occurred
and the summit conference was abandoned.
I do not know whether the U2 incident was
-the sole cause of the collapse of . the summit
meeting or whether there was some other
, cause. The people concerned in the sumr
conference and therefore in the peace
: the world--our . peace-were the Soviet
Union, Great Britain, the United States of
-America and France: At this meeting of
* the United N'ations it was moved, seconded
and went on. the record that there sho:
be a conference between . the two, one-o1
whom-President Eisenhower-had already
, made -clear that he would not have a bilateral
conference. Therefore it seemed to
me--and I hope honorable members will
not . think this ' is stupid-that to carry a
resolution that there ' be a meeting between
the two when. at least one of them had said
he would not attend was rather -beating the
air. So far from me homing in on this matter,
which is : the legend on the part of the
Opposition and -its academic advisers, I was
invited by President Eisenhower-I do not
boast about this--to come to Washington
to discuss this matter. He also invited Mr.
Macmillan to go to Washington to discuss 
the matter. I went. Dean Rusk was there
as well as various other people connected
with the American Administration. We
had a discussion about this matter at the
White House later in the afternoon. I had
suggested that it would not be a bad thing,
instead of having a blank negative, to have
an amendment moved which called on all
four parties to have a summit conference,
' to get back to the one thing that represented
some hope for the world. These
gentlemen whom I am supposed to have
og-rolled in some way are not insignificant
9_ eople. When I put my submission they
said, " This has great merit They asked
me to draft an amendment. I drafted an
amendment. We discussed it that afternoon
and I submitted it at the United
ations. I am happy to say that although
. he amendment was defeated, to the intense
joy of Her Majesty's Opposition in Australia,
it was supported by Great Britain,
the United States, the Republic of France,
Australia and Canada. The Soviet Union
did not vote against the amendment; it
abstained. Was that an unhappy event?
I must tell honorable members opposite
what. was in my amendment because they
are badly in need. of instruction on this
matter. I wonder whether anybody on the
other side of the House will disagree with
-x single' word of this amendment,. putting
l; flim-flam, of a-political kind on one side.
* My amendment recalled that there had been
an arrangement for a meeting, ' that the
meeting. did not begin its work and.. that the
President of -the United States, -the President
f the French Republic and the Prime
-/ Minister of the United Kingdom, had made
; public statements, saying that they would
welcome such a meeting in order to reduce
world . tension. -I went on-
* Believing that much. benefit'for the world'could
arise from a cooperative ' meeting of the ' Heads
of government of these, four nations in relation
to those problems which ' particularly concern
them, Is this disagreeable -to the Opposition? The
amendment -continued-
Believing further that progress, towards the solution
of those problems would be a material contribution
to the general work for peace of the United
Nations, Urges that such a meeting should occur at the
earliest practicable date.
I have heard Labour members,.. former
Labour ' Ministers and. Labour -candidates time after time stand on platforms and say
, that those are-their views. But when a
Prime Minister drawn from a party other
than their own expressed those views, and,
if I" may say so, with some vigour, and
secured the support of the great powers
which, alone, if they act in concert, can
reduce tension in the world, the result is
the kind of jibe-the kind of sneering
remark-that we have heard on this
occasion. Sir, I will not occupy any more time on
that matter. I do not want to re-write
history for my opponent. I am too busy
for that. So I will go on to a few contemporary
issues-very few. In the course
of his speech he once more returned to
King Charles' head-the TFX bomber.
The honorable gentleman became frightfully
mixed up about this during the election
campaign. At one stage I thought that
he would repudiate the contract to buy the
TFX. I am not sure that was not his
intention. At another stage he said to the
electors, Elect us to office and we will buy
a replacement for the Canberra", as if you
could buy it in a pawnshop. There was no
appreciation of the fact that if you are to
replace a magnificent vehicle like the
Canberra bomber, which only the other day
was the last word, then you must ensure
that you will get . the latest word and, if
possible, something which will be operative
and effective for a reasonable time to come.
The whole case about the TFX was
stated. But, of course, there are people in
various countries who do. not like orders
being placed for aircraft other than their
own, so the other day some scribbler wrote
an article-my distinguished friend the
Minister for Air ( Mr. Fairbairn) who knows
about these things referred to it in the
course of his speech yesterday-in which he
said, " The TFX is. encountering enormous
diffictilties My distinguished' opponent,
always willing to snatch at even the slightest
straw in. the torrent, said: " There you are.
You woh't get the TFX until 1970." In
' fact, nothing is known either from the
United States, which has a vast interest in
the . performance of this aircraft, or from
the . people who are building the aircraft,
that lends the slightest colour to these
, arguments. I do -wish that the honorable
: gentleman would not continue repeating
, false figures. The . position is ' that the
American Government has undertaken to 
deliver the TFX order beginning in 1967.
The Australian Government has accepted
this estimate. We believe it is a sincere
estimate, and nothing has occurred to cause
the American Government to indicate that
it will not be able to meet the delivery
dates. Therefore, to use the old Australian
phrase, this is another furphy. I say that,
with great regard to the honorable member
whose electorate includes Shepparton.
I should like to refer to two other
matters. I seem to remember that during
the election campaign and during last year
-I am open to be corrected-the Opposition
devoted a great deal of its forensic
talent to explaining that we were ruining
the economy, that we were introducing a
period of massive unemployment. Indeed,
a little before then the Opposition was explaining,
in the most learned fashionbecause
I am sure its adviser was in a
technical sense a learned man-that the
loan market had been ruined. We were
told what the Labour Party would do to
restore it. Unfortunately for the Labour
Party, this is all in the past now. The
economy has not been ruined; on the contrary.
The loan,' market has not been
ruined; on the contrary, it is almost ' embarrassingly
lush and fruitful. So what does the
Opposition do? My friends on the other
side of the House-I do not blame themday
after day have been asking, " Will the
Minister for Labour and National Service,
through his counsel before the arbitration
commission, tell the commission how
tremendously prosperous this country is,
how lush the loan market is, how marvellous
is the state of the economy, how much
productivity has increased? Having been
through this kind of thing for some time
I cannot find it in my heart to blame
honorable members opposite. I suppose
you try one thing and if it does not succeed
you try another. If the solution turns out
ultimately to be the opposite of the one
you tried first, well, you know, life is full
of mutations, so one can understand and
forgive..-I shall refer to one other matter because
I see that my time, so generously extended,
is running out. During the last four sitting
days I have been fascinated to discover an
almost concerted plan by Opposition members,
egged on a little, if I may say so to
my old friend, by a speech from this side of the House, to talk about gerrymandering
the electorate. " Gerrymander" is a
beautiful word. It hails from America and
it has a resonance in it. It is intelligible
in English, so it is used. The Opposition
claims that what we propose to do about
the Commonwealth Electoral Act represents
a gerrymander. I would have ignored
this had it been just a passing exercise on
the part of one honorable member but I
suppose about ten honorable members
opposite have claimed that we are proposing
to gerrymander the electorate. Fortunately
for us, and fortunately for Austral. Y
most of them have explained what they)
mean by the word. As I understand it-
I speak subject to correction, because I am
always willing to be corrected-they mean
one vote, one value. They claim that tb~ -F
must be no discrimination between a larn1,
widespread rural electorate like Kalgoorlie
or a compact metropolitan electorate like
my own. There must be no discrimination
because the moment you depart from the
principle of one vote, one value, this is
a gerrymander. I know that my friend
the honorable member for Leichhardt ( Mr.
Fulton) treats the statements of his colleagues
with a certain amount of congenial
contempt, but this apparently is the new
Labour doctrine. The Labour Party has
been in office in the Commonwealth for.
seventeen years altogether, perhaps n,
long enough from its own point of view.-
The Electoral Act of the Commonwealth
of Australia first became law 62 years ago
in 1902--62 years ago! I was so cut to
the quick by all this talk about gerrymandering
that I put myself to a little troub;
and said to my officer, Bring me the 1961
Commonwealth Electoral Act Here it
is. It is 62 years old, give or take a month
or two. Section 16 of the act states-
In making any distribution of States into Divisions
the Commissioner-
There was one commissioner in those daysshall
give due consideration to--
Community or diversity of interest,
Means of communication,
Physical features,
Existing boundaries of Divisions;
and subject thereto-
I hope honorable members opposite will hold
their breath so that they will not die of
shock nowthe
qluota of electors shall be the basis for the
distribution, and the Commissioner may adopt a 
margin of allowance, to be used whenever necessary,
but in no case shall such quota be departed
from to a greater extent than one-fifth more or
one-fifth less.
That was t-he position in 1902 and for many
years thereafter. The current legislation is
almost indistinguishable from the original
except that the number of the section is
different. It is now section 19, which is in
these terms-
In making any proposed distribution of a State
into Divisions the distribution Commissioners-
The plural, Commissioners is used now.
ope that is not fatal-
'-dall give due consideration to-
Community or diversity of interest,
Means of. communication,
Physical features,
Existing boundaries of Divisions and
S Subdivisions,
State Electoral boundaries;
fhen follows the provisions about a tolerance
of one-fifth up or one-fifth down. So,
if honorable members will trouble themselves
to read what appears in the policy
speech on this matter, and what appears in
the Governor-General's Speech, they will
discover one or two points. I attach great
importance to one of them and that is the
trend of population in various areas. This
was mentioned even by some honorable
members opposite to-day.' These are important factors. We modernize them. There
is no compulsion to make a quota difference,
but there is the same permissive authority
to the commissioners to go up or down by
one-fifth. Yet I have lived long enoughtoo
long, some may think-to find that what
has been completely accepted in this Commonwealth,
what has produced, by and
large, sensible, honest recommendations,
what has been left untouched and untouchable
by every Labour government that has
sat in the Commonwealth Parliament, is
now to be described by honorable members
opposite as a gerrymander. All I can say
is that it is ludicrous; it is out of proportion;
it is unreal. But I welcome it, if I may
say so, because it shows after their defeat
and after the failure of their ambitions, how
barren members of the Opposition have
become. This is all that they can find to
come up with-an allegation which has
only to be examined by a boy reading acts
of Parliament to be exposed as utter
humbug. Mr. Cyde Cameron.-Wind up. Your
time is up.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I have wound
up. I thought it was a very good ending,
and I hope you will remember, it.
By Authority: A. J. ARTHUR, Commonwealth Government Printer, Canberra. 



ROYAL AUSTRALASIAN COLLEGE OF SURGEONS,
MELBOURNIE LAYING OF FOUNDATION STONE,
6TH MARCH, 1964+
Speech by the Pri~ me Minister, the Rt. Hon, Sir Robert Menzi&amp; es
Mr. President, My Lord, My Lord Mayor and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I put a prudent question to the President just now,
I said: " Do I lay this stone first and speak afterwards?" and
he said: " Speak first". And I hope if I forget to lay this stone,
he will remind me.
As a matter of fact, you know, I am a masquerader on
an occasion of this kind, Here I am all done up as a surgeon.
Two days ago I took out three Members of Parliament and had them
sworn as Ministers and I didn't know which of my many ties I ought
to wear on that occasion but I found that the one which was the
cleanest and most presentable was the tie of the Royal College of
Gynaecologists and Obstetricians ( Laughter) and I am very distinguished
in that field. So I put on that tie and the Governor-
General who doesn't miss much, had a look at me afterwards and
said, " What tie is that you are wearing?" I said, " Sir, I am a
gynaecologist and obstetrician ( Laughter) and nobody ought to know
it better than you do because I hove just given birth to three new
Ministers" ( Laughter)
I am also a physician, I am an architect though sadly
out of date in my architectural views. In fact there are very few
things that you can name that I am not one of them in a fraudulent
sense; when they mean there is no merit in this matter they
always say causa honoris and, causa honoris, I am a most versatile
character, but in reality I know nothing about these things. But
I do know that when I read through the story of this College,
beginning as recently as 1926, I found this the most exciting story',
I think, that any Australian could read. A wonderful story, This
country has for many, many years enjoyed a world reputation in the
field of surgery, but it was only as recently as 1926 that this
College was established, later to become the Royal Australasian
College of Surgeons, now holding its hood up in any company in the
world, now with its fellowships, honoured and respected and valued
all over the world. This is a wonderful story to be able to tell
after thirtyseven or thirtycight years, and it marks two things, one
of them being the enormous development of surgery in the modern
world. Occasionally in an idle moment I have a look at Sam
Pepyst diary or one of those earnest recorAs or not so earnest
records about the tail end of the seventeenth century and there
are one or two descriptions of operations. It couldn't have been
much fun, I think, for the patient in those days before annesthetics,
before antiseptic or aseptic surgery. Not much fun, except for
one thing and that was that to induce a species of anaesthesia
in the patient, liberal applications of grog were made and so the
patient, in a state of affairs that would never recommend itself
to any modern temperance body, became almost unconscious to the
villainies that were being perpetrated on him. Well, that's of
course before your time and before my time.
All I know is that probably in the lost fifty, Sixty,
seventy years the developments in the art and science of surgery
in the world have been phenomenal, Indeed it is worthwhile people
recalling occasionally that although we do manage to destroy life
on a very great scale in the modern world, you surgeons have 
El -2
managed to preserve life to sustain life to the most astonishing
degree, and all this is due to learning, constant-. study, a constant
willingness to learn new techniques and a devotion to the task
which excludes, I an perfectly certain, at the time of operation,
all other considerations,
I don't mind saying to you as a man with two professionsthe
profession of the law and the profession of politics that I
envy you the profession that you pursue. This is, in the highest
sense of the world, a constructive occupation. But if people had
not founded this College, if they had not taken steps to encourage
post-graduate work, further work, expert lectures, expert experimentation
and teaching and thought surgery would have tended to
stand still except for what might read in the documents
proceeding from some other countries. The great thing about this
ollege, the marvellous thing I think about it every time I
drive past it when I come into Melbourne is that it represents
the consciousness in practical terms of the need constantly to
learn more, to know more at the end of one day than one knew at
the end of the previous day, to be willing to learn to be willing
to be bold, There is a lot of courage, I always think, required in
the art of the surgeon. A man who is timid, a man who says, " No,
IVll play safe," might get by, but he will never add to the sum of
surgical knowledge. Many lives that would have been lost if every
surgeon had played safe, have been rescued because many decided that
courage should be added to skill and that between the two of them,
wonderful results might be attained.
And so it is not merely a matter of recalling what has
happened in the field of surgery on the world scene today is an
opportunity to recall with pride what has happened in this part of
the world in Australia and in New Zealand, to recall the great
men, the Imaginative men who established the College, and the
couple of generations of people who understood that they must go
on and on and learn to become more and more competent, not simply
because this would be of some advantage to them. Wie all have some
advantages from whatever we do in a material sense, but the driving
force in this College has been the widening of the boundaries of
knowledge the raising of the standards of surgical skill, the
benefit of' the people as a whole.
And that is why, in whatever capacity I may masquerade
myself today7 I would like to say before I lay the foundation stone
that as a Prime Minister who as has just been said, performed a
successful operation not very long ago, as a Prime Minister who has
been saddled with the responsibilities of Government in this
country for a long, long time, I would think myself rather odd if
I didni't so that while occasionally in my simple vanity I may be
tempted to Think that I have done something useful or something
good, today I am perfectly certain that I am addressing, particularly
in the professional sense here today, men who, for themselves and
for those who come after them are doing work about which nobody
can argue. This is constructive work, not as well known as the
work of people who are in the headlines but very frequently
immeasurably more important. And so, as the Head of the Government,
I say how grateful I am to you, Sir, for having invited me to come
here, how proud I am to have the opportunity of being associated
with this great development and how confident I am that just as you
now look back on fairly modest beginnings, and I admit that price
of œ E13,000 made me a little green with envy ( I don't think we will
be able to build a new Parliament House with that) but just as you
look back on these modest beginnings, so your sons and grandsons
will look back on this with all its extensions as a modest beginning
because year after year, generation after generation, this work will
go on. I thank you, I congr~ atulate you and I will now go across and
hope when I pull the right string or handle the right instrument
I ought to have a ward sister with me, I think that I may declare
the stone well and truly laid. 



ThE THIRD ADELAIDE FESTIVAL OF ARTS
AT ADEL,. IDE, SOUTH Ai73TRdJIA
Official Opening b_ the Prime Minister,_ the Rt., Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies. K, CH; QC; MP.
My Lord Mayor, Mr, Premier and Ladies and Gentlemen
As her most inadequate substitute, I would like to
read to you right away a message which 1er Majesty The Queen
Mother invite d mo to convey to you on this lovely and memorable
occasion. She says this:
" As Patron of this, the Third Adelaide
Festival of Arts, it is a great sorrow to me
that I can't be with you today at this Opening
Ceremony. I have learned with pleasure of
the outstanding achievements of the two previous
ventures. You may indeed look with pride on the
results of your original idea, for the Adelaide
Fcstival of Arts is no longer an experiment but
an established feature in the cultural life of
Australia with an ever-growing reputation
oversea s.
To all those who have been associated
with this Third Festival I cffer my congratulations
and my warmest good wishes for its success.
S igned ELIZABETH REGINA."
( Applause)
Sir, I have stated that I was an inadequate
substitute. I had a little to do originally with the proposed
visit of Her Majesty because your Premier asked me on one of my
visits to London to find out, a little delicately, and of course
I am famous for my delicacy, whether there might be a favourable
response to an invitation. All I can tell you is that the well
known and lovely eyes of Her Majesty The Queen Mother lit up with
pleasure at the very thought of it. I know that she is genuinely
tremendously sorry not to be here. She was looking forward to it.
All I can say, as His Excellency the Governor-General said the
other day in his speech at the Opening of Parliament, is that all
of us will regard her visit not as cancelled but as merely
postponed. Her Majesty, I don't need to say to any of you has
an assured place in our hearts. Long long ago in this country,
she captivated the hearts of millions of people and they still
have the warmest place in their memories of her. She also
challenges the mind stimulates the imagination. She is really,
if I may say so, with all humility one of the very great women
of the century in her own right, ( Applause)
She, herself, in the Message that I have just read
to you, indicates one reason why she wanted to be here, Of course
there is a second reason. She really has a very soft spot in her
heart for Australia. She has now on at least two occasions, very
happy memories of this country and of the people of this country
and it is not to be wondered at becauso we, as a people, have
always made it clear to her in what deep affection we hold her and
this produces inevitably a feeling of warmth in her own heart, a
feeling of pleasure in her own mind. She will indeed be desperately
sorry not to be here. 
-2-
She mentioned that this Festival is an imaginative
effort. It began this is the third occasion now it began no
doubt as an experiment. It was enormously to the credit of
Adelaide and its citizens that it was an experiment made not in
the largest city in Australia but in a city which had imagination,
some understanding of what the arts mean in the history of the
country. Those who began it must have wondered, just as those
who began the Edinburgh Festival wondered. Edinburgh is not the
largest city in the United Kingdom; it is not the largest city
in Scotland, but the Edinburgh Festival now has a name that rings
around the world, one of the great artistic events, not only in
the history of Edinburgh or in the history of Scotland but in the
history of the modern world.
And Sir I speak without exaggeration when I say
that this Festival in Adelaide is not only unique in Australia,
is not only becoming extremely famous in Australia but that it
attracts world figures, world names in the fields of art in all
its various manifestations. And therefore this Festival has made
the name of Adelaide, the spirit of Adelaide, the imaginative
understanding of Adelaide well known all over the English-speaking
world and I have no doubt that by the time the sixth Festival has
been organised and put on, it will have a fame that extends to
every continent in the world.
Now Sir, this is a wonderful thing for a city to
achieve when it is not one of those cities with millions of people,
with vast accumulated wealth, but a comparatively small city
though the capital of a great State. And this, therefore, is
a remarkable achievement. I hope that every person in South
Australia has a just pride in it. I hope that we will all feel
immensely gra-eful to the people who organised it, who have
succeeded in the remarkable feat of bringing so many people from
so many places. All I ask that you give to me is a slight
suggestion of credit for the fact that whatever the other limitations
on the powers of the Commonwealth may be, we have legislative
authority over meteorology ( Laughter) and since I know that there
would be some people who would blame us if it were raining today,
all I ask is a humble meed of praise for the magnificent day that
we have brought with us. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Sir, I myself am immensely sorry and so is my wife,
She is even more sorry because she is what they call a balletomane.
I am immensely sorry that we shall have to be away from here
tomorrow, but so that you may understand some of the rigours of
life from the point of view of a battered old Prime Minister, may
I tell you that tomorrow night I have to deliver a nost learned
lecture lasting for forty-five minutes or fifty minutes out of
Melbourne and that on Monday morning I go to Sydney to open the
Annual Conference of the Graziers' Association, so that I may
condole with them about the disastrously low price of woolo
( Laughter) Sir, I need to say no more. The procession waits;
it is headed by the Scots Guards band, and I am told if I don't
stop, it will start and once it starts, nobody will want to hear
one word from me and nobody will. ( Laughter) Therefore, Sir in
acknowledging the honour that you have done me in the regrettable
absence of Her much-loved Majesty The Queen Mother, I declare the
Festival open and in declaring it open and wishing it all success,
I would rather like to be able to connunicate with The Queen
Mother, if I may, as her representative on this occasion and tell
her that by their applause the people of Adelaide sent not only
their humble duty but sent her their love.
i-


NINETEENTH STUDENT SESSION AT THE ADMINISTRATIVESTAFF COLLEGE, MT. EL! ZA VICTORIA8TH MARCH, 196+Speech by the Prime Miriter,_ the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert MenziesMr. Chairman and Ladies and Gentlemen:
The other day, having let myself in for this, I was&nbsp;interviewed by Charles Booth and Ragnar Garrett and I said to them,&nbsp;" What do you want me to talk about, because everybody knows that&nbsp;businessmen know all about politics and that politicians know nothing about business. It seems to me to be an unfair distribution of virtue, but everybody understands that this is the case."
" But," I said, " there is one thing that I must say&nbsp;that most businessmen, and, I am almost prepared to think, most&nbsp;politicians, know nothing about and that is the true problems of&nbsp;running a federal system of government."
I thought I would like to talk to you a little aboutit because, make no mistake, however effective you become inbusiness administration, you will constantly be barking your shinagainst problems of government what government ought to do thiswhat government has the power over this matter; and what governmenthas the power over another. This is a problem that bedevilsthe scene in Australia. it is very little studied. I wonder howmany people who are here tonight have read the CommonwealthConstitution in the last ten years? Not too many. Not too many.I think they do a little more reading of the Constitution in theUnited States of America. I am not sure" I think they like tore-read the Declaration of Independence because there is a finebravura quality about it somewhat detached from life but veryexciting. In Great Britain they know nothing about Constitutions;they have none. They are in a magnificent position. " TheConstitution of England as the great French wit said, " Ellen'existe point".
And it's true. Parliament has all power and&nbsp;may exercise it. The United States of America has a Federal Constitutionof an orthodox kind. So have we, not inconsiderably modelled onthe American one. Canada has one of a rather different kind butstill it is a Federal system. South Africa has provinces as wellas a inion, but it is not a federation of a country in which noproblems of power in relation to the national government or theparliament can arise.
Well, the world goes on. In Great Britain and&nbsp;I've told them this I am not talking behind their backs; I made&nbsp;a powerful speech to them on this across the table at the last&nbsp;Prime Ministers' Conference. I told them: " I think you gentlemenhave had an immense experience in writing federal constitutionsyou know nothing about trying to make one work." And that's true,because in my own time, as in my current term as Prime Minister,Itve seen a Federation established in the West Indies and I've seenit broken up. I've seen a Federation established, the Federationof Rhodesia and Nyasaland and a few months ago it was broken up.It resolved into its constituent parts. And it is only a few monthsago, relatively, that we were all meeting about and discussing theCommon Market the European Commrion Market and I was being toldby very distinguished English statesmen: " Of course, wo don'twant to go into a European Federation; what we are contemplatingis a kind of confederation" you see. I said to them, " Yes Iknow the meaning of the woras, but do you realise their implications?"I will say a little nore about that in a momentø So you &nbsp;see, here we are in Australia with a federal system a federalsystem in which power is divided and divided according to a very&nbsp;precise specification in Section 51 of the Constitution, all thepowers specified going to the Parliament of the Commonwealth, all&nbsp;ti-xe ones not mentioned remaining with the States, the sovereigntyof Government belonging to the people of Australia and being&nbsp;exercised as to part, and as to the more important part, ofreality by the Commonwealth Parliament and Government and as to&nbsp;the residue by the State Parliaments and State Governments.
Now that is a very simple definition of our system&nbsp;of federation. You will be surprised to know how little&nbsp;understood it is. It is certainly not understood at all by the&nbsp;people who were talking rather glibly about a European federation.As I say, I will come back to that because it is, I think,interesting. But let us stay on the home ground for a while.
Here we are, we have powers specifically given tothe Commonwealth, enumerated, set out, you may read them all inSection 51 of the Constitut4on, and the ones that are not therebelong to the States, Indeed, most of those that are there canbe exercised by the States unless the Commonwealth exercises thorn,because few powers are exclusive to the Commonwealth like customs,bounties, excise, defence ( for all practical purposas); theseare powers given to the Commonwea2 th exclusively, but all theother powers or most of the other powers are concurrent powers.We have a power of taxation. Well, so have the States not atthe moment exercised, but not for constitutional reasons. Therearo a lot of concurrent powers, but the Constitution itsclfsolved that problem by providing that where the Commonwdealthexorcised a power and made a law in a particular field which wasa valid lathen any State low whiich was inconsistent went bythe board. In other words, it established the paramouLntey ofCommonwealth law on items within Section 51 of the Constitution.
Now, I mention this to you because I&nbsp;think it ought&nbsp;to be compulsory reading for all people who aspire to debate&nbsp;these matters to read Section 51 with some care to see what&nbsp;powers are given to the Parliament of the nation. If you werein my place, you would go around Australia, you would receive&nbsp;representations, deputations of all kinds from people wrho say," You know, we are coming to you with thiis, because this is amatter of great national importance. If it is a matter ofnational importance then of course,' 1 the Commonwealth ought todo something about It," 1 Lnd I say, " Wll, I ama sorry. OurConstitution doosntt soy that the Commonwealth Parliam. ent is tohave power to pass laws about all matters of national -importance.It has power to make laws about thtirtyeight specified mattersand no others." They say, " Oh, well, that is a legal quibble."Now, let's beware of this. This idea that you just make a goodgoneralised statement that " this is of great national importanceand therefore you follows in the Commonwealth ought to be doingsomething about it", is not only stupid but disastrous. Youknow, Itve been in smaall shires in Australia, small towns inAustralia and have had the local worthies say to me, " Look, wemust have a better water supply in this town. It is going tocost œ C150,000, It's of immense national importance. It willimprove Lthe health of this district and therefore make a contributionto the health of humian beings in this nation and thereforeto our capacity to defend it in the event of war." Now this issuperb, isntt it? ( Laughter) This is superb, this is the way toeliminate the Constitution and with it, eliminate all troubles.Of course, life is not like that, nor is the Constitution.
Now, this is worth thinking about. There is anawful lot of nonsense talked about the Federal system of &nbsp;Government and a good deal talked in our country. Federalism,as a great writer once said, is legalism and we can't get away&nbsp;from it. If you are going to divide by a Constitution the powersof the national Parliament and the powers of State Parliaments,then it is quite clear that there must be somebody who will decidewhether the boundaries have been overstepped. If you left it tothe Commonwealth Parliament to say, " Well, in our opinion, ourpowers extend to passing this law," then we would have completeunification in Australia in a generation. Therefore there hasto be an umpire and the umpire is the High Court, just as in theUnited States, the umpire is the Supreme Court of the United States.Its function, or one of its functions, and its most importantfunction, is to pass on the validity of laws made by the Commonwealthor made by States in order that these constitutionalboundaries shall not be overlapped. Now this is, I thinkrinevitable. It gives rise to all sorts of bitter argumentsalong lines like this: " What are these people doing? Theyare trying to control the progress of events." They're not.They are just trying to do their duty, just trying to exercisethe judgment that they are bound to exercise as to the validityof some law made by some Parliament in Australia.
Now, our great-grandfathers or our grandfathers, &nbsp;as&nbsp;the case may be, who wrote the Constitution originally, did a&nbsp;remarkable piece of work. At this point I want to warn youagainst another fallacy. Every now and then, I am told bysomebody probably somebody engaged in State politics, and Iwas once myself " You know, you are only here, you'ro only inexistence, you the Commonwealth, because we, the States, createdyou. We made a bargain with each other and we conceded certainpowers to you and kept the rest to ourselves. You beware."Well, that is, of course, unhappily untrue. The Constitution ofAustralia wasn't made by any of the six Colonial Parliaments atall. It was the product of a series of popular conventions whichcontained in some instances very well known members of StateParliaments but contained a groat number more people who were,fortunately for us, well furnished with learning and scholarshipon constitutional matters and they had a great deal of moeetingand convention; they had two or three referenda in the nineties,and finally, the people of Australia voted for what some of thepeople of Australia not any Colonial Parliament had decidedwas a good thing. WIhon the people had voted for it off wentthe leaders of the Convention to London to present the new draftConstitution to the Government of the United Kingdom which thenannexed the Constitution as a schedule to an Act of the ImperialParliament, as it then was, and it became law. It became law inthe short run because it was an Act of the Parliament of GreatBritain. It became law, of course in substance, because it wasthe act of the people of Australia. It is well to have this inmind: The sovereignty was in the people; the sovereignty wasn'tin six Colonial Parliamonts, although each of then was a completelyself-governing colony, like the Colony of Victoria,
Now I mention these facts to you because there isa fallacy which is constantly being promulgated here that youwill come up against time after time and that is that Australiaconsists of six sovereign States. I hear this constantly everytime there is a Premiers' Conference. It will be one of thered-letter days in my life if each Premier doesn't at some stageutter this piece of nonsense: " Of course, you must remember, weare a sovereign Stato," So there are six sovereign States;I don't know where the Conr,-onwenlth cones in because if we havesix sovereign States what sovereignty is loft for the nation.It's absurd. The sovereignty inures in the nation in the people,Some of the sovereign powers are exercised by the CoimlonwealthParliament and Government; some of the sovereign powers are&nbsp;exercised by the State Parliaments and Governments. Don't let&nbsp;any of us be under any misapprehension about that matter. There&nbsp;is a division of sovereign powers and each of us exercises his&nbsp;bit of sovereignty within the limits of the Constitution of the&nbsp;nation.
I don't know how long it is since you gave yourselfthe pleasure of reading about the events that led up to theAmerican Civil War, but they are very well worthwhile recallingin this field. When I was a boy, I thought the Civil War wasabout " Uncle Tom's Cabin" you know, that sort of thing......and the good man and the bad man and some little wretch beingtaken over the ice on the river, You know, it was a terrificaffair, " Uncle Tom's Cabin", and peGple were brought up tobelieve that this was the whole outfit about which the AmericanCivil War was fought. It wasn't. The Southern States in theUnited States took a very strong view that they weren't goingto be dominated by what they regarded as the hard-facedprofessionals from the North and therefore they tended to be,in a very acute sense, " states righters", as we would say, andthey would keep on saying, " But we are sovereign States." The&nbsp;very phrases were used.
And they had the view that if they didn't like what&nbsp;the North was doing it might be on Negro emancipation itmight be on anything, and they didn't like it then all theyhad to do was to secede because, being sovereign, they couldexercise their own sovereignty by departing from the Union.You see? This was a very widely-held doctrine0 This was thedoctrine about which Lincoln conducted his famous debates andwhich he challenged and ultimately defeated. Are we allsovereign? May we secede? And the answer to that was: No.Your sovereignty is now merged in the sovereignty of theFederation. You are not able to secede. You can't restore yourown sovereignty by your own act. This Federation is a compactwhich binds everybody, and therefore this is an indissolubleFederation. In our turn, we said so. You may see it in thepreamble to the Commonwealth Constitution " one indissolubleFederation".
But in America, it hadn't been so stated; butessentially, of course, if the Federation were to mean anything,to have any existence and any future in the world and anyservice to the people, it had to be indissoluble and that waswhat the Civil War was about basically, that was what it wasabout.
A very great Englishman named Bryce who wrote whatis still the classical book on American Federation he wroteit back in the nineties, quite true, but he wrote it with fullknowledge of all the events leading up to the Civil Warpointed out that what the Civil War really achieved was tosettle this argument once and for all and to establish quiteplainly that the sovereignty was the sovereignty of the nati. onand that no State was sovereign in the sense that it couldconduct its own affairs to the point at which it seceded.
The State of Western Australia in a rather frolicsome&nbsp;moment - what, how many years ago? - had a Secession Movement.&nbsp;Well, it was good clean fun and, you know. it did no harm.They carried a referendum to secede from the Commonwealth andthen the next time there was an amendment out to increase thepowers of the Commonwealth Parliament, my good friends inWestern Australia and I admire them for it voted for it,( Laughter) This is very satisfactory: Well, we would like tobe out, but if we can't be out, we would like you boys to have more power. The secessionists carried their case to the House&nbsp;of Lords. Well, it was quite hopcless, I was in London at thattine and, really there was nothing to argue about. It had longsince been established that there is no sovereignty in that sensein some part of a federation nor is there any right to secedefrom the total body. And its important to remember that.
I recalled it, to my own satisfaction at any rate&nbsp;when I was in London last year or was it the year before? Ilveforgotten now discussing the Common Market..... Now, ofcourse, the Common Market argument ran high and hot and had avariety of aspects. I don't want to talk to you about theeconomic aspects of it because they have been canvassed to andfro all round the world. But one of the things that becameinvolved in this was that I think at least five of the Continentalcountries were looking forward to having a European Federation.Le Grande Charles doesn't believe in it. ( Laughter) He said withgreat vigour that this was to be an association of people, anassociation of States, but it was not to be a federation. Andhe was right from my point of view, as a matter of intellectualreasoning, to deliver his veto.
I've not the slightest doubt that he was right, and&nbsp;I tried to make this understood in London. I said, " You keepon telling me that you don't want to be in a federation but you&nbsp;want to be &nbsp;in a confederation in other words, you want a fairlyloose association of States but you want to have a few things&nbsp;established at the centre about which you agree a common codeon so-and-so, certain tariff rules which apply to everybody, a&nbsp;very considerable bureaucracy in the middle which deals with amass of economic and sometimes legal and sometimes financialmatters this is what you want, and you think that that meansthat no problem of a federation arises, but I am bound to tellyou this, or remind you of this, that there is no example inhistory, in modern history of a confederation which didn't eitherbreak up into its constituent parts or become a federation, withthe consequent loss of sovereignty in the constituent membersI don't want to be too technical about it but this was vastlyimportant.
The same Bryce pointed this out in words that are&nbsp;quite modern, sixty or seventy years ago, that in a federationitself there are two impulses going on we see them in Australia.We've all seen them. Whether consciously or unconsciously, weall know a great deal about them. There is the centrifugalforce tending to drive them apart I haven't seen that operateso much in Australia and the centripetal force that bringsmore and more centralisation of authority and centralisation ofpower, so that unless we all watch it, some day it will producecomplete unification. And there is no escape from this. Noconfederation, no association of states in the history of theworld ever stood still. It will become closer or it will becomemore remoteo We've seen it become more remote in the West Indiesvery quickly so that there is no federation there at all today.
We've seen this separatist idea, the centrifugal force, operateso swiftly in the case of the African countries that Nyasaland isnow an independent country Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesiastill have some vastly complex problems to deal with.
And in the case of Europe, this must have been thesame thing. This puzzles me. I couldn't make them appreciate thefact that once they cor. mitted themselves to something that wasorganic, something that was structural in their relations withEuropean countries, however valuable a lot of arrangements of a&nbsp;practical kind, a pragmnatic apprcach might be, that the momentthey went in for anything structural, they would find that theywere well on the move to having a Europe. an Federation,
Now, it may be a very good thing to have a European&nbsp;Federation. I don't sit in judgment on that matter. This is&nbsp;not my immediate business. All I want to say is that if there&nbsp;is a European Federation, Great Britain won't be a sovereign&nbsp;State any more than Victoria is in Australia for the reasons that&nbsp;I have given you. It will be a constituent member of a highly&nbsp;legal structure in which there is a division of sovereignty&nbsp;according to the rules set out in the agreement and therefore&nbsp;it would be, I thought, rather hard to have Great Britain as a&nbsp;non-sovereign state but as a member of the European Federation,&nbsp;coming along to have conferences with soy, Ghana, as a fully&nbsp;self-governing state, Similarly with Pakistan, India, Australia, New Zealand Canada and Great Britain the only non-sovereign&nbsp;body. It didn't appeal to me very much.
And of course the answer always was: But of course,that's the last thing we want and that's the last thing we areafter. To which the reply had to be: But how do you know whoereyou can stop the process, because if you establish what De Gaullecalls the " association of nations", " the society of nations", itwill either become closer and begin to look awfully like afederation or it will grow more remote and Europe will go backinto the old whirlpool of historical hostility. And do youknow let justice be done the great De Gaulle...., it is alwayspossible and in fact sometimes agreeable to disagree with him abouttkiis or that arnd he is not one of the great constitutionalscholars of Lhe world, but he is a very great man and he hasseen with completely clear instinct that if he wants France tobe a great powerful independent nation, restoring its glories inthe Western world he can't allow it to become a mere province ina larger organisazion, He is quite happy about having Italy andthe Benelux countries coming along and playing along, gettingtogether for economic purposes, financial purposes but for'political purposes, for anything tb~ at will impair the sovereigntyof France no. In other words: I think he is one of thestatesmen in Europe who has understood that the federal ideaproduces problems which can't be solved by a few casual remarksin an armchair, which have to be studied, which have to beexperienced so that you not only know them in theory as I havehad to know them as a lawyer, but as I have had to know them bytouch, in having to deal with the particular problems that emerge.
You know, on the whole, I think that Australia hasmanaged its federal system pretty well. I think there is a gooddeal of nonsense talked of a " states rights" kind. I have saidsomething about that -that it iJs " flim flam" and by the way.But on the whole we happen to have managed the business inAustralia by doing one or two sensible things, one of them quiteillicit. Shall I tell you about the illicit one first? Yes,I knew that would have an instant appeal to you, you captainsof industry, ( Laughter)
Now here is a great continent in which all the highestconcentration of development is down here in Victoria or over therein New South Wales or now, to an increasing extent, in the southof South Australia yet also in which up North, where you haveso many growing things, are the large beginnings of what will bean immensely larger mineral industry in all its forms. Northerndevelopment is more than a political cliche; it is somethingthat represents one of the great problems in Australia. How canthe people who live, and live well and prosperously in onerelatively small section of Australia do something to increase a&nbsp;development elsewhere? Now, you, m&nbsp;ay say to me,&nbsp;" Well&nbsp;obviously&nbsp;something ought to be done, somctinrg ought to be done to give&nbsp;an incentive ( thatl the modern word)&nbsp;to &nbsp;people to go and&nbsp;adventure their capital in the north and go into those remote&nbsp;places and look for minerals and search for oil and do all these&nbsp;things, that are wonderful things for this country,," And of' course the incentive obviously is to make some discrimination in&nbsp;their income tax.
People say to me-. " Why? Why don't you relieve of'all tax people who are earning their income beyond a certainparallel in the country?" And I say, " A jolly good idea, butgrandfather didn't think so." Because grandfather put into theConstitution a provision that no law may be made by the Commonwealthof taxation or briefly, of money, which discriminatesbetween one State and another or between one part of' a State andanother. You can imagine the old gentlemen doing it, canv't you?They sit down there. They've got six reluctant colonies whothink that on the whole 1. t wouldn't be a bad idea to haveFederation. Not flogged into it by a war, as the United Stateswas by the War of' Independence but a conscious effort of reason&nbsp;and persuasion. But, at the same time, they were all colonies.
Down in Victoria, of coursa, we are the broadestmindedof people, and I am perfectly certain of their saying," Well, of course, we are going to get mixed up with those scompsacross the Murray; we must be very careful; we must preserveourselves as far as we can. And you get some of these rather oddprovisions, in the Constitution about uniformity, It's uniformitymad. We are uniformity mad in Australia. Unless somebody getsexactly the same deal as somebody who lives 2,000 miles away, thereis something wrong, This is awful nonsense.
This is a country which can be developed only by&nbsp;encouraging the unorthodox, by encouraging non-conformity, by&nbsp;encouraging inequality I don't mean to the point of injusticefor that is a different matter. But why should everything haveto be ironed out in this fashion. But they did it, and thereforewe cannot, by a taxation law, provide a rate of tax in Queensland,in the Commonwealth which is not to apply equally all overAustralia. And in legal truth I don't want this to be usedagdnst me if it comes before the High Court as it will no doubtwecan't apply a rate of taxation north of lownsville which issmaller than the rate of taxation south of Townsville, all otherthings being equal, because of this wonderful anti-discriminationprovision in the Constitution. So all I can say is, that it wasdone by the Commonwealth Zone A, Zone B and there are manyhappy or unhappy taxpayers in the north of Western Australia, inthe Northern Territory in the north of Queensland who secure anadvantage from this,, Ll I want to say is, I think it is quiteillegal. We have rested on the very com., fortable proposition -thatnobody outside of an asylum is likely to challenge it,, ( Laughter)
But now, that is just a single example of what I am&nbsp;really getting at over this matter&nbsp;in that I believe that anational Government could do far more for the development ofthese parts of Australia, crying aloudfbi' development, if it hadeqbcate powers of discrimination and were not bound by these ratherantiquated ideas that you must have uniformity and that means thatwhatever the law is,&nbsp;it has to be the same at Weipa as it would&nbsp;be at Mount Gambier,
This is very foolish, looking at it with the eye of&nbsp;history and certainly foolish if one tries to look at it with&nbsp;anything like the eye of statesmanship, But I mention it to you&nbsp;because a lot of people will say to you Why don't they doso-and-. so7 Wñ y-donyt : Loy dc sometiliirg aboit -it? ' Jall, if theyhad had to sit down as frequently as I 11ave had to do and say," By Jove, I would like to do so-ar d-so,, I think this is a splendididea. How can we work this one out so as to dodge the Constitution?"This is a health-~ giving exercise0 I don~ t have any objection toit, I think it is a highly moral. undertaking, not irmoral, Afterall, mest people I think dodge as much income tax as they can andas long as it is within the law it is right, but it is a greatpity. I think that rmore and more, as we go on, we will bethinking about our constitutional powers -not in relation to alot of these matters that get discussed on political platforms,most of which I can assure you are completely trivial from theconstitutional point of view and trying to make a Federal systemwith its written Constitution flexible enough to serve theinterests of a country that is growing at almost an explosive rate.This is the great problem of federal governrment. I've had a longexperience of it. Ilve seen it from both sides, In a manner ofspeaking, I suppose I have got sorme expert knowledge on thismatter and I still find it one of the most teasing things in theworld,
I will just add one thing because time goes on,I have to be in Sydney tomorrow. We have a meoting next week of.the Loan Council. The Loan Council consists of the State Treasurerswho are usually the State Premiers and the Commonwealth Treasurerwho is the Chairman, and I attend and by an act of grace on thepart of the others who attend, I am allowed to speak when I vwantto. That is the Loan Council. The Loan Council. was set up underthe Financial Agreement and the Financial Agreement was authorisedby one of the -few ameondments ever made to the CommonwealthConstitution. The Loan Council was established to do one thing,one thing only,
There had been great confusion up to that timeNew South Wales was borrowing at 5 1/2&nbsp;per cent, and some other State wanted to borrow at per cent. Well, there was a great&nbsp;deal of conflict and competition in the markets and then if oneState looked as if it might default, this affected the credit ofthe other States who wanted to raise money on the market. Thisbecame a terrible problem, particularly as we had one or two ratheradventurous State Premiers in those days. And so the FinancialAgreement was made and the Loan Council established,, And thefunction of the Lean Council is to decide how much mioney can beborrowed for a public works programme, how much money can beborrowed at reasonable rates and conditions. That's all,
In the old days when the Loan Council decided that,the meeting adjourned with suitable compliments. When I was firsta member of the Commonwealth Goverrnment, I was Attorney General,I used to attend the Loan Council meetings I don't knew in whatcapacity. Still there it was, and in looking back on it now, itis hilariously funny. This is back in 1935-6-7-8, you know,-notall that long ago, The Commonwealth Bank used to underwrite theloan programme, And the Commonwealth would get from the Stateswhat their estimates were and their loan works programme. As arule, it was about œ 19M, or 20M1. for the whole lot and,metaphorically though not actually, the Commonwealth Bank sat witha Governor who was in the corner of the room and the Premierswould have a magnificent debate and beat it up by half a million,It might be œ_ 19 then it must be Z20M and then somebody got arun on and thought it ought to be œ C22M because his State wantedmiore and then the Prime Minister, Mr, Lyons, would say, " Well01,letts adjourn for half an hour" and you would go around the corner,so to speak, and have a word Lind come back and say, " No, the banks will underwrite 20 Million Pounds. &nbsp;&nbsp;And œ 20M. it was. And everybodywent away, Th&nbsp;e money was in his pocket because it was underwrittenby the central banks.,
Well, of course, today we talk in programmnos atLoan Council meetings of about œ 300M. and they are always toosnall, so I gather. But we don't sit down now and say how muchmoney can be borrowed on reasonable rates and conditions becauseuntil the last two years that would have meant that we would havedecided that the limit was œ 60M, or œ 70M. because that was aboutwhat the market would yield over a period of years œ 80M. perhaps,sometimes a œ 100M. with a bit of luck, and we developed a newtechniqueo
We, the Commonwealth want now to satisfy ourselvesthat in physical terms the performance of the loan works programmeis a feasible one and if that cones out at œ 300M. and if ourestimate of what the loan market will produce is œ 150M., thenwe have got into the habit of saying, " Well, we think you needthis programme, we think that these works must be done for thepurposes of economic development and we will therefore raise whatwe can on the market and we will supplement the market return outof the Commonwealth Budget. We will advance the money to you tomake up the short fallo" This honourable occupation, painfuloccupation, ran us up over a period of about ten years tosomething over œ 600 or œ 700M, and it is one of the beauties of afederal system that having done this, having either stepped upthe taxation or jacked up the taxation in order to provide thesevast sums of money, I was always able to attend something or otherand hear my State colleagues denouncing the Commonwealth for itsmiserable attitude towards taxation and demanding that it bereduced, ( Laughter) I don't know whether that's a warning tobusiness managers in esse or a warning to politicians in posse( Laughter) but it applies equally to both. These are complexmatters. I think that it is remarkable how far accommodationhas been worked out so that the strict letter of the Constitutionhasn't prevented certain really material economic development.That's one of them. The Loan Council business has been made towork for the good of Australia though it is quite different fromthe one which was established by constitutional authority. Itis not illegal but it is a voluntary affair, and it works, and itworks to the good of the people of Australia.
But don't let it be thought and don't let it besaid that every problem which crops up in Australia is one which,because of its importance to somebody is one that belongs to theFederal Government or Parliament because I am a very greatbeliever in the Federal system. I believe in the division ofpower. Butyoucan't really be an understanding, intelligent, devotedfederalist unless you know what the federal system is, unless: youknow that there is a division of power, that there are some thingsthat a government may do one government and some things thatit can't. And I think that if we increasingly clarify our mindson that, we will have less confusion, get rid of a lot of avoidablebad temper and irritation and sometimes hatred by realising thatwe are all the servants of the one sovereignty and of the onepeople, that each of us has his allotted task to do and ought todo it within the rules laid down for playing of the game,
Now, Sir, I have spoken too long, I am going to leave&nbsp;after a little while and go to bed and make a powerful speech, I&nbsp;hope, to the graziers in Sydney tomorrow. Therefore, I will shut&nbsp;up and sit down, but if anybody has a simple question that he thinks&nbsp;I can answer I will be glad to have a shot at it.



ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF THE GRAZIERS' ASSOCIATION
HELD IN SYDNEY ON 9TH MARCH, 1964
Speech by the Prir. e Miniter. the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen
You know, Mr. McMaster is quite right I said I
would be very pleased to be here, and then a little bit later on,
somebody said, " Well, the Queen Mother is not able to come out to
Adelaide to open the'Fostival, They would like you to open it",
and I said, " Oh, yes, I would be very pleased to do that", not
looking at the dates, Then somebody else said, " We'd like you to
make a powerful speech for about an hour on Sunday night to an
Administrative Staff College in Victoria" and once more, not looking
at dates, I said, " Yes, I would be delighted," Then somebody
said, " We would like you to make a great speech at the College of
Surgeons and lay a foundation stone on Friday," and I said, " Yes,
I would be very pleased to do it", and so here I am, pleased for
the fourth time in the third State ( Laughter) in one weekend.
But I must say, Sir. that I really am pleased to be
here not only because I have happy memories of the last time I
spoke hero but also because I think that there are one or two
matters that the Graziers' Association and the Prime Minister,
whoever he may be, ought to discuss together from time to time
because this is, in a sense and I don't need to say it to you,
the age of slogans0 Somebody coins a phrase, somebody prints it,
somebody quotes it and before long I am hearing it on all sides,
The fact that it is wrong doesn't seem to matter very much. Among
The ptvrases that have been enjoying some currency in Australia in
the last few years is one that I just want to say a few words about
because I won't detain you unduly,
It has been put on a variety of occasions to me and
to other people that there is an inevitable conflict between
stability and growth, These are the very words in which it was
last put to me and I raised an interrogative eyebrow and demanded
some evidence of the truth of this proposition and because the
fact that I questioned it seem. d to be regarded as rather
remarkable, I would like to question it now with you, and give my
reasons, What they say is that there is an inevitable conflict
between stability and growth. Now, of course, this statement
begins by being hopeless because you are dealing with two utterly
different matters. Growth in Australia is a physical matter
growth because we will have more land under cultivation growth
because we will produce more wool growth because we will have
more minerals discovered and developed and used growth because
we will have greater and better water supply growth because we
will have more roads, more basic industries established on'which
to build a superstructure, Growth, yes, we are all in favour of
growth and so have our predecessors been in Australia because few
countries in the history of tho world have grown as much or as fast
as our owno But growth is a physical matter. You may measure it
in that senseo Stability, in the sense in which we all employ it,
is a monetary mattor, When you say you want stability with growth,
you say we want stability of monetary values in other words, we
want to avoid inflation and, at the scnoe time, we want to develop
and develop and develop the material resources of the country, I
am at a loss to understand why it is thought that these two things
o oo o o ./ 2 
-22-
are incompatible, They are not, The best evidence of that is
that vwe have had two or ih. roo years now in A. stralia of the most
enormous physical growth and dovelopment and we have had practically
a dead level in the consumor price indo-, We have had, so long
as we keep it, stability in a nonetary sense and growth in a
developmental sense, Now, Sir, I mention this because time after time,
people think that when you talk about stability, you moan stagnation
in physical growth, forgetting that you are talking about a
monetary conception and that when you talk about growth, some
people will say, " Oh, you must be very careful" under the impression
that you are talking about an inflation of the currency. The two
things are utterly different. The two things are entirely
reconcilable and in my opinion, it is one of the great businesses
of statesmanship in this country to do all that we can to reconcile
them, to prevent the cost level from rising, to prevent inflation
from wrecking the foundations of growth and at the samo time to
have all the development, all the growth, all the added productivity
that we can achieve, Now this seems to Sir, to be so sinple
as to be almost elementary, to be alrost a truism, and yet I am
perfectly certain that before long I will walk down the street and
I will encounter some very well known man in the business world
who will say to me, " Of course, my dear fellow, growth and
stability are incompatible," Now, I hope ; hat I have said will indicate to you
I don't believe that to be true. Apply it to the businesses in
which you as graziors are engaged. Woll, you have a vested
interest haven't you, in avoiding inflation. So have I as the
head of the nation, Don't let us forget tt tt there are many many
people in Australia who have a vested interest in inflation, to
whom some degree of inflation represents positive advantages and,
forx all I know Sir, there are more of those than there are of you.
and that is why it is very important politically not just to coun6
the heads but to calculate the ideas, to work out with some sense
of justice what ought to be done. I would nerely begin always
by saying to myself, " Well, recognise that you have very many
people who have a vested interest in inflation, who cro not
exercised by it." Sir, I have even heard economists and one speaks
with immense respect for economists ( Laughter) if only because they
present such an infinite variety of opinions, but I hWve heard
economists, well-known if nIt oeinent, at any rate well known
who have said about 2% inflation a year is a pretty good idea,
This will be the proof that the country is moving. And when I
occasionally say, " Well, that's a splendid idea. That means that
when we go out to raise moncy for public works for the developnent
of this country we ought to be saying, if you are right, to the
investors, ' Well, I understand that you will write off your investnent
at the rate of 2 per cent, a year'", When the last groat
inflation was on in Australia, the Loan market used to fail, the
Commonwealth Goverment had the somewhat dubious advantage of
having to supplement the Loan market in order that these public
works progra-mes could go on and it used to cost us, on the
average, about œ 60M or œ 70M. a year out of the Budget and that
meant that the taxes either didn't come down or went up. My
experience was that when we had performed this act of singular
magnanimity without any obligation we wore able to go out at the
next State election and hoar -urselves being attacked for our
taxation policy by the very fellows who had collected œ 60M, or
a year out of us to maintain their works programme, These
are just the ironies of life, ( Laughter) So long as one doesn't
become sleepless over them, one survives themn 
-3-3
But the fact is that every time wo had an inflationary
process the Loan narket has been advers ely affected for the nost
obvious reasons. Yet I an perfectly certain that there are very
few people loft in Australia who don't realise that any development,
whether it is in primary industry or secondary industry or tertiary
industry, any development is conditioned upon an adequate supply
of funds for governent works. It doesn't natter whether they
are the Snowy for electric power or whether they are some water
storage with the consequent reticulation of water for irrigation,
whether they are for roads with consequent inprovenmnt upon
transportation it doesn't natter what they are, all these basic
services we look to the governent or governnents to provide and
we all want then to provide then if they can out of Loan noney
because this business of providing then out of revenue means that
today's taxpayer is unduly loaded to supply his sonsl uses and
purposes in twenty years' tine. And so we would like to have then
done out of Loan money, and today we are increasingly getting then
done out of Loan noney.
Today we have a Loan nmrket which is nost renarkably
successful, and one of the reasons for its success is not that
they go hone and say their prayers you know, these financiers
say their prayers and say " Isn't it wonderful to have the Menzies
Governnent" I think nost of them doubt it ( Laughter) but it
is because there has been stability in the currency, because
inflation has been checked and therefore one of the by-products
is that the Loan markets have been well supplied and therefore the
works progranes of Australia have been able to go on apnceo
Nov you as I said, have a vested interest in avoiding
inflation, After all, you neot the local costs if there is
inflation, if there is a steep step up in the wage ratq and if the
techniques of production haven't kept step with then, you will
find that your costs, whatever they ray be for, are rising and that
your price still remains, as I daresay it always will one way or
another, at the mercy of the buyer. Now, it is quite true that
prices have been healthy of late, We have known periods, haven't
we, in which they have been very bad. We have known one or two
periods in which they have been embarrassingly good. I won't go
back on it, ( Laughter). But above all things you do represent a
great industry which cannot afford to be, and which we cannot
afford to have, priced out of the world market or priced out of
existence, and therefore you have a vested interest in some
stability of costs, or at any rate in a cost level which is
supportable if you are to continue your industry at a reasonable
profit and sell your commodity on the world's market at a reasonable
advantage. This is all perfectly true.
How do we meet this kind of thing? How do you meet
it? Well, you meet it of course in one sense by constantly
aiming at more efficient production, I mean by constantly aiming
at a bigger clip per sheep, let's put it that way. By constantly
aiming, as I hope everybody will, at maintaining wherever possible
the quality of our wool. These things represent better methods,
better grazing methods, better ways of handling the various
problems of classifying wool, all this kind of thing these are
matters that you, in a managerial sense can look after. You are
not the mantors of what you will pay but you are, in a sense, the
masters of how you will handle your business,
But in the long run, you know and I know that if
we were to have an acute inflation in this country not all the
skill, not all the enterprise not all the applicaion of art and
science to your industry could prevent you from having your costs
rise against you and perhaps at a time when the world's demand was
sustaining one of those occasional falls that it does. Therefore,
I say to you and I say it with warm approval, you have a vested ./ 4 
-4-
interest in avoiding inflation. I don't mean to say, Sir, that any
government can sit down and guarantee that there never will be a fall
in the value of money, That would be an absurdity because there are
many instruments of policy in this country which don't belong to
governments at all and there are many circumstances which bear upon
the value of money which exercise a pressure. This is a vastly
complex thing. Somebody tells me the central bank, the Reserve Bank,
under Government persuasion if necessary has ample power to avoid
this. Of course that is not true. The Reserve Bank has great power
to do a great number of matters and every time it does one of them
in the normal fashion I am pleased about it, I don't mind saying,
because I prefer the occasional nudge to the economy to the sudden
hit by some large emergency scheme on the part of a government.
But give all the powers the Reserve Bank has in and they are not
by any means all the powers the financial powers in the country
give in what the Commonwealth may do with its limited powers, it is
still true that there are many agencies in the country which affect
the supply of money, the price of money, the value of money which
at the moment, are not under compulsive authority in Australia. But
that doesn't mean that the Government of the country indeed the
governments of the country should not constantly have in their
mind the great truth that stability in the value of money, stability
in the value of savings, stability in the value of investments is one
of the great conditions which enables growth to occur.
S There is an argument that goes on, and I don't want to
enter into it, about overseas investment in Australia. We have had a
very great deal. It goes on. I, myself, believe that it is not
unrelated to the remarkable stability of this country. Political
stability I don't mean by that that I an Prime Minister or something,
but I mean by political stability that this is not a country that
changes its government by revolutions or assassinations. I have
been Leader of the Opposition myself and still alive which is a
romarkable thing ( Laughter) in our country. But stability, stability
of government stability in broad economic ideas, a steady growth,
the possibility of immonso resources these are the things that
induce people overseas to put their money into Australia and they put
it in for growth, not as a hiding-place, but for future growth. They
put it in for future growth because they believe as I do that growth
in the country depends entirely or primarily upon the fertility of
S the soil from which you are going to grow and the fertility of the
soil depends a great deal on the stability of the countryj the sort
of stability that means that people are not going to lose their
investment in a wild inflation or lose their investment in some wild
political " bouleversenent", some revolution.
We ought to remember these natters and remenber them with
very great pride, but we will do best, Sir, on all these mntters if
we don't become the victins of slogans. What I have said to you
today was designed primarily to dispose of the slogan which seems
to me to be so false that you can't have stability and growth at the
sane tine. I an happy to say that if I an relieved by God or nan
from my responsibilities in a reasonable time in the future, I should
like to have enough time off before my ultinate departure to look
back and say, well, we did show, with the help of the people of
Australia that you can be stable and that you can be fast-growing
at the sane time. To Australia this is tremendous. To Australia's
greatest industry, this is vital and so I therefore have given nyself
the great pleasure of coming here, wishing you well in all your
undertakings in the course of this conference and saying to you, if
I may, that you are not to be beguiled by the siren voices that will
occasionally be hoard. You just stick to the good old rules of being
sound, sensiblo, forward looking, skilful and responsible. That's
all I ask of you ( Laughter) and I daresay that in your turn, you
would say, " Well, if you would even live up to that, old boy, we
would be a lot better off than we are."
Sir, I declare the Conference open. 



FOR PPSS FREMIERIS , IRTo1964 j / j2J
COMMONWEALTH AID ROADS 12Z. 68 / 6
Statement by the Prme Minister. the Rt. Hon, Sir Robert enzieq
It is propose that the new Commonwealth Aid Roads
legislation will provide as follows
a period of five years from 1st July, 1964;
subject to matching contributions by State Governments
in respect of that portion of the grant known as the
additional grant, the Commonwealth will make available
to the States over a five year period a total sum of
œ 375 000, 000 for the construction, reconstruction and
maintenance of roads;
the basic grant payable to the States by the Commonwealth
will total 330,000,000 distributed over the five
years as follows
1961,-6 5 62,000,000
1965-66 64,000,000
1966-67 66,000,000
1967-68 68,000,000
1968-69 70,000,000
in addition to these basic grants of œ 330,000 000, the
Commonwealth will make available to the States further
sums totalling œ 45,000,000 on the basis of for every
œ 1 allocated by the State Governments from their own
resources for expenditure on roads over and above
certain base amounts. These are the amounts required
to be allocated by States for roads expenditure in
order to qualify under the present legislation for the
additional grant in 1963-64, The amount of such
additional grants by the Commonwealth will be subject
to annual limits as follows
1964-65 3,000,000
1965-66 6,000,000
1966-67 9,000,000
1967-68 12,000,000
1968-69 15,000,000
the State Governments will be required to ensure, as at
present, that not less than 40 per cent, of funds
made available by the Commonwealth will be spent on
roads in rural areas, other than highways, main roads
and trunk roads; a a * O/ 2 
2
there will be no special allocation of Commonwealth
funds for e enditure in metropolitan areas, But
the Statf. e Governments will be free to allocate any
part of Commonwealth Aid Road grants other than the
proportion reserved for rural roads for expenditure
in municipal or local authority areas which includes
metropolitan areas;
the amounts made available by the Commonwealth will be
distributed, as at present, between States in the
proportions of 5 per cent. of the total for Tasmania,
and the balance between the other five States on the
basis of 1/ 3 according to population, 1/ 3 according
to area, and 1/ 3 according to motor vehicles registered;
the provision in the present legislation permitting the
States to spend up to œ 1,000,000 of the amount made
available by the Commonwealth each year on works other
than road works connected with transport by road or
water will be renewed.
the provision in the existing legislation permitting the
States to make paylmnts for or in connection with
research relating to the construction, maintenance or
repair of roads will be continued and will be extended
to include research relating also to planning and
design of roads.
CANBERP 12th March, 1964. 
000
PROPOSED DISTRIBUTION OF GRANTS UNDER THE NUE CCOiNONWEALTH AID ROADS LEGISLATION ( a)
.964-1965 TO 1968-6
1964.-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967,-68 1968-69 fotal Five Years
Aic di ' 1 l BaiidT ota basic Addi-tB oal so asic A' 1ddi t-f 0To. taleB asic Adde Fef nalt
ional ionali ional ional ional ional
œ: 000 E' 000 œ 00000 000 E 000 000 E0000 E 10001œ' 000 œ 1000 œ' 000 œ 1000 ' 000 œ 0Looo œ 000ooo ooo œ ooo
N. S W 17,341 839 18,180 17,901 1,678 19,579! 19,460 2,518 20,978 19,020 3,356 22,376 19,579 4,196 23,775192,301 12,587 104,888 27ø 97
VIC 12,, 202 590 12,792 12,595 1,181 13,776 12,989 1,771 14,760 13,382 2,362 15,744 13,776 2,952 16,728 64,944 8,656 73,800 19.68
Q'LD 1,259 545 11,804 11i, 622 1,090 12,712 l1,986 1,634 13,620 12,349 2,179 14,528 12,712 2,724 15,436 59,928 8,172 68,100 18.16
S. A. 7,13 345 7,475 7,360 690 8,050 7j590 1,035 8.625 7,820 1,380 9,200 8,050 1,725 9,775 37,950 5,175 43,125 11.50
W. A. 10,963 531 11,499 11,322 1,061 12,383 11,675 1,592 13,267 12,029 2,123 14,152112,383 2,653 15,036 58377 7,960 66,337 17.69
TAS. 3, 1 150 3,2501 3,200 300 3,500i 3,300 450 3,750 3,400 600 4,000 3,500 750 4,250 16,500 2,250 18,750 5.00
TOTAL 2,0C' 3,000 65,00 ( 64,000 6,000 70,000 66,000 9,000 75,000i68,000 12,000 80,000 70,000 15,000 85,000330, C0045,000 375,000 100.00
Assumes the grants will be distributed to the States in each year in the proportions of 5 per cent of the total
for Tasmania and the balance between the other five States on the basis of one-third area, one-third population
as at 30th June, 1961 and one-third motor vehicles on register as at end December, 1962 as published in the
Cormmnnnwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics' Preliminary Statement No. 5: Census of Motor Vehicles, 31st
December, 1962. It is also assumed that each State will allocate for roads in each year an amount at
least sufficient to qualify in full for the additional grant 



ADDRESS BY THE PRIME SISi._ IR % CITG. Ma( ZIEs. 14. 16.
OFICIA. OPZN: N(; OF " GEQEGE ? 4CtRIEPF BARRCH WbIEilAL., OCEAN BEACH. MINLY.
Mr. Chai man, Mr. Mayor, Ladies and Gentlement
Just so I won't miss the bus, I declare this building open.
just so that you won't fall into a state of despair I see that somebody has
very kindly nut uP over there a notice next to my namsake, the sergeant, w~ ich says
" Four-hour Parking", I take it that that's the dead limit, four hours.
Now I won't go on for more than another three.*
Now you may complain about It raining, but I do not my one regret about this
rain Is this, I wish it were falling in Canberra-you don't need it, having enjoyed a
typical suuvaqr, but we do. But there is one reason I like to see it falling here,
you know, for years and years, shil" Yarsp I've put up with the unkind remarks of my
colleagues at Canberra, the ones who come from Sydney, making uniformly rude remiarks
about the Melbourne climate particularly the Mlbourne suarer -I had to come here
to discover It.
Now this is really a great occasion, I am not going to speak at any length
to you, you have just had an admirable summary of the history of this great Scheme
and the work that it does. But I'm here very largely because this work, this great
Scheme Is, I think, one of the most exciting thingsim Auitplial V will allow.
me to make just one broad remark or* this ' atter we have rather got Into the habit,,
haven't we, of looking to gonziiaents for .11 the 9eod things-that we thinkr out to
4be done. We have a very great disposition to say, well, wt pay our taxes, there
are governments, we elect them, we don't think such of thopi still thety're the best
we can get and we mst leave it to them until we get the opportunity of tossing
them out. All this, of course, Is highly Intelligible to me, but don't let's fall Into
the error of thinking that In this hummn Ilfeg, full of humaan beings, we can leave
everything to a govenment department, because as I once took the liberty of saying an
another occasion, there or# many departiments iWall gov~ m. entsp but I don't know a
single department of * loving kindness*, and If we're to have loving kindness not
parcelled out according to the Toles of the statute or the 2egVlatiena made under a
statute then It still remains for human beings to provide It* And the Interesting
thing in Australia is that so many human beings, relatively speaking, have seen this
challenge and have wonderful things for all of us. They my at some stage be
a ssisted by 3 qoYrr-. mht or by a depatet or by sme officials of It, but they
themselves have the vision, the imegination, the kindness In their hearts to start
the work. Now there are two great names as we all know9 In the Inland of Australap
one is the ' Pam of Drumond because of this Schee and the other is the name 
, j04lynn of the lnland, with the Flyingq Doctor SeTvice, with a1l these things that
-: have been done, ( do you think I requiret this-) ( If I take this ( umbrella) I'll speak
long I think-you'd better take it back). Flynn of the Inland, now all sorts of
things happen In the centre of Australia. But you sea it was one mang with
imagination,, with devotion, wh~ o started all thee* things in the inland, and that's
whiy the name of Flynn Is imortal* And In this case It was 9oe man, quickly
accompanied by another, Drummond, and then Barron,-uho thought of this, v" e created
this, vdico provived the fire and the inspiration and the generosity to make it go on.
Really, I dare say that not all of you read the Bible as regularly as
you should, but there is one line in-. it that we ought to remember on an occasion like,
this and It Is " Let us now praise famous am and our fathers % bich begat us".
Let us'praise famous motn, We are praising one to-day -we are commemorating one
to-day in the n3me of this building -but really every night we ought to thank heaven
we hdve been able to produce in this country, people, of unselfishness, of skill,
of devotion, of Imagination, who have enabled these great things to be done.
When I was a very small boy In a very primitive section of-the bush
in Victoria there was a doctor here, another doctor 25 miles awayp that's true, but
what happened to little children who had some physical defect, some kind of complaint?
Without diagncsis, I wouldn't Mnow. When you think that in this very place,
hundreds and now thousands of children have been rmeolved and twated and given a
* vision of a new life, when you th. l*. of that, then this wouldn't have happened If
we, hadn't had people with Imagination, aided in this case, of course, by that
remarkable woan, Airs. Hill*
This Is a great tiuavirete, a great triuvirsea and although their
names may be personally unknown to a great number of peoplo in Australia, I can
assure you indeed that this great Scheme is increasingly well-knove to the people
of Australia and that they have a proper pride in Ito Now I call on you to have
pride in It, I call on you to'have a feeling of something like inspiration vwen
we think about. it. I call upon you to reember that what can be done by three
people, initially, can be d* 6* by three thousand or thre millions, so be it that
they have imagination and goneros~ ty In their mind* and hearts.
So, Sir, this Is a great hmian occasion* You are getting wetter
and wetter, and I, like all public speakers, an performing the remarkable feat of
getting drier and drier, at the same time. Therefore, to repeat myslf, 9 I went to
thank you for your patience under these conditions and to repeat, that I have a
aiinal honour inl declaring this building open. 



CIVIC RECEPTION. MANLY. N. S. W.
12th MARCH ,1964+
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Mayor, Mr. w4entworth and Ladies and Gentlemen
I wouldn't want to describe this as a big moment because
it is a rather truncated moment. I was given a programme this
morning and I metaphorically have an eye on the clock. Now,
might I Just begin by thanking you and referring to one of the
last observations made by Bill Wentworth, He described me rather
rashly as the " 1P. PM, 1" ( permanent Prime Minister). I would like
to have you know that the wife of a former Governor-General of
Australia, Lady Gowrie, always in writing a letter to my wife,
addresses her as " Dear not PPM. but P. MM. which means
" Prime Minister's Missus" ( Laughter) but then later on as it
became more and more clear that I wasnrt entirely my own master
on these things, I think, Pat, she began to address you as
too. ( Laughter) Now, Sir, today and I must mention this before I
forget it we have had three rather splendid events and some of
them may not have been observed, One is that when we arrived
over the road we had the pipes. Now, I have a good deal of
Scottish blooA, my wife has a most diabolical mixture of Scottish
and Irish blood but whichever way it goes, it is always a great
thrill to hear Lhe 11pipes and to hear them played so well and I
would like to say " thank you" to those who attended us in that
way* And there is a second thing about my clan, the Mingies
clan if you care to address me properly. The clan colours are
red and white and we have both been delighted to find that you
have given us that complimont in the table decorations along here.
The slogan, if I remember correctly, is' Geal ' us Dearg a suas"
which is my approximation to Gaelic and it means, " Up with the
white and red" ( Laughter). In Melbourne they have always thought
that that made me an absolute certainty to be a supporter of
South Melbourne in the football ( Laughter) but I never have been.
Then when we walked in down below, we had all these rather
dwarfed, anaemic-looking characters ( Laughter) representing
lifesaving clubs and that was a great compliment and a great
pleasure. As a matter of fact, I didn't realise until I was
coming across here this morning from the airport that surfing, to
put it no wider than that, is an extremely modern art. I thought
that it went back to time immremorial in this greatest of all
surfing States, but oh no, one of my Secretaries was able to tell
me, as an old Sydrieian, that it is within living memory that some
lawless citizen, he thought a bank manager, plunged into the
surf and was prosecuted ( Laughter) because it was a breach of
the law. Very interesting that this thing one always associates
with Manly should have been of such modern growth.
He also told me, Sir and you have repeated itthat
this was once known as " The Village". Certainly, of all cities
of this kind, it has a unique character and I was wondering with
him as to why it had this unique character until I realised, as
an ignorant man from Melbourne might be forgiven for not knowing,
that it is within the memory of men of middle years that if you
wanted to come by water you came by the ferry so that this was
a relatively isolated community, though I am bound to say that the
e./ 2 
-2
first time I ever came here as an ordinary respectable citizen
many years ago, and got off the ferry and went along the Corso
and went over on to the beach and gazed on the people, I didn't
observe as perhaps I should have this simple, unsophisticated,
unworldly character which I now gather the citizens of Manly
possess. ( Laughter) Still even then, allowing for all that, it
was great fun. As for the quarantine station, I must mention
this. I don't know very much about the quarantine station.
I don't remember that in my current incumbency we have had any
case put to us about the quarantine station. I don't recall it.
You check up on it. You will get the same answer no doubt
( Laughter) but any rate I remember years ago and not so many
years ago at that -if f were in Sydney, I oucasionally went out
Li a yacht with a very well-known Sydney man and we found our way
around the harbour and I studied the first rudiments of keeping
the boat half a point off the wind with great skill -I have
always been indebted to him for teaching me that because, by
Jove, I've been keeping it half a point off the wind for a long
time now politically ( Laughter) ( Applause) Well, wo always
arrivei. at lunch time and dropped anchor just near the quarantine
station and even then I used to look at it and admire the utter
solitude of the place, not a human being to be seen and, as far
as I can tell, not a germ to be seen ( Laughter) We ate our rood
and had a drink of something or other, then we up-3nchored and
went back to tae other side of the harbour. A&amp; nd so, Sir, I was
surprised to hear you say there is still a quarantine station.
Has it been used of late? ( Voice in background Well,
think of the advantage. There you have a lovely bit or parkland
with a few harmless old buildings on it and if you had your way,
you would have all thi. s thrown open and you would cover it with
red-tiled roofs, wouldn't you? ( Voice in background " No")
Oh, that's out. ( Laughter) When you bring that next deputation,
make a point of that, will you? ( Laughter)
But, really, ladies and gentlemen, all ' I want to say
to you on behalf of my wife and myself is that we are very
grateful to you and we are very glad that in an official capacity
we are able to come to this famous city. You know, one of the
things that has been going on in the world which attracts the
attention, I think, of a great number of thoughtful people, is
that in the modern world, let me make it more narrow still in
the world since the war, since these great movements of national
independence have been occurring right through Asia and through
Africa and elsewhere in this world there is a great disposition,
which I think is a wrong disposition, to create self-government
from the top. The disposition is to say to a country -it may
be Ghana, it may be Kenya, it may be some other country -" You
are now given independence", so we in effect pass an act of
Parliament and we say, " There you are, now you create a Parliament
and you are self-governing independent and all other things will
be added to you," There is a great disposition to say this, a
great disposition to do it in many international bodies, to start
at the top and say " Create a National Assembly in this country"
and then you have lone the lot. It can work the future out as it
1ike, It is worthwhile reflecting Mr. Mayor, that that hasn't
been our historic process, either in 4reat Britain or in Australia
and if there are any people n the world who ought to understand
Parliamentary self-government it is the British because tafter
all, our ancestors invented it. But they didn't invent Itfrom
the top. They invented it from lower down in this tructure of
organisation, from the old shire moot, from the old " hundred"
moots in England from the little organisations of local government
spreading out into some sort of county organisation and ultimately to./ 3 
-3
by slow and painful degrees, over the course of centuries, into
a Parliament which was the apex of this structure of selfgovernment.
But it is an apex which could not be sustained
without the sub-structure, so that I don't believe that any
State Parliament could be effective or even survive without
a sub-structure of municipal government and I certainly don't
believe that a national parliament and government could survive
without a sub-structure. The whole thing about local government
is not only that it attends to local affairs much more
effectively than far-removed people could, but that it gives
people experience in the art of self'-government it gives people
the opportunity to be elected, not to some great office of
profit but to an office of service, to an office in which
they are responsible to people for a variety of matters and
in which the people look to them and in which they look to the
people and they come and they go and they may be voted out,
they may be voted in, but this is part of our genius in the
business of government. We take it ' for granted, but it has
been completely ignored many many times in the last twenty
years, You take our responsibilities in New Guinea and Papua
not so remote from us, from you. There are plenty of people
in this world wh~ o think that the one thing you have to do* in
Papua and New Guinea is to set up a parliament and then walk
out and say, " Well, now, it is !, ll yours. You are completely
self-governing, you are independent. We leave you to it."
That is not our tradition. For years now, we ave been helping
to create in thos3 territories local governments, the equivalent
of our municipalities, with a lot of the indige-nous inhabitants
getting experience., first in a irimitive way and then in a more
advanced way, in tae government of a particular area for
particular purposes, and the longer this goes on, the more
completely do they come to understand local government, the
more fit will they be to engage in general self-government
through a parliamunt when that day comes. Now, Sir, I don't
want to be tedious about this matter,, This nappens to be a
proposition that I have uttered not only here but in many other
parts of the world. I think there is a great lesson in it and
that means that every time an Australian like myself ha s the
opportunity of going into a municipality, of touching even
lightly and casually the sytem of local municipal self-government,
one is reminded that this is not only historically but
functionally one of the great things in a democratic world.
Therefore, Sir, I use no mere form of words when I say
that I am de-lighted to be here and I am honoured to be received
by the Mayor,* This is, of course, to us an elementary truth,
but to many people it is completely unknown.
I wonder Si r, if I might just before I conclude say
this to you: thait there are people who are so young as not to
remember a time when I wasn't Prime Minister. I can remember
it very well, ( Laughter) The first contact I ever had with
what we are pleased to call politics was when I was a small boy
in the bush living in a country shire in Victoria and my father
was one of the shire councillors, and on shire council meeting
day which was perhaps once a fortnight it may have been once
a month in those days down a rather rough track from the town
twenty miles further north came a horse and buggy, the wheels
rattling over the gravel or the unbitumenised miacadalm, as the
case might be. Anyhow, it came rattling and groaning, and my
old man, having addressed my mother and the rest of us powerfully
on the burning issue of the day in the Dimboola Shire Council
about which our own heat was less than his, would mount up into
the buggy with this other mian and they disappeared into the night
0 6 ./ 4 
for another twenty-four miles down the road to a town called
Dimboola. and there they met and conducted their high mysteries.
And a couple of days later, they came back and shed each other.
Now this was my first introduction to the business of government
and when I look back on it and I think how primitive everything
was, how rough and crude the roads were how utterly limited
were the facilities and I look back on Lhose men who devoted a
good deal of their time and no small fraction of their energy
to going down, considering these fellows, arguing with the shire
engineer, being instructed as every sensible councillor is by
the shire clerk ( Laughter) when I think of that, I think that
wasn't a bad introduction Lo the art of government, It preserved
one from having delusions, it made one understand that matters
of less magnitude than may be engaged in by a parliament are
still matters of great importance and that they are not to be
neglected and it is on that foundation, vividly remembered by
me that I think my earliest interest in political affaizrs arose.
I admit there was one other factor ari. that was that
my father who ultimately went into the State Parliament of
Victoria was, unlike me, greatly given to argument. ( Laughter)
He was willing to argue with anybody about anything and in those
early days if you lived in the country, you were a free trader
automatically. The old man wasntt. Having ascertained thiat
all the people in the district were free traders, he became the
highest protectionist my family : ias ever known. ( Laughter)
That was good experience too, wasnt t it, because there is very
frequently great virtue in being different.
tto ankNow, Sir, we must go elsewhere as you know. I want
ttoa nkyou very much for what you have said and if I may say
so to you, on behalf of both of us, it is clear that as was
written in old times, the prayers of a righteous man avail much,
( Laughter) because yours were in reality both well answered. 



OPENING OF NEJ1 SCIENCE BUILDING AT SCOTCH COLLEGE,
1vELMMITNE
21ST MARCH. 1964,
Speech by the Prime Minister? the R~ t. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen
I think there is a considerable amount of Scots
caution in the fact that the benediction .% ras pronounced before
I spoke. ( Laughter) This has never happened to me before. I
think it very prudent because in my long Presbyterian experience
when the benediction is pronounced, the congregation is free to
leave. ( Laughter) So it is very kind of you to remain.
Now I am at a disadvantage today. As a rule, the
speakers, according to an unwritten Australian practice, stand
or sit in the shade while the audience sits in the sun and gets
roasted. ( Laughter) This is a splendid idea. It is essential
that the speaker should have command over the audience and therefore
that the audience should be a little uncomfortable. Today
you are all sitting in the shade and the position is reversed but
it is worse for me because this I think, is the eighth occasion
on which I have opened or helpeA to open one of these science
blocks, th-, subject of aid from this well-known Industrial Fund
and on each occasion in the past and again today, Mr. L. C. Robson,
the chief executive of that concern has been present. On all
other occasions, he has made a speech and he has spoken before me
and I have picked up a few crumbs that have fallen from his
scientific table, Today he is here the wretched man, gre at and
good man as he is sitting in the shade, smirking a little and
saying, " Well, it~ s Menzies who has to speak this time, all by
himself." ( Laughter) Now, Sir, it is a very wonderful occasion and it is
an occasion that should not be allowed to pass, even so far as I
am concerned without me paying my tribute to the imaginative work
of the Indus~ rial Fund. This doesn't account for all these science
blocks that are being built, but it has meant that over the last
year or two or three, hundreds of thousands of pounds have been
raised and disbursed in order to improve scientific teaching in the
independent schoo, s, as we call them, of Australia.
Now, this is imaginative. Just indeed, as I am
prepared to admit, that our own proposal as a government, which
is now going into effect, to find œ 5M. a year for science
laboratories and equipment in secondary schools is itself imaginative
stimulated not a little by the work of the Industrial Fund.
And It means, as you have been told that so far as the independent
schools are concerned, one-quarter of the _ 5M. because that is
about the proportion œ 1lim. every year will be devoted to these
purposes. Now that doesn't mean, of course that every secondary
school that wants, and deserves, a science block will get one in
a year. That is, of course, manifestly impossible. But when you
look forward over a term of years and imagine what this can do,
then I think it will be agreed that there will be little reason
why the great schools, secondary schools independent or State
should not be able to improve the standard of their science
teaching improve the qualifications of those going on to the
universihos or any other tertiary institution and thereby add to
the total scientific knoviledge and facilities of the country.
Now I am not a scientist. Somebody some years ago
invented a subject, a rather grisly subject, called political
science. I know nothing about it. I am not a scientist but I
know something about politics and something about the responsibility ./ 2 
2-
of Politics and something about the political history of the
world in our time, and there are two things that emerge from that
consideration. The first is and I say this without denigrating
the scientists that the failures of civilisation in this century
have been failures of the human spirit, failures in the great
and important art of knowing about people, of understanding
people, of tolerating people, and these failures moral failures,
intellectual failures have been brought about, I think, because
we have underestimated the importance of humane studies and of
human understanding, If we are going to avoid wars, if we are
going to avoid catastrophes, internationally, then we must never
lose sight of the fact that the business of education is every
bit as much moral as it is intellectual, every bit as much a
matter of training character and quality as it is of training
people in the accumulation of facts.
But there is another aspect. It is going on now.
We have become rather accustomed havent we, of learning about
new weapons, new explorations into space. More and more, a lot
of people ha-ve begun to think that the sole business of science
is propulsion and that we must explore outer space and that all
this is* of necessity a very good thing. W~ ell, it maay be. I
notice that a few people from time to time, and a few nations
from time to time, contemplate spending a few thousand million
pounds or dollars on trying to strike a blow at the moon? and I
have nothing against the moon at all. I hove an affection for
the moon. The moon has always struck me as being a highly
handsome civil and reflective lady and why we should be wanting
to hit her I don't know. I leave this to the scientists to
explain. Aut putting on one side this silly ignorant prejudice
of mine, I see in the current world such a scope for scientific
development, such an irresistible demand for science, for the
application of science in this very earth of ours that I marvel
how we can survive or how the world can survive this century unless
we produce far more scientific workers and thinkers and explorers
than we do now. Consider, ladies and gentlemen, where we are it's a
very pleasant place, a very comfortable city; it's a very
comfortable country. We are by no moans overcrowded. WVe could
have many many more people and hardly notice them. But the
population of -the world nay almost doublo itself by the turn of
the century, may almost double itself in the lifetime of most of
the boys of this great school who are here today. And people,
if they are to live in this world, if they are to have some chance
of advancement in this world, if they are not to be consumed by a
diet of starvation and hatred must be fed, must be clothed, must
go on developing their own activities in life and this will be
done not by doing with the soil or the elem., ents what grandfather
did with them. This will be done only by people forcing their
boundaries of knowledge further and further so that land will
produce far more, so that elements now existent can be used
effectively and properly, so that the world will undo, release
its elements to sustain a population twice as great as we have
now, This pressure of population on resources is I believe,
the greatest genuine social problem that confronts us today in this
world and it will not be solved with great respect to my
particular union by politicians as such. It won't be solved by
legislators as such, It will be soDlved by thousands and millions
of people who are discovering and applying new things and that is
where the scientist comes in. And some of the scientists may go
to the moon if they want to, but I do hope that the vast majority
of them won't think) that the vast majority of boys at school
wontt think that it is no use taking science or being interested at o / 3 
-3
in it unless you went to bo a nuclear physicist. Every aspect of
science is under demand in the world humanity requires it.
Therefore, I would think that apart altogether from the tremendous
advantage that is got by having a new building with proper light,
with proper facilities something to attract the student instead
of the dark thing of old days with a solitary bunsen burner
flickering in the corner, that apart altogether from the inherent
attractiveness of this new building, it would increasingly be felt
that there is here a great vocation which will sarve mankind all
over the world. We are an advanced country. ' Jo : ught to produce
far more people of this kind per thousand than another country just
across the water, and we will need to. The Western countries will
need to if they are to bring to the crowded Eastern countries of
the world, emerging into independence, emerging into higher
standards of life, if they are to bring to them a real hope of a
happy future. Now there are three Presbyterian parsons on this platform
and they have corrupted me hecauso, you see what I have been saying
to you sounds singularly like a sermon. Bu it is a matter that
I believe in, it has deeply affected my own outlook as the head of
the Government on what ought to be done about science teaching and,
therefore it gives me particular pleasure to be hero and to be
about to l~ eclarc the building open. But before I do, I would like
to tell you, just in general that my colleague, Senator Gorton
and I have hiad a very great A~ eal of interest in evolving the
particular ways and means of solving this problem of giving
scientific aid to schools, particulbrly to the independent schools.
The others can be dealt with through the State Governments without
difficulty. One thing about which Senator Gorton will be making a
statement next week is the setting up of a Committee to advise
us, of competent people. I am happy to say that we have been able
to persuade Mr. L. C. Robson to become associated with us in this
great venture. This is worth untold thousands in efficiency in
the administration of this scheme. But we also have established a
Committee or my colleague has and will be announcing it but I
think I might be permitted to say that one of this small but very
representative authoritative Committee to advise us in relation
to the indepenient schools on an Australian basis is Mr. Selby
Smith himsel F, and we are deeply grateful to him. ( Applause)
How he is going to deal with his successor and become a Professor
of Education and at the same time devote some time to coping with
people like me, I don't know, but I am grateful to him and I wish
him well. And, Sir, having said that, I am happy to say that it
is a pleasure for both ray wife and myself to be here. It is a
pleasure on such a lovely day, in such a lovely setting and for the
benefit of such a fanous school, to declare this building open. 



BLOODHORSE BREEDERS1 ASSOCIATION OF AUSTRALIA
DINNER AT HOTEL AUSTRALIA, SYDNEY
23RD MARCH, 1264
Speech by the Prime Minister., the-Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr, Chairman and Distinguished Colleagues at the Top Table,
excluding Alister McMullin, and Gentlemen
I am here under false pretences. Part of them is
attributable to Alister McMullin and part of them to myself
because this man McMullin who masquerades as the President of
the Senate and I must say in past experience, can always be
relied on to vote the right way ( Laughter) has for some years
said to me, " Why don't you come to the Bloodhorse Breeders?
annual dinner?" and I'v said, " Oh, Alister, you know really
with great respect I notoriously know nothing a bout it, Even
my political opponents regard me as being rather inbred."
( Laughter, applause) Though as a matter of fact, I'm not; the
lines are good. Then this time he came around in that disarming
manner that people acquire in the Senate. After all, they have
nothing else to do ( Laughter), except to acquire a disarming
manner. And he said, " Now, I wish you'd come. They are all
friends of mine" which I thought was a pretty bold remark.
( Laughter) and " 21ou know, it will be an easy, informal evening."
He gave me to understand, though I can't pin him to the words,
that there would be no speeches, and I thought, wellq I have
always wanted to go to a dinner where there were no speeches.
Of course, it turned out that he had deceived me, Well, I have
put him in possession of my views on that matter.
But the other aspect in which I am here under false
pretences is entirely due to me. If you wanted to produce as an
exhibit tonight a man whose degree of ignorance was perfection
( Laughter), then you've picked the right man, The Chairman was
good enough to make a reference to the fact that my distinguished
colleague, the Treasurer knows something about this business and
has been seen from time to time at great events. Well back in
191+ 0 I think it was, Harold Holt spoke to me and he sail., " You
know, old man, it's all right about this cricket business and so
on. Dontt you realise that the greatest cross-section of the
community is to be found at a racecourse. You must go to
Caulfield," ( I think it was to the Cup) Well, there was an
election somewhere in the offing, ( Laughter) and I succumbed and
I went, and it was very agreeable. We had a splendid lunch with
the Committee and one of the oddities about me is that I always
know all the members of the Committee though I don't know what is
going on, In due course, the main event was to occur, and in the
meantime I met a very well known man in Melbourne who was a great
friend o1 mine, and we wandered off across the lawn and stood near
some rosebushes and got deep into conversation no doubt, as I
was a party to it, frightfully highbrow. And it happened that when
the main race was being run, we were so deep in conversation that
we had our backs to the track and there we were and the moment the
race was over, Harold Holt came across to me and said, " I'm sorry,
old man, never come again." ( Laughter) What I have designed as
something that would build us up for the next election, you've
converted into a positive disaster." So there you are. This
demonstrates what a hopeless exhibit I am, but still I am not
unaccustomed to this. There are a few things in life that I know
something about. Occasionally I get the opportunity of talking
about them. But most of the honorific things that have come to me have
come in the most queer garb. For example, when I arrived in Sydney
this afternoon, I was wearing a lovely green necktie with coats of 
-2
arms on it and somebody said, " What is that?" I said, " I would
have you know that I am a Fellow of the Royal Australian College
of Surgeons." This just rocked them because since I was a small
boy in the country and chopped the head off a chook occasionally,.
I have never performed any surgical operations whatever and now
I am a Fellow of the Royal Australian College of Surgeons. I am
a physician. ( Laughter) I cantt heal even a break in the Party.
( Laughter) ( Applause) The last time we had a Prime Minister's
Conference in London, I was taken away at the end of one afternoon
and taken around, on due warning, to the Royal College of
Gynaecologists and Obstetricians'and I was made a Fellow of the
College. I had to turn side on and explain that my position was
somewhat ambiguous because they might not know whether I was
there as a patient or as a practitioner ( Laughter). If I were
called on by an angry wife to build a dog kennel the kennel would
fall over within five minutes, but I am an archiiect, Understand
this, gentlemen? This is one of the few joys of public life to
be a physician, a surgeon, a gynecologist, an obstetrician, an
architect, a builder yes, I'm a builder I'm a plumber, and
therefore I am not unaccustomed to masquerading in a sort of
false capacity and I hope that these fellows like young Maloney
hero tonight, or even young Bob Heffron, if he were here, will
not use this against me because life is something of a masquerade.
But the one thing that I would like to say to you is
this, that ignorant as I am, brutishly ignorant as I am of the
fine points of your great enterprises like all amateurs, I have
my moments. L-4 the old days when we iravelled by train at the
weekend to Melbourne and back on Sunday nights, I had two people
on my staff and a then Chairman of Committees of the House of
Representatives who sat in the same compartment and who read
pink papers all the way from Albury to Melbourne. They all had
lead pencils and they were, I understood, engaged in that rather
esoteric exercise of studying form ( Laughter) and by the time
we were within twenty miles of Melbourne they would turn to me
hopefully and sayI " Well, what do you think will win the main
race today?" I would say " Well, how would I knogi. Give me
your papers." And I woulci look at them and by some metaphorical
process of putting a pin in a piece of paper, I would say, " O0h,
Dogsbody, of course, obviously will win today. Dogsbody is
improving right along the line." And Dcgsbody used to win.
( Laughter) I usad to receive the most tremendous accolades from
my staff for this almost diabolical knowledge that I hod of form.
I have lived a long time and I have been in politics
a long time and I've been Prime Minister now for an almost
deplorable amount of time and I had enough sense to know that
when I had done that four times running, that wns the time to
retire ( Laughter) and never again did I offer any advice.
But I have been talking tonight to Mr. Crowley about
your great exercise. Very international. He has had people
here from a number of Asian countries. I venture to believe,
knowing some of the people concerned in it, that Australian
racing authorities have done an enormous service to racing right
round the world. ( Applause) That is not to say that they would
ever take me with them except as " Exhibit A" l, but really it is
a fascinating thing in a world in which, so many occasions of
difference arise, so many brawls going on either public or
subdued, so many quarrels, so many well alivertised differences
of opinion things that really make you feel anxious about the
future of Lhe world, that one of the great counterbalancing
activities has been international sport in its various forms.
( Applause) This is true. I hope I won't be thought to blaspheme
if I refer to the fact that we have recently had a cricket team
here from South Africa. Now, there have been all sorts of 
-3-
arguments about South Afr~ ca. Nobody i~ n Australia who saw them
or met them will argue about the superb quality of the South
African cricketers, tLheir courtesy, their character. They were
tremendous diplomatic representatives of' their own country.
( Applause) As you move around the world, as I do from time to time
at your expense, once a year, sometimes twice a year you really
become astonished to realise how many of these sporting activities,
games activities, are going on which tend to bring nations
together. Sometimes they don't of course, sometimes there is a
bit of a brawl and of course a brawl is something that is
completely foreign to my nature. But by and large, all round the
world there are more and more people who think of another country
in terms of their own particular sport, whether it is racing,
whether it's cricket, whether it's soccer, whether it's football,
whatever it may be, and this is to me one of the great hopes of
the world because I don't believe that we will ever solve international
problems by cold reason. I don't think they will ever
be solved by the people who write books and who conduct dialectical
exercises. They will increasingly bp solved if we understand
each other, if people around the world get to understand that
exciting truth that human beings are human beings wherever they
may be ( Applause) This is a tremendous and exciting thing.
Whether it means that in some far-flung corner of the earth I have
to encounter by accident some deplorable character like Bill Dovey
and say, " How are you, Bill?" and he says " Have a look at this
next race"; I have a look at it and wonder what on earth has
happened. Whether it's that way or on a cricket field or on a
football ground, whatever it may be, even in the field of lawn
tennis ( Laughter) if I may refer to such a non-controversial
matter ( Laughter), in all of these things I believe that the
world makes progress because the world ge'is to understand itself
and the people of the world get to understand each other better.
This is, I think, a matter of great moment.
And soI Sir I hope you will allow me to make my apology.
Everybody knows thai almost on everything that matters I am
completely ignorant. I never attend a businessmen's dinner, whether
it is manufacturing or commerce without being given to understand
that while I am an agreeaible sort of fellow it is a pity I don't
understand what's going on in their particular world. But the
longer I live and I have now lived a fair time or an unfair
time the longer I live the more I realise that the proper study
of mankind is man and that the proper answer to most of our
problems is to know the other fellow, to understand the other
fellow, because the moment you do that, reconciliation becomes so
much easier. Now of course, there are a lot of seriously-rainded people
in the world who regard sport as something a little below the
salt. You musn't be too interested in horse-racing in cricket
of something of that kind this won't do, this lacks gravity.
I think the world has had enough gravity, quite enough to carry
it on for a long time. What the world needs is a growing sense
of fun and happiness and it is because I feel that way that I
was cajoled by Alister McMullin into coming and, as it turns out,
if I may say So, have enjoyed myself enormously. 



6410.~
FOR PRESS P. M. No,, 20/ 1964+
FOR~ ESTRY AND TIMBER BUREAU
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Forestry and Timber Bureau, formerly under
the control of the Department of the Interior, has now been
transferred to the Department of National Development. This
transfer is in keeping with the Government's intention to
concentrate the work of the Department of National Development
on the assessment and development of Australia 1s natural
resources. The management of forests in the Australian
Capital Territ'-, ory will remain with the Department of the
Interior,
CANIERRA, 26th March, 1964. 



HOLD FOR RELEASE
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 21/ 1964
DEATH OF GENERAL MacARTHUR
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The late Douglas MacArthur was undoubtedly
one of the great soldiers of the recent war. He was a
man of remarkable talents and personality and he has an
assured place in Australian history.
CANBERRA, 1st April, 1964. 



641U~ 0
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 22/ 1964+
RESIGNATION OF CHIEF JSTICE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt., Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that he had
conveyed to the Governor-General the resignation of Sir Owen
Dixon from the Chief Justiceship of the High Court of Australia.
" The resignation will be effective as from
midnight on April 13th, 1964 said the Prime Minister,
" The Full High Court will sil in Melbourne on the morning of
that day, so that Sir Owen may be farewelled in the presence
of his own Bar, of which he has been so distinguished a member
for so many years." I" Sir Owen Dixon has brought special honour to
the law, not only in Australia but throughout the Englishspeaking
world, He is one of the very greatest judicial lawyers
of the century? and has had, in various fields, an unsurpassed
record of public service. He will take into his retirement the
greatest of assets, the admiration, respect and affection of all
his contemporaries,"
CANBERRA, 1st April 1964. 



FEDERAL COUNICIL, LIBERAL PARTY OF AUJSTRALIA
HDEA T HOTEL CAN15ERRA, CANEERPA
Srjech by the Prime Ministerj w) Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Men~ ies
Mr, President and Delegates
I have been reading with considerable pleasure
over the last few days the reports made to this meeting from
the Branches and I am most gratified by the references in themn
to myself. I am even more gratified by the references made to
my wife and on her behalf I want to thank you very sincerely for
them. ( Applause) You know, I w~ ant to take you back quite a few
years to the beginnings of our Party. In 194 when the Opposition
in the Federal Parliament had suffered one of the severest
drubbings in memory, we were in a state of some confusion and
I resolved then and there that somethiing had to be done. There
were splinter groups everywhere some 13 or 14 parties and I
got together with some of our stalwarts Bill Anderson ther'e
was one of them, associated with a particular group.. and. all the
letters calling -the groups together went out of my office on thie
Opposition side of the Parliament. We know what the result has
been and it was brought perhaps to its greatest climax in November
when we had our great victory. ( Applause
Now my contribution to that victory was to sot the
date of the election but it was the Party which rallied and in no
election have I led a Party which was more united and more
determined and more cohesive than was our Party last year.
( Applause) This indeed was the seventh successive election
success ( Applause) It is often said after a series of victories
such as we have had that in the normal course, the pendulum
principle, that we might expect to lose two or three elections
and to be out of office for some years. I hnve it in my ageing
bones that having won seven elections there is no reason
whatsoever why the Liberal Party should not win the next two or
three or four or even five more elections for we have been blessed
by an Opposition which has fallen from one confusion of mind to
another. This Federal Council Meeting is for all of us a
spirited occasion. We will hove differences in detail and applicati
on expressed but they will not mean differences in the
principles of our Party. In a Party of less virility than ours,
you might say that the reverses of 1961, coming after an
unprecedented twelve years of office, could have caused disintegration,
internal revolts and surrender to external pressures.
The opposite turned out to be true. We had, at
Canberra, two years of unsurpassed loyalty, steadfastness and,
in its literal sense, integrity. That was the principal reason
for our great victory on November 30-th, 1963.
But there was another reason, which is to be
remembered at all times. We rediscovered the profound appeal
of Liberalism to intelligent and eager youth.
It may be m~ ore than useful to elaborate this
proposition, and to analyse some of the reasons for it. In all
the great meetings I addressed, I found, for the first time for
some years, a great preponderance of listeners in the younger 
-2-
age-groups. And they werc listeners, eager to hear and to understand,
plainly concerned about the problems, including the
international problems, of our country. It did both my heart
and my mind good to see them.
Labour speakers had no such experience, as their
leaders have reluctantly conceded.
What do the newer Australian generations want from
those of us who are actively engaged in the formulation and
execution of policy?
Do they just want " security" in the sense of that word
which connotes a powerful paternal government which accepts and
performs all duties% leaving it to the citizen to enjoy his
" rights". If so, the Australian Labour Party might suit them.
It does not understand democracy. A true democracy requires in
the citizen the acceptance of duties and the self-respecting
reception of rights,
A democratic country is an independent country because
it has independent proud and balanced citizens.
It is a trite saying ( though the Socialists don't
understand it) that independent nations are not made up of
dependent people; that the greatest privilege of democratic
citizenship is to serve a community in which he shares power and
responsibility. It was once the claim of our opponents that we were
reactionary, that we wanted to turn the clock back to
restore laissez-faire, to say " each for himself and the Devil
take the hindmost as the elephant said as he danced among the
chickens." ( Laughtor)
We have, over many years, demonstrated the falsity of
this charge. We have greatly aided social justice. We have not
just kept the ring and allowed vitory to go to the strong. We
have encouraged free enterprise, have recognised the making of
a people as one of the dynamic inducements to the taking of capital
risks in the development of the nation. But we have insisted upon
the performance of social and industrial obligations; we have
shown that industrial progress is not to be based upon the poverty
or despair of those who cannot compete.
After over fourteen consecutive years of political
office at the centre of the nation, we can point to a range of
achievements, in industrial justice and peace, in social services
in a growingly successful attack upon poverty, in widely distributed
rising standards of housing and of living generally, which can be
matched by very few countries in the world. ( Applause)
How has this been brought about? The answer is, to my
mind, clear enough,
We have been human, with a sense of human destiny and
human responsibility. As the etymology of our name " Liberal"
indicates, we have stood for freedom. We have realised that men
and women are not just cyphers in a calculation, but are individual
human beings whose individual welfare and development must be the
main concern of government. ( Applause)
We have no doctrinaire political philosophy. Where
government action or control has seemed to us to be the best
answer to a practical problon, we have adopted that answer at the
risk of being called Socialists. But our first impulse is always 
-3-
to seek the private onteriuriso answrr to help the individual to
help himself, to create a climate, economic, social, industrial,
favourable -to his activity arnd growtii.,
Our opponents have an exactly opposite point of
approach. Their first instinct is the * Socialist one-. " The
right way to deal with this matter is for the Government to
run it!" Private enterprise and effort are the alternatives
to which they reluctantly turn only when the Socialist plan proves
to be constitutionally incompetent or in practice unworkable.
The validity of this brief analysis is, I think seen
with increasing clarity by a younger and, on the whole better
educated generation, who want the opportunity to make Zheir own
way and place in the world, and reject the feeble notion that the
chief end of man, from the cradle to -the grave, is to be ordered
aroundcbyt and live dependent upon, " the Government". But this
utter con rast of approach between Liberal and Labour is still,
in the minds of too many people, obscured by two things.
One of them is -that the Socialists, especially alk
election times pt their Socialist objectives and principles
under cover. ' hpy appeal to the " profit motive", that diabolical
thing, by offering to the electorts both rewards and fairies, In
appropriate electorates, they are, for all practical purposes,
Liberals, but with more money to spend. 1 It is not long since
their leader promised that, if elected, he would so to speak
suspend the Socialist objective for the life of Lhe ParliamenL
What his outside masters would have done about it we will,
fortunately, never know,
These are, of course, pretty shoddy manoeuvres, and
have lacked success with the general body of electors for a
long time. But they have deceived far too many people who ought
to be our supporters, It is for us, in this organisation, to
make clear the grc1-at basic conflict of principle and method to
which I have referred,
The other factor which tends to obscure the true nature
of the conflict, is the allegation that the Liberals themselves
" are Socialists when it suits them." Witness the Post Office,
the telephone service the railways, the groat Snowy Mountains
Scheme, not one of which, of course, could have been either
created or sustained by private investors. To say these things
is merely to prove what I said earlier. We are not doctrinaire.
We have no instinctive passion for government control or operation
for its own sake.
Our first question is not whether the Government could
do this thing, but whether private citize-, ns could. If the answer
is that they could, our answer is that they should. We deal withach
case on its merits9 without dogma or prejudice.
Sometimes a middle course must be followed, I will
take two examples. The first is, broadcastin and television. Labour,
the Socialist party, wanted and wants Government stations only.
We have stood for a dual system with commercial stations competing.
We have much reason to be thanklul that such a system exists.
The second is Civil Aviation. Our internal flying
services were pioneered by private enterprise. A Labour Government
established T. A. A. the Australian Airlines Commission and
tried to give it a monopoly. The Act was successfully challenged
on constitutional grounds, and private enterprise continued, 
a When we came back in-to office, we did not seek to destroy the
Government airline, which was well rwinaged and efficient. But
we wanted competition. We thus evolved our " two major airlines"
policy one government, one private. In the result, the public
interest has been magnificently served. Here we have the contrast
between doctrinaire socialism and the practical approach of a
Liberal and enterprise-encourziging administration.
As I have many times said, Socialism is both
reactionary and out-dated. I can understand how it attracted
the support of radical thinkers after the industrial revolution
in Great Britain and later at the turn of the century, when
industrial power was in a limited number of hands, when the
rights of employed people were imperfectly recognised, when
trades unions were too commonly regareed as subversive bodies,
when the economic doctrines of laisse ' z-faire held sway, when
social services were almost non-existent, there grew up in many
minds a belief an egalitorian belief in the virtues of
uniformity. There was, and is, no uniformity among personalities,
or talents or energy. We have learned that the right answer
is to set Zhe individual free, to aim at equality of opportunity,
to protect the individual against oppression to create a society
in which rigiats and duties are recognised ana made effective.
In this free society, the tyrannical notion of an all-powerful
Stata is rejected and dogmatic Socialism with it. In its
place, we have puZ opportunity without any class privilege,
social and economic justice, and the civilised democratic
conception that governments are not the masters of the people,
but their servants. I have stated, I venture to believe, our Liberal
creed. We must believe in it, preach it and practise it9
fcjr its success and survival are essential to the future of
our nation. 



64/ 0 2
FOR PRESS P. M. 24/ 1964
FUNERAL OF GENERAL MacARTHUR
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Prime Minister has directed that as a
mark of respect, the flags on Commonwealth buildings
throughout Australia are to be flownat half mast on
Saturday, the day of General Douglas MacArthur's funeral.
CANBERRA,
8th April, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. 23/ 1964
AUSTRALIAN REPRESENTATION AT MacARTHUR
FUNEA
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister ( Sir Robert Menzies) announced
today that Australia would be represented at the funeral of
General of the Army Douglas MacArthur by the Australian
Ambassador to the United States, Sir Howard Beale, K. B. E.,
the Rt. Hon. FM. Forde and General Sir John Northcott,
K. C. MG., C. B.
The Head of the Australian Joint Services Staff
in Washington, Major General C. Long will represent
the Australian Military Services at the funeral which takes
place on Saturday, April 11.
Mr. Forde and Sir John Northcott will leave Sydney
by air for the United States tomorrow ( Thursday) evening and
will arrive in Washington on Friday morning ( Washington time).
CANBERRA 8th April, 1964.
BACKGROUND NOTE Mr. Forde was Minister for the Army and
Deputy Prime Minister in 194+ 2, when General MacArthur arrived
in Australia to establish his headquarters here and he continued
to be Minister for the Army throughout the period in which General
MacArthur was stationed in Australia.
Sir John Northcott, a former Governor of
New South Wales, was Chief of the General Staff from 1942 to
1945 and was Commander of the British Commonwealth Occupation
Force in Japan in 1945/ 4+ 6. Both of these appointments brought
him into close contact with the late General MacArthur.
J I 



PRESENTATION OF A~ dARDS TO SCHOOLS OF ART
AND ARCHITE'CTURE ROYAL MELBOURNE INSTITUTE
OF TECHN6LOGY, MELBOURNE APRIL. 1961
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen
I am pretty good at giving things away, but I regret
to say to those who are waiting to get the awards in their
clutches that they have to l~ isten to me for a few minutes first.
This seems to be the drill.
When you said, Sir, just towards the end of your
remarks that you hoped the day would never come when a lot of
data was fed into one end of a computer and a painting in oils
came out at the other, I wasn't half so surprised as you were.
I've seen quite a few of late that looked as if they had been
produced in exactly that fashion. ( Laughter) However, I am
never controversial about these matters. I won't go further
than that. Butl~ it's quite true Sir that here we celebrate
the marriage of science and ari. 1his is a very great
technological institute, very well known all over Australia,
and in a technological age ithas a very great deal to
contribute to the life of thetcountry. But art has its own
place and, I hope, an enduring one, and however scientific we
become, I hope we will never quite lose our sense of beauty,
our sense of capturing in some form or another something that
we can Jive with and enjoy and something that we can pass on
to succeeding generations as part of the proof that we are
civilised, A lot of people think that civilisation is best
expressed by supersonic aircraft, by the telephone which never
stops ringing and on which you sometimes get the caller
television in which my taste I am happy to say, is of tUe
Tese are all very useful things to have around but
they are not any necessary proof of civilisation. But here,
particularly in this section, you are dealing with matters of
a different kind, matters I think which will recommend us to
our successors even more than some of the applied scientific
affairs with which we become increasingly familiar,
Architecture, as I was reminded just before I sat
down iste father or mother or is it both? ( Laughter) of
all thesarts. I suppose that's because the primitive Eskimo
built an igloo and left a pormanent mark on architecture, or
somebody else leaned something up against a cliff and left
another permanent mark on architecture. I am prepared to
admit that architecture is one of the great and enduring arts,
today a science an engineering feat. All I venture to say
is that I hope It will never lose its conception that in
addition to being a scientific affair and an engineering
enterprise it is a contribution to art, whatever the form
of the building may be.
One of my troubles about that, if I may say this
to my architectural tutor, is that I do think nowadays that
we are tending to lose a little individuality that we are
tending to internationalise architectural design. I sometimes
fear that in fifty yearst time, it will be very hard except by 
-2-
looking for some water, some stream, some lake, to distinguish
one city from another. This, I think, would be a tragedy.
You take London, which is already beginning up in
the city to incorporate some of what I will call the international
ideas on architecture, Well, when I first knew it indeed as
a great deal of it still stands, London has character, a
character of its own, Quite true that the buildings tended
to be lower; quite true that a place like Bush House could at
one time be referred to enthusiastically as a skyscraper when
it wasn't. But London and Portland Stone and the whole quality
and character of the architectural landscape had a unique
quality, I think, of its own.
I remember many, many years ago we -ere having lunch
with James Bone ( Muirhead Bonets brother)ø James Bone was the
London Editor of what was then called the " Manchester Guardian"
and a brilliant writer and essayist, and he said to me, " What
is your most vivid impression about London." I said, " Oh,
Portland Stone. Look at it. ' Jashed white and brilliant where
the weather takes it and full of dark velvety shadows where the
weather doesn't take it, maturing so quickly, getting a quality,
a patina of its own so soon." He said, " Man your observation
is right." He said, " This is it." " ell," I said, it is
almost to me a thuab-print of the London scene,'" He promptly
then, to my immense satisfaction, pulled dovrn a book that he
had written in which he had used that very expression, a book
called the " London Perambulator". It is so good that it has
never been a best-sellera ( Laughter)
Do you see what I mean? It will b a poor day when
any nation loses its own character and becomes merely part of
the general mass of mankind, It will be a poor day when our
own architecture in Australia doesn't possess some quality of
its own which indicates to us and to the onlookers something
of the feeling and spirit of Australia. Itts all right to say,
as no doubt people do occasionally that the Georgian architects
of Nash Adam, so on, the Adam Brothers, are now outdated and
they diL't know much about the problems of lighting and all
this kind of thing, but they did, and those like them, make a
,.; ontribution to the century of good taste which nobody has quite
succeeded in destroying. T has disappeared in many places
but there it is. It is something that you don't see anywhere
else, And the same, Sir, if I may say so, goes about art,
about depictive art, Let's take painting. Now, I have no
feeling of resistance to any form of experimentation in painting.
Some I understand and some I don't. I suppose that occasionally
applies to the painter himself for all I know but there it is,
and so be it that he has learnt the elements ol his craft, so
be it he does know about drawing and about putting on paint and
about getting a sense of modelling and composition-give him
all that and he is a free man to investigate any field that he
likes and I do hope again that we won't develop into a state
of aflairs in which a particular composition, a particular
abstract, a particular whatever-it-may-be looks as if it might
have been painted anywhere in the world. In other words,
that this is just part of a uniform international movement,
Letts have our own character in our work and see that
it interprets something of our own feelings, our own environment,
our own upbringingg our own sense of our own nationality. I am
not a great believer in uniformity. I would hate to think that
s. o. o./ 3 
-3
the time would come when neither our buildings nor our pictures
nor our sculpturescouild be distinguished from the buildings and
pictures and sculptures of any other country in the world.
Let's have a bit of good, healthy individualism on this matter.
And I think the right way to bring that about if
I may say so, is to do what you do here, to have people taught-,
those who were enthusiasts those who want to do these magnificent
things, to have them taughi the elements, and it is essential
that they should be, Nobody could make a speech that anybody
would listen to unless he understood the language that he was
using and had understood its composition, how it is made up, how
it balances itself. These are all part of the rudiments of the
kind of education that ultimately enables a man or woman to get
up and make a speech or to write something that may be understood
and enjoyed, and similarly, you cannot, at your peril, neglect
the basic training in any of these arts.
Nowl Sir, yon said quite rightly that I have suffered
considerably from artists in my time. There are two classes of
portrait-painter fcr example, One is the chap who really
legitimately gets you to sit for him. If he is an imaginative,
gay character, he chatters to you and you chatter to him a~ nd in
the meantime he gets down some resemblance to you on canvas.
There is the other and more earnest fellow who poses you in the
chair and then says " You see that knot on the window over
there? Now, if you iwouldn't mind that's right, put your
head back a bit, yes just watch that." And as you
watch that ( Laughter) you go to sleep. I may say I am not a
bad sitter because I lo stay awake. On each occasion when Ilve
been sitting for a portrait, I have devoted the whole of the
time to preparing a speech on the Budget, ( Laughter) On one
occasion I composed an entire policy speech under the influence
of Ivor ? Iele. This is, I think, a good thirg.
But I was told by one portrait-painter that he had to
paint a famous general, and the famous general wanted to be painted
in a rather heavy uniform and it was very hot weather in a veiry
hot country an'. the famous soldier nominated after lunch for the
sittings. He had a good lunch and he would come in and sit and
in three minutes he would be asleep. It is very difficult to
paint a sleeping mane The artist said, " Well, I wonder whether
you can bring your personal assistant with you, Sir?" having had
three awful failures, you see, " and talk with hm and this will
help to keep you awake and give me a chance." So the personal
assistant came the next time and sat there, and in three minutes
they were both asleep. ( Laughter) The artist then said. " Sir,
I am terribly sorry, could I have just one sitting after
breakfast?" and he had one and, without mentioning any names,
you may see it in the War Memorial at Canberra. One sitting.
The other experience, of course, that I have had is
being sent portraits by people who have never seen me ( Laughter)
but who have looked at alleged photographs of me in the Press.
These arrive at quite a steady rate at my house a couple of times
a year, and these are very embarrassing because they are not
always good. ( Laughter) I must confess that I have only been
modelled if thatts the right word once and that was when I
had to come up here and sit for Victor, you see, on several
occasions, and he put me in a chair, perched me up a bit, had a
look, got this great mass of stuff and slapped it around and
then began to do this and that. He seemed to me I being of an
ample build, to devote too much time to putting bits on ( Laughter)
0/ 4 
and too little time to taking bits off, But still, after a
couple of these sittings, I thought that he had a most
encouraging head, but the next time I came up, he had done
two more. He was practically running a raffle with himself
as to which one of them he regarded as being the best,
( Laughter) But I must say that he was quite civil about it,
I enjoyed it, Each time I arrived downstairs, I received a
warm welcome from such students as were around and when I
left, I received an equally warm farewell. AnA therefore~ I have,
in a sense, suffered from people of thf. s kind but . L rematn
their friend and I remain their admirer.
I for one, am tremendously proud of the stream
of Australian art in all its stages going back to the original
work done in the beginning of the nineteenth century yes,
it's old-fashioned to us, you see every leaf on eve.-y twig but
it had a qualicy of its own. It nowr has tremendous historic
interest, Then we have moved onthere through the influence
of the impressionists and have come on now to a later stage
with other influenc3es and I really believe that if you were to
mount a perfect and wall b&amp; lanced historical exhibition of
Australian painting and trallan drawing, you would have
just about as interestin g/ liece of history as you could find.
I know that we did it up to 3 point in the exhibition that
went to the late G~ lery in London, But a comprehensive one.
It would be splendid. All the people who like the very oldfashioned
would be down that end of the gallery and people~
like myself who have a secret and not-so-secret passion for
the impressionists would be about here and all my more modern
and up-to-date friends one or two of whom I see hero today,
would be up at this ena of the gallery. But we could move around
and get to know each other and feel that we were looking at
something of historic interest0
There are many things for which we think we may be
remembered but for which we may ' turn out to be forgotten and
I believe that art is long and art is enduring, wvhether It is
the art of the architoct or the art of the painter or the art
of the draughtsman of the decorator all these varied forms
that I have been glancing at this afternoon this is something
Ei., during. It doesnt disappear with yesterh. yts newspaper,
it doesntt find the fate of something that is written on water,
I believe it endures and your business here is to see that those
who come through here, through this division of this Institute,
will be all the time aiming to make their contribution to
something that has an enduring quality and an enduring
chara cter. And I know that the work here is done well, the
instructional work here is on a very high level and I am
therefore delighted to have been with you this afternoon, to
have stood for a few minutes between those who have been
awarded the prizes and the prizes that they will receive.
I am told I hope rightly all I do is to hand over an
envelope. This seems to me to be an admirable idea because
you can't put anything heavy in an envelope but you can put
paper that folds, so I hope it works out that way. Thank
you very much. 



6^ 4/ ij5
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 25/ 1964
The following message has been received by
the Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies, from President
Johnson of the United States of America
" THANK YOU FOR YOUR KIND TRIBUTE TO
THE MEMORY OF GENERAL DOUGLAS MicARTHUR,
THE WORLD WILL LONG REMEMBER THE CONTRIBUTION
THAT HE MADE TO HISTORY WITH THE HELP OF OUR
AUSTRALIAN ALLIES. SINCERELY,
LYNDON B. JOHNSON. I:
CANBERRA, April, 1964. 



64/ 056
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 26/ 1964
COMMITTEE OF INVESTIGATION INTO
TRANSPORATION COSTS IN NORTHERN AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, today
announced the appointment of a Committee to investigate
transportation costs in northern Australia. In announcing the
terms of reference and the composition of the Committee, the Prime
Minister recalled that in his policy speech prior to the recent
general elections for the House of Representatives, he had
expressed the Government's intention to appoint such a Committee
to carry out a thorough and authoritative examination of the facts
behind the high cost of transportation in northern Australia.
The names of those appointed are as follows
Sir Louis Loder, CBE,( Chairman), former Director-General
of Works
Mr. G. R. Fisher, Chai-man, Mt. Isa Mines Ltd.,
Queensland
Mr. Blythe, Managing Director, Air Beef Ptyo Ltdo,
Western Australia
Mr. P. Baillicu, Grazier, Vice President N. T. Cattle
Lessees' Association
Captain J. P. Williams, CMG, OBE, Chairman, Australian
Coastal Shipping Commission
Mr. B. B. Callaghan, General Manager, Commonwealth Development
Bank.
The Cormmittee will function under the following
terms of reference " Having regard to the Government's economic
policy objectives of
assisting, in co-operation with the States of
Queensland and Western Australia, the promotion
of soundly-based development within the northern
part of Australia; and as part of such development
of achieving significant and stable increases in the
population of the area; and
of encouraging the growth and diversification of
private enterprises;
and having regard to the special problems that may be posed
for such development by the effects of the present levels
of transportation costs, the Committee is invited SOO0 
2
to mako a thorough and factual examination of,
and to report on, the costs of transportation to,
from and within northern Australia, with particular
reference to the costs of transporting goods, and
the effects of such costs on the development of
northern Australia, and
to examine possible moeans whereby such costs might
be reduced and to report on the practical and
economic feasibility and the implications of each
means so examined."
The Prime Minister expressed satisfaction at
the establishment of a sound and workable Committee under a
capable and experienced Chairman. Ho said that every assistance
would be accorded the Committee in its studies of northern
transportation costs. The Government would be looking to it
to produce in due course essential information and analysis on
a problem which is vital to our North.
CANBERRA, 17th April, 1964. 



INTERNATIONAL FEDERATION OF BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL
" OMN'S BOARD MEETING HELD AT CANBERRA ON
APRIL. 1964
Speech by the Prime Minni: te. r L Rt, Hon, Sir Robert Menzies
Madam President, Mr. Byrne, Your Excellencies and Ladies
I feel completely unnerved ( Laughter) by two circumstances.
The first is that when I was cajoled into coming here
I use the word " cajoled" though I might have said " ordered" or
" compelled" ( Laughter) I was under the slight misapprehension
that this was a board meeting. Well, it is the biggest board of
directors I have ever looked at in my life. ( Laughter)
And the second unnerving circumstance is that today
was, I think, one of the very few occasions that I can recall when
I was marched into a roomful of women in complete and respectful
silence, ( Applause) Those are two special circumstances but,
of course, there is the overriding circumstance that for a man to
stand up I exclude the idl. e members of the Diplomatic Corps
( Laughter) before an audience of 40C women is a very great
ordeal, believe me, because opinions differ as to whether men
understand women or don't. I am one of the few fallows honest
enough Uo admit that I don't and, therefore, I will just have to
say something on my own account,
" The decade of opportunity" this is a splendid topic,
It would have been even better if I hadn't been reminded in the
lobby outside that in 1951, I had made a profound obsorvation on
this very matter an obvorsation that I had long since forgotten,
but still, "' the decade of opportunity" that is a good title and
more than a good title, a very good theme because it is
constructive. It means that you are not here to ventilate the
grievances of the past but to envisage the opportunities of the
future. This, I think, is a thing equally valid for you as it
would be for a corresponding number of men gathered together
here. " The decade of opportunity".
Now, I had a look at your objects and if I may quote
a rather abbreviated snippet from them, I saw that one of the
purposes is to provide information and assistance to achieve equal
status for women in political life. Now, of course, countries
vary, In Australia I believe that there is, for all practical
purposes, an equality of status in political life. This varies,
of course, from place to place, but in my own State of Victoria,
and in the case of my own Party, the selection of candidates for
Parliament is made by a convention of people representing equally
men and women. The fact that they almost invariably select a
man for a candidate is not my responsibility ( Laughter). I think
there is, in substance, equality of status for women in political
life but we can't end there, can we? Equality of status, I suppose,
means equality of opportunity. We all, man or woman, have our
chance, politically, by vote, by influence, by represenation in
Parliament and so on. How far we take advantage of that opportunity
is really a matter for us and not for other people,
I want to say something to you about this question of
politics, because although I am not quite as long in the tooth
as a Prime Minister as you might suppose, I have still had some
experience of it and I suppose I might be regarded as having some
expert views in the political field, Quite true. I needed to be
reminded that it is twentyfive years since I first became Prime
Minister but I think that in justice to the people of Australia,
it should be pointed out that two years and four months later I
was relieved of the burden of office. ( Laughter) And that it / 2 
-2-
took another eight years for me to purge my offences and be once
more admitted to this office, If_ you want to see a genuine
quarter-century head of government, you want to go to South
Australia and insist on them showing you Sir Thomas Playford who
has been Premier of that State well, I think he was Premier
before I first became Prime Minister of Australia and he has
been Premier ever since and, so far as I can judge, only the Grim
Reaper will remove him from office, ( Laughter)
Howeverg even in my limited experience, something is
learned and I thought I would like to say this to you that you
are an international body, as we have been reminded that you
have come here from a variety of countries some of them old
in government and some of them new in independence and selfgovernment;
it is just as well I think, for us to ask the
question: What is involved in taking a hand in politics? And
in particular, for a woman to take a hand in politics.
I hope you will not think me offensive when I say
that it is not sufficient for any woman just to stand up and
say, " I am a woman. Parliament ought to have the women's point
of view and therefore elect me to Parliament", because I would
be most astonished to discover that there is any more unanimity
of view among ten women than there is among ten men. ( Laughter)
I don't undertake to say at any time what the man's point of view
is but I know what my own is, mostly, but I don't undertake to
generalise and I think it is a mistake to generalise,
The first thing to do about politics is to understand
quite soon that this is a business of the utmost seriousness,
It lends itself to fun occasionally, to a little genial abuse
occasionally, but it is a matter of the utmost seriousness. It
is the business of the nation and if the business of the nation
is to be conducted with skill, with understanding, with humanity,
then there are some things that must be learned about ito
Not at all sufficient for any one of us to go into Parliament and
say, " I don't need to know any of the basic elements of p. olitics
I come here to argue for so-and-so and this I will continue to
argue for until I achieve it. It may be right; it may be
wrong, but that's my theme."
Now I believe, in my own old-fashioned way, that you
can't begin to understand the politics of a country and therefore
to participate in politics of that country unless you know the
true structure of government in that country until you really
know what is the machinery by which that particular nation has
chosen to get itself a government and to get itself law3s This
is where all the variety is met.
Here we are in Australia. We are a Federation. We
have six States who were, until 1901, self-governing colonies
completely attending to their own affairs and then we had a
Federal Parliament and a Federal Goverinent which has some
specific powers of a national kind entrusted to it, all the other
powers remaining with the States. Now this is a complex system
of government, Highly complex. It is a highly legalistic
system of government because as somebody says that the Conmonwealth
Parliament has part of the law which it had no power to
pass, it is liable to find itself in the High Court of Australia,
corresponding to the Supreme Court of the United States of
America and having its law declared invalid. You can't separate
a good deal of logalism from federalism, but you can't begin to
understand the political problems of Australia without first
understanding that it is a country with a federal system and
that powers are divided between the national Parliament and the
State Parliaments. You don't solve problems as people very 00 / 3 
-3-
freauent. ly try to in Australia by taking then all to Canberra,
( Laughter) because most of the problens that people want to take
to Canberra ought never to cono he,. e a t c: ll; they belong to the
State Parliament or the State Govorn( mnt or the municipal council
or municipal governmrent. Even in our oe. n countryvhere we have now
sixty-odd years of experience, there are far too many people who
undertake to talk about politics who just dontt understand the
structure of government, the division of power, the division of
authority and therefore the division of responsibility in a
federal system. Those who come from the United States know a
great deal more about this because the United States has a federal
system. I will say something nore about that in a moment because
there again, there are plenty of opportunities for error and
nisunderstanding, Now, our great neighbour, New Zealand, intimately
associated with Australia, has two advantages, if I might put
it that way, and I think they would put it that way from their
point of view, One is that they have none of this problem of
legalism because they do not have a federal system. They have a
unitary government, Rightly or wrongly, they have one government
over one people. That is a very great advantage to then from the
point of view of simplicity, of understanding the political scene.
I am not saying that the sane system would apply to Australia
because I don't think it would. And of course there are other
great advantages that we, being fairly near and somewhat larger,
they are able to tell us their opinion of us with complete
friendliness and with great effect, ( Laughter)
Now I said that if you take the United States, you
have another federal system of government with a division of
powers between Washington and the various American States. If
you go further afield into other countries, other countries in
the British Commonwealth, you will find an almost infinite variety
of systems of government, some of them with a high centralisation
of power in the executive, some of them not, but I defy anybody
to identify the system of government in almost any one of them
with the system of government in any other and that of course is
right. That is as it should be because you don't make people
independent in order to compel thoe to adopt your system of
government; that is a denial of independence and when people
become independent, they have a perfect right to choose their
own system of marrging their affairs and they nay choose to do it
by a concentration of power in the central executive that would
be intolerable to us in Australia or they may find some middle
course, but whatever it is, it is theirs.
There is a good deal of false optimism in the world
about this matter, People are very tempted to think particularly
in some of the great Western countries that all you have to do
with a former colony now to become an independent nation is to
endow it with a parliament, or whatever it might be called and all
is well you have established a new system of government. Of
course you haven't because all systems of government proceed from
the ground up. They grow; they are not built from the roof
down; they are not imposed on people. They have to be, in the
long run, the choice of the people themselves. Therefore there
is an infinite variety of ways and means of a country governing
itself. Having said that, I just want to turn back very
briefly to what I was saying about the United States of America,
a country held in great respect and affection in Australia, a
country to whom we are bound by many -agnificent ties, but we
are quite capable of misunderstanding Americans and American 
administratlion just in the same way as in London there is always
adanger that ww-: 1: e. 1 be a gravoe nii.-, s-,-, dcrstanding of American
policy and in Washington-a gralic i-in21sndrstanding of British
policy. This used to trouble me a great deal wondering how this
came about, how could there be any instinctive opposition between
people so close, so identified in their ultimate ideals and in
a great deal of their history. How could there be this, as an
instinctive matter; why did this irritation arise; why was it
that every few years you would find such an uproar going on in
London and'in Washington that you would ' think the two countries
were going to become inveterate enemies., We have all seen this
happen, haven't we. And I have a theory about it.
My theory is that people have neglected the first
lesson to be learned in politics and that is to understand the
structure of government to understand h~ ow policies are evolved
and how they a. 3' e pi~ t inio ' operation, because if you do that, you
will at once realise that the American procedure and the British
procedure are utterly unlike and until people on my side understand
the differences, they will tend to misunderstand the results and
misunderstand the circumstarnces. Just let me explain what I mean
and in this respect, what I say about the United Kingdom is
equally true about my own country because we derive our governmental
Pystem from the Old Country. All right.
How does a policy become evolved, a public policy
on some informational matter particularly? How does that become
evolved in London? By a Cabinet, they have a Cabinet meeting.
The Foreign Minister circulates papers about his particular
problems, about nation X Y or Z. They all have an opportunity
of reading them. The red boxes go round and the hav their
keys and they read them. Then they arrive at the Cabinet meeting,
and then they discuss what the policy ought to be, and at the end
of the Cabinet meeting, that has been determined, It is no
longer the policy of an individual, it is the policy of the
Government of the United Kingdom, delibera-tely, carefully worked
out and therefore when it is announced, people may accept it,
sub3ect to the inf rmi-ty of politicians who do occasionally
change their minds, I know, but people will accept that as the
policy on this problem of Great Britain,
If some private Member of Parliament makes an
extravagant speech, either on the extreme right wing or the extreme
left wings and, you know, these wings are projected in all
parliaments6, nobody need assume that what he says is the policy
of Great Britain indeedton the contrary everybody in Groat
Britain knows that it isnt the policy of Lhe Government because
if it wore the policy of the Government, he wouldn't bother to
make the speech. He has made his speech to exhibit his difference
not his agreement, and the result is nobody really assumes that
because this type of extravaganza is engaged in, one way or the
other? that that has anything to do with the poiicy of Great
Britain. That is true in Australia,
Now7in the United States, their system of evolving
policy is quite different. They evolve policy far more through
the process of public debate than we do in British countries.
Take an examplo. The Secretary of State, the Foreign Minister
of the United States, a great functionary, he is, in the eye of
the world, the man who expresses and is responsible for the
foreign policy of the United States but very frequently before
he has time or opportunity to come Lo a conclusion the matter is
taken up before a Committee of Congress -Foreign Affairs
Committee, Foreign Relations Committee -and he is there crossexamined,
very frequently publicly, about how his mind is running,
how it works. Then somebody else comes along who is the majority
leader in the Senate or who is a very prominent Memaber of the House
0~ M 0 0 
of' Representatives, and he is called before the Committee and all
this is thrashed out, you see, day aftcr day, day after day, in
public, so that the policy on -this matter perhaps begins to emerge
as a result of public discussion, because this is public discussion
if the press people are there and not uncommonly the television
people. Now in Great Britain, where they are accustomed to
the habit of pronouncement, they read this. They say, " O0h,
well, did you see what so-and-so said? He is the majority leader
in the Senato and this is what they are going to And when
the following day it turns out that somebody equally authoritative
has said to the same Committee that exactly the opposite is what
they want to do, a feeling arises I have seen this happen
that there is too much fluctuation in policy. " All this variation,
why don't they make up their minds," wlhereas the truth is, of'
course, that this is part of the process of making up the mind and
nobody ought ever to get excited about it until the end result,
The late John Foster Dulles was a friend of mine and
he was a man of great character; very contrcversiai, I agree,
but a man of great character and of high patriotism, I knew him
well, but Foster Dulles liked to have public conferences and
public discussion, Well, each man to his choice; he liked this,
but he used to think aloud at these conferences, I have twitted
him at this in the past. He used to think aloud, He used to
say, " 1Well, now, ask a question. Look, one thing we could do
about this would be so-and-so" and he would explain that with
great clarity arnd the gentleman from the Indianapolis Gazette
or whatever ii might be if that line suited his papers, would
rush out and put it on Lo the wires. Perhaps before two minutes
had gone, Foster Dulles, still thinking aloud, would say, " Well,
on the other hand...." 1 and he would give the benefit of his
views to the conference, discussing three or four alternative
possibilities. ' dell, now, this I concede at once, was very good, if
all reported from a public educational point of view. It would
help people Lo understand what the possibilities were on th . s
matter, but of course in the result, view No. 1 would be in the
afternoon newspapers somewhere and view No. 2 in the morning
papers some-where and view No. 3 in the following afternoon's
papers because these are the rules of life. And the result was,
a lot of people used to say, " Why doesntt he stick to one
policy? Why doesn't he keep his mind clear? Why all this
wavering around?" And I would frequently have to explain to
people that it wasn'ft that at all, that when he reached his
conclusions, he reached a firm concliusion and his technique,
though well understood in the United States, wasn't understood
at all in Great Britain or in Australia.
Now, I dontt want to convert this into a series of
historical reminiscences but I just want to establish the one
point that I wanted to make to you that if you want to lead up to
a more complete approach to politics and political activity for
women, then to begin with you must understand something about
the system of government In your own country and, if possible,
something of the comparative systems of government in the world,
because if we all understood them, clearly, we would be saved a
great deal of misunderstanding and occasionally a certain amount
of ill temper. In short, this business of politics is not just
a matter of making speeches about some current or casual problem.
The business of politics is the business of government and it
can't be conducted with skill or with safety unless the people
who are engaged in it understand the foundations of their science / 6 
6
and their art as well as its particular app] icauions at any given
momento Now hcat all nay seen very dull but I remember
many years ago reading a book by, I think, Stephen Leacock.
It night well be because it was a very wise and cnusing book.
He pointed out that in one part of the United States of America
where he lived once, he encountered a judge who, whenever there
was any family occasion a wedding, a funeral, a christening,
a jolly get-together always arranged to have himself called on
to speak and always gave a short but powerfil talk on the American
Constitution. ( Laughter) There is a lot tr-be said for that old
judge. I hope not to be so tedious as that but I thought the
opportunity should not pass without ny suggesting that there are
basic elements in all these things which should not be neglected,
And having said that at undue length, I now I
was going to say have great pleasure in declaring the conference
open, but I have great pleasure in declaring the Board open. 



64/ 0' 3
STATMENT Y TI'E P MIFNISTEP
THE FIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ROBERT KYTE, NZCIHE, S , Q0, MP.
MINISTERIAL APPANGEMENTS
I announce the appointment of The Honourable
Paul Hasluck as Minister for External Affairs and
Senator The Honourable Shane Platridge as Minister for
Defence. Mr. Hasluck.. replaces Sir Carfield Barwic
whose resignation to take up the position of Chief Justice
of Australia was announced yesterday, and Senator Paltridge
takes over the Defence portfolio vacated by Mr. Hasluck.
Senator Paltridge will continue, for the time being, to
hold the position of Minister for Civil Aviation.
A further announcement on Ministerial arrangements
will be made at a later date.
CANBERRA Apr. i 2, 1954. 



OPENING OF SIR LESLIE MORSHEADWAR VETERAN
HOE. CN3~-A, A C To
26TH APRIL. 1964
Speech by te Prim,; stn~ cer, ',_ tfnS. Robert Me-7APe
Mr. President, Lady Morshead and Ladies and Gentlemen
I rather think. that the ' resident made a slight
understatement when he said that without the women this
organisation culd not exist, because the simple truth, o0
course is that without women, none of us would be here.
( laughter) This is a truth of universal application,
Now, I regard this as a siLngular honour to be allowed
to declare open this building and to declare it open in the
name of one of the great Australians olo our time Leslie
Morshead. I knew him for a great number of years, He was,
a few years before myself, born i~ n Ballarat and as all Ballarat
people will admit, that is no bad 4thing, ( Laughter) He went
to school in Ballarat and then became for a time a schoolmaster.
I always used to say to him: " Where did you get this gleam in
the eye? Where did you acquire this habit of command?" and
he admitted to me that he had been a schoolmaster for a few
years. It must have been terrific.
Then, OA. course, as you have heard, he had a remarkable
record in the First World War and between the two wars, a very
remarkable record in business administration. All the time he
kept up his cuntact with the citizen forces whatever they might
be called from time to time, and in the Second World War, he
became one of the immortal figures of that war, I just want
to say something about him, if I may, in one or two of these
capacities. First of all, he was a great citizen soldier, This is
something almost peculiar to Australia no regular army until
quite recently, men accustomed to responsibility and command in
their business affairs devoting some of their time sometimes
a great deal of their time, to the art of war., It is sometimes
forgotten that whereas many of the groat men in military history
in other countries or most of them, sometimes all of them, were
highly trained professional soldiers of immense distinction
in Australia so mnany of the people we think of from Monash Z
Morshead were great citizen soldiers some might have satd
amateur soldiers but enriched by the whole of their civil
experience and greatly gifted in the command of men.
Early in 1941, 1 was in the Middle East and I went out
to Bardier and Tobruk and Benghazi, and at this time, these
places had just fallen by attack upon the Italians, I very well
remember with some trepidation that the day that I was at
Benghazi there was a little counter-attack by the Italians; it
was fairly near to the event. Leslie Morshead had taken his
brigade to England and had brought it back to the Middle East
and it was the nucleus of what became the Ninth Division. Now
that was an extraordinary piece of country. It must have been
a problem for any rmilitary conmander, because although there
was a defined coastline, an indented coastline, particularly at
Tobruk, the country itself looked to the superficial eye to be
a mere desert. You would wonder how anybody could find cover in
it until you discovered that there were little depressions and
waddies, dongas in the territory; but I would have thought
terribly hard places to defend. Well, at the time I was there / 2 
2
which was sometime in January of' 1941, there was no problem of
defence because the wii~ o] e-mov(-mentu was westward to Benghazi and
down towards the bottoma uf the gu-tll anid it was only then that it
was discovered that the Germans under Rcmel had landed, coming
across by the short cut from Pantelaria and that they were massing
themselves for an attack with a Panzer Division hitherto unknown
in the fighting that had gone on. Well, anybody looking at
Tobruk from the ground, looking at Tobruk from the air, would
-have said, well this would be a tremendously difficult place to
defend tremendously difficult, against armourbut there were two
great tings. One was that there was a tremendous spirit in the
men who ultimately withstood the siege of Tobruk when Rommel swept
eastward and the other was that -they Ihad as their commanding
officer one of the very great soldiers of the war, Leslie Morshead,
He could look you in the eye and appear to be fierce
but he was fundamentally a modest man. Ho had the most enormous
qualities, building up the morale of people who were with him,
And so, in the long run, we all know what happened. Rommel came
along, Benghazi fell, Tobruk first of all fell and then didn't and
then was isolated on the flank and so the Fourth rolled eastward
till the day came when the defence of Tobruk had at long last to
be altered, But what from April of 1941 to October of 1941,
Tobruk held out as an isolated post on the side of the wiiole
German advance to the East in country to a lay eye, as I have
said, would appear to present every conceivable problem of defence,
in which defence had to be active and in which defence had to
harry the other man and not get bogged down within a narrow
perimeter, and for those months it held and I will always believe
that one of the dominating reasons I know there were great men
there, marvellous people, we honour them every year in Australia,
but you know someplace in the centre there has to be a great man'
and this was a great man, Leslie Morshead. He can never be done
sufficient honour in his memory for what he did at that time in
that place. It may interest some of you to know that in March,
April and into May of that year I was in London sitting in the
War Cabinet with the great Winston Churchill anca staying with him
each weekend down at Chequers. Hardly three days would ever go
by without him saying something about the defence of Tobruk, This
captured his imagination. You know, with that rich vocabulary
of his, he would look at me and say " This is not a matter merely
of defending something. This is a sally-fort from which to attack
the foe". I had the great honour once of sending Leslie Morshead
a message about this which I know he kept because he referred to
it years and years after the war.
And then, of course, don't let us forget that that
was an. episode of defence against siege, but it wasn't so long
thereafter when at Alamein, Morshead commanded the Ninth Division
and that was the crucial turning battle of the war, Let me
emphasise that fact. There were people, when I was in Egypt early
in 1941, who thought that if the enemy once got near the delta
there was no defence possible. Alamein was designed to jreven
them from getting into the delta and Alamein, this crucial battle,
meant that the Rommel forces rolled back, that the whole position
in North Africa became clear, that an attack on Italy became
feasible, that a strike into the heart of the enemy from the
Mediterranean became possible. I really believe that if you had
to determine what were the crucial battles of the war, Alamein
would be at least one of them and I would think possibly the
crucial battle. e. e / 3 
Somubody '. ro'Ce a book Which read as a bcy
called " Seven Decisive BcaGles of History" or something of
the kindo I've forgottena This, I believe, was a decisive
battle in the war and therefore we must not think of these
matters without thinking back to the man who played so great
a part in them Leslie Morshead, I have told you a lot of
things, all of which you know better than I do. I thought
I would rather like to tell them in the presence of his widow
because it is important that she should know that she wears
a name that is not a great name just because somebody said it
is but a great name because he made it one, and I think it is
a marvellous thing that in this city his name should be
commemorated in this fashion. I hope that all over Australia
it will never be forgotten,
It is a very particular honesty for one who
was his admirer and, I am happy to say, his friend, to be able
to stand here and declare this building open, 



64/ 07) 4
The Pr-; ie Minrister, Sir Robert Yenzies, to-day sent
the folowinp rLiec ,&amp; ge
CCOOITf! G. IPT. T', TU I", L'IONSi ON YOT -R GREAAT I. TI
SIHOUL01D DO !. UO/ H TO P: R'OV. Fj, I-F PROOF BE ZI: FnD
THAT J! TLjYJLP iA T7UE iOLTTTJ: AI. tZ\'* TITY ANT
THA T YOU Ic22IAK FOR IT VITH THL AUTHORITY Oa:-ITS
PEOPLE.
LC2' f 2-7, JRA 



OPENING OF ARTS BUILDING, UNIVERSITY OF
JESTERN AUSTRALIA, PERTH, W. A.
29TH APRIL, 1964
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr, Chancellor, Mr. Dean, Mr. Court and Ladies and Gentlemen
I see considerable changes since I was here last.
On the last occasion, as you have been reminded, I opened a
building belonging to what I suppose might be called the
Students Union. I received a very merry reception ( Laughter)
which I enjoyed, having led a few of them in my own time.
Today I am astonished to find the docility of the
students ( Laughter). They looked at us as we marched in here
with absolute respect ( Laughter). Jeli, it appeared to be so.
One or two almost had an appearance of veneration. ( Laughter)
At least it appeared to be so, and so these changes come, but
such is the fallibility of human memory that I ought to begin at
once by saying that I declare this building open. ( Laughter)
( Applause) You never know, I might do it again. It depends
entirely on whether, having made a few brief remarks, I look
around and my wife waggles an eyebrow at me to remind me that
I really ought to do it twice. ( Laughter)
Sir, it is a great pleasure to do this task because
it is a great pleasure to visit this University. I have always
had more than a sneaking idea that a university ought to be a
place that has some beauty, some charm, something to remember,
something more than a towering skyscraper as you see in some
cities, something that has atmosphere, something that in due
course will evoke memories, and I am bound to say that this
university is enviable in those respects. I know that some of
the new buildings are not, perhaps from one point of view, as
beautiful as others but then I am an old-fashioned Tory on
architectural matters. You see, I like this building; I think
it is wonderful, and one of the fascinating things to me is my
old friend, Professor Alexander, who has always masqueraded to
me over many years as a species of bolshevik ( Laughter)
( Applause) has been giving me from time to time broad hints
in a very friendly way that it is time I saw the error of my
ways, I'm delighted to find that at long last the wheel has
turned full circle in his case ( Laughter) and that we both
agree that this is a lovely building. So hero we are. This is
a new act. ( Laughter) I can say that about him because he is
an old friend of mine and I value his friendship and the fact
that he is a friend of nine was one of the reasons that helped
to persuade me to come over to perform this very pleasant task.
Now, Sir, it will hardly be said about me, though
I an the least scientific of mortals, that I am not interested
in science, the teaching of science, the development of science,
because when I look back on all the new science labs, that I
have opened at schools and upon various things that my own
government has been able to do, I realise that we have and
have, shown some practical understanding of the importance of
science, If I ever had a temptation to forget it then all I
would need to do would be to look around and see the Universities
Connission and see your representative on it, Professor Bayliss,
helped by a bias in favour of this university ( Laughter).
I wouldn't run any risk of not being aware of the importance
of science, but I always come back to the tremendous importance
in this world of the humanities. Now, I may have to say something / 2 
2
about this tonight; therefore I won't waste any powder and shot
on it because you will all be there tonight ( Laughter) and you
will have to listen to me a second time.
But, Sir, an arts building, designed to further the
study and understanding of the humanities, covering in its range
languages, ancient and modern, literature, history, philosophy,
all of these matters which are so easily forgotten in the modern
world where a lot of very successful people profess a distaste for
history. Indeed, wasn't it Henry Ford I who made that superb
remark whichreverberated around the world " History is bunk".
Well, that is one point cf view. It's a very poor point of view,
because I happen to be one of those who believe that one of the
first things, if you are to create a civilised man or woman, is
to induce in him or her some knowledge of men, past as well as
present, some knowledge of events, past as well as current,
because if there is anything calculated to bring proportion to
an otherwise educated r. ind, it is a knowledge of history, an
understanding of it; not an understanding simply of those things
that we used to have pushed into us when we wore very small
boys a long list of dates, of kings and battles but an
understanding of the great social development that has occurred
right through history in one country and another.
This is a necessary thing if we are to have a sense
of proportion if we are not to be in all our controversies
purely ad captandum as we too frequently are in the modern
world. It is so important to learn, not just from machinery,
from plant, from tust tubes important as all these things
are you must do more than that. It is necessary to learn
from men I will use " men" as including women for the sake
of brevity to learn from men. ( Laughter) Yes, I know, I see
the point you have made. Ihave known wcrenwhowere more long-winded
than men; I have known men who were nore long-winded than women.
It's a toss-up in the long run, but I will use " mon" as including
women in the best statutory fashion. We must learn from r. en, we
must learn from history, we must learn from literature.
Do you know that I an frequently shocked to discover
that there are r. en in the world of considerable scientific
attainments who are, when it cones to expressing themselves in
word or in writing, almost illiterate, and this is ridiculous,
on the face of it. Who can be a great scientific discoverer
unless he can convey to other people the nature of his discovery?
Who can conduct scientific research work of real value to the
people of the world unless he is able to explain it to other
people? Who, indeed, in any avenue of life can reach the top
nark unless he has the power of communication?
I have known a number of men in my life which is
now going on a number of rien of enormous distinction in some
particular field, whether it was in the field of military
activity or engineering or whatever it night be and when I found
them to be in the very top flight I suddenly discoverd by
contact with then that they had all these things the power to
express themselves with clarity and lucidity and justice so that
other people heard and understood and were prepared to follow.
Now this is so true, isn't it? And it is a very great pity to
find too many people, otherwise trer. ondously good at their
particular specialty who make some stumbling explanation of it
and who, when you put an enquiry say, " Well, anyhow, you know
what I mean." Now, the great function of a department of arts is to
produce balanced, educated, civilised people, not necessarily
specialists in some field but people who, having achieved a broad
e / 3 
-3-
cultivation of the mind, are capable of quick learning, of human
understanding, of exposition and of objective judgment. This
is what I believe the humanities to be concerned about, whether
they achieve it through the teaching and study of literature, of
history, of languages, of philosophy or whatever may be, in the
broad curriculum. Now, Sir, it is a very interesting thing, I am sure,
because my friend. Professor Bayliss, as a member of the
Universities Commission, would bear this out, that although I
many of us thought that with all the concentration of the public
mind and headlines on physical sciences, on scientific discoveries,
on technological developments, from the more simple forms up to
sputniks and satellites I had thought that all this, by
romanticising these matters, would produce a tremendous growing
demand for space in the universities. Yet the fact is, so
far as I know there may be one or two exceptions the
restrictions on numbers going into the universities have needed
to be on the humanities side not on the science side. There is
a greater and growing demand on the humanities side so far than
there is on the science side, at least that was so the last time
I obtained some statistics about it.
I wonder why that is. In other words, I permit
myself, just for five minutes, to put the question to myself
and to you: Why does this come about? Why is there such a
demand on the arts courses? I think it is a very interesting
question and I sat down the other day to ask myself whether I
could think of the answers to it. Well of course, there was
one, a cynical answer, quite easy, and that would be that arts
subjects seem easier than scientific ones. That's a rather
cynical proposal. I have known some people who I think might have, in
a candid moment, said, " Yes, that will do me". You know, the
mathematicians....... although, of course you have a school
of mathematics in this department..... bu the mathematicians
are a horror to ordinary unmathematical people. There is one
thing I always thought about my colleagues who were great
mathematicians and that is that they had a slight advantage,
I might write a superb so I thought paper in English and
get 85 marks out of 100 because it was all a matter of opinion.
Same in history; same, with moderate concessions, in Latin
( Laughter) but my mathematical colleagues, they got 100 or they
got none. Well, I was almost among the none ( Laughter) and
therefore a lot of people I think, may imagine that it is
easier. I don't think here are too many who have that point
of view. I suppose there are some people who take up the study
of the humanities or some of then this certainly doesn't apply
to the classics because they think they call for somewhat less
precision of thought. And of course everybody here knows that
any man who engages in precision of thought, even in my humble
avocation, is always liable to be told that he is quibbling, that
he is pedantic or that there is some other incurable disease which
attaches to him. ( Laughter) And so there are quite a few people
who say, " Well, I like a little bit of looseness of thought.
I like a little bit of the broad sweep of humanity, old boy
you understand me? ( Laughter) and therefore I think I might be
attracted to become a Bachelor of Arts." Well, they are in a
hopeless minority too and in today's world I would have thought
a disappearing minority. 
I have come to believe that there are very many
people in the world parents as well as students, who
instinctively react against what they feel to be a narrow
specialisation, who instinctively react against the idea that
a man should be educated for one specialty and for no other,
whereas in fact, he ought to be educated to have a broad view
of mankind, fitting him for a variety of occupations, because
he has developed his mind before specialising in some technical
matter. Now, there is a lot to be said for this, a groat
deal to be said for this view. I always like to remember if
there is one country in the world which, quite early in its
history, established a tradition of scholarship, it was Scotland,
where the ploughman's son was brought up, giving that he had
intelligence, to believe that he was not just to be a ploughman,
he was to learn something, he was to advance on the position
of his father, and how many ploughmen's sons in Scotland went
to Edinburgh or Glasgow and took degrees in arts, raising their
educational horizon, raising their general mental capacity a
tremendous number, a great tradition. And I suppose even in
Scotland there were people by whom we are all plagued from
time to time who said, " But this is useless learning. Why
learn Latin?" ( I'm sorry I didn't learn it better myself) And
if you replied, " Well, you will never really understand your
own language unless you understand at least something about
Latin," the answer is, " Oh, well, it's all right. It will do.
People will know what I mean, they will know what I am getting
at." This is really one of the important things in the world:
to have a breadth of study,
Now you look back in this century and some of us
at least, have lived right through this century. There hasn'f
been much deficiency, has there, in scientific exploration,
not much deficiency in scientific growth, some glorious triumphs
in the field of biochemistry and all these things that have to
do with the preservation of life, some dramatic, amazing and
sometimes horrible development in the great arts of destruction,
but could anybody say that thetwentieth century has been marked
by a growing understanding of human beings, by a better understanding
by one nation of another, by a greater realisation that
we are all human beings wherever we may be and that really all
human things ought not to be alien to us? Has there been any
adequate realisation of that? I venture to say not.
I believe that in the second half of this century
the proper study of mankind must be man in the true and vigorous
sense if we are to avoid marrying the advance of science to
constant or recurring human disasters. And that, Sir7 is why
I believe in the hunanities, because they serve humanity, because
they are vital to the survival of the human race, because in
their very name, they serve two purposes the humanist, the
purpose of the humanist, the purpose of the human being, living
as a social being, wherever he nay be in the world.
Now, Sir, this sounds awfully like a lecture on my
part but I am provoked to do it on an occasion of this kind and
before I open the building for the second timo ( Laughter), I
want to explain to you that I have had to be on my best behaviour
for today. I have had to give some rather shoddy imitation of
being intelligent ( Laughter) because I an speaking to you today
in the presence of two imen who have cost me and ny Government
nore than any other non I know. ( Laughter) 1 
One of themlas over a long period of years disgorged
Commonwealth grants on a scale sometimes terrifying, but still
I am bound to admit he has never made a recommendation yet that
we have rejected. And the other one, of course, I have already
referred to the member of the Universities Commission.
Dear me, I remember when Keith Murray came out. I got him, and
I was in London and I borrowed him from Harold Macmillan and
got him out and set him up with a first-class commission of
enquiry and it was only when I had done all this that I was
game to tell the then Treasurer what I was up to. ( Laughter)
A bit of experience is not a bad guide on these matters
and so I kept dark until I had the Committee established and
then it went around and of course then it brought in its
recommendations. Dear me, oh I read them and I gave instructions
that they were to be circulated to Ministers on the
morning of the Cabinet meeting. ( Laughter) I got them all to
sit all day and at about midnight, I had a gene~ ral approval
for the recommendations. And that is how it all began. When
I look back on those modest beginnings -there were only about
œ 3OM in recommendations in those days -and I look at what these
boys do to me now well, every time I see Keith Murray
w, if ch is occasionally fortunately, I say to him, " 4hat a mild,
man you were". ( Laughtor)
However, Sir, this building is one of the results
and therefore, for the second time and I am like the character
in " Alice" you know, and what I say twice is right ( Laughter)
and so I say for the second time " I declare this building open"
5 



CONFERRING OF THE HONORARY DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF
LETTERS UPON THE PRIME MINISTER. SIR ROBERT
GORDON MENZIES, KT, CH. QC, MPP AT WINTHROP HALL,
UNIVERSITY OF VjSqRPN USTRALA
29TH APRIL, 1964+
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Chancellor, Mr. Pro-Chancellor, Ladies and Gentlemen
Never in my life have I permitted myself to
make a speech with my hat on and, therefore, in breach of
all the rules, I take it off,
I have been having a most fascinating time
tonight. My mind went back to the several occasions when I
got a Degree myself that I had earned; all my others are the
unearned increment, I don't know what the position is today,
but in my day the Bachelor of Laws had a hood with,... what
do they call b. at fur? Vermin or something ( Laughter) around
the edge of it. It cost you three guineas to hire it. The
Master's Degree was exactly the same but it had no fur trimming
and it cost you five guineas to hire it. ( Laughter)
As all these distinguished graduates came up
tonight, I wondered whether they were still exposed to these
raids on the privy purse on such a celebrated occasion in their
lives, but I had another thought as thay came up. You know,
I'm getting along in years now and I begin to think thiat all
the graduates are young and all the policemen are young. I
suppose that's true enough, but when tonight I watched them
come up Bachelors or Arts and then came along dentists.
They all looked so young. ( Laughter) It was hard for me to
believe that as soon as practicable, they will be saying to
poor victims in the chair, " Open your mouth a little wider,
please" and then using that superb phrase that all dentists
have invented they don't say " Spit" they ray " Let that cat
please" ( Laughter). I could quite imagine it, It was great
fun, but when a most talented young man came along to be given
the degree of Master of Arts for a thesis: " Personality
Characteristics of Habitual Traffic Offenders",( Lauaghter) well,
I thought for a moment I had better speak to my colleague, the
Minister for Customs and have his thesis banned. ( Laughter)
Then, of course, it is not for me to take on, in
open combat, the Public Orator, except that all of those of
you who have vestigial remains of your Latin in your minds will
not have failed to realise that he is a Professor of the new
pronunciation. Now this is one of the great problems. I say
this to all of my fellow Latinists here tonight, male and
female, this is one of the great problems, how you pronounce it.
Oh dear, I went through most of my life thnking that disjecta
membra was disjecta mzembra but tonight I was reminded that it
is disyecta membra ( Laughter) Don't talk about Julius Caesar
it's Yulius.( Laughter) I was reminded of Julius Caesar tonight
when that charming young woman gave me thie crown, and I remembered
a few scraps from Julius Caesar in ray acknowledgment.
Well, now, this is not the first Public Orator
under whom I have suffered. ( Laughter) It is a very odd ' thing
but when you get to my stage of life and you have been able to
do a little that's all in ' the university field, but you
feel you've done it with great good will. people in the
universities attach importance to it andwhen I look back on
the number of unearned degrees that I have had al~ l over the
a e / 2 
-2
world, I blush for shame. I know a lot of people in Australia
think that I am not capable of blushing ( Laughter) but I am,
I think that on seventeen occasions these strange unpurchased
fruit have fallen into my lap. Bjut I remember four of them.
I wonder, Mr. Chancellor, I wonder if I might, even at this late
hour, take your time by mentioning very briefly four recollections,
because they are all different.
One is that 7 as you have been told, I was given a
degree at Oxford. Fascinating occasion, highly distinguished
by the fact that one of my co-graduands was Margot Fonteyn who
is now in Australia.( Laughter) She and I have no superficial
resemblance whatever, ( Laughter) She had two great advantages
over me. One was that she is decorative and the second is that
she came late in the list. I had the great misfortune in being
first in the list, only because I happened to be Prime Minister
of Australia. We~ marched up tho High Street, went into the
Divinity School and there, our Master of Ceremonies gave to all
of us pieces of paper which contained on the one side the Latin
of what was to be said about us and on the other side the
English. This man was bilingual whoever did it. He did the
Latin anci he did the English ai least I have always assumed
that, Unfortunately for me all the others had a chance of
sitting down and reading and looking wise, but I was first up,
so I had no chance of looking at my English at all. The
Public. Orator hc did his subject well. He had the new pronunciation
thank aod the Chancellor, at that time Lord Halifax, had
the old pronunciation and between the two of them I arrived
at an average sort of an ide.-as to what was going on.
Well, my luck was in because I stood there you
can't imagine it, any of you who are not utter highbrows, you
can hardly imagine what it meant standing there in the presence
of all the great and learned in this great seat of learning,
with the Public Orator declaiming past your right ear in the
most impeccable Latin Which T knew had to cc-ntain a couple of
jokes because that's he way Public Orators go on. ( Laughter)
I want to tell you and this is the proudest boast
of my life that I listened, I tried to appear intelligent;
there were two jokes and I laughed at each of them at the time.
( Laughter) This I regard os my greatest moment and nfterwards
I spoke to the Plublic Orator and I said, " You know, that was a
great strain on me, but still, I got the points didntt I?"
He said, " Yes, you did. You did very well."' I said, " The
one comfort I had was that when I looked around in the theatre
to see all these immense scholars, none of them saw the joke,
none of them understood a word of what was being said ( Laughter)
and this made me feel that it would not be true to say that a
little Latin is a dangerous thing. It is better to have little
than none," 1 That was a great occasiont
On another occasion, I was given a degree by
the University of Laval in Quebec, a French Canadian University
and L'oval is a most fascina-ting place, quite seventeentheighteenth-
century in its character. As they were giving me
degree, noduta euto oe mistranslation in some
correspondence ( Laughter), I thought that my tinec had conae to
speak sorme of ray reply in a species of French. So I did, about
15r0 words, all with loving care. I walked up and down the night
before and I rehearsed this, you see, and I was delighted at
the result because although nobody present understood a word I
said, they were all with the highest possible courtesy, looking
at each other and saying, 11Tl essa-ie, ii essaio" and I thoughtthat
was rather agreeable. ( Laughter) 
-3
Another one that I recall, and I must got bock to
tho Latin, but I won't keep you long is the Royal University of
Malta. My wife and,-I arrived in Malta one day and had a tremendous
day, about foar days in one. We went all over the island we
attended this and that. It was very hot; we got very we through;
we got very tired, but we went on and on and on, and in the long
run, I was driven down, looking as proud as a lord mayor ( if you
know what I mean) ( Laughter) ( Applause) down through the streets,
to receive a degree. The Governor was Lhe Chancellor and somebody
else was the Vice Chancellor. They had given me, just before we
had set out on our driving the oath that I was supposed to take,
an oath, about, I would think, four or five hundred words. I hu-d
to kneel at a faldstool and read out this oath and it was in
Latin, and I had no timie to give it the study that it no doubt
deserved as we were galloping up and down the island.
When I arrived at the University, I said with that
impudence that has served me fairly well in my life, I said to
the Vice Chancellor, " Quickly, quickly, my dear boy, old pronunciation
or new?" ( L. aughter) This is very important. He said,
" Itts all right, nobody will ever know" ( Laughter) " Take my
advice, you mumible" l ( Laughter) So I took his advice and I knelt
there qnd I mumbled. My wife was very annoyed with me. My staff
said, Never heard you mumble like that before". " Wellill I said
" I mumbled on the best possible advice". ( Laughter)
Then on another occasion this is the last one
I1ll quote to you, though it is the earliest in point of time,
in 194+ 1, when Winston Churchill was, of course, at the peak of
his powers, Great Britain and all the rest of us were in the
very throes of a struggle for existence, I was in London and I
went down to Bristol to be given a degree at Bristol of which
Winston Churchill was then Chancellor. A few hours before we
arrived, the place was bombed and the Great Hall at Bristol was
burnt and the whole town was in smoke and fire, It speaks volumes
for the durability of the true university spirit that the ceremony
went on. It went on in the Senate Chamber, a small place the
American Ambassador the President of Harvaird, myself, Winston,
the Chancellor. All the faculty came in with their academic
robes thrown over the battledress, all smoke-stained, with the
fires burning outside, smoke down the street,
This was a memorable, an unforgettable occasion.
And the ceremony went on, and it went though in the normal fashion
and then the old man who, of course added to his tremendous
spirit a lovely sense of the dramatic, said to me, " La. 0t's go
outside and let the people have a look at us" ( Laughter) and he
lit a fresh cigar and we went on to the front steps. I had a
few movies taken of this by some convenient arrangement, There
were the people; there was the smoke; there was the fire, and
they all rose to it because their leader had not cancelled an
arrangement in a great seat of learning but had made it clear
that whereas the struggle must continue, learning must never be
cast down. That, to me, is one of my unforgettable nomories,
And, Sir that duly sunnarises everything that I
would like to Says ft has been my great privilege to do something
about the universities, I go back to the time when Sir Keith
Murray came out to be Chairman of a Committee, and I agree, I had
a great deal to do with that, but from then on what was created
has gone on, I almost bel~ ieve of its own momonum. Once as a
result of his Committee, once we-had established tha,-t the progress
of the universities was something that was vital to the existence
of Australia, that notion itself developed a momentum which I don't
believe anybody, however stupid, could have stopped, We set up
0 Isa .. / 1+ 
I the Universities Commission. We have had the most unbelievable
co-operation from the State Governments because never forget
that although the Commonwealth Government, stepping somewhat
outside its constitutional responsibility, has found many millions
for the universities so have the Governments of the States.
This has been a joint enterprise of the most exciting kind, and
I believe that in the result, great things are happening to
Australia and the future of our country is liable to be improved
beyond all our imagining.
Sir, I said something this afternoon about the alleged
conflict between science and the humanities, I don't want to
repeat it, All I want to say is that it is our business in a
university, your business, our business as people who are
concerned to reconcile the study of matter of phaysical or
chemical lorms or elements with the study o1 man both individually
and socially. This is really the great challenge to the world
in the second half of this century, to have people not only
clever in a scientific sense and that's essential7 if the world
is to make material progress, that's essential if we are to do
our duty by the now countries in the world which need growth
and need improvemont, and that also in the doing of all these
things we should never forget that the most important thing on
earth after all is man, woman, the human being who must be
understood, who must be encouraged, who must be, wherever necessary'
catered for, because otherwise science can become an inhuman
monster and without it, human beings can become academically
disposed without purpose, without drive, without ultimate
ambition for the rest of the world, This is a great joint
enterprise and I know of no places in which it can be conducted
half so well as in the universities.
Of course, it is quite possible to be an able scientist
and to be ignorant of a lot of the things that have boen referred
to tonight. It would be a pity, it would be a calamity, but it
is also happily quite possible and increasingly probable to be
a scientist with a clear view of humanity and an acute sense
of social responsibility. Look back on the biochemists. I remember saying to
somebody two or three years ago, in fact I think it might be found
in some essay I wrote, that when people in some of these great
over-populated countries of the world the Chinese continent,
the Asian mainland looked into the sky and saw a sputnik passing
across above the horizon and marvelled at it and sa-id, " Isn't
this tremendous. The people who can do this must be the masters
of the world," a little information to them would have let them
know that half of them would not be looking at it if it were not
for the work of the medical researchers in the Western Hemisphere
the biochemists, the people who produce all the antibiotics, the
enormous discoverers, the oculists in the field of the brain.
Think of all these wonderful things that have been done by the
scientist and the applied scientist and we get a rather better
balanced view of mankind.
Sir, I believe that the course that is open to all of
us is to study and practise the humanities against the background
of a world which expands or contracts as scientific knowledge
grows or fails, This is the great thing that we must remember
and therefore, Sir, living as we do in an era of brilliant
cLvernoss and immeonse manterial achievement, the like of which
our great grandfathers would have regarded as utterly impossible,
living as we do in this era, we still have to face up to it that
whether the close of the twentieth century, our century, will find
us credited by our successes, with a groat contribution to true,
human, spiritual and intellectual devolopment, will be a question,
part of the answer, perhaps m., ore than part of the answer, will have
to be provided by the vision and faith and sense of mission of our
universities. Mr. Chancellor, I thank you. 



OPENING OF NEWT CLINICAL SCHOOL BUJILDINGS
ST. VINCENT'S HOSPITAL, SYDNEY
3RD MAY, 1964+
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Mengies
Mr. Chairman, Your Eminence, Mr. Sheahan, Mother Rectress and
Ladies and Gentlemen My simple function this afternoon is to declare
the Clincical School and the Students' Residence open. If
somebody will be good enough to remind me at the right time,
I will do that. In the meantime, I take leave to tell you, as you
have already discovered, that here is a sort of port of last
call. Whenever an occasion of this kind happens and I look at
my State colleagues even a good friend of mine like Mr.
Sheahan, I know that before he finishes, he will lay a little
hand on me ( Laughter) and throw out a broad hint about something,
I don't mind that from another politician, but if I may say so,
with all the truculence of a Presbyterian ( Laughter), I take
great exception to being nudged by the Cardinal ( Laughter)
( Applause), because when we went through the students' residence,
I may have imagined it, but I felt quite certain that he gave
me a quick dig in the ribs. ( Laughter) And under these circumstances,
I think that I really ought to say a few words in my
own defence, unaccustomed as I am to that kind of exercise.
( Laughter) It is quite true, as you have been told, that I have
been fortunate enough to have more than a little to do with the
entry of the Commonwealth into tertiary education, with the
Murray Committee and the adoption of the Murray Report and then
the creation of the Universities Commission, and those things
undoubtedly though they have produced occasional discomfort
for the Treasury have been a great opportunity for new life
to the universities of Australia and for that I am thankful,
but you know, it wasn't until after that had beon done that I
was approached by various people and invited to consider whether
the teaching hospitals ought to be put on some footing which
would approximhate them to the universities proper. So in order
to secure a completely unbiased report, I added to the Universities
Commission a well.-known professor of medicine; that is
a very good way of seeing that nothing is overlooked. And in
the result, we decided two things: First that we would include
teaching hospitals who were, in the view of the Advisory Committee,
doing work that could be properly be described as university
work, that we would include them in the recommendation for grants
to be made by the Commission. Now that was a very great step
forward in the teaching hospitals.
In the second place, we decided we would, pending
a rather fuller examination of running costs because it is not
easy to segregate the normal costs of running a hospital from
the special costs attaching to tuition of a clinical kind
pending the conclusion of that matter we would make contributions
for the capital expenditure of ieaching hospitals. Now
that is a comparatively recent matter. I expect that before this
year is out, we will have received and acted upon the report on
the recurring expenditure side. I say that because my friend,
Mr. Sheahan, was getting in a bit early on this, as if we hadn't
thought of it. I expect before the year is out, that this will
have borne fruit. ./ 2 
2
But in the meantime, I tell you, I had a bit of
pleasure in walking through this clinical school this afternoon
because it is literally one of the first fruits of that new policy
and I am delighted and I hope that it will be followed by many
other hospitals in many other places.
I suppose I don't know, but I suppose that centuries
ago you didn't need to know much to be a doctor. Judging by some
of the seventeenth and eighteenth century works that I have read
in my time, you needed to have some of the faculties of a butcher
and your patients needed to have endurance far beyond that of Job.
But in the last hundred years, what miracles we have seen, haven't
we? The great miracles in surgery, the great revolution in
medicine which converted it from a ways and means of sedation for
the patient while nature did the work to this positive antibiotic
approach to the cure of disease these have been marvellous
changes, and not one of themn has been made by Act of Parliament.
( Laughter) We want to remember this. We are a little bit given in
Australia to thinking that if only politicians were all sensible
meaning by that if they all agreed with all of us everything
would be solved, which is of course untrue. None of these changes
that I have referred to were made by Acts of Parliament. How
could they be? They were brought about by devoted men and women
of immense skill going in for research, tackling problems, incurring
risks, making revolutionary changes.
Who would dare to compare the hospital of today with
what hospitals must have been before my time a hundred years ago,
U I said " before my time" because I sometimes feel I am getting
near that point ( Laughter) though, of course, I am encouraged by
the example of Mr. Chancellor, whom I always refer to both
publicly and privately as Peter Pan. ( Laughter) ( Applause) This
is all a magnificent pieco of hum-on endeavour. The complexity
of today far exceeds the complexity of the past.
People don't always perhaps realise it but the work
of a Prime Minister, particulairly in a Federal community, today is
three times as complex as it was when I first became Prime Minister,
and ten times as great as it was for a Prime Minister in the middle
of the nineteenth century in Great Britain. The world, as it
grows smaller, becomes more complex, the whole body of knowledge
in science, in any profession, and above all, in medicine and in
surgery, keeps crowding in. There are more things to be learned,
and the more things there are to be learned, the greater must be
0 the facilities for teaching them and for studying them and the
result is that today's hospital, particularly a teaching hospital,
has a complexity of responsibility, very good for the human race,
of immense benefit to mankind but it can't be done cheaply.
It can't be done without consiantly keeping up to date, it can't
be done without being able to call on the skill of the right
kind of people. Now, Sir Douglas Miller who has spoken to you today is
at shining example of what can be done by a man of great skill
and of great devotion. ( Applouse) I have read in the documents
that were given to me in view of today not for the first time
some account of the honorary medical staff, people who with little,
or for the most part, no remuneration, have used their time and
their talent and their enthusiasm in order to train other people,
in order to help ether people. You know, that's a marvellous
thing; I hope that spirit will never die, I hope we won't become
so highly organised someday in Australia that everybody does what
he is paid to do and no more and that we pay for everything and
9 / 3 
-3
that we expect to get everything. The world is moving not by
people with that attitude of mind but as result of people of
energy and enthusiasm and imagination who never thought for one
moment that it was someone else's responsibi-Lity to do what
they themselves could do. This is, I think, one of the glories
of the medical profession.
There was a time when I was at the Bar, when I used
to cross-examine medical men quite freely. As a rule, they were
very poor witnesses. ( Laughter) Anyhow, there used to be a lot
of cross-examination going on, and once or twice, because I had
performed some exercise of logic, in which I had outwitted the
medical witness, I used to think to myself, " You know, those
doctors, Put a query against I have long
since got over that childish illusion. I have the most
tremendous respect, and so have you for the medical profession
and I will continue to respect it, so long as it produces, and
it has so far, such marvellous examples of fidelity to ideals,
of energy, of cdication to the task in hand. This, I think, is
one of the things that will be learned in the clinical school.
I had a look at the motto of the institution today
on the front of the cover of the programme. If I may, I would
just like to emphasise, Your Eminence, one word in it, though
this may sound painfully like a sermon " caritas" yes,
charity. I prefer, myself, rather to say " the love of Christ
urges us on." Urges there is an urgency about it.,
The word " urge" is of tremendous importance. Wie must all have
a sense or urgency about the things that we hove to do because
we don't know what tomorrow will bring forth. Urgency is it.
Urgency is in the mind and spirit of the groeat medical worker
as he tackles his problems, isn't it? " This is not something I
can put off for a month or a week or a year; this is the job.
Look at this pationt. Look at this problem" and he is urged on,
he is driven on by these feelings that he has in his heart and
in his mind. This is a wonderful spirit. Wonderful spirit.
All I can say is that I hope that out of this clinical school,
there will come not only medical men of wonderful skill and
medical women. I hope that not only will it produce good doctors,
talented doctors but that it will produce generation after
generation of what I choose to call the Millers of this world,
the enthusiasts, the people who will have a sense of urgency and
who will never relapse into doing their bare duty or observing
the barren rules of routine.
And therefore I am delighted to be here, honoured to
be here. I have made a mental note of what His Eminence, the
Cardinal, said. All I can tell him is that I will take an
opportunity of trying to pass the buck to somebody else ( Laughterl
always reserving the simple truth that I am a port of last
resort, for the time it reaches me there is nobody to whom I can
pass it. But you nay be assured at all times of my own understanding
of the problem and my own simple pleasure at having
been able to take a small part in solving, or helping to solve,
some of these problems in the modern educational world.
And so on this happy day when the heavens have been
smiling on us, I would take liberty huxzibly myself to smile on
you and say that I am. d'e lighted to be here, and remembering with
magnificent accuracy what I an here for I now declare the
Clincial School and the Students' Building open, 



FOR PRESS P. M. No, 20/ 1964
MES3AGE FROM P ESID ENT JOHNSON
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, released
in Canberra this afternoon the text of a message wh. ich he had
received from the President of the United States of America.
The President's message is as follows
" Twenty-two years have passed since we
fought the decisive battle of the Coral Sea and it
is deeply reassuring that the enduring bonds of
co-operation and friendship between Australia and
An.. rica remain firm.
The Coral Sea eng ge :-ent in which
Australian and United States Naval units constituted
a single integrated coimmrand, serves to remind friend
and foe alike of the power of free peoples when they
move in concert against aggression.
It is with great pleasure. Mr, Prime
Minister, that I extend to the people'of Australia
on this memorable anniversary the greetings and best
wishes of the people of the United States,"
BACKGROUND NOTE The message was brought to Australia by
General Hamilton H, Howze, Commanding General Eighth US, Army
and Commander-in-Chief United Nations Forces in Korea, who is
visiting Australia for the Australian American Association's
Coral Sea Week Celebrations, General Howze handed it to the
Prime Minister at Sydney airport shortly after his arrival
this afternoon from Korea and before the Prime Minister left
for Canberra.
CANBERRA, 3rd May, 1964. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Hon. L. H. E. BURY, M. P.
ON
HOMES SAVINGS GRANT BILL 1964
SECOND READING
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 5th May, 1964.]
Mr. BURY ( Wentworth-Minister for
Housing) [ 8.54.-1 move-
That the bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this bill is to help young
married couples obtain a home of their own
by authorizing payment to them by the
Commonwealth of tax-free grants to supplement
their own savings. It is designed to
increase the proportion of national resources
vail able for housing purposes by providing
-astrong inducement to young people to save
in ways which provide funds for investment
in housing.
Housing is vital to the welfare and happiness
of individuals and thus to our future
evelopment as a nation. Without proper
housing, the process of marriage and family
formation which are the very essence of
Australia's future must be seriously impaired.
The Government seeks, moreover,
to foster a healthy property-owning democracy
of sturdy independent individuals and
regards home ownership as a basic
ingredient. It is a linchpin of family life.
Our constant quest to expand and develop
Australia demands large-scale immigration,
and more people need more houses. In the
absence of special measures, housing could
become a limiting factor to our population
growth. Most of us are conscious too that.
we shall shortly be moving into a period in
which the marriage rate in our existing
population is likely to rise substantially. We
must be ready to meet this position as it
arises. 5723/ 64. In housing we shall always fall short of
the ideal. We can be proud, however, that
despite all the difficulties we have been
through since World War II., and the present
shortcomings evident to all of us, we
probably have more accommodation available
per head than any other country. It
behoves us to maintain and improve this
record. However good, it is small consolation
to those without a home.
Australia, under the present Government,
is a rapidly developing country of increasing
wealth. By and large, Australians are able
to afford a relatively high standard of housing,,
and it is the wish of almost every
married couple to own a home of their own.
However, in the early years of marriage
there are numerous calls upon savings, and
many couples are compelled to postpone
home ownership. We believe that these
young people should be assisted to attain
this most desirable objective. However, to
merit this assistance, young people, both
before and after marriage, should make
some effort themselves by saving a portion
of their incomes.
The Government has become particularly
concerned with the difficulties facing many
homeseekers in raising sufficient funds for a
deposit large enough to meet the requirements
of lending institutions. This problem
applies particularly to young married persons.
The causes of this situation are complex,
but two factors are worthy of particular
notice-the rising price of land, 
especially in the vicinity of our capital cities,
and the availability of funds from lending
institutions. There is little the Commonwealth Government
can do about the price of land.
It has become increasingly scarce relative to
demand and nowadays building blocks often
have to bear the cost of development work
such as water and sewerage, roadmaking and
other charges in their initial price. These
are State matters. The availability of funds
is also highly critical and is subject to Commonwealth
influence. Basically, in a fully
employed economy, additional resources
can only be devoted to housing if less are
applied elsewhere. One cannot eat one's
cake and have it. Overcoming any housing
shortage, therefore, entails some diversion
of funds from other uses to housing finance.
The Prime Minister ( Sir Robert Menzies),
in his policy speech made on 2th November
last, promised a two-pronged attack on
this problem-first, a scheme for home
savings grants for young married persons
up to the age of 35, and secondly, the
establishment of a mortgage-insurance corporation
to insure mortgages up to a high
proportion of the value of a house and
land. This bill represents the first instalment
of the new housing policy. It provides
both for assistance to young married
people seeking a home and for a means
whereby additional savings can be made
available for housing purposes. Its provisions
cover broadly the nature of the
grant, the definition of persons who will
qualify, the homes eligible for the grant,
acceptable savings, the period and amount
of saving, information to be submitted, the
manner and time of payment and the
necessary administrative arrangements.
In the introduction of a new scheme such
as this, certain interim difficulties are
inevitable until its details are widely understood
and people affected have had time
to adjust their affairs to meet its requirements.
The need for interim provisions to
cover savings until they can be put into
one of the permanent forms which will
ultimately be required is particularly
apparent. I have allowed as far as
practicable for the temporary problems
which can already be foreseen, but feel
obliged to ask the House for a wide measure
of administrative discretion until the scheme
has settled down to a routine basis in its
permanent framework. It will be readily recalled by honorable members that the
procedures under our social services legislation-
those most closely akin to thesehave
been refined by practical experience
over 50 years.
This bill, when it becomes law, will
authorize the payment of a Commonwealth
grant of œ 1 for every œ 3 of acceptable
savings for a home by persons aged less
than 36 years. The acceptable savings of
each partner to a marriage will be eligible
for the grant, but the total grant payable
in respect of a home will be œ 250. Th
grant will be an addition to savings mad,_
over a number of years and will be payable
in respect of a home anywhere in Australia.
The bill provides that a person eligible
for the grant must be under 36 years of
age, not only at the date of marriage, bt)
also at the time when one or both of a
married couple sign a contract to buy or
build the home, or commence its construction.
Although a grant will not be
paid to an unmarried person, young people
contemplating marriage may take steps to
acquire a home and become eligible for
the grant when they are married. But if
they do this, they must marry and submit
a claim for the grant within twelve months
of taking steps to acquire the home.
To be eligible, a person must have lived
in Australia and have accumulated accep
table savings in Australia for at least three
years. There is, of course, no maximum
savings period. The sooner saving commences,
the easier it will be to accumulate
maximum acceptable savings of œ 750. A
person need not have been born in Aus
tralia nor have become naturalized. Newcomers
to Australia who have lived here for
at least three years, are married and intend
to continue to live here, are eligible. The
legislation also provides that a temporary
absence from Australia, such as an overseas
holiday of business trip, may be counted
as residence in Australia. Moreover, a
number of young Australian citizens work
or study overseas. These young people,
if they deposit savings in a bank in Australia
for at least three years and live in
Australia during the three months before
taking steps to acquire a home, will be
eligible for the grant. Australian citizens in
the Territory of Papua and New Guinea
and our other external Territories may
save with a branch of an Australian bank
and become eligible for a grant in respect
of a home in Australia. 
Once a person has received a home
savings grant, he or she will be ineligible
for a further grant. The marriage partner
of a person who receives a grant, and
subsequently remarries, also will be
ineligible. However, the person with whom
remarriage takes place will be eligible, provided
he or she has not received a grant.
Mr. Whitlam.-The second spouse will
be eligible?
Mr. BURY.-Yes, whatever may be the
,'" ltatus of the person remarrying. A widow
'.. kor example, may marry again.
Before aperson may become eligible he
or his marriage partner must have taken
steps to acquire a home. Home ownership
is the objective of the scheme. To be
jligible a person, or that person's husband,
or both of them jointly, on or after 2nd
December, 1963, the commencement date
of the scheme must-I wish to exphasize
the word must
have entered into a contract in
writing to buy an existing house and
land or the right to occupy a flat or
home unit; or
have entered into a contract in
writing with a building contractor for
the erection of a home on land held
by one or both of them in an approved
form; or
if an owner-builder, have commenced
the construction of a home on
land held by one or both of them in an
approved form.
The husband or the wife or both may be
jeligible persons provided each has saved
for at least three years. Although the
savings of the husband and the wife will be
treated as separate individual savings, the
maximum acceptable savings in respect of
one home will be œ 750, and the maximum
grant to husband or wife of both will be
œ 250. If the husband and wife have deposited
their savings in a joint account in
both their names, half of these savings will
be deemed to be those of the husband and
the other half those of the wife. If only one
of them is eligible, half the joint savings will
be deemed to be those of the eligible
person. I now propose to refer to homes
eligible for the grant. Broadly speaking,
to be eligible a home must be the
first home owrned by either or
both of the married couple upon or after marriage. It may be either
a house or a home unit. By and large,
ownership of a home by either partner at
the time of marriage will exclude both of
them from eligibility for the grant, for the
good reasons that they may either occupy
it as their matrimonial home or sell it and
use the proceeds to buy another home. It
is not, however, our intention to deny payment
of the grant to eligible young people
who buy or build, before they are married,
the home they intend to live in after
marriage. If one or both of a married
couple signed a contract to buy or build
the home, or commenced the construction
of the home prior to marriage, and this
home is occupied as the matrimonial home,
it will be eligible provided one or both of
the couple did not own another home in
Australia upon or after marriage.
For obvious reasons, a building condemned
as unfit for human habitation or
listed for demolition will not be eligible.
If the home is being newly constructed,
the plans must have been approved by the
local authority. The home must also be
built on land of which one or both of the
married couple are, or are entitled to be.
registered as the proprietor, or on land
which one or both of the married couple
holds on lease or as a life interest, and
my department is satisfied that the terms
of the lease or the life interest offer a
reasonable prospect of security of tenure
for a sufficient period of years. In the
case of a home unit, we must, of course,
be satisfied that the purchaser will receive
a title to a particular flat or apartment,
or an assurance of the right to occupy it.
Mr. Duthie.-I reckon about ten people
will qualify for these benefits.
Mr. BURY.-If that is the honorable
member's view I invite him to meet the
cost of this legislation. There are, however,
certain classes of dwellings which,
when purchased, will not be eligible for
the grant. As honorable members know,
the Commonwealth is already providing
significant assistance to people seeking a
home. We are currently subsidizing the
interest payable for more than fifty years
on some œ 50,000,000 per annum of loan
money available to the States for home
building under the Commonwealth and
State Housing Agreement. The Commonwcalth
is also building a large number of
homes in the Australian Capital Territory 
and the Northern Territory. These are
usually offered to tenants at less than an
economic rental, or for sale on a deposit
as low as 5 per cent. of the total purchase
price with the assistance of a long-term
loan from the Commonwealth at a relatively
favorable rate of interest. If purchasers of
these homes were to receive the grant, we
would, in effect, be paying them a double
subsidy. We do not believe that most
Australians would wish us to do this.
A home built by a State housing authority
and paid for with money made available
under the Commonwealth and State Housing
Agreement will not be eligible for the grant,
where it is sold by a State housing authority,
or is being purchased with the assistance
of a loan by a State or State authority
out of moneys made available under the
Commonwealth and State Housing Agreement.
We consider that subsidized homes
built by the States with funds provided
uinder the Commonwealth and State Housing
Agreement ought to be reserved for those
with very small means and on low incomes.
This housing is made available at below
its true economic cost for social reasons.
In some States there are long waiting lists
for these housing commission houses largely
because they are relatively so cheap. It
would be wrong to inflate these lists and
disadvantage the most needy elements of
the community by adding those who can
better afford to look after themselves. The
homes savings grant scheme is designed
to help those who help themselves by saving
appreciable sums. Likewise, a home built
by the Commonwealth or a Commonwealth
authority in one of the Territories will be
ineligible when it is first sold or when its
purchase is being financed by a loan by
the Commonwealth or a Commonwealth
authority. However, the many homes being
built by young people in Canberra with
the assistance of a loan of Commonwealth
moneys from the Commissioner for Housing
will be eligible for the grant.
Houses built through co-operative societies
which receive moneys under Commonwealth
and State Housing Agreement in
the States or direct from the Commonwealth
in Canberra or the Northern Territory will
be eligible. It will be realized that these
homes bear the cost of administrative
charges imposed by the States and borne
by the societies and involve a substantial
deposit which the owner has to find. Homes acquired with the assistance of War
Service Homes loans will be eligible even
though these loans are offered on exceptionally
favourable terms and conditions.
The reason for this decision-I am sure
it is one with which all honorable members
will agree-is that Commonwealth financial
assistance to ex-servicemen in home ownership
is a repatriation benefit in the nature
of a post hoc payment for services rendered
to the nation.
Mr. Cope.-How many ex-servicemer",
are under 36 years of age? About two; J.
I would think.
Mr. BURY.-The honorable member
would be surprised. Apparently honorable
members opposite think that Australian
servicemen have not been in action since
1945. A War Service Home loan is not
a social welfare payment and should not
debar its recipient from social welfare
benefits available to young persons throughout
the community.
The homes savings grant is aimed at
assisting those who need and merit financial
aid in acquiring a home. Those acquiring
expensive homes stand in less need of
assistance from the taxpayer whose interests
must also be weighed. For this reason
a home which, together with the land, costs
more than œ 7,000, will be ineligible for
the grant. It is intended that the scheme
should apply equally to homes in rural
and urban areas. If the œ 7,000 limit were
to ipply to the cost of the whole of the
land and all improvements, many people
living on rural holdings would be ineligible
for the grant, because the value of their
land-their main business asset-would
usually exceed œ 7,000. We will therefore
take into account for purposes of the œ 7,000
limit only the cost of the home and of the
land immediately appropriate to the home.
For purposes of the scheme, the cost of
that portion of the farm on which the
dwelling has been, or is being, built will
be the value of half an acre of the land
at the average value per acre of the farm.
There are also other cases where, if we
were to take as the cost of the land and
the house the value of the land and all
improvements on it, such as a shop or a
surgery, the couple owning the land would
be ineligible for the grant. Where the
overall cost of the land and all the building 
improvements will exceed œ 7,000, it is proposed
that my department be given a discretionary
power to identify the home
and to have regard only to its assessed
value in applying the œ 7,000 limit.
As honorable members would expect,' a
great deal of thought has been given to
determining the acceptable forms of savings,
bearing in mind the purposes of the scheme.
The forms chosen are in aggregate those
in which the great bulk of personal savings
ra home is accumulated. Moreover,
he institutions chosen are those which
provide a very large proportion of the
finance for private home building. The
reasons for this will be clear from my
opening remarks.
D The acceptable forms of savings for the
purposes of the scheme are-
Moneys deposited in a home savings
account with a savings bank. These
will include moneys placed on fixed
deposit and moneys invested in deposit
stock issued by some savings banks,
provided the account is designated a
home savings account. An eligible
person may have home savings
accounts with more than one bank;
Oma ot rnaedyisn g plbaacnekd, oprno vfidixeedd sduecpho sdiet powsiitths
are designated a home savings account.
Mr. Reynolds.-Will that hove to operate
for three years?
Mr. BURY.-If you will be patient you
will see the picture as it emerges.
SMr. Webb.-It is a bit difficult.
Mr. BURY.-I know it is, for you.
Other acceptable forms of savings for the
purposes of the scheme are-
Moneys deposited with a building or cooperative
housing society registered
uinder a law of a State or Territory.
Moneys paid to a building or co-operative
housing society as subscriptions towards
the purchase of shares in such a
society, provided the shares are not
quoted on any stock exchange.
Moneys paid for the purchase or lease
of land on which the eligible home
is being. or is to be. built.
I wish -to stress that on and after I st
January, 1965, these will be the only
acceptable forms of new-let me repeat, new-savings for purposes of the grant
scheme. However, in view of the fact
that most existing savings were made
without fore-knowledge of the new scheme,
special provisions will apply to savings
made up till the end of this year, and also
for savings made in certain institutions not
eligible in the long run to be kept in their
present form up till the end of 1967.
Because many young people have been, and
are, depositing savings for a. home in a
variety of other forms, my department, if
satisfied that these people have been saving
to acquire a home, will for a period regard
these savings as acceptable. Accordingly
the bill proposes that, up to the 31st
December, 1967, moneys deposited in the
following ways on or before 31st December,
1964, will also be treated as acceptable
savings. They are-
Moneys deposited in any savings bank
account, not being a home savings
account.
Moneys deposited in a current account
or on fixed deposit with a trading
bank.
Moneys deposited with a friendly society
or credit union registered or incorporated
under a law of a State or a
Territory.
However, savings in these forms up to
31st December next, to remain acceptable
after that date, must either be maintained
in -the form in which they are held at
the end of this year or be transferred to
one or more of the forms in which acceptable
new savings must be made from 1st
January next.
Mr. Cope-That will be easy to explain
to my constituents.
Mr. BURY.-Yes, it will. It is surprising
how bright some of them are. After all,
the people to benefit will not be more than
36 years of age.
Mr. Hansen.-What about savings in
Commonwealth bonds?
Mr. BURY-This will include savings in
any form, as I mentioned. It will include
savings in Commonwealth bonds. This
means that any moneys saved and deposited
in any bank account up to the end of this
year will be acceptable up to 31st December,
1967, if they are maintained in their
present form and after 31st December, 
1967, if before that date they are transferred
into one of the acceptable forms
ot new saving. The same conditions will
apply to savings deposited with a friendly
society or credit union. They may be left
with the society or union and be -acceptable
up to 3 1st December, 1967.
I have had a number of discussions with
representatives of friendly societies and
credit unions, some of whom have expressed
their interest in registering associated building
or housing societies in conjunction with
their other activities. Many of them have
funds now applied for a variety of purposes
not connected with housing. There is no
time limit on the acceptability of savings
placed with any registered building society.
The above provision will give friendly
societies and credit unions ample time to
adjust their affairs to fit in with the new
scheme without disturbing their existing
resources. Credit unions are growing fast
and play a very constructive part in collecting
and channelling savings to fruitful
purposes for the benefit of their members
and in fostering a sense of financial
responsibility. The further harnessing of
their activities to the housing field would
be a most welcome development.
It is desirable at this stage to make it
quite clear that the bill now before the
House, which defines savings deposited with
building and co-operative housing societies,
friendly societies and credit unions as
acceptable savings, is in no way intended
to imply that the Commonwealth is, or will
be, responsible for the financial soundness
and solvency of iany of these institutions.
Because until now there has been no
definitive statement of acceptable forms of
saving, we are also proposing that money
saved and accumulated in any form for
home purchase uip to the end of this year
will be acceptable, provided the savings are
deposited or invested before then in any of
the approved forms of saving. Home
savings accounts will not be blocked accounts
in the sense that the owner of the account
may not withdraw money for any purpose.
However, a withdrawal will in most cases
reduce the amount of acceptable savings.
Obviously, any moneys borrowed-not
saved-will not be treated as acceptable
savings. We have considered at length when the
period of acceptable savings of an eligible
person should cease. The scheme is aimed at encouraging personal saving by young
people before they enter into a commitment
to acquire their own home. The bill therefore
proposes that the period of saving will
conclude on the day one or both of the
married couple, or a person intending to
marry, signs a contract to buy the home,
or signs a contract to build the home, provided
this is not later than the day construction
commences, or, in the case of an
owner-builder, the day on which construction
commences. As soon as the contracthas
been entered into or construction of'
the home commenced, the period of acceptable
savings concludes for both the husband
and wife, and for both partners of an
intended marriage. This significant date is
described in the bill as the " prescribeddate
As the grant is intended to be a reward
for continuous saving over a period of
years, not for the deposit of a single lump
sum and no further saving, there should
obviously be a limit on the amount of
acceptable saving in a year. To give effect
to this, it is necessary to define years of
saving. The years of saving of an eligible
person will be the twelve months' periods
dating back from the day on which the
period of acceptable savings concluded.
May I make this clear by quoting a
hypothetical example. Suppose Mr. Smith
signed a contract to buy or build, or commenced
the construction of his home on
20th February, 1964. The years of saving
of Mr. and Mrs. Smith would be 21st
February, 1963, to 20th February, 1964;
21st February, 1962. to 20th February.
1963; 21st February, 1961. to 20th February,
1962; and so on into the past; but
information will not be sought beyond seven
years. In respect of savings periods that
conclude after 31st December next, the
savings of each eligible person in any year
of saving will be acceptable uip to œ 250.
1 now wish to explain briefly the manner
in which we propose to calculate acceptable
savings, as it is set out in the bill. The
amount of acceptable savings of an eligible
person during any year of saving will be the
amount by which his or her total savings
at the end of the year exceeded savings at
the beginning of the year. Total savings
will include, in addition to balances held
in an acceptable form with a bank, building
society, friendly society and credit union,
the amount of any payment or payments 
made to purchase the land on which the
home is being, or is to be built. If, however,
the total of an eligible person's acceptable
savings at the end of the year is less
than the total at the beginning of the year,
the acceptable savings at the beginning of
the year will be reduced hy the amount of
the decrease during the year.
If a person, whose savings period concludes
after 31st December next, saves more
than œ 250 in a year, the excess will not be
7aicsc espatvabinlge, s ienx caenpyt tyheaatr, iffo llao wpeinrsgo na ryeedaur ceisn
-which he had excess savings, the amount of
the reduction will be treated first as a
withdrawal of excess savings and only if
the reduction in savings exceeds the amount
of excess savings will the total acceptable
7savings in earlier years -be reduced.
As the grant is a reward for saving to
acquire a home, we must be reasonably sure
that the young people will obtain the home
and will live in it. It is proposed to pay
the grant as soon as my department is
satisfied that the home will be bought or
built and lived in by the married couple.
We appreciate that there will be many
young people who will wish to know in
advance of entering into a commitment
to acquire a home whether they are
eligible for the grant and, if so, the
Qapproximate amount of the grant they may
expect to receive. It is my intention to
arrange Australia-wide distributiion of a
pamphlet that will answer most questions
on who is eligible, what homes are eligible,
,--&gt; what are acceptable savings and tiow the
grant will be calculated, and give advice on how to complete the application form.
Officers of my department will also be
instructed to supply the maximum feasible
amount of information in response to enquiries.
However, as honorable members
will understand, it will be impracticable
to determine the amount of acceptable
savings and of the grant payable to an
eligible person in advance of entry into
a contract to buy or build the home or
the commencement of its construction.
Offices are being established in each capital
city under the charge of regional directors.
I wish to add that it is my intention
that the scheme be administered as sympathetically
as the bill permits. I do not
pretend that, in the time we have had to
examine the ramifications of the -scheme, we
may not have overlooked some minor
aspects. Partly to cover the unforeseen
but also to permit the sympathetic treatment
of unusual cases, the bill, as already
mentioned, has been drafted to give substantial
discretionary powers to the secretary
of my department and his delegates
in administering the scheme. I am quite
satisfied that these discretionary powers,
similar in most respects to those of the
director-general and his delegates under the
Social Services Act, are necessary to permit
the smooth and effective introduction of
the scheme. I believe this bill will encourage
young people to save and so make
a useful contribution to assisting young
married persons to acquire a home of their
own. Accordingly, I commend it to the
House. Debate ( on motion by Mr. Whitlam)
adjourned.
BY AUTHORITY. A. J. ARTHUR. COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.
ON
, DSTATES GRANTS ( Science Laboratories and
Technical Training) BIll 1964
3) SECOND READING
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 7th May, 1964.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 11.181.-1 move-
That the bill be now read a second time.
This bill will carry into effect a promise
,-de by the Government that, if returned
Jpower, it would provide annual amounts
of œ 5,000,000 for the provision of science
buildings and equipment in all secondary
schools, government or independent, without
discrimination, and similar amounts of
000,000 annually for State technical
JIcation. Both grants are to be made
under the powers conferred by section 96 of
the Constitution, and State governments
have agreed to be the channel whereby
amounts will be paid to independent schools.
In the case of the grant for the provision
of science buildings and equipment in
secondary schools, honorable members will
recall that on 5th March last a statement
was made by my colleague in the Senate and
also read by me in this House giving details
of the manner in which these grants were
to be made, and it is therefore unnecessary
to enlarge at length on the proposal. On
that occasion, schools which were eligible
5941/ 64. for assistance, and which were seeking assistance,
were invited to make application as
soon as possible. Up to the closing date
for applications to be considered for assistance
in the year 1964-65, which was set
as the 21st April, some 410 complcted
questionnaires had been received from independent
schools, and a further 96 completed
forms have since come in. So there has
been a very wide response.
Since the original statement, the personnel
an~ d terms of reference of the committee set
up to advise the Government on standards
of science buildings and equipment for independent
schools and on particular projects
submitted by these schools have been
announced and the committee has commenced
operation. In the nature of the
detailed examinations required for each
project, it may take some little time before
all grants for 1964-65 can be approved.
Excellent co-operation -has been received
from the authorities responsible for independent
schools, who are in process of
setting up committees of advice in each
State. 
I think we have seen enough already to
indicate the substantial size of the programme
in front of us, and the great need
for improvement in the science facilities of
many independent schools, which have been
struggling along endeavouring to teach
science, often under severe difficulties.
The magnitude of the problem means, of
course, that even with the substantial funds
we have made available, many schools will
have to wait some years for assistance. This
may have some compensating advantages
because many schools will require a good
deal of time to plan in full detail the
facilities best suited to their needs.
Honorable members will observe that
in the First Schedule to the bill the amount
appropriated for science laboratories and
equipment is œ 4,952,900. The remaining
sum required to bring the total to
œ 5,000,000 is œ 47,100 and this is the share
of schools in the Australian Capital Territory
and the Northern Territory, which will
be separately appropriated in the forthcoming
Budget. It will be recalled that the method chosen
to divide the money between government
schools and non-government schools is first
by obtaining from the Commonwealth
Statistician the numbers of secondary school
pupils enrolled in government schools and
the numbers of secondary school pupils
enrolled in non-government schools and
dividing the total amount of œ 5,000,000 in
proportion to those numbers throughout
Australia, and, secondly, allotting the sum
available for government schools to the
various State Governments in proportion to
the populations of the States as certified by
the Statistician. On this occasion, the total
sum available to non-government schools
will also be divided in an identical fashic
although in future years it will prove de\,)
able, from time to time, to adopt a more
flexible division between non-government
schools in the States, depending upon the
urgency of the need as revealed by investigation
of school applications.
Splitting the funds available on t,.
formula I have given will yield the following
results for 1964-65:-
SCIENCE BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS.
DIVISION BETWEEN STATES AND TERRITORIES.
GovernmentSIndependent Schools.
State. Schools. Total.
Catholic. Other. Total.
New South Wales 1,355,000 377,700 121,700 499,400 1,854,400
Victoria 1,022,600 237,900 139,100 377,000 1,399,600
Queensland 524,200 109,900 83,300 193,200 717,40"
South Australia 337,700 60,300 64,200 124,500 462,2t
Western Australia 258,500 58,400 36,900 95,300 353,80%,
Tasmania .120,900 25,100 19,500 44,600 165,500
All States 3,618,900 869,300 464,700 1,334,000 4,952,900
Australian Capital Territory and
Northern Territory 34,400 9,900 2,800 12,700 47,11
3,653,300 879,200 467,500 1,346,700 5,000,000
Discussions with the States as to the
avenues for expenditure of amounts available
to them are still in process, but from
the plans put forward so far, and from the
amounts of money being made available by
the Commonwealth in relation to amounts
previously spent by the States. I believe
that the new grants are going to have an
immensely stimulating effect on the teaching
of science in schools throughout the. country.
Emphasis on the significance of this is hardly
necessary. There are two ends to be served. The
first is to raise the general level of education
in a society which is becoming increasingly
dependent upon the scientific use of resources.
The second is the special education
necessary for those young people who
are to take up scientific or technological
careers of all sorts, and who must come
forward in increasing numbers, and must
have an ever-deeper understanding of
science both theoretical and applied. 
The new grants will enable States, as we
have already seen from preliminary plans,
to undertake new and imaginative projects
for raising the standards of the best students
and preparing them for work at tertiary
level; and this development will, I am sure,
be paralleled in the private school systems.
Coupled with the opportunities for the most
talented young people to prolong their
schooling through the new Commonwealth
secondary scholarships, I believe that this
plan opens a new era for the development of
scientific education in this country, in an
age when all advanced countries are putting
great emphasis on the application of science
to development and welfare.
Turning now to the grants for buildings
~ Ad equipment for use in technical training,
the split-up in the Second Schedule will
indicate the entitlement for each State. We
had hoped that before the introduction of
-this bill the Committee on the Future of
ertiary Education under the chairmanship
-of Sir Leslie Martin would have reported,
and that we would have been in a position
to take into account those of its recommendations
that may affect the area of
technical and technological education.
There is, however, no difficulty at all in
1964-65 in carrying out the intentions of
the Government with respect to this grant,
which will be spent for any purpose in the
fields of the training of tradesmen, technicians
and technologists agreed between the
Commonwealth and each individual State.
:) There is no intention on the part of the
ommonwealth to exercise a close supervision
over the States either in the field of
science buildings and equipment or in the
field of technical education, provided that
we are satisfied that in both cases expendi-
&gt; ire by the Commonwealth is in addition
1--to, and not in substitution for State expenditure;
and the State Governments have
readily agreed to this proviso. The method
of procedure will be a simple one, involving
agreement in general between Commonwealth
and States as to the type of project
upon which expenditure is to take place,
notification by the States within that general
agreement of the particular projects to be
undertaken, and agreement by the Commonwealth.
Thereafter, construction can proceed at
speed, without detailed supervision by the
Commonwealth. Examples of the type of
project which will be assisted are the very
substantial expansion of the Hobart Technical
College and the Central Technical
College in Brisbane. A wide range of
courses will benefit from this expenditure,
which I might say will represent a very
substantial increase indeed in the size of the
technical education building programme in
the various States; and the moneys available
for producing skilled tradesmen, technicians
and technologists will be greatly augmented.
New ground is being broken in both the
scientific and technical fields, and it is
invigorating to see the readiness with which
all sections of the educational field have
responded to the offers of assistance and
the fresh thinking which has already been
engendered. My hope and I am sure the
hope of all honorable members is that
Commonwealth moneys can with great benefit
be used to stimulate activities which could
not be afforded previously by either State or
independent schools, and that teaching of
science and training of skilled young men
and women will be greatly improved.
Debate ( on motion by Mr. Calwell)
adjourned.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS PM. No,, o6!
DEVTLOPMENT OF NOCRT \ Nf ATUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Min.... ister. the_. Hon. ir obert Menzies
Today the Prime Min. ster and Commonwealth Ministers
met with the Premiers of Queensland and Western Australia to
discuss means of achinvij.: Lg closer co-operation in the development
of Northern Australia. The Comonweal c Mini. sters in attendance
were Mr. McEwen, Mr. Holt, Senator Sir William Spooner and Mr.
Barnes. The Premiers expressed their full support for the
action taken recently by the Cormmonwealth to make the examination
of Northern Development problems the special responsibility of
the Minister for National Development, and for this purpose, to
establish a new Northern Division within his Department.
It was agreed that this arrangement provided the most
appropriate machinery upon which to develop closer co-operation
and co-ordination of activities between the two States and the
Commonwealth, including the Northern Territory.
The three Governments have alreoady demonstrated vigorous
support for Northern Development and are currently engaged in
projects in the area involving very large sums of money. These
projects have been developed more or less ad hoc.
They include beef cattle roads in northern parts of
Queensland Western Australia and the Northern Territory, the
reconstruction of the Mt. Isa railway, port development in the
Kimborleys area of Western Australia the brigalow lands development
scheme, and the first stage of the Ord River project. These
together involve expenditure, by the Conmonrwealth and the States,
of approximately œ 65 million.
In considering future action, the Ministers agreed that
it was desirable for the three Governments to develop continuing
liaison arrangements. It was agreed that the est: blishment of the
Northern Division of the Commonwealth Department of National
Development provided the means for the development of continuing
liaison between Co: mmonwealth officers and officers of the States
of Queensland and Western Australia. The task of the officers
concerned will be to study all aspects ofrnrthorn development
for the purpose of assisting Ministers in determining what ought
to be done to develop the north, how it should be done and the
assessment of priorities. The manner in which the task would be
approached would, of course, need to remain flexible to meet
changing circumstances. The Ministers agreed that appropriate Commonwealth and
State Ministers would neat together from time to time to review
progress in Northern Development, to co-ordinate thinking, and give
directions to those who will be required to investigate particular
proposals. As a starting point, the Northern Development Division,
in co-operation with State Officers, will prepare an assessment
of the progress inde with projects now in hand and of those that
might warrant consideration in the future. This document, which
will include some qualitative and quantitative assessment of / 2 
-2-
particular propsls, ;; ll assist i4nI Inidste. rcsi ding what
steps ought -next lo be takc. CI'i-ate NorI'tiern Development.
As part of the contInuing arrangerient for co-operation
between Couno-onweaelth an( A State o:: icials, the Pre. liers have
each nominated a Senior State Official, as Liaison Officer with
the Connuonweaith in Northern Development
The Queonslond officer is to be Sir J2uos Holt
Co-ordinator-Generl of Public Wrks, and Westarn Austi'alia
has nominated Mr. Parker, Director of Engineering.
CANBERRA, 7th May, 1964. 



641F-1 1
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 32/ 1964+
OVERSEAS T MIERARY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
I am now in a position to announce the following
details of my Journey overseas in connection with the meeting
of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London in July
14+ th JuneDate of departure from Australia
l6th-l9th June Visit to Israel
l9th-2Oth June
2lst-3Oth June
June to
16th July
18th July En route to the United States
via Rome
In the United States
In the United Kingdom
Arrive back in Australia
In Washington, I will have discussions with the
President of the United States on Wednesday, 21+ th June, and
with other members of the Administration on that day and the
following day. In London I will attend the Prime Ministers'
meeting between the dates of 8th and 15th July.
My wife will accompany me. My private Secretary,
Miss L. H. Craig, and Sir John Bunting, Secretary to the Prime
Minister's Department, will also be with me.
CANBERRA, 13th May, 1964+. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RIGHT HONOU ALo. 3I ROBI: T iMEvNZIZS
IN THE HOUSE OF T1LP1ESENTATIVES
ACADEMIC SALARIES
Honourable members will recall that last year,
when announcing the Government's programme of aid for
universities during the 1964-66 triennium, I foreshadowed
the establishment of an Inquiry to advise the Government on
the levels of academic salaries which could appropriately be
adopted by the Coionwrealth for the purpose of calculating
recurrent grants for universities.
We have now reached certain decisions about this
Inquiry. It will be conducted by Mr. Justice Eggleston of
the Commonwealth Industrial Court and of the Supreme Courts
of the A. C. T. and Norfolk Island.
The Government will appoint two assessors whose
function will be to assist the Inquiry with expert advice and
analysis based on a special knowledge of universities and
government interests in the subject. I have written to the
Chairman of the Vice-Chancellors Committee and to the President
of the Federation of Australian University Staff Associations,
inviting them to submit jointly a panel of three names for
the Government to consider when appointing the assessor with
special knowledge of the universities interest. The other
assessor will be a person with experience in government service.
The terms of reference of the Inquiry are
To advise the Government on the standard
salary or range of salaries for a professor and the
standard salary range for a reader or associate
professor which the Inquiry considers should be
adopted as a measure of academic salaries to be
used by the Australian Universities Commission
for the purpose of recommending grants to be
made to universities, including the Australian
National University, for recurrent expenditure.
It is our intention that the Inquiry should
proceed in an atmosphere of informality and without being
given a statutory basis. It will thus dispense with sworn
evidence, verbatim records and public hearings. Actual procedure
will be a matter for decision and announcement by Mr. Justice
Eggleston. In due course, the Inquiry will be comnnunicating
with interested parties to invite them to submit views in writing.
I would remind honourable members that the Commonwealth
fully accepts that salaries paid in a State university
are, and must remain, ultimately a matter for that university
and its State Government. The basic purpose of the present
Inquiry is to provide guidance for the Commonwealth and, as
already announced, its findings will be applied retrospectively
to 1st January, 1964 in relation to recurrent grants offered
by the Commonwealth to States for their universities. The
Commonwealth will also adopt the findings as a basis for its
recurrent grants to the Australian National University from the
same date. 



NOT TO BE PtYBL ISHEDt BROADCAST OR CABLED P.!../ 33/ 1964
BEFORE 0030 HOURS FRIDAY, 15TH MAY.
STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THlE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES, KT, CH, QC, MP
I announce that the Governor-General, His
Excellency the Right Honourable Viscount De L'Isle, V. C.,
K. St has received The Queen's
permission to relinquish the office of Governor-General in the Aust.
autumn of 1965. Although his retirement is still some time
away, the Governor-General and I have each felt it to be
desirable that some public indication be given now to His
Excellency's intention to retire, so that, as and when
necessary, he may lay his plans for the future. He will,
subject to his period of leave in the United Kingdom between
S June and August, carry out his full duties as Governor-
General until the time of his retirement.
The Government received the news of His
Excellency's retirement with great regret. It would have
wished, if circumstances had permitted, to arrange an
extension of His Excellency's appointment so that he
might continue for a further period of years with the work
he has so well and with such a high sense of duty carried
out as Governor-General of Australia. His Excellency's
retirement conforms, however, with the understanding which
0 he had with the Government at the time of his appointment,
to the effect that he would be unable to accept office
for a period of more than four years.
Lord De L'Isle came to Australia with his wrife,
the late Viscountess De L'Isle, in mid-1961.
CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. V+/ 1964+
NEW ENGLAND NEW STATE MOVEMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister ( Sir Robert Menzies) and the
Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the Country Party ( the
Rt. Hon. J. McEwen) today received a deputation from the
New England New State Movement comprising the President?
Dr, P. A. Wright, and the Campaign Director, Mr. U. R. Ellis,
The purpose of the Deputation was to put again
to the Prime Minister and Mr. McEwen the case for the creation
of new States in the Commonwealth.
The Prime Minister offered to take the matter up
with the Premiers of the States at the Premiers' Conference
to be held early next year. He asked the New England New
State Movement, in collaboration with other State Movements,
to prepare a written statement of their case which the Prime
Minister will circulate to Premiers and list for discussion
at the Conference.
CANBERRA, 21st May, 1964+. 



FOR JERESS P -M 35/ 2.6-
ANZAC JUBILEE PILGRIMAGE TO GALLIPOLI
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister ( Sir Robert Menzies) announced
today that the Government had decided to make a grant of
œ C20,000 to the Returned Servicemen's League to assist the
League with its plans to mark the Jubilee of Anzac, which
falls next year, with a pilgrimage to Gallipoli,
" This is an enterprise in which every Australian
can take pride" said Sir Robert. " The Commonwealth Government
is pleased to endorse the plans of the Returned Servicemen's
LTeague for a pilgrimage of the original Anzacs",
The Government believed that those taking part
in the pilgrimage should be in a position to meet their own
fares and other expenses. It was recognised, however, that
there were some Who should obviously be included in the party,
but who would bc unable to do so without some financial
assistance. It had therefore been decided to make a grant
of œ C20,000 to the R. S. L. so that it could assist such people.
The Prime MinistQr said that the Government
believed that it was very appropriate for the Returned
Servicemen's League to attend to the arrangemonts for the
pilgrimage. All enquiries regarding this matter should
therefore be addressed to the R. S. L.
CANBERRA, 22nd May, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. NO. 36/ 1964
FOUNTAIN IN CHIFLEY SjUARE, SYDNEY
COM4ONWEALTH CONTRIBUTION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister said today that the Commonwealth
Government would contribute 5,000 towards the cost
of erecting an appropriate fountain in Chifley Square,
Sydney, fronting the Common. realth Centre Building, Chifley
Square is the open area created by the intersection of Hunter
Street and Elizabeth Street Extension and was recently so
named by the Sydney City Council in memory of the late
Right Honourable J. B. Chifley, a former Prime Minister of
Australia. The Prime Minister said that the Lord Mayor of
Sydney had asked that the Commonwealth contribute along with
the Sydney City Council and others to the cost of a fountain
worthy of this important site. This the Commonwealth is
happy to do.
CANBERRA, 26th May, 1964. 



6 4/ 0
FOR PRESS P. M. No. r7/ 1264
DEATH OF MR. NEHRU
Tribute by the prime Minister, the Rt. Hgn. Sir Robert Menzies
This is a significant date in history. It marks
the close of the life of one of the most remarkable men of our
time. Mr. Nehru was the maker of modern India. He had
survived, with a singular balance of mind, both hardships and
successes. He occupied a place in the hearts and hopes of his
hundreds of millions of people which it will not be easy for
any successor to attain. His great gifts and his unceasing and
positive interest in world affairs gave him a notable standing
in world negotiations and conferences.
When the Commonwealth Prime Ministers meet in
London in July, it wil1l be difficult to realise that he has
gone, and that we shall see and hear him no more.
CANBERRA,
27th May, 1964. 



MAYORAL DINNER, KEW, VICTORIA
O3TH MAY. 1964
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Mayor, Councillor Ryan and Parliamentary Colleagues and
Ladies and Gentlemen You know, these toasts to Parliament are always
dubious affairs never more dubious than tonight. Here's this
wretched fellow, O'Brien ( Laughter) who has masqueraded for many
years as a friend of mine; he sandwiches me between himself and
Arthur Rylah who speaks after me. This, I venture to say, is a
dirty football trick ( Laughter), characteristic of the Tigers.
( Laughter). Oh, you neednet be too perky about this. I've seen
a few odd things done by Hawthorn, but still,. o.... You noticed,
though didn't you, that in the middle of a good deal of propaganda
against the Commonwealth, to which I am accustcmed, he came back,
time after time, to his real grievance which is that Geelong were
able to buy a player from West Australia and that now some other
team I don't know which is subject to the Coulter Law, and
is going to buy another player, but his team, the Tigers have
fallen so far in public and footballing esteem they couldntt afford
to buy half a rover, That this is the thing that works in his
wain was quite obvious tonight because in the middle of a bit of
high-falutin' about Western Australia and so on, he kept coming
back to the real substance of his grievance. Now all I can tell
you, Sir, is that my team this afternoon won its second match for
the year by one point ( Laughter, applause) and this delighted me
while at the same time faintly surprising me,
Now I will resist this temptation to instruct
my young friend there, OBrien.... I must interrupt myself. I have
a Secretary who gives me a not-e when something is going to happen
and when they referred to him they had in brackets after his
name " solicitor". How right they were, ( Laughter) But I am
accustomed to this. If I gc to the Melbourne Town Hall somebody
gets up and makes a pcwerful speech about the injustice to Victoria
and my only comfort is that when I am in Sydney which I am, not
infrequently, earnest-looking men of high status in the community
say, " You know, it's a terrible thing the way this Government of
yours is run by the Victorians. Why dont we have more men from
Sydney in the Government?" and I have to say to them, " Well, why
don't you send them in?" so I am not unaccustomed to this.
But I have been very interested tonight because
here I am sitting with two people on my right who are members for
the East Yarra province and nobody among you except the very
venerable, like Bill Dickinson, will remember that I was once the
member for East Yarra, and by Jove I know more about how I became
the member for East Yarra than most of you will ever know because
I stood for East Yarra in a frolicsome moment, being then a
barrister with a good deal of business, and in those days nobody
had a party nomination you just nominated yourself and you went
around and you prayed that you might get a few supporters. Of
course, rightly or wrongly the great men of the Victorian
Government have now made, I believe, voting compulsory, but in
those days it was voluntary. About 14,000 votes were cast in an
electorate of 90 000 and therefore you had to go out and see
whether you could pick up enough of them to win.
Now, I an told there are no press here and
therefore I can admit to the most brutal violation of the
electoral laws because when I stood, I had to get somebody, a
/ 2 
2-
great friend of mine, to act as my secretary, and then we engaged
one or two gentlemen in different corners of the electorate to go
around and do a bit of canvassing. They were paid practically
per capita. ( Laughter) I had 56 meetings, the largest of which
at the Hawthorn Town Hall, was 56 people and the smallest of which,
at Glen Iris, was four, two of whom were on my staff. ( Laughter)
That little escapade quite unsuccessful as it turned out
because a relative of his defeated me by 2 to 1, cost me œ 1,200.
Oh, these were the days.
Then, some months later, there was a byelection
and I stood again, and being a little browned-off after 56
meetings and four people including the staff, I decided I would
have 8 meetings. My entire campaign cost me œ 90 and I won by
2 to 1. Now there may be a lesson in this. I don't undertake
to say what it is, but that's how it happened and that's how I
became the member for East Yarra. Thirteen months later I left,
voluntarily, and stood for the Lower House, After that, all my
troubles began. Really, Dick, when I look back on the Upper House,
my thirteen months there, it was wonderfulo Peace, perfect
peace in this dark world of sin. ( Laughter) It was absolutely
marvellous. It was only when I stepped across to King's Hall
and had a look at my colleagues in the Lower House being battered
from pillar to post, the conscience stirred in me, so I left the
Upper House and went into the Lower House and ever sinco then,
I have been in one kind of trouble or another, All except one.
This I always think about when I come out into my own place and
among my own people. You know, the electorate of Kooyong.....
No doubt I have said this to you before, but I'll say it again.....
the electorate of Kooyong is one of the few in the Federal
Parliament that still retains its own nameo There has been a
Kooyong seat since 1901 and in the whole of that time, they have
had four members represent them,
The first was Knox who was the memuer for Kooyong
until about 1909 or something of that kind; the second was Sir
Robert Best who was always, when his party,. my party, was in
office, a Minister; the third was John Latham who represented
Kooyong with immense distinction for twelve years and was a
Minister at all relevant times and Deputy Prime Minister.
In 1934, I went up to become Attorney-General, member for Kooyong,
and I had a simple ambition at that time that I might be undetected
long enough to he member for Kooyong for twelve years which seemed
to be the ruling rate, and as you all now to your sorrow, I've been
member for Kooyong now for thirty years. ( Applause)
The one point I want to make is that in the case
of Best, Latham, Menzies, Kooyong was always represented by a
Minister, except when the other party was in power. In short,
Kooyong has the greatest record of any electorate in Australia
in insisting upon being represented by people who, rightly or
wrongly, achieved some status in the political life of the country.
All I want to say to you is I hope that will long continue.
( Applause) I don't mean by that that I hope I will long continue.
I have that philosophic state of mind now, that state of euphoria
which proceeds from the certain knowledge that whatever else
happens, I'm a certainty for a State funeral.( Laughter) I really
don't want to have a State funeral while I am still in Parliament
if that's the right way to put it I d rather like some day to
have a few years of private life. Private life is a tremendously
precious thing. A lot of you chaps don't realise that the
greatest sacrifice that a man makes who is heavily and continually
immersed in politics is that he loses his private life. It would
be fun, wouldn't it, to have a bit some day, but in the meantime,
0* a ao/ 3 
-3-
what I want to say to Kcoyong and Kew is the very heart of itI is
that I hope the standards will be kept high and that some successor
of mine will someday be able to stand here and be spoken about by
a successor of young O'Brien, if such a thing is conceivable
( Laughter) and be attacked for being a better Australian than he
is a Victorian. ( Laughter)
Well, I ought to say no more about that, I'm sure, but
before I sit duwn, I want to say this to you. It's quite true,
all these arguments go on; it's quite true that in a Federal
system there will always be the most intricate problems. You
can't treat every State the same, if you are dealing with a
country in which there ib an insistent demand for development
here or there or there. Of course youean't and nobody really
pretends that you can. Nobody from Victoria, no representative
of the Government of Victoria ever pretends for a moment that there
ought to be no more per capita spent in West Australia than
there is in Victoria. I've never heard it said. There is, of
course, an entirely inteliigible arguaent all the time as to
whether this doesn't go too far, whether perhaps a little adjustment
ought to be made, but what we must realise here is that we
do live in a Federal commvonixy and thac we live in a very great
continent, a tremendous continent, roughly the size of the United
States of America, ai. d that if this is in due course, as I believe
it will be, a great conntry and indeed a great power, then we
must not be too loca. in our vision. We must see the continent
as a whole ana do what we ui for the continent as a whole.
This, I am perfectly ctrtain. xepresernts the views of most
Australians who look outside CJhieir own bsckyard and who see this
place from Sydney to Porth from Hobart to Daiwino It's a tremendous
thing. Now, I'm going off once more, and it's no joyride,
in a fortnight s time to attend. a Prire Ministers' Conference in
London, but before I do that, I am going to the United States so
that I may have some r3al taiks with the new President of the
United States '* rhom I have met, of course, but whom I don't k1iow
as well as I kneu the late PresidenG Kennedy, This is tremerdously
important -chat we and the United States we, relatively small,
the United States vastly great should undei. stand each cther
not just with that after-dirner backø-slapping quality which is
so easy, but in true terms, speaking to each other as man to man,
country to country. This is ' f tremnendous significance. Indeed,
Sir, it is of vital significance to Australia and to Australia's
future. Therefore this is one of the number one tasks that I must
undertake. Then we are going to have a Prime Ministers' Conference.
Well, I first attended a Prime Ministers' Conference when I was
not a Prime Minister. You may say that's rather characteristic of
me, horning in, but the fact was that in 1935 there was a
Conference, and Mr. Lyons was then Prime Minister and he was ill
and he said to me, being also in London, would I go along and
represent him. I'll never forget it, at No. 10 Downing Street,
Ramsay MacDonald was the Prime Minister. George Forbes was the
Prime Minister of New Zealand, or as Ramsay called him, Forrbis.
Talk about Sassenachs. ( Laughter) Hertzog was there from South
Africa. I think that year Bennett was theie fbr Canada. Five of
us. We all spoke the same language, not only literally, but we
all felt rather the same way about the world's problems. It was
quite possible at that time to come out of a meeting adn say, " Here
is a joint view that represents the view of the British Commonwealth."
Now today, all this is gone. South Africa is out.
We have about twelve or thirteen new countries in the Commonwealth,
half a dozen of whom know nothing about democracy but have
dictators of their own, 4 4, 
It's no longer possible to sit there and talk as
we could even ten years ago about all the great things that we
have in common, the sense of democratic parliamentary existence,
the sense of equality before the law, the impeccability of the
law, these great traditions which still work I am happy to say,
in what I choose to call the Crown members ol the Commonwealth.
But today you have all sorts, an infinite variety from Makarios
in Cyprus and N1k'umah in Ghana through Ababaka Bulewa in Nigeria,
who is a great man who understands all thesa things to perfection,
down to Tanganyika with a frightfully good man like Nyerere and
Zanzibar which is, for all practical purposes, a communist
protectorate, but which is now engaged in some rather tenuous
alliance with Tanganyika,
I don't need to go right through the list the fact
is that we now present a group of people of almost infinite variety
and the last time I attended one of these meetings at Marlborough
House, no longer at No. 10 because it was too small, it was
staggering to see what quarrels could emerge between two new
members of the Commonwealth about matters which you and I would
regard as the commonplaces of' political life. In other words,
we now have a new and turbulant Commonwealth, quite diffferent; all
the old unifying elements in the case of half a dozen of us have
been weakened and th4. s Conference is going to determine, I believe,
whether a structure so made can, long continue or whether, if it
continues, it could continue except by laying down certain
principles of life and of unde~ rstanding which will be the true'
condition of membership,, Don't any o2 you envy me going to this Conference,
This will be, as I am perfectly certain, one of the crucial
conferences in the enti4-re history of the Commonweal. th. A:. 1 I can
say is that I will do my best. I have lived long enough to have
got over the habits of dogmatism. I know thai;' certaiii things
that seem to re to be inevitably right will not be so regarded by
other people and we must learn to live together., In fact, Mr.
Mayor, the whc-. 1,3 essence of your delightful party tonighv' is that
we are all here living togeth-r. W,, e don't need to learn to live
tog~ ther but there are hundreds of millions cf people in the
world with whom -we will have to learn to live together, and this is
not easy. This calls for immenise tolerance, for great patience,
for the most genuine attempts at understanding. Facing that kind
of probhlem as I do i~ n the next six weeks, I beg of you to be
excused from conducting an argument on another matter with a man
who i~ s a close and valued friend of mine., He can save it until
next yaar. 



PM No. 39/ 196).
FOR PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
RESIGNATION OF THE MINISTER FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
SQe. months ago, Senator Sir ", illiam Spooner, Minister
for National Development and Leader of the Government in the Senate, and
Acting Prime Minister in September 1962, told me that, after an uncommonly
long, continuoes and arduous period of Ministerial service, he would like
me to agree that, at some convenient time towards the middle of this
year, he might resign from the Cabinet, while still continuing to serve
in the Senate. e discussed this at considerable length. I knew that
She had made great and patriotic sacrifices of his personal and
professional interests, and that he had every right to return to normal
family life. On the other hand, T was, as the head of the government,
conscious of my own natural desire to retain the services of a Minister
who had, with unsurpassed devotion and concentration of effort, achieved
so much in the establishment of a firm foundation for the great Snowy
Mountains Scheme, in the development of water resources along the Murray
and elsewhere, in the improvement of the coal mining and marketing
industries, in the encouragement of bauxite minmng, of uranium production,
of oil search, indeed of mineral development gancrally, particularly in
the North of Australia. His name will always be remembered in connection
with Northern Development, from the Ord River to the new beef ro'. ds of
Queensland. To these I must add his persistent activity in the field
of housing, in War Service Homes, and in the periodic negotiations of
Commonwealth-State Housing agreements, and in the provision of funds
for Building Societies. But, conscious and proud as I was of these notable
achievements, I did net feel able to deny his request. I felt, and feel,
that so long and sustained and successful an effort of public service
had earned him a period of private or semi-private life.
Accordingly, Sir William has today tendered his
resignation from the office of Minister for National Development. This
is a great loss to the Government. It is for me a real deprivation.
Our close association and friendship have been a source of strength to
me over the years. No Prime Minister could have had a more faithful
colleague, or one more devoted to the highest interests of the growth
of the nation.
CANBERPRA 2nd June, 1964. 
I received the following letter from Senator Sir William Spooner:
" My dear Prime Minister, I now formally tender my resignation to you as a
Minister of State. As you know I have had it in mind to do this for
some months past. After my lengthy service in Cabinet now in its
fifteenth year and permitting insufficient time to attend to my fown
personal affairs, I woula wish to be relieved of Ministerial duties
so that I could, under less continuous pressure, pay more attention
to my own professional and business interests.
0 I have been happy to have your understanding of my
desires and your agreement to permit me to give effect to them.
I know that I will miss the interesting work of my
portfolio and of Cabinet. I will however continue as a Senator
and be able to assist the Government in that capacity.
1 take pride in having been on3 of your M1inisters
for so long and in the friendships which I have made with you, our
Smutual inisterial colleagues, and so many others."
and have sent the following reply:
" Thank you for your letter of 29th May. I am
issuing a statement to the press in the terms which I attach; that
statement will, I hope, reasonably express my feelings on this
occasion. You carry with you, of course, my warmest friendship
and good wishes. As, in point of practice, it will be necessary to
have a formal letter of resignation from yourself to the Governor-
General and as there will be some Ministerial re-arrangements to
be made, I would be grateful if you would allow me to hold your
resignation for a few days before actually presenting it to His
Excellency. Kindest regards."
JUNE 2, 1964. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 18/ 1964
SENATOR GORTON TO BE ACTING MINISTER FOR
EXTLEANAL AFFAIRS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, announced
today that, during the absence overseas of the Minister
for External Affairs, the Minister for Works, Senator
Gorton, would act as Minister for External Affairs.
Mr. Hasluck will leave Australia tomorrow on a visit
to countries in South East Asia, returning on 21st June.
He will again go overseas on 29th June, to be in London at the
time of the Prime Ministers' Conference, and return on 19th
July. CANBERRA, 2nd June, 1964, 



FOR PBF&amp; SS P. m. 40o1964
RESIGNATION OF SIR WILLIAM SPOONER
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The front page story in the i'Sydney Morning
Herald" referring to the resignation of Sir William Spooner
is entirely false and in all its implications malicious,
The story states that " only two months ago he
refused Sir Robert's offer to appoint him Australian
Ambassador to Washington", and that I resented his " refusal".
This is completely untrue, since no such offer was made.
It was, I thought, pretty well understood in Cabinet
circles that Sir William had no ambitions to go to Washington.
In any event, I knew three months ago, when he first
approached me, that he wanted to secure relief from his
Cabinet work. It would have been very strange for meo, under
these circumstances, to have endeavoured to talk him into
taking on the exceedingly arduous labours of Ambassador
to Washington. The whole basis of this story is false.
Furthermore, the story is wickedly unjust to
Sir William Spooner. I would have thought that an honourable
man with fifteen years of continuous Cabinet service,
interrupted by very few holidays of any kind, might be
entitled to reach the conclusion that he would like to go
Lack to private life without being gratuitously pursued
by the groundless allegation that he had been dismissed.
CANBERRA, 3rd June, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 2Z1964
MINISTERIAL APPOINTMENTS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The following Ministerial appointments will be made
today Minister for Civil Aviation Senator Henty
Minister for National
Development Mr. David Fairbairn
Minister for Air Mr, Peter Howson
Minister for Customs and
Excise Senator K. McC. Anderson
Senator Paltridge will succeed Senator Spooner as
leader of the Government in the Senate.
The swearing-in ceremony will take place at 4.30 p. m.
today.
CANBERRA, June, 1964. 



FOR PRESS A? POI TMI', ENT OF ( GOV.'' RNr1ENT I P
Statement by -t ee Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robrt Menzies
The Prim-ie Minister has announced the appointment
of Mr. J. Aston as Government Taip.
1 0t"-June, 1 96JI
June, 1964. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 44/ 1964
LOAN COUNCIL AND PREMIERSI CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Arrangements have been made with the State
Premiers for a meeting of the Loan Council and the Premiers'
Conference in Canberra on 2nd and 3rd July. Mr. McEwen, as
Acting Prime Minister, will preside at the Premiers' Conference
and Mr. Holt, as Treasurer, will be Chairman of the Loan
Coijncil. CANBERRA, 11th June, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. 45/] 92N
VISIT TO ISRAEL
It is announced that the Prime Ministerts
departure for overseas, arranged for next Sunday, 1i+ th
June, is being postponed. Postponement is on medical advice.
As a result, the Prime Minister's proposed
official visit next week to Israel is cancelled.
The Govornrient of Israel has been informed and
the Prime Minister has conveyed personally to the Acting
Prime Minister of Israel ( Mr. Abba Eban), and through him
to the President his great disappointment at not being able
to visit Israel at this time.
The report of the Prime Minister's medical advisers
is as follows " Sir Robert Menzies is confined to
bed with a recurrence of an abdominal
disorder and is unfit at present to undertake
overseas travel. He will be required to
remain in bed for observation and treatment
for some days."
CANBERRA, 12th June, 1964. 



FOR PRESS FLOOD RELIEF
Statement by the Prime Ministera the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menziesi
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, has
sent the following telegram to the Premier of NewSouth
Wales " I HAVE LEARNT WITH CONCERN AND REGRET
OF THE DISASTROUS FLOODS OCCURRING IN NEW
SOUTH WALES. IF YOU FEEL THAT THE FACILITIES
OF ANY COMMONweALTH DEPARTMENT OR AUTHORITY
COULD AE OF PRACTICAL ASSISTANCE TO YOU IN THE
IMMEDIATE PERIOD WE STAND READY TO DO WHAT
WE CAN. I AM ASKING THE MINISTER FOR NATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT TO BE AVAILABLE FOR CONSULTATION
WITH YOU IN THIS REGARD."
CANBERRA 12th June, 1964.
The Premier of N. S. W. has asked for Commonwealth assistance
towards the relief of personal distress and the Commonwealth
will, of course, make this available in the usual way. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 46/ 1+
CABINET APPOINTMENTS
Statemen jthe Prime Minister, the Pt. 11cn, fir Robert
1i4enzieos
The following members of the Ministry are
appointed to positions in the Cobinot
The Hon, A. S. ulrme. 0 Postmster-General
The THon. David Fairba-' n Minister for National
Developmen.
The Mini. ster for Labour and National Service,
the Hon. William YcMchon, will be oppointed Vice-President
of th-, xEcutivo Council in succeasion to Senator the
Hon. Sir William 3oponor,,
( BACKGROUN'ID NOTE Tie Vice-President of the Executive
Couincii presi-ds at meetings of the Council in the absence
of the Governor-General0 These metings, under the
circumstances, are most frequenly held in Sydney and
there are renons of practical convenience thorcfore in
eppointing a Sydney Minister to the position
CAN BERRA,
13th June, 1964. 



64/ 067
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 47/ 1964
EXCHANGE OF MESSAGE3
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, last week
sent the following message to the Acting Prime Minister of
Israel, Mr. Abba Eban " You will have heard from your Ambassador
that, on medical advice, I am required to cancel
my visit to Israel next week. This gives me
personally and officially the greatest possible
regret, I would like you to know how grateful I am
for the invitation extended to me by your Prime
Minister and for the arrangements which you and
your colleagues had made to receive me. I am
most disappointed not to be able to visit Israel
at this time. I would like you to convey my
personal regrets also to the President of Israel,
Mr. Zalman Shazar."
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Monzies, has received
the following message from Mr. Abba Eban, Acting Primo Minister
of Israel " While I am naturally disappointed by
your inability to be with us this week, my first
thought and that of my colleagues is for your rapid
restoration to complete health. Please accept
Israel's best wishes for your recuperation together
with an expression of hope that we may have the
privilege of receiving you in our country in the
near future."
CANBERRA, 17th June, 1964. 



PRIME MINISTER'S DEPARTMENT.
CANBERRA, In replqwie No. 62/ 2396
24th June, 1964.
MEMORANDUM TO ALL DEPARTMENTS:
The Budget Session of Parliament is expected to begin
Oarly in August. Department; and Authorities are reminded
of the Prime Minister's wish to have their statutory reports
available to Members and Senators for consideration before the
commencement of the Estimates debate.
O hYour co-operation is again requested in ensuring
he production of reports in time for the Estimates debate, or
if this does not prove possible, in the preparation of interim
3tatements. For your information, the discussion at the
committee stage of the Appropriation Bill the Estimates
debate) is likely to commence towards the end of August.
The Prime Minister has directed that this Department
should make the necessary arrangements for tabling reports.
When reports are ready for tabling it would be appreciated if the
lollowing procedure could be followed:-
Four copies of the report to be sent to the
ParliamentaryLiai3on Officer, Prime Minister's
Department, Canberra, with a request to arrange tabling.
An additional 226 copies to be addressed to the
Parliamentary 1, iai: ion Officer, Prime Minister's
Department, Room M. 103, Parliament House,
Canberra. These copies are required for distribution
to Senators, Members, the Parliamentary Library and
the Press.
When reports are received, the Parliamentary Liaison
Officer will arrange the date of tabling with the relevant Minister
in the House and the Senate and prepare the formal tabling
statements. He will also arrange distribution to the Press with
the Government Public Relations Officer.
Any report which is tabled may subsequently be ordered
by the Parliament to be printed. In having reports prepared
for tabling Departments and Authorities should therefore observe,
where possible, the Parliamentary Printing Committee's requirements.
If they are in any doubt about these they should consult the
Government Printer. ( P J aer)
Acting-SeAV-t'a'ry. 



FOR PRESS WHITE HOUSE LUNCHEON 64/ 0 7
TEXT OF SPEECHES
Following are the texts of speeches by Presicent Johnson
and the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, at lunch on
24th June at the !" hite House, Washington.
PRLSIDIENT JOHNSON
" Mr, Prime Minister, Mr. Chief Justice, My Friends
This is a delightful and very happy and heartwarming occasion
for me today.
It is one to which I have looked forward with great
anticipation. We here in Wasington know our guest as a good and great
friend of America
I hope that Sir Robert and all of his countrynaen know
equally well that the President is both an old and good friend
of Australia : ind a very great admirer of the Australian peoplea
As many of my personal friends and associates have heard
me say through the years, I lost at least a part of my heart
to the Australian people a long time ago.
I v'ill never forget their warmth when I wac statiuned.
there in the early and anxious days of the war in the Pacif: c,)
and just to illustrate why our guest of honor has been Prime
Minister for 17 years and why he has beon an astute and expert
parliamentarian for more than 35 ye: ars, before we came
downstairs I was telling him of the graciousnesj of a great
lady whose name I could not remember, but with a very slight
description of her qualities and her assistance to me during
the early dnys of the war, the Prime Minister, without any
difficulty, called her name and located her and brought
back to my memory many other gorid things obout her.
I long for the day to come, and hope it can come between
now and November, when I will have my constituency as well In
hand and know them as well as he doe-,
Some of you may be familiar with the accounts of one
apisode that occurred when the plane in which I was riding as
a member of the Navy was forced to land away from our Base.
Several writers later filed stories that my contacts with
Australians in the area indicated that I might have had a
promising political future down under.
I can only say that in considering his extraordinary
success for many years, the Prime Minister obviously has much
to teach the elective officials in America, and I am so proud
that I have been privileged to sit and visit with him and to
learn from him.
We are grateful, Sir, that you honor us with this visit
this year, We remember with particular favor your visit to our
country last year when you sat here at this chair by the side
of our beloved President John Kennedy.
At that time you made a statement which I think expresses
so well the feeling between our lands.
Then you said, " We work for the same kind of free world." / 2 
2
In the geography of frecdom, all areas and all corners and
all regions of the free world are important, and they are all
vital. For us here in the United States it has been a source of
great strength to know that there stands a nation so dedicatei
to freedom's defense as Australia.
I don't know when a news announcement has given our
country more comfort or been received with greater satisfaction
than the announcement made las week by your Minister c'l
External Affairs concerning the additional contribution that
the people of Australia were ready and anxious to make to
contribute men and materials and equipment along the side of
our men who are now fighting for freedom in South Vietnami,
So we are proud and we are very grateful, Mr. Prime Minister,
to have you stand by our si. e.
We are glad to have you stand with us as members of ANZUS.
V o are happy to work with you in the United Nations.
We are assured to know that you are with us wherever
freedom is in danger.
Australia and the United States do really, truly, as
you say, woirk for the same kind of free world.
I am sure that brief as your visit now must be, this
frienly meeting with you, will help us to work together in
even closer understanding,.
I am grateful that you have come here.
Out di3cussions have been fruitful,
Our understanding has been improved,
My desire to return your visit has increased, if that is
possible, So to my good friends who have assembled here v. ith us
today in this house, I should like to ask you to join with me
in a toast to Sir 1obert M-enzies, The Prnie Minister of
Australia, and to the enduring bonds of friendship and freedom
between our lands.
Mr. Prime Minister."
SIR ROBERT MENZIES
Mr. President, Chief Justice, and Gentlemen I have
been reminded by you, Sir, that last year I spoke in this room,
I think, in the presence of and as the guest of that great man,
the late President Kennedy, and I should not wish to begin
even the briefest of speeches without paying a tribute of
respect and affection to his memory.
But, Sir, the world goes on, and you now have the
responsibilities of this enormous office.
I think perhaps the one thing that prevents a man occupying
one of the very greatest offices in the world from becoming
subject to delusions about himself is that he is usually so
conscious of the task and of the responsibility that he has no
time left for showing off.
This is so true. 000 / 3 
-3-
You have this enormous responsibility, and you would be
perhaps surprised to know how many people, so many thousands
of miles away from you, and whether they would be on your
side or another in your own country, they pray for you and
wish you well in the discharge of this immense human
responsibility, And so, Sir, I am greatly honoured to be here as your
guest. There is another thing about it.
I am here as Prime Minister of Australia, a British
country. I myself am British, and some people might say
insistently so, but here we are in one place, at the one time,
When I saw you last time here, Sir, and you were
Vice-President, I was beginning to turn over in my mind . vhether
I shouldn't have a premature election, and I de. ided that
I should, Most people were confident that I would be beaten, but
I wono Now T don't know whether there is a moral in this,
Mr. President, but everybody I have spoken to so far in the
United States is confident that you will win.
I hope this is not a bac omen.
Now, Sir, I don't want to detain this distinguished
audience, but I think that it would be appropriat-, if you
don't mind, for me to say something about the position of
your great country in the world, and particularly in the
free worl, and in particular with us in Australia.
It is one of the issues of history, something that I
have referred to before today, that nations which have immense
power, and, therefore, acciumulate immense responsibilities,
are seldom terribly popular.
Great Britain, you know, was the Great Power in the
world in the 19th Century, and enjoyed a supply of epithets
of an abusive kind in Europe which has perhaps never been
equalled since,
Great Power doesn't give you great friendship.
Indeed, great gifts to other nations don't buy
friendship. Gratitude is a scarce commodity, and yet all great
nations, and none more so than yours, perhsps none so much
so as yours, have been conscious of responsibility and have
done things materially and spiritually for other countries
in the world, and very frequently have received small thanks
for it. That doesn't matter.
What matters is that these things are cone,
What matters is that people are given an opportunity
of standing on their own feet, of developing their own
national and individual characteristics.
This I am sure in the long run is a good thing for the
world. 
But mhen it comes to a country like Australia, well,
we are a small country,
I preside over a country which is about twice as large
in point of population, and perhaps ten times as large in
point of physical resources as the country which was presiled
over by Thomas Jefferson,
It is worth recalling becaus we go on as yor went on,
and we may some day in the wisdom of providence and by some
strength in our right hands ani courage in our own hearts
and minds be one of the great and powerful countries in the
world,. But that is a long way off.
What is present with us J. s that vwe have a relationship
with the United States which is not the rslationship between
a benefactor and a pensioner.
It is, I am happy to say, a proud relationship 06tween
friends, one immensely powerful and the other, ourselves,
much less powerful?
Why are we friends
People will say to me in a skeptial sort of mood,
" Yqs, o c-ours,, you keep in with tle United Statos be-ause
you want i. hem to defen. you."
This is said as if we regardel the problem of our defence
as something for somebody else to attend to, and for us to
neglect or ignore.
Don't you believe it for one momenta
Vde shall defend ourselves in Australia, whe . ever the
circumstances, to the very last gasp that we have, but we will
defeni ourselves with all the greater succoss if we know that
we have great friends like yourselves who will be defending
us or helping to defen?.-us not because there is some statutory
obligation, or not just because of some treaty between us,
but because we both heppen to believe in exactly the sane things,
the same attitudes of mind, the same patterns of behaviour,
the same great attributes of character and quality.
These things we have in common,
It is because vwe have them in common that we will defend
them in common.
Sir, there may be people around the world, I dare say
there are, who fall into the deplorable habit of thinking
that the United States should be regarded as a sort of
Gendarme to keep the peace of the world, and true it is that
you have accepted enormous responsibilities, but ion't you
think for one moment that in my country when we consider
problems of international peace and war we say " Lea-e it to
the United States".
We may be small, but we are friends, and it is a good
thing to have friends, great or small.
It is a good thing, above all other matters, to have
friends who are not going to resort to questioning when the
day of trial comes, but who will be there, and there for all
purposes of the survival of those things that you stand for and
that we stand for. 
I am always completely at home in this place, in this
city, always capable of having an argument with an American.
Not with the President.
I wouldn't dare to do that.
And not with the Chief Justice, althouoh I would enjoy it.
But with Dean Rusk, vwho I want to tell you at once,
I don't care what side you are on in politics, but Dean Rusk
is personr. gratissima with us in Australia.
But still capable of having an argument, of course.
It will be a poor day, won't it, when we can't
It would be a very poor day when little iustralia won' t
be able to summon up its traditional impudence by looking
at the big United States and saying, " What do you mean, you
big stiff This, of course, will happen.
You wouldn't belie-7e it, but there are people in my own
country who have been heard to make rude remarks about me,
and I don't mind that a scrap as long as they are in the
minority. But, Sir, I have enjoyed meeting you today.
I had met you before, but in a highly formal sense.
I am very glad to kn-w that from now on we will be able
to communicate with each other in terms of personal
friendship. I do hope you will be able to come to Australia, and I
believe that you want to come to Australia,
But whether you succeed in the near future or, as one
might say, in my time, or not, the fact remains that in'-
Australia you have friends, little friends, friends you may
chide, friends you may encourage, friends to whom you can hold
out all of the usual appurtenances of friendship which run from
chastisement to approval, but still friends, because I want to
make it clear to you that however small it is, the thing that
we do, we will always be foun, to do it because we know that
everything that matters for us, and everything that matters
for you, is at common risk in this strange world, and must,
therefore, be defended explained and defended in common,
Sir, I thank you very much, indeed, for your great
courtesy. I regret very much to find that your congress is under no
better discipline than my House of Parliament, and some of the
ones who were here whom I was hoping to persuade about
something or other have gone off, not to persuade or to be
persuaded but to vote.
So thank you very much. OO---
ISSUED BY The Press Secretary
to the Prime Minister. 



PRESS CONFERENCITH PPRTh1 IN ISTER_ _ SIR
ROB3E'.-T 1' ENZIE. õ , MJSTh. YJIAN EMNBASSYWPA.
SHINGTON~. DXC., U. SSOAQ
CorresuondensPresent : Mr. John Moses, Sydney Morning Herald
Mr. Alan Reid.) S. Tdney Daily Telegraph
Mr,, JoD Ate. ti Melbourne Herald Org.
Mr, David Mtthcw, Australian Associated. Press.
Mr. Bruce GrLani;.-Mlbourne Age
Mr. Jan Moffi-t. News Ltd. of 1-ustralia.
Mr. Henry Keys, ULP. I. Correspondent for
Austr-alian clients.
Q, There has lboon a lot of cJsw3ir n the Administration. in
recent days about ; eqeLi of ~ idtzade with Communist
China. Thtere has a-I. o beon dci.. olpairticularly about
sales by Australi. 9, Canada ,. nd Nco! j Z2ealand to Com-nunist China.
Did -this ccme up in youar talks?
A. No, it wasn't rais -d,
Q, The point of view tlhet ias been expressed here is that this
W ir giv4ng id and ccio'; to a potential enemy which Wishington
is positive may ona coay go ' to war-r in Pacific. Whiat is
your feeling?
You wrant me now i; o miake a S, tement about the ganeral position
in tb-c Pacific., of co,, u'_ se -wo hiavre danger-s in South-. East Asia,
We have been dreadfull ly exoc_, csed ty some of TUhem already.
But thi; s p.-ohlcm n. c. w of rd with t countries and
what ought to be lIi: s o' h c. n'dti~ which you deal
w it h. Idelli, this is a ol~ d one, 1 hiave nothing to i. dd to
it. AsI syit h ist tee vith me here.
Q. Would you characteiise yona2 meoeting w~ itha the President and
oter officials as working sessions o-a means of gettin
personal2ly a oqua-inted wit'-h t l-ii
S A, Oh, much more in t-ha e 5cof( It entegory, Yes,, Oh, I had met the
President Lefore, but cnly just in a muost formal way, and I
wanted to get to know him in an indivi) dual sense-, and that I
think succeeded very well.
Q. It seems to me that the toasts that were exchanged yesterday
at the luncheon, even reading them in the printed form, were
unusually cordial and warm.
A. Yes I think that that is quite true, 7 that wvas the feeling
thai we both. had, Ohn, f-Lom. that point of view it was
extremely useful. Then of course there were other people.
Dean husk, of course, is by way of being a very old friend of
mine now, and when we meet we just conduct a tour of the
relevant portions of -the world and exchange our ideas, and if
he has some more inforT. mation he gives it to me, But itts not a
working session. Each these hias been purely private
conversations. For a start when you are going -to add to the
supply of paper in the Chancer-ies there is always somebody
there writing it down. But tb. ere? s nobody there writing it
down this time, So we h-aven't added to any of the files.
Merely brought ourselves up to date. But that was the main
purpose here, purely personal one,, Then I'm going through to
Thndon too. It's a very good thaing to have some fresh
individual picture of your own of the people here who are
engaged in matters jointly -, vith the Uni-ted Kingdom and ourselves., 
2
Q. Sir, is the U. S. Administration satisfied with what Australia
is doing in South East Asia?
A. I believe so and everything that was said to me suggested that,
and suggested it with a great deal of enthusiasm, I mean it
was unsolicited and they were particularly pleased of course
with what we have been able to do acmittedly not very much
in South Vietnam because very naurally they sometimes feel
that everything is being left to them and these little bits of
assistance showing the flag in a practical way, accepting some
of the risks in common this has had a very big effect. I found
not a hint of complairt, and a good deal of satisfaction.
There was a time not so long ago wilon if you listened to the
unspoken words you could detect criticism about the size of our
own defence effort in Australia. Nothing of that this time
on the contrary, there has been very great satisfaction at
what we have been doing.
Q. Sir when you say that our co.. t. ribution there is not very great,
is there any likelihood cf Jt being increased?
A. Oh, there is no suggestion at present about tlhat No. It has
only recently been stepped up, as you know,
Q, Do you detect any change in th;; Amsrican line on Indonesia,
a slightly firmer line Lhi before? It seemed to me that some
time ago there was a rather ambivalent attitude towards
Soekarno?
Ao I think that that might f:-. r. ly have been said I was alert to
any signs of that, but I cdidi't find t; hem. Mind you, I was
dealing with the people like Mr, Rusk, Mro McNamara and so on,
who have never been singelasrly ambiguous onl this mutter
themselves, But I found i. n them and the President quite a
clear-cut realistic view as to what was going on.
Q. Did you find arything, Sir, to detract from the interpretation
of the ANZUS TMreay applied the Malaysian area?
A. Well, you remember, there having been some argument, I made a
speech in the House on this matter, very carefully, and
explained step by step wh.' t the position was. I enquired
yesterday, I knew that they had had the full text of it and
I just confirmed what I had previously been told by saying
to them " May I take it that what I said received the complete
agreement of your people", and th-io answer ' aJ " Yes." They
regard that statement as accurate, and I suppose, in a sense,
definitive. There it is. ( I was delighted to find that a
tape recording typed back admits of errors even here in the
city of efficiency, because I see that I am on the record as
having said that Dean Rusk was " persorn gratissimo") ( Laughter)
Q. Sir did you hear of Mr. Mikoyan's statement today in Djakarta
pledging support to Indonesia against Malaysia and suggesting
the possibility of Indonesia obtaining weapons more powerful
than those the British would have in the area?
A. Whose statement?
Q, Mr. Mikoyan's,
Ao No, No, I'm sorry. I have neither seen it nor heard it.
Qo Sir, did the subject of the TFX concern you during your
talks with Secretary McNamara? ./ 3 
-3-
A. No. Australia is taking a late delivery of these aircraft now.
It is a year late.
A. Yes. When these aircraft come in, they are always liable to
have adjustments made to them, in the first twelve months
particularly., le could take the first deliveries and make any
adjustments ourselves that we wanted to make in tne light of
experience, or by waiting for twelve months we could have the
benefit of all the adjustment work that was done here the
experience that would take place here, All our experts were
unanimously of the opinion that it was worth the twelve months'
difference in time to get the superior quality in the results
and that was the unanimous view. There was no argument about
it in Australia and I think it has been announced nasn't it,
that that's what we are going to d-o It didnt affect the
timetable otherwise the life of the Canberras and so on all
that was adequately provid.-d for, they thought, even on -he
year's late deliv'e.-y. In subs-ance it was a question of
doing our experimenting, doing our adjustment well. In a small
supply country like our own that's not as satisfactory as
waiting for a year and getting the benefit of everything that
occurs here. So that we'! have a slight delay but greater
efficiency in the results.
Q. Sir, did the questicn of Cyprus corie up at all in conversation
with the President? Heis very much ex3jcised by it at the
moment. I wondered if ha discussed it with you as a Commonwealth
statesman about what was once a Commonwealth problem.
A. No, no, no, I'm glad they didn't. I think that a few arguments
are going on between other parties I know when to keep out
of those a: rguments, If the time comes that the Commonwealth
has to say or do something about it that's a different matter,
But I've kept out of it here,
Q. In the exchange of Toasts, Mr. Prime Minister, there was
mention of the possibility of a Presidential visit to Australia.
Did you extend any specific invitation to the President?
A. Well, I told him that we would be delighted if he could come.
And that if he did come, we: would be delighted to make every
conceivable arrangement. In fact, I said that if the House
were not sitting, I would convene it for the purpose of his
visit, because I think it would be tremendously important.
He can't put a date to it; he genuinely would like to come.
I'm sure that he's contemplating the possibility in 1965, when
he's got throughhi. s present discontent. But nothing like the
fixation of a date, I told him that I thought the best
season of the year to come to Australia on a quick visit was
in our Autumn, or in other words, in the Spring here. But
I wouldn't be holding him to a firm promise to come or any
firm date but I'm sure that he would like to and I regard
it as a strong possibility that he will,
Q. How are you feeling, Sir Robert, if I may ask you? 9 a., o0 
A. Well, well, I havon't my normal supply of
nervous energy. I'm flat, but apart from that Itm
improving. I'm limiting my engagements as much as I.
can because because as I said, I wasn't supposed
to come for another ten days. I'm supposed to be
convalescing,
Q. Sir, can you reveal the name of the lovely lady that
was alos mentioned in the toast yesterday?
A. No, I can't. I can't. It's vary curious. I'm pretty
certain I identified her. But perhaps on the sketchy
information that the President gave me, I might have been
wrong, It would be a little embarrassing to quote a name,
and then have somebody rush along ond say, " The first
I've ever heard of it", But; Ill check up on tnis, and if
it turns out to be right, I'll let you know, but I won't
take. the risk of embarrabsing anybody at this rtage. It's
very amusing. 



THEF A1\ EfRICAN AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATION
YOiK, U. S. A.
SpDeec bthe Primre Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert MenzLe.
Now, I thioughit I would just like to say a littl'-3e to you
about an aspect or ipahaps two aspects, of 114ton~ betoa
our countries. It is far maore th'an a pos-;--randi-* al flour-ish to s y that
the United States and Austraiia are d'woted friends th-au~ s
elementary, vle all know that, wo know that this relalionshIil ljhas come
abutinwa ad n thiat it is no w, I ventur-e to Say, cna
of those tin-s we hor( 1y need -to 01, e1 suuoriderstepnd oach"
other, I-n tne interv al'S o f -i ~ ittle liveljy reci-rmination, we
like each other., we, havc great initerests in co~ Tm~ fl:
T. here ar-e ocyni-. s as I said the othaer dsy -at the White
House who thiink thiat we fl-ove a sort of cupjb oa love because we
look to you, th e United States of Araefr. rE tri protect us to be
our friend in times of ne-d. I su~ pp07a, t 0Cflfl-! i CQlyq ; a t t ha3t
is perfectly true2 but It is much m-ore, 0 Grue to ' Say t ve rA d
ourselves as uoncerned 4-11 ccio ot!-in rJ J~ ary tei_-ms Land in
civiñ L terms withi the Un-ited Stat es because we do hnappen to bo the'
sam,, e ki'Lnd of peopie and ' T7 do iaprif thiat'a no-t too weak a
, rord, to believe pasoionatle. y-in c. LiC samc -thing the same valuas,,
And when twro fri endly na~ cioris one gr. eat and one small
happon to ha,) ve L;[ Lis robust, fcitht in cor.-: n, I dionit thbii-k we need
to argue 2bout hoiw bbmg. cgi . er one is tho~ llpn th-e othe2 whnat
contr-ibution one imakas -to tiiis or the oth; er malkes to that,
Thre truth is that i* Ln our relaltions with you, not cnly1: are
thiey wonderful fro-m our point o f v4iew%, but tihey are reciprocal,
thoiy imTpor obli get ions onour p-.; rtbig 0lWhh ewl
at all. timoes honourably dischrge ard thre3fore -we are friend&amp; s',
I know of,-no c-ircum~ stan. ce that could conyiceivably arise
in the iworld that woiild ma-ke us ene-mies. ut do let ime repeat
scmething I have sai. d before today. You are tha grcatos, t power
inteworld and sometines in fact, perhaps reasonably L'rcquenty
you admit iJt, But you ar~ e the greatest power in th-e -w.. orld tkhe
greatest in physical. resour-ces thie greatest, wrhen it comes to the
point, in that moral fo-rce that can be exercised by a0 great and
civilised people,
And like all great powers in the history of the world, you
have made rather-more critics than friends, I was going to say
onemries, maybe. You. have becn &amp; ble to help scores of nations a
lo fpeople don't lilke being hielpe-d., Thecy takLe help, they see
the intrinsaic merit of the help., but at the back, of their minds
there J. s a sort of f&amp; pling cf -6sent~ ment, W'hy does he have all
those things whean I don~ t? Thnis is thie oldest thing in -the world.
Nowv, Sir, this is pcrtu of the low of life arnd the main thing
is that we are not to be discouraged in wc11l-doing h causa thei
am-ount of gra'titudo t'rat is -to be nodce is inadequa-te. T he i
are oodth-ngs to bo. doro arnd th_ er e are go3od things thiat oughlt
tore godn * enu'. as goo . ip i. thsrn hy will pay
0.00/ 2 
2-
their dividends in world progress and in world peace.
In the second place, of course we are right down there
off the South-East of Asia and we have immediate problems, almost
on our doorstep. And it is to the great credit of the Uni-ted
States that it has assumed a role in the solution of those
problems which is historically of tremendous importance. But we
are there and we are a long way away,
We have next to us Indonesia, 80 or 90 million people;
a lovely country, a country whicL has a form of government which
is no doubt one of those intr: im forms of government in which
power tends to be concentrated in one hand or one set of hands,
We have one ambition as far as Indonesia is concerned, and that
is that we should bc good neighbours and friendly neighbou rs and
live in peace and occasionally make some contribution to the
much-needed economic improvement of that country.
Further north there is Malaysia and at this very
Smoment, Indonesia, through the head of its government, breathes
threatenings and slaughter against Malaysia. The world can't
be indifferent to this state of affairs becausu let me remind
everybody, if you need to be reminded Malaysia is a country
which has grown out of Malaya. has grown out of the British colony
of Malaya and the British colonies in Borneo Sabah in the north
and Sarawak farther south. This fcrr of government, this national
entity Malaysia, represents one of the frequent triumphs of
British policy in this century, for Britain, the greatest colonial
power in the nineteenth century, has been the greatest decolonising
power since the Second World lWar.
Malaya represents the classical example of how a colony
achieves its independence and self-government, with reasonably
trained people to take a hand in the administration with a
healthy economy. Mclaya is a museum piece, except that it is
very much alive in this field and now, of course voluntarily
as the United Nations has found the two Borneo Territories
and Singapore have been added and we have Mlaysiao Malaysia,
a member of the United Nations,.... Malaysia which, being
challenged to the validity of its creation, persuaded the
* Secretary-General of the United Nations to send a mission and
to make an investigation and to make a report,... Malaysia
enjoying a guarantee from Great Britain of her military security
against military aggression,.... Malaysia, enjoying a guarantee
given by Australia, through my own mouth in the Australian
Parliament, that should there be attempts made to overthrow
her independence or her integrity, we will ourselves come to the
assistance of Great Britain in her defence.
Now, these are very large, very large matters and I
sometimes wonder whether people understand them or what it is
all about. Why shouldn't Malaysia be free and independent, just
as much as Indonesia? Why shouldn't she? Why should we have
to listen to all these silly words like " neo-colonialism" which
is the last invention of the polysyllabic attackers of the world?
Neo-colonialism: Here is ialaysia, an independent country, free, entitled
to be free, entitled to all the protection that can be given by
the United Nations and the United Nations Charter, and yet every
few weeks you read that another threat is made, that a few more
troops are put in across the border, that there is an infiltration
that goes on and orn and threats to " crush" Malaysia. a * of. e/ 3 
-3-
Malaysia has made no threats against Indonesia none
at all. The only threatening party, I regret to say, is Indonesia
itself. And in that state of affairs and this is the real point
I want to put to you in that state of affairs, you will constantly
find pressures for more and more conferences.
Might I with great submission offer a slight warning
about conferences? I know that a ccnference every now and again
is vital tremendously important. I know that many of the
procedures of the United Nations represents a high form of
conference between nations. I know that every now and then some
great nations will induce a conference between two squaobling
nations in order to see whether it cannot lend its good offices
in producing a settlement, Cyprus is a recent example.
But when energies are diverted to bring t', o nations
together in conference over a matter like Malaysia, I just want
to say to you, that unless there is the utmost good iaith on both
sides, then that conference will hurt one and help the other
that such a corference may turn out to be, in itself, an appeasing
process which gi" es an advantage to the aggressor.
Now I know that it was no less a man than the great
Winston Churchill himself who said in that homely and splendid
fashion of his: " It's better to jaw-. jaw, than war-war." And a
lot of us have seized on this. All I wan-to say to you is that
remark did not mean that Winston thou ht that undrr all circumstances,
" jaw-jaw" should prevail, because if he had, all the views
I uier heard expressed by him in relation to the pre--rnr years
would be falified. Now what happens? There is a conference about Malaysia.
Tunku Abdul Rahman, a splendid man with no trreat against
Indonesia but with a vital interest to defend his own frontiers and
the freedom of his oTn States, goes to a conference. The Tunku
says: " Well, iirst of all, I won't go unless I have some assurance
that your infiltration into my country with arms with forces
regular ana irregular, is going to come to an en nd ndthat there
is a formula devised for a phased withdrawal when the political
conference begihs." And then somebody is bound to heave a sigh
of relief and say: " WJel isn't this good? We have now got them
coming into conference and this is it."
But what happens when the conference goes on? Does
anybody here really believe that Indonesian forces are not still
finding their way into Borneo? Does anybody really believe that
any withdrawal that might have occurred is more than merely
nominal here or here or here? Does anybody doubt
that on this matter time runs against the Tunku and that time
runs against Malaysia? If the aggressor can have his way across
the frontier, then of course the morale of the local people
begins to suffer and the whole conception of Malaysia may find
itself weakened. Now that doesn't mean that you want to go and become
involved in a war. It is ridiculous to think of anybody being at
war with Indonesia a country not under threat and whose orderly
development everybody is willing to assist. But it does mean that
before we put too much pressure on Malaysia to concede something
here or there, or go into an unconditional conference, we ought
to remember that there are conferences and conferences, some
capable of altering the whole history of the world for the better
and some regarded as a mere cover for further advance and further
attack by one of the parties to the conference. 000 0 
Now, I am afraid I perhaps haven't explained that to you
very clearly. But the one thing that I find as I go around the
world that really troubles me a little is that I think that we
ere a bit disposed today to say: " ell, we want a quiet life and
if we can just get people to talk to each other that will dispose
of that problem for the next week or two." And frankly, except
on cond. tions of the utmost good faith on both sides, I distrust
such conferences. Then, of course, that's not the only place. We have South
Vietnam in which we are very happy in a small way to be able to
assist the United States in what I venture to describe as a " film,
clear policy." I know there are people iho can tell you it is
wrong, that it can't succeed, that the whole solution in this part
of the world is as General de Gaulle would say " There must oe
a po] litical solution." I venture to doubt it very much. I think
that there must be a presentation of firmness, not of provocation,
but of firmness, in relation to South Vietnam.
All we want in this world today is some smashing victory
by Communist Cnina ir South-Last Asia, some removal of the forces
of freedom fiom this zone, and the whole history of the world will
be altered. And whbt I permit myself to remember is that the
whole history of Australia vill be altered.
We must be together, we must be firm, we must not be
provocative but above all, if I may say so, we don't want to be
unduly misled by ideas that the pcifect answer in what was Indo-
China the perfect answer in the whole area, including South
Vietnam is a declaration of neutrality, A country that is
neutral with more than 600,000,000 Chinese on its flanks and its
friendr thousands of miles away, is not likely to remain neutral
for very long.
Now all these are matters of great argument,
I am glad i am speaking after Governor Stevenson because
he would no doubt take me apart on a great number of these matters,
but I just wanted to take the opportunity of stating once more
how identical cur interests are, of indicating to you one or two
of the dangers of which I think we might beware in our joint
enterprise, and to conclude by saying, as I began, that whichever
way it goes, my little country, and your great country, will be
together through thick and thin. 



64/ 073
FOR PRESS P. iNi 8zj 264
PRAISE FOR DRIVE TO HELP HANDICAPPED
Statement by the Prime Minister he R. H n. obert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, has sent a
special message commending the ona-week " Employ the Handicapped"
campaign which starts today.
The Prime Minister said
" in a rapidly developing country like , ustralia
with a need to use all its manpower, it is particularly
shortsighted to pass over tens of thousands of pLysically
handicapped men and ioraen who could, if given an opportunity,
make a definite contribution to the welfare of the
community. Charity does not enter tiie picture when I speak
of employing the handicapped. Thousands of handicapped
Australians prove daily that without special privileges
they can hold full-time jobs.
Last year the Commonwealth Employment Service
found jobs for 10,300 physically handicapped people, while
from 19+ 8 to 1964 the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service
prepared for full-time employment more than 17,000 allegedly
' hopeless invalids'
The comm unity gained many millions of pounds
eamnnpuloaylmlyen tt', h rorautghhe rp lathcainn g ketehpesineg Autisetmra loina npse nisnio ngsa infrfouml the
public purse. Yet there remain at least 300 000 Australians
who still receive repatriation or social service benefits
for disabilities. Of these some 125,000 suffer permanent
disabilities and are regarded as unemployable for life.
I reject this view. I am convinced that we cannot
afford to waste the abilities of our citizens simply because
they are not physically perfect.
This week the Junior Chambers of Comnierce will
promote the employment of physically handicapped Australians
through their ' Employ the -Handicapped' campaign. I commend
this contribution to economic welfare and social progress."
CANB13RRA, July, 1964. 



EMBARGO: NOT TO BE PUBLISHED OR BROADCAST BEFORE
6-pm ( Btsh. Summer time) July 6, 1964 or
3 am ( Est. Australia) July 7, 1964
BRITISH INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT
FIRST BAILLIEU LECTURE
THE-INTERDEPENDENCE OF POLITICAL AND
INDUSTRIAL LEADERSHIP IN THE MODERN STATE
by
THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
QoC., M. P.
PRIME MINISTER OF AUSTRALIA
deli vered
AT THE HALL OF THE. MERCHANT TAYLORS' COMPANY
THREADNEEDLE STREET, LONDON, E. C. 2.
on
MONDAY, 6th JULY, 1964 
" THE INTERDEPENDENCE OF POLITICAL AND
INDUSTRIAL LEADERSHIP INII THE MODERN STATE"
There are two good reasons for my sense of pride
on this occasion. One is that it would be an honour for any man to
be asked to deliver to you the first Baillieu Lecture. Lord
Baillieu is a great Australian and a great man. He bears a
name greatly distinguished in what I will later refer to as the
" industrial statesmanship" of Australia. He has added to it
by his great services to British industry and international
understanding. The work of such men should appropriately be
honoured during the years of their activity; we have, as a
rule, a bad racial habit of deferring our praise to the obituary
column. My second reason is a quite simple and personal
one. Clive Baillieu is my friend, always more than faithful
and more than just to me. This personal reason enables me to
add affection to respect.
You have invited me to speak of the interdependence
of Political and Industrial leadership in the modern world.
There can be no more important subject. I am delighted with it,
for I have lived with this problem for many years as a political
leader, and am now given the opportunity of setting down, in a
more or less ordered form, some of the results of that experience.
I begin by saying that we must bring our vocabulary
up to date. The word " statesmanship" has usually been applied
to the highest level of politics. It has connoted the management
of state affairs which, when the term came into use, were
political affairs " pure and simple" if you will forgive such an
imaginative expression. Those were the years, not so many
generations behind us, when even lawyers could profess to find
an intelligible distinction between governmental functions and
business functions, with mutual exclusiveness. 
Those days have gone. The lines have not been
merely blurred; they have disappeared under the pressure of
modern complexities. Today the management of state affairs
cannot be artificially confined in its scope. Politics and
industry are deeply involved with each other, acting and
re-acting upon each other. The qualifications of the modern
statesman will be inadequate or incomplete unless he is conscipus
of the problems of industry and the impact upon those problems
of political policies and actions. This is not just to say
that there has been a change in political outlook; it is also
to say that there has been a change in industrial outlook.
Neither change is as yet complete.
Industrial activities are, in the modern world, no
longer purely private matters, to be resolved by private decision
alone in the light of unfettered competition. I beg of you not
to think that I suffer from the reactionary socialist doctrine
which discourages the rewarded enterprise of the individual and
attributes quite mystical faculties to that omniscient and
omnipotent body, the State. What I am saying is that neither
politics nor industry can live alone. The old-fashioned " sturdy
individualist" who told government to keep clear of his business,
that he wanted neither help nor hindrance from it, is as dead as
the dodo. The doctrinaire socialist still flourishes, but, in
my country at least, his voice becomes fainter.
It is frequently charged against those of us who are
not Socialists that we are reactionaries; that we want to turn
the clock back; that we yearn for a restoration of laissez-faire.
In the modern world, this is quite untrue. The truth is that
it is the non-Socialists who have moved with the times. I can
understand, as an intellectual and historical exercise, how
Socialism attracted the support of radical thinkers after the
industrial revolution in Great Britain, the creation of " dark
satanic mills", the horrorsof child labour, when industrial power
was in a limited number of hands, when the rights of employed
people were either denied or imperfectly recognised, when the
infant Trades Unions were too commonly regarded as subversive
bodies, when social services as we now know them were almost nonexistent.
It is not strange that under these circumstances there
grew up in many thoughtful minds the egaliterian belief that the
creation of social and industrial justice demanded a high measure
of uniformity, and that uniformity could be achieved only by the
mastery and management of the State.
But we know, and occasionally admit, that there is no
uniformity among personalities, or talents, or energy. We have
learned that true rising standards of living are the product of
progressive enterprise, the acceptance of risks, the encouragement
of adventure, the prospect of rewards. 
3.
These are all individual matters. There is no Government
department which can create these things. What governments can
and should do, when encountering some new problem or developing
state of affairs, is not to say " the Government will run this",
but first of all to seek the private enterprise answer, to help
the individual to help himself, to create, by legislation and
administration, a social economic and industrial climate favourable
to his activity and growth.
The validity of these theses is, in my own Australian
experience, covering a consecutive fifteen years of Prime
Ministership, seen with increasing clarity by a younger and, on
the whole, better educated generation of electors, who want the
opportunity to make their own way and place in the world. They
reject the enfeebling notion that the chief end of man, from
the cradle to the grave, is to be ordered around by, and live
dependent upon " the Government". There is some eloquent corroborative
evidence to support my own judgment. At the recent
Australian election the leader of the Labour Party, a party whose
principal objective has for very many years been " the socialisation
of the means of production, distribution and exchange", promise
that if elected he would, in effect, suspend the socialist objective
for the life of the Parliament!
Clearly the definition and function of Statesmanship
have widened. Industrialists may protest that politicians should
not interfere in business affairs. But it is impossible to
believe that in a complicated world of international trade and
finance, of economic theories and policies which are no longer
academic exercises but touch and concern all forms of human acticity,
and of the domestic social demands which have brought about what
we call " the welfare state", governments, however non-socialist,
can be passive observers.
Today's industrialists, whether primary or secondary,
and however individualist they may be, demand and obtain government
intervention by way of aid and organisation. I will illustrate from
my own country. There are internal marketing schemes for the
handling of certain primary products and price stabilisation
schemes administered through various boards for such commodities
as dairy products, wheat, and sugar. The farmer is still a free
agent, farming his own land and producing his own goods. But
he has called government aid in to secure for him the adequate and
reasonably stable prices which he needs to make his individual
enterprise effective and profitable. 
Under special circumstances, government provides
subsidies. One example is butter, where a domestic subsidy gives
to the dairy farmer some assurance of a profitable domestic price
to be set off against his frequently unprofitable price on world
markets of considerable instability. Another is a recently
introduced bounty on superphosphates, designed to encourage the
use of fertilisers and the consequent increase of production and
reduction in costs.
The manufacturer has frequent resort to the Tariff
Board and special statutory authorities for customs tariffs and
bounties. In the broad sense, he looks to Government for
assistance and protection. He may not put it in so many words,
but he is acutely conscious of the interdependence of government
and industry. But perhaps he tends to over-simplify the problems
of government. He is occasionally disposed to see his own
industrial problem as if it were in a national vacuum. " My
business is being adversely affected by lower-cost imports; the
solution is a higher tariff; please provide it!"
This is, of course, a dangerous over-simplification.
Protective tariffs are designed to avoid unfair competition;
but they should not be designed to prevent all competition.
Complete domestic monopolies are inconsistent with international
trade. Now, whatever could have happened domestically in the
absence of government interventions and controls, it is clear that
international trade is today so involved with government trade
services, trade treaties, international conventions and export
inducements, that it could not survive without them. Speaking
again of my own country, this has been recognised by both government
and industry. We have regular consultations with industrial
and financial leaders. We are assisted in specific fields by
many groups of advisers. We have an expanding overseas Trade
Commissioner Service which provides an exploratory instrument
which individual industrial exporters could probably not afford.
An Export Development Council of leading businessmen advises us
on ways and means of increasing our export income. Two notable
results have been the creation of the Export Payments Insurance
Corporation with outstandingly good results and the
introduction of a scheme of tax concessions successfully designed
to encourage more production for export and a more vigorous search
for and development of new markets overseas. 
We are, of course, all familiar with such intergovernmental
agreements as those relating to wheat and meat and
sugar and certain metals. On our side, at least, all such
agreements are worked out in the closest consultation with the
industries concerned. The Trade Treaty is now a commonplace. It enlarges
the horizons and opportunities of individual producers while
helping to bring into a healthy condition, the trade and financial
balances which are a constant care of government.
I will not seek to multiply instances or make anything
like a complete catalogue. But I will say at once that such
examples as I have given are all examples of the inevitable interdependence
of political and industrial leadership in the modern
world. Once this is acknowledged on both sides, the future
becomes clearer. But it must be acknowledged as a vital principle
of government, not just as an occasional and accidental by-product
of some extraordinary circumstance:
This truth is, in my opinion and experien.. as till
obscured by some antiquated dogmas, and prejudices, and limitations
of outlook. Thus, it is still the practice of many economists and
financial writers to refer to capital expenditure in " the public
sector" and in " the private sector" as if they were referring to
two mutually exclusive and indeed actively competitive zones.
Nothing could be more wrong. When private capital is laid out
upon capital expansions of industry, this is done on the assumption
that public capital expenditure will be made to provide the streets
or roads, the water services, the lighting services, the schools,
the means of public transport, the housing, without which an
extended industry could not hope to carry on. I would be
prepared to say that in my own country, the overwhelming bulk of
expenditure in the so-called public sector is basic expenditure
in the private sector. May I take just one rather striking
illustration. The famous Snowy Mountains Scheme at the headwaters
of the Snowy, Murray and Murrumbidgee rivers, will, when
completed, have cost well over œ 400 million, all provided by the
Commonwealth Government and therefore to be called expenditure in
the public sector. Yet, apart from some fractional supply of
electric power to the Australian Capital Territory, and to
governments in New South Wales and Victoria, the great purposes of
the Snowy Scheme are to provide hydro-electric power and light to
private industries and private citizens, at cost, and to provide
through its great dams and lakes, water for the 
irrigation of the thousands of privately owned and operated farms
which will be brought into existence.
There are other old prejudices and limitations of
outlook in the industrial world. Let me look at some of them
quite frankly. In the economic field, now so directly and indirectly
affected by government economic policies and actions, it has
become essential that industrial leaders should understand
something of politics, should, by getting to know something of
the complexity of national and international economic problems,
come to understand that it is dangerous as well as selfish, to
behave like a pressure group. We have all seen occasions when
representative bodies in the business and industrial world have
demanded higher import duties at a time when the best judgment of a
wise and well-informed government might lead it to increase imports in
the interest of some international trading advantage. It is, I
suppose, natural that many men in industry should take short views and
be affected by the prospect of some immediate advantage. After
all, very few of us look over the wall of our own garden to get
a picture of the outside world. It is simple, and tempting,
to demand reductions of taxation when things are going well,
( so that they may go even better!), and not always popular to
point out that, while deficits in Government budgets are appropriate
in times of recession, they could hardly be deliberately planned
at a time of expansionary growth and inflationary pressures.
In short, there is still a considerable failure of
mutual understanding. Governments have a disposition to be
over-statistical and sometimes if I may make such a confession
to lean too heavily on economic orthodoxy or its current version
in a highly unorthodox and muddled world, where the laws of -reason
or of nature receive much violent treatment. We have discovered
that, in evaluating the effects of some economic measure, statistics
are not enough, for in their very nature, statistics are always
out of date. This is one of the reasons for my own Government's
consultations with industrial leaders whose knowledge is gained at
first hand in the factory and the market-place.
It is one of the occupational hazards of political
leadership or responsibility that, in our anxiety to avoid the
dangers of travelling in a " wilderness of single instances", of
being induced by hard cases into bad laws, we may, under the
compulsion to make laws of wide and general application, come to
treat men and women as just ciphers in a calculation, and not as
individual human beings whose individual welfare and development
must be the greatest ultimate concern of government. 
Avoidance of this hazard requires constant contact
with people as well as papers, with practical managers of
industry as well as economists, with the people who provide the
revenues as well as those who spend them, with TradesUnions as
well as organisations of employers.
For, if we are to be civilised people in truth as
well as in name, we must be members one of another. For me,
the perfect society would be one in which, by equality of
opportunity and a full development of individual character and
talent, each citizen was independent in his own heart and mind,
but all citizens were inter-dependent in all social rights and
duties. dHas it ever occurred to you that, in spite of our
parliamentary democracy, the characteristic of which is that
the rulers and the ruled are the same people, putting into or
casting out of Parliament those of their own number whom they
freely choose, and thus coming to obey laws of their own making,
we still hear on all sides " why doesn't the Government do this or
that or cure this or that?", as if the Government was a foreign
body. I cannot suppose that this engaging habit is peculiar to
Australia. But it illustrates a serious defect in our social
development. Politics is too often, and by too many politicians,
seen as a clash of material interests, a " dialectical materialism".
Employment is seen, by too many advocates, as importing an inevitable
conflict between the interests of the employer and of the employee.
And there are those with " webbed and inward turning eye" who appear
to believe that there is a conflict betwee i government and industry,
that they do not understand each other and never will, and that
in this conflict each must get the better of the other if it can.
I imagine that the pure Socialist, the stern unbending nationaliser
of all industry, will seek to get rid of this conflict by making
Government the master. If our antipodean experience counts for
anything, the creation of a nationalised industry does not dispose
of the other problem of employer-employee relationships, but
rather complicates them by adding political overtones to industrial
demands. In all these matters, we need a greater sense of
inter-dependence. The great common interest in any industry is
that it should be successful, growing, and profitable. Only
thus can it provide a growing employment, good wages and conditions,
and personal security.
I do not want to be misunderstood on these points.
Though I am the leader of a great non-Socialist party, I am not
a doctrinaire anti-Socialist. I recognise that there are some 
things which, in their very nature, lend themselves to government
management or control. Over our history in Australia, we have
established government control of the postal, telegraphic, and
telephonic services, the international communication services, the
railways. In a . country like Australia at least, such things lend
themselves to Government monopoly control, which nobody seeks to
change. But the practical difference between the Socialist
and the non-Socialist seems to be this. People like myself,
before resorting to State Management, first seek for the private
enterprise answer, Only when that is not forthcoming do we put
the Government in charge. The Socialist approaches the problem
from the opposite direction. He seeks first the Socialist
solution, and turns reluctantly to private enterprise only when
the Socialist plan proves to be unworkable. I, of course, know
but little of your domestic politics, nor would I dream of
embarrassing you by intervening in them. But I do know something
of the politics of my own country where, strangely enough, we have
parties superficially not unlike your-own* I will, therefore,
illustrate my point by reference, exclusively to Australia. It
must be admitted that the way of the Socialist in Australia is made
harder by reason of our Federal Constitution, with its division of
legislative authority between Commonwealth and States, and its
specific prohibitions of certain types of law, whether Commonwealth
or State. To economise on time, I will take three examples of
what I mean. The Commonwealth's power over broadcasting is
attributed to its specific constitutional power to make laws
with respect to " postal, telegraphic, telephonic, and other like
services". The first people to enter upon broadcasting in a
business way were private citizens. The business grew and became
more complicated. To avoid chaos, government intervened, first by
negotiating the acquisition of certain leading stations and then,
in 1932 by creating an Australian Broadcasting Commission more or
less on the model of the BB. C.
By 1942 the present pattern was established, The
AB. C. conducts national broadcasting services and is sustained
largely by listeners licence fees. There are licensed commercial
stations, which derive their revenue from advertising. This dual
system, though occasionally threatened by the Socialists, has
worked well, with a good deal of co-operation between " overnment
and industry. Australians would, in my opinion, strongly resist
a government monopoly of such a pervasive and persuasive means of
communication, instruction, and political propaganda, The dual 
system preserves the right of choice of the individual listener,
and, by competition, improves efficiency.
More recently, we have dealt with television in the
same way, and for the same reasons.
My second example is that of the Civil Air Services.
These were pioneered by private enterprise, and with a great deal
of success. The Labour Government in 1945 decided to nationalise
the industry by first creating a National Airlines Commission with
power to conduct air services, and then, by a series of statutory
devices, giving it a monopoly, thus eliminating the private
services. The High Court found that the creation of a monopoly
in interstate air services violated Section 92 of the Constitution.
Since then, we have enjoyed the dual system, which provides a most
healthy competition, and has resulted in a very high . standard of
efficiency and safety. This system is not by any means accepted
by the Labour Party, but I think it will survive.
My third example is in interstate shipping coastal
shipping where a successful Commonwealth Shipping Line operates in
competition with private shipping companies.
These examples show that government organisms and
private enterprise can live together to the public advantage.
At the very least, they dispose of the false hypothesis that
there is an inevitable conflict between government and industry,
and that such a conflict can be resolved only by victory for one
side. You may think these remarks to be rambling, and even
irrelevant. Yet they all tend to confirm the truth that there is
an interdependence between government and industry.
Certain matters which seemed simple to me when I was
young now seem to me most difficult. This is inevitable when
you begin by seeing the problem from a distance and end by seeing it
from the inside. One lives and learns. Some things I have
learned to believe most strongly can be put in a short series of
propositions. 1. Rising material standards of life in a democracy
cannot be adequately attained unless industries
are developed, production increased, and the resources
of the nation expanded. They will not be attained
by a simple process of redistribution, nor by the
creation of a state of affairs in which we are all
employed by and dependent upon the State.
2. An uncontrolled and unregulated free competitive
enterprise would tend to destroy the weak, impoverish
the poor, and reduce that dignity of the individual 
man and wompn which it must be the purpose of
democracy to create and enhance.
3. By seeking a compromise between these two extremes
we do not, as in the case of many compromises, arrive
at a weak solution. Paradoxically, we arrive at a
strong one. When we blend the two ideas, with
common sense and a spirit of co-operation, we secure
a modern state inii which there is more to distribute
because private citizens have been encouraged to
produce more, for profit and reward, and have been
helped to regard life as an adventure and not a
folding of the hands with a feeling of absolute
security. In that state the private entkepreneur
will observe his social and industrial responsibilities,
partly because 4overnment requires him to do so, but,
even more importantly, because he realises that the
adventures of discovery and risk investment, and
advances in skill and management, will reap their
richest harvest if the people employed in the enterprise
feel that they are getting their share in advancing
prospects and their full recognition as human beings.
In brief, it is in co-operation that we will do best.
Within that framework, there will still be conflicts about wages and
hours and long leave and retirement benefits and health schemes,
and even mutual criticism of Rovernment's bureaucratic tendencies and
the insensibility of the individual manufacturer to the overall
economic needs of the country. But they will all be more readily
resolved if all concerned are conscious of the paramount need for
co-operative effort in what is seen to be the common cause.
I will conclude by elaborating this a little.
Interdependence in leadership is designed to nourish a
sense of interdependence among the people, and in turn to be
nourished by it.
In my experience, all democratic governments are
accused by their opponents of sudden changes of policy. I will
not argue about this, except to say that changes of emphasis,
and changes made from time to time to meet special circumstances,
are not necessarily changes of policy. Rigidity of mind and
common sense must frequently be in conflict.
But I do believe that if we are to avoid what will
appear to be sudden decisions, or if we are to avert some of their
unhappy consequences, we must face up to some of the underlying
elements ( not always visible) in a sound national progress and a
developing economic strength. 
11.
I have, I think, time to mention two of them.
One of them is public morale. If people know what
a government is aiming at, and what great industrialists are
aiming at, and they have respect for the honesty of purpose of
the leaders in each field, they will be less liable to panic
or to depression. This was gloriously proved by Winston Churchill
during the war. Great things though he did in many fields, his
vital contribution to victory was his fostering of morale. He
saw more clearly than most, and expressed more clearly than any,
that morale was the essential basis of survival and of victory.
What he did in war is no less necessary in peace.
Our economy tends to be plagued by booms and depressions. These
close relatives do not arise from purely material factors or
possess some inevitable character. Each is contributed to, if
not entirely created by, psychological factors. In the more
primitive days of banking, the " run on the bank" was the psychological
cause of insolvency much more frequently than it was the result.
In modern times, we have seen depressions accelerated by caution
and pessimism on the part of management as much as by fear in the
minds of the customers. As I once heard a noted economist say,
back at the beginning of the thirties, " Prices fall because
they fall!", i. e., because people tend to stop buying on a falling
market. If people understood the reasons for temporary fluctuations,
if they understood the purpose of government financial measures.
designed to increase or reduce the volume of purchasing power, to
restrain inflation or to encourage expansion, they would be less
inclined to aggravate their own problems.
This is, of course, easy to say. The civilian problems
of peace are less concentrated and less intelligible than the
civilian problems of war. But, if we had, in government and in
industry, a clearer sense of co-operation, of joint responsibility,
we might make a massive contribution to the spirit and morale of
our people. The other element goes beyond an understanding of
what we, government and industry, are doing and intending. It
concerns itself with what private citizens make of what they are
doing and intending theiselves. For it is upon their self
reliance and enterprise that our whole structure must be based.
They are under great temptations today, in the era of what has been
called " the welfare State". It will be fatal if they come to
regard the government as the only creator of all good things, as the
perennially solvent guarantor of personal prosperity for all.
For governments, and government departments, are administrative
rather than creative, nor can any government guarantee or financial
provision be any more effective than the sum capacity of the
people, as producers and earners and taxpayers, to provide. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 49/ 1964
MESSAGE TO PRIME MINISTER OF INDIA
The Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies, has asked
the Australian Ambassador, Sir James Plimsoll to convey to the
Prime Minister of India, Mr. Lal Bahadur Shastri, Sir Robert's
personal regret at Mr. Shastri's illness.
In his message to Sir James Plimsoll, the Prime
Minister said he regretted also Mr. Shastri's consequent
inability to attend the Prime Ministers' Meeting this week.
He had looked forward to meeting Mr. Shastri in London and
looks forward now to a meeting when circumstances permit.
He wished Mr. Shastri a quick and full recovery.
CANBERRA, 8th July, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. 50/ 1964
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. John McEwen,
said today that senior Ministers would have discussions in
Canberra next week with representatives of industry and commerce.
Mr. McEwen said that these economic consultations, which had
been first instituted by the Government in 1962, had proved
extremely valuable as a means of securing the up-to-date views
of those engaged in producticn and business on trends in the
economy. Mr. McEwen said that the Government placed great
importance on this regular intercharge of information with the
private sector of the economy. He said by this means both the
Government and industry and commerce were fully appraised of each
other's assessment of economic trends.
The Ministers would first have discussions on the
afternoon of 13th July with a group of national organisations.
The organisations which would attend are
Asscciated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Associated Chai:. bersof Manufactures of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Wool Growers' and Graziers' Council
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Bankers' Association
Master Builders' Feder'ation of Australia
Federal Chambers of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Retailers
On the morning of Tuesday, July 14, Ministers will
have discussions with representatives of the Australian Council
of Trade Unions. At 2,30 pomo that day, Ministers will meet
representatives of the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council
and at 4 p. m. representatives of the Export Development Council.
CANBERRA, July 9, 1964. 



PRESENTATION TO THE PRI12 MINISTER,
SIR ROBERT M~ ENZIES, BY THE INSTITUTE
OF BUILDERS AT THE GROCERS' HALL,
LONDON JULY,_ 1964
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
I was told by my staff that there would be no
speeches. So far the prophecy seems to be wrong. But I am bound
to tell you that if I once got going and developed some of those
themes of yours, you would all be here a long, long time.
I want you to realise what a versatile fellow I am.
( Laughter) I am a gynaecologist and obstetrician, as you said.-
I am a surgeon, I am a physician, I am an arc-hitect I couldn't
be relied on to design a hen coop ( Laughter); I am a plumber,
a builder. The gynaecologists, like you, were good enough to
give me a -tie, here in London quite splendid and the last
time I wore it, I was going out to Government House with a couple
of new Ministers to be sworn in, and the Governor-General said to
me, " That's a rather decorative tie. What's that?" I said,
" That's theGynaecologists' and Obstetricians"'. , He said, " It's
a very odd tie to wear". I said, " Not at all I ye just been
giving birth to two new Ministers". ( Laughter ( Applause)
But you know, Sir, I am grateful for this. I have
always admired builders and, at the same time, envied them. My
line of country, as you have courteously pointed out, has been
heavily involved with politics. Dear me, when I look at my
respectable days at the Bar and I now realise that I have been a
Member of Parliament, one way or another, for about thirty-five
years and a -rmMei nister for sixteen or seventeen of them, I
realise that my lines have been cast inevitably in that field.
And, of course. you know, poli'iicians are neve-r given credit for
building anything. Indeed, there is no evidenc--. risible that
they7 have. Everybody knows if the country is gc-Lhg well, that
it was his fault and not the fault of the politician. Everybody
knows if the country is going badly that the politioians are lousy
and that the Government ought to be changed. So we lose both ways.
I suppose we do have to write a great deal on water
or on sand and that's inevitable. Those of us wuith enough vanity,
occasionally conso le ourselves in the still watches of the night
by saying, " Ah, well, when history comes to be written you know
that frightful platitude when history comes to be written, old
boy, you'll get an honourable mention, ( Laughter) even if it is
only in a footnote." I'm never too sure of it, all the same.
The historians can't be relied on, and therefore one never knowa,
but at the same time, you have your monuments all about you.
I was talking this afternoon about Mannie Hornibrook,
whom some of you know in Australia, a great bridge-builder. We
now have a lake in Canberra I make bold to say we wouldn't have it
if I hadn't been advocating it like mad for a long time, persuading
the Treasury and having the item struck out in my absence and
having it struck in again when I came home ( Laughter) but really,
the man who has got a memorial in relation to the lake is Sir
Manuel Hornibrook. He built two magnificent bridges across it, a
great credit to him and a great credit to the city of Canberra.
And so you will understand why I really feel this afternoon I am
in company that is a little too good for me. ( Laughter) I feel a
little above myself because here you are, mortals though you be,
v e.* e/ 2 
-2
you occasionally produce the stuff of immortality. People like
mqe, we just hope for the best.
But anyhow, whether it is the best or the worse,
politics is a most interesting business, frustrating, sometimes
terribly amusing. I'ni. at a Prime Ministers' conference now which
is very amusing because I am the only fellow who makes speeches
that are speeches anid not written out, so mine are the only ones
that never reach the newspapers. ( Laughter) ( Applause) We meet
in private, great frankness is to be observed, you know, this is
the theory of it, and if I haven't heard too clearly what somebody
is saying, it's all right, I open a paper the next morning and
there it is, because I know it's gone out.
When I first attended a Prime Ministers' Cdonference,
I wasn't a Prime Minister. I was there representing my then Prime
Minister, Mr. Lyons. That waa in 1935, so I'm the senior
inhabitant. At thattime, there were four of us. Ramsay
MacDonald was the Prime Minister, Geurge Forbes was the Prime
Minister of New Zealand, I think R. V. Bennett was there from
Canada and I was representing Mr. Lyens, and I am not sure that
at the same time, sitting discreetly in the corner, there wasn't
Godfrey Huggins from Southern Rhodesia. We've been arguing today
about Southern Rhodesia. Things have changed. Godfrey used to
turn up. He wasn't invited. ( Laughter) He had no right to be
there because Sou~ thern Rhodesia wasn't a member of the Commonwealth
but he arrived, very sensibly and sat there and we all liked him
immensely. Now there is a terrific argument going on, of course,
as to whether Southern Rhodesia is to be given certain orders or
not. When I look back over those thirty years, it seems a little
hard to believe, doesn't it, that a country which has been sitting
with us should today be the subject of dlebate, and somewhat
acrimonious debate at times. Still, I think we got through that
one pretty well. We w-ill resume again next week. I am now sitting
there looking at the representatives of eighteen countries,
including. my own, eighteen, all sorts and condi. tions, all sizes
and shapes. I will just tell you one simple remin-iscence of two
days ago. At the last Prime Ministers' Conference, the Prime
Minister of Sierra 1Leone, Milton Margai, was present. I don't
know whether any of you ever met Milton Margai, but he was a little
chap and he wore a cap such as my old Scotch grandmother used to
wear, you know, with Leads. ( Laughter) And he was a splencd
chap, wonderful chap. He delivered himself to one representative
whom I didn't care for very much, one day, in the most spirited
fashion. It would have done great credit to an Australian in a
bad temper. ( Laughter) I admired that very much indeed. Well,
he's dead and his brother, Albert Margai, is now the Prime
Minister of Sierra Leone, and he arrived. He's a huge fellow.
He's about six feet five and he's large in every conceivable
direction. He's a terrific fellow. And I being the oldest
inhabitant and therefore entitled to a certain amount of privilege
and impudence, walked across to him and shook him warmly by the
hand and said, " Now tell me, are you a brother of Milton's?"
He said, " Yes". I said,' " Don't think I'm being offensive, but
same mother and father?" ( Laughter) He said, " O0h, yes, same
mother and father" and then he gave a great hearty chuckle and
said, " Mind you, Milton was the only little fellow in the family."
( Laughter) 0 .0a / 3 
3-
Ycu know, Sir, it is not what emerges from a Prime
Minister's Conference, because I lay odds that, as usual, the
communique at the end of it will be the greatest collection of
cliches that the world has ever seen. It always has been in the
past, because you see, we have a unanimity rule. ( Laughter) There
are aighteen vet oSE and it is only when a proposition is so
harmless, such as the accommodation was gcod, or something like
that, that it gets into the oommunique ( Laughter) and then our
friends of the Press write scathing articles about it. Very
properly. It is a most awful, dreary collection of platitudes
in the world. But the real point is not in the commuaique, but
it is that round the table are all sorts of fellowB, some of whom
may poop off in their own countries and make fiery speeches and
breathe threatenings and slaughter. But when you are sitting
around, chatting with them at intervals, or across the table,
you find that they are all, basically, people you can talk with
and get to understand, and this is what distinguishes the Prime
Ministers' Conference, or one of the things that distingu shes
it from the United Nations because in the United Nations, pecple
haven't time to sit down and have little friendly conversations
breaking the ice. They are all round the corner cooking up
an amendment or lobbying for something. ( Laughter) Well, we
don't go in for that.
Therefore, long mar we survive and Sir, long may you
survive. In spite of this accident that has happened to it
today ( Laughter), I hope the Institute goes on and flourishes
for a thousand years, aiid all I need ada is that I am most
greteful to you azd to your members for the honour you've done
me. 



UNITVMSITT OF 3h! RIINHAM
DEGRE CONUGAYIO1 19W
Ceremony In Great Hall-
11.0 am. 3aturdaY. 11th July
THE RT. RON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES -Prim Minister of Australia
Hats are curious things -hae you noticed thatt The
higher orders, like myself, we war these; and then I -m
supposed to keep It en, but I wn't. I noticed this owrning
that on a slightly lewer level they wear mortar-bierds ad
this permits an imfimite variety of app arm" but I want to
award a special prime to the m Who, I tboxgbtv were bis
mortar-board with the post bravura tes right bookew a well
thatched head. I refers you willI all uaderstai, to Mr.
Jonathan George Hodgkins,
Now, Sir, I don't want to detain this congregation but
there are pertaps one or two things I would like to say. OVA
of~ them is about the Public Orator. Boing public, but no
orator, myself, I have a great Interest in Publie Orators..
Very frequently they address the Chancellor in Latin, a language
now not as commonly understood as it should beg but even then
If you still retain a smattering of Latin, Sir, yeu are up
0 against the great problem of hew It is te be premeunod: old,
new. or what I call ' Law Courts Latia'. -A very great problem.
At another great seat-. of learning 1* this country I as presented
by'a Public Orator, who produced his Latta with the stiotest
adherence to the new proieatms Xnms of Y" ot cients
understand this), and the Chanoeller was Lord Ealifax, who plied
much to my relief In the old prenuneiation, ad I thought I was
doing very well when I roughly, roughly, understood both of them.
I found out afterwards, looking around all the assenbled 4int
that It turned out I was the only ome who did, and that Is very
encouraging. In the University of Western Axstralia * the other'
iday I was given a degree, 9one of these unearnd dogrees4 I have
one or two of sy own that I lae sweated. for and A t'ePblic
Orator. did most of -it. In Englsh and then a -few phrasses* In Latin.
Now I must tell you, If you don't know, that mWn years ago in my
country I had a 1little disputo with the waterside workoe about
the shipping of vig iretm they emteed so ** Pig Ireneva I
title that I have wars with singular distinotion for a longs long
time, end the Public Oratokr at the Vniversity of Western Australia,
Sir, he presentedom einally inthe Latin bit: ' 8sub nemime
poemsi ferrimo'. 
Sir, having disposed of these irr~ lvaines, I would lk*
to say something, If I night on this very happy oecailon, about
you.* I ease from a far but I do It camn fkab ' a very
far spot In your mind. We hive bas. over many yeafts great
friends, and 1, over many years, have been your preat. aairor.
I think that this country has been fortunate ' in having In Its
service a aman of sush learming, high Intelligence, great
courage In prosperity and afversity, as the present Lord Avon,
whom I know bettor as Anthony Meg ad this University, If I
may war so, io greatly hemiured to have him Is the ohair.
You know, Sir, polities of whieb I M a species of
practitioner myself polities io regarded by all aes-politieal
people an etraordinarily easy., and by all newpaper
Icommentators as almost fantastically simple. Quite easy.
Polities, of course; statesmanship In the conduct of the affairs
of nations; is the most testing of all occupatins It sowetime
attracts the attentio* of people * t coarse 1i6re and low
quality. Ivory sow and thoen It attrats te attention of a man
of fine fibre and great quality. I don't Ilke anticipating what
that mythical being, the historian, will say; you knew, this Is
one of the clches of life isn't It 40the historian will sayg,
the belief being, Mrw. Chancellor, that histerima got It right.
Well perhaps they do oceasiemally. But still, In the long
a runthere Is a judgment of history and I ventur, to say with
W some dogma that history wilf roeer4f when It somes to be settlei
ad balanced, If -It ever 4068, that your Chancellor was the
gratest Foreign Minister that this country has had In thi
century, and a Prim Miniaster of such courage and Imagination'
that, looking back an Itp and we had a few troubled tises
together, I marvel at his fortitude.'
This is a groat-story. af-g roat life,,. and when I received
a letter asking me to come here to be honouared by a -degreeg and
I found that the Chanellorwas thisfriend of em, what
normally would have been a peat pleasure beoao a singular
pleasure, a tremndous occasion for rejoicing io ' my heart, and
pride In my mind, and that is my first reason feWt appreciating
this honour. 
Ihae a ade~ d reason, ' ast which I wtil bi. quits, brief.
I t sum out that I have tad good deal 6a do Oith the moders.'
developent of. Universities in Anstralia, aNo. I 1*~ It turns
out,. because although I an a Uniersity am myself sd have
always had, I hope, ioe undoretandiug of what Univereitses
man and how mushi the wend ne043 thou, It 614 tuan' iut thatk
after the wa there was a tremeadous upsurge In the umer of
students who wanted to * one Into the Austr~ lian Universities.
Now the Australian Universities are primarily the bulsino of
the State Goverinomte, the Stato'Fanlset, In Autralia;
the Commnwalth bad sever entered Into that field; but the
whole problem seened to me to be so troesedous ad so growing
that I did secure the services of Sir Keith Murray to come out
and head a Comittee, and whea he made his rdport, and I read
the figures, I concealed the report from the ' Treasury. I
don't encourage deceit as a general role, but on this occ1ao
I practised a 1ittl. 14 I didn't conceal it from the. altogether,
but~ I just let them have It * t the las possible moment, and
then I bad a Cabinet Meeting and I eiraulated the report Mons
the Cabinet Ministers only the night befft the ' Cabinet Meeting,
so I was the only ose really who know wat was in the report,
and by nightfall we bad adopted every re~ onedatlon In the
0report. Anybody who is coatemplating. pellitio as a career
could do no -better than study that ozmple -of political technique.
And'since then we have establid a Usiversity Commssion mad
the " nount that is called for year by year, or every triennim,
grows in the most fabulous fahibon, buj this I believe, has
* opened up a new chaptoet In the history of the Universities*
and In, this generation, In this omtury, everybody met realiso,
that the greatest need of the world, and the greatest need of
your country, and the greatest nemed of my souatip, is net am
happy stroke on a financial inveptiment, but a lnreasing
producton of educated men and wonen throu* b -or Uiveritse.,
Ibis is -tho potential wealthl or the country ad, without i,
* we will dwindle,, peak and pine.
It Is a very exelig thing to me $ Irv to go to0 eenforriSg
of degroes 11it this, becomee I leek around'and I see literally
in front of se the additional assets thkat the nation % as secun"&amp;,
and t hope every graduate will tbink of it, not in a priggIsh way
but with an understanding of poew $ no that is'. 
But' there Is one great* problem that conifronts the
Universities In my country and that so doubt cozfronts the
Universities here. it is this. It io always possible,
given enough authority, or Impuence, or Ingenuity, to getmoney
out of the Treasury., It!@ a fact It's always possible.
But you can' t get. Uaiveroity. professors and lecturer, and staffs
in nome shop or free any Govewmnt 4eparmt Thousinds and
thousands of undergraduates are added to -the normal rate of~
Increase in my country every year, and my complete problen all
the time is where are we going to provide the academic staffs
that are needed to mantain this standard. Tbat Is -a Much
bigger problem than bricks aad mortar$ A mobh bigper preblem
than money, because of-all things that W, mus" t 84014' -it is a
debasement of the currency. . W. i co't hov# a Greshmans Law
applying to aeaidenio standards., of bad money drivimng out good.
we can't have this. We post son't. afford it.
I have a fixe4 belief that every 7earls.# oup of g ra4jates
ought to be, on the whole, rather better than their predecessors;
better trained amd, of @ ou" rso, In the world of. Soiesnoeamplexities
grow so-uch that you must be Immeasurably letter equipped a
scientists than your fathers were. ftt must keep the standards
up, end I hope that the staMisrds will be Ike" ae, that many
people who are now going to the Unmvrsitles and who bay* great
talent and have achieved high acidenic statuq, that som of then
will think of working In the Univofttiei,.. of teaching I. n schools,
of helping to produce a new generation. We can't all go off
after the best paid job, there must be constantly, year Sy Year,
a number of people who'have a feeling of dedication . to this
matter and who say, I an determined th~ t the standards of my
L'niverity will ris not fall, eivery year. That's the greatest
problem that confronts the Univrsties, in my opinion, But
every tim, Sir, I feel pessimistic abopt it*, and' I go to an
In'vesttture and I see the neow graduates, I-become an optimist.' 



6 / 00
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 51/ 1964
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen,
and senior Ministers had discussions this afternoon on the economic
situation with representatives of a group of national organizations.'
After the meeting, Mr. McEwen said that these talks, which were
first instituted in 1962, had again been most useful.
Mr. McEwen said that the Government would continue
to hold such economic consultations at regular intervals.
The various representatives reported a satisfactory
level of activity over the whole economy. They considered there
was no need for further stimulation of the economy, nor was there
need for any drastic restraint. Efforts should be mede to contain
pressures making for increased costs rather than to red. uce demand.
Increased productivity could make a major contribution to price
stability. Some organisations, while accepting the concept of
Restrictive Trade Practices legislation, sought opportunity for
further consultation. Ministers present, in addition to the Acting Prime
Minister, wer-e
The Right Honourable. Harold Holt, Treasurer.
The Honourable W. McMahon, Minister for Labour
and National Service,
Senator the Honourable Shane Paltridge, Minister
for Defence an" d Leader of the Government in
the Senate.
Senator the Honourable Harrie Wade, Minister for
Health and Acting Minister for Primary Industry.
Representatives who attended the meeting were
Mr. L. Atkinson, President, Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia.
Mr. R. V. Allison, President, Associated Chambers
of Manufactures of Australia.
Mr. J. P. Heffernan, President, Australian Primary
Producerst Union.
Mr. T. M. Scott, Vice-President, Australian Woolgrowers'
and Graziers' Council.
Mr. A. F. Havard, President, National Farmers' Union.
Mr. L. M. Ridd, Vice-President, Australian Wool and
Meat Producers' Federation.
Mr. H. F. Clarke, Chairman, Australian Bankers'
Association. / 2 
-2
Mr. K. G. Hooker, President, Master Builders'
Federation of Australia.
Mr. N. W. Lawrance, President, Federal Chamber
of Automotive Industries.
Mr. Theo Kelly President, Australian Council
of Retailers.
Mr. McEwen said that Ministers would be having
discussions with representatives of the A. C. T. U. on the morning
of 14th July and would also have separate meetings with the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and the Export
Development Council that afternoon.
CANBERRA, 13th July, 1964. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. NO. 53/ 1964
EC CNOMIC C ONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rto Hon.
John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister2 the Rt. Hon. John
McEwen and senior Ministers had meetings this afternoon
with the Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council and
the Export Development Council. This followed talks
yesterday with representatives of commerce and industry
and this morning with the A. C. T. U.
After the meeting, Mr. McEwen said that this
was the last of the present series of economic consultations
first instituted by the Government in 1962. He expressed
the Government's appreciation of the valuable work being
done by both Councils which had been established in 1958
to advise the Government on the development of secondary
industry and the development of exports.
Apart from Mr. McEwen, Ministers present were
the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, Treasurer, the Hon. W. McMahon,
Minister for Labour and National Service, Senator the Hon.
Shane Paltridge, Minister for Defence and Leader of the
Government in the Senate, and Senator the Hon. Harrie Wade,
Minister for Health and Acting Minister for Primary
Industry. Representatives of the Manufacturing Industries
Advisory Council paticipating in the discussions were Sir
Jamas Kirby ( Chairman), Sir Robert Webster, Mr. R. Irish,
Mr. R. Darvall and Mr. A. Glenn, The Export Development
Council was represented by Sir John Allison ( Chairman),
Mr. R. G. C. Parry Okeden, Mr. Leslie Atkinson and Mr. B. M.
Sims. CANBERRA, 14th July, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. 52/ 1964
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John
McEwen and senior Ministers today met representatives of the
A. C. T. U. in order to obtain the Council's views on trends in
the economy. This followed discussions yesterday with
representatives of commerce and industry, and formed part of
the series of economic consultations first instituted by the
Government in 1962. The A. C. T. U. was represented by Mr. Albert Monk
( President), Mr. W. P. Evans ( Junior Vice-President) and Mr.
H. J. Souter ( Secretary). Apart from Mr. McEwen, Ministers present were
the Rt. Hon. Harold Holt, Treasurer, the Hon. W. McMahon,
Minister for Labour and National Service, Senator the Hon.
Shane Paltridge, Minister for Deience and Leader of the Government
in the Senate, and Senator the Hcn. Harrie Wade, Minister
for Health and Acting Minister for Primary Industry.
The A. C. T. U. representatives had put forward a
number of proposals and Mr. McEwen said thaz the Government
had also appreciated receiving the A. CT. oU.' s views on thb.
economic situation.
CANBERRA, 14th July, 1964. 



64/ 09i5
E~ MBARGO NOT TO BE CABLED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE
7.00 P. M. E. S. T. ON THURSDAY 16TH JULY, 1964.
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 54/ 1964.
VISIT OF HER ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCESS MARINA, DUCHESS OF KENT
Statemnent by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen, M. P.
The Acting Prime Minister today announced the dates and
itinerary which Her Royal Highness Princess Marina, Duchess of Kent,
has accepted for her visit to Australia later this year. The visit
will be for almost two weeks and its main purpose is for Her Royal
Highness to have the opportunity o f visiting the British Exhibition
which will be held in Sydney from Friday, 25th September to Saturday
October,, Mr. McEwen added that Her Royal Highness would not be
undertaking visits to all States and said that this was in accord with
the Government's aim to have Royal Visits rather than Royal Tours. By
associating these visits with a specific occasion, it was possible to
eliminate many aspects of a formal tour.
SATURDAY 26TH SEPTEMBER Morning Arrive at Canberra
S MONDAY 28TH SEPTEMBER Engagements in Canberra
TUESDAY 29TH SEPTEMBER)
WEDNESDAY 30TH SEPTEMBER Afternoon Leave by air for Sydney
Engagements in Sydney
THURSDAY 8TH OCTOBER Depcart from Sy dneyy by air for London
Mr. McEwen also released the programme of engagements which
Her Royal Highness will undertake in Canberra:-
SATURDAY 26TH SEPTEMBER
Morning Arrive at R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn
Stay at Government House
SUNDAY 27TH SEPTEMBER
Morning Attend Divine Service at St. John's Church
Evening Dinner at Prime Minister's Lodge e 0 
-2-
MONDAY 28TH SEPTEMBER
Morning Visit Australian War Memorial
Lay wreath, view Roll of Honour, Hall of Memory
and visit Galleries
Proceed to Canberra City for drive through
Commercial Centre.
( BACKGROUND NOTE There will be assemblies
of school-children along the route)
Afternoon At Government House Receive Heads of Diplomatic
Missions
* 0 Attend Garden Party
Evening Dinner at Government House
O0 TUESDAY 29TH SEPTEMBER
Morning Visit W. R. A. N. S. at H. M. A. S. HARMVAN
Luncheon with Commonwealth High Commissioners
at Canberra House
Evening Attend Reception at Parliament House
WEDNESDAY 30TH SEPTEMBER
Afternoon Leave R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn, by air for Sydney.
Mr. McEwen concluded by saying that Her Royal Highness would feel
very much at home in Australia and would be received warmly and sincerely
by the Australian people. It would be Princess Marina's first visit to
this country and many would remember the sorrowful circumstances which
prevented her from being in Australia with her late husband The Duke of
Kent, who, before his tragic death on Active Service had accepted a
term of appointment as Australia's Governor-General.
BACKGROUND NOTE
The Premier of New South Wales will announce separately
the programme of engagements for Princess Marina's visit to Sydney.
CANBERRA 16th July, 1964. 



STATEMNT BY THE FRINE MINISTER AT MASCOT
AIRPORT ON ARRIVAL HOME AFTER RIME MINISTERS1
CONFERENCE IN LONDON 18TH JULY. 1961+
Q. Good morning, Sir. You are looking very well, if I may
may so, Sir.
A. Oh, I'm not too bad for an old man. Tomorrow, of course,
tomorrow afternoon I will have a Press Conference
and TV interview ai Canberra. I will have had a day
in bed and recruited my mental energy. All I want to
say this morning is that I think that this conferenee
was a great succes and I suppose for some people
a surprising success. There were no bitter dispUes,
There were arguents, of course. That'sa what we are
for. But the communique that ultimately came out
represented a remarkable degree of agreed opinion.
From my point of view the matters that I
will try to say something aboua in more detail tomorrow
are first of all the references to Malazia, a problem
to which I. myself, devoted a very great deal of time
in this conference. Second the statements made
about Southern Rhodesia whicA I think may need some
clarification. I don't know. I haven't read the
papers here, of course. I don't know what has come
out of one or two clarifying statements that I tried
to make in London. And in the third place, I will
take the opportunity tomorrow of saying something
about what I believe to be the effect on the future
of the Com onwealth of this meeting. On each of
these things, I think that good things can be said
and I myself came away from this conference with a
degree of satisfaction in the result that, quite
frankly, I didn't expect to have when I arrived
there.
Q. How did you find President Johnson, Sir?
A. He is a very interesting chap.
Q. Did he promise any further
A. Now, wait a minute. I thought it was arranged this
is not a press interview. I'm not answering questions.
I will tell you about him tomorrow, if you want to
know. Thank you very much, Sir. 



FQg8 Lii s P-" 4Y n/ 5965
WORkI ANr SPKQ D " OCOi.
StatMant bM tbe Pi. ster. tb2 Ht-Lim. Sir Robert Md pAU
The Prie Minister, sir Robert M3eniesssoon
after his return fram England today, send the follwing
telegram to 11r. Donrld Campbell s-
" YOU H1AVE ,! 43 ; PLEEkrNDID SUCCS III
6Pih ut MA&amp; NY fRUSTfIO? 0N8 AND I s* 1' D YW
M IIEARTY CrflGRATJL. TiIJ0NS. R. G. 11LANiZES."
CA71BLRH/ I
18th July, 1964. 



PRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCE
GIVEN BY THE FRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES _ AT CANBERRA ON SUNDAY,
19th JULY, 1964.
PRIME MINISTER Subject to your concurrence, I think the best thing
for me to do would be to make so-me general statements of my own
about this conference. Those statements may cover some of uhe
questions that you have in mind, but it will make, I think, for
coherence if I just say scmething on my own account first.
There are two things to be said about this
conference which is the ninth consecutive Prime Ministers' conference
that I have attended, The first is that there were eighteen Prime
Ministers or Presidents in attendance, There was a great variety
of views and, of course, that meant that the work of the Chair was
uncommonly difficult because there were eighteen of us all not
unwilling to say something about one p.: oblem or another and if we
were to get through, -chis required great patience on the part of
the Chairman, Sir Alec Home, and he certainly exhibited that
patience in a remarkable fashion. He was tactful5 he enlivened
the proceedings from time to tim3 with a little humour if things
threatened to become a little tense and he was, whenever firmness
was required on the part of the United Kingdom, admirably firm,
Everybody, I think, at the conference regarded his contribution
to the conference and to the result as quite outstanding. I think
it is very proper that that should be said.
Well, in comparing this conference with those
that have taken place in the past I am able of course to look
back over a fairly long period would say that the debates on
this occasion were more active, more forceful, perhaps in some
respects more assertive, than in the paste That was inevitable,
and not a bad thing. There was also, particularly on the part of
the newer members of the conference, a tendency to look for
majo*-ities. Every now and then, somebody would say, " I would like
to move such and such" and he would need to be cold that we don't
have resolutions or votes or majorities or minorities in a Prime
Ministers' conference. We meet to exchange our views with frankness
and to learn something from each other.
There is a disposition, and I pointed it out
myself more than once, to regard the Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
meeting as a sort of a sub-committee of the United Nations that
brings in all these United Nations techniques. Now that in my
opinion is no good. This is something quite different from the
United Nations and I think ultimately that view came to be accepted.
Now it would be foolish to pretend that there were
not periods in this conference which were periods of tension, where
sharp disagreement might have resulted in some sort of deadlock,
but these were surmounted. I don't know whether you surmount a
turning point, but still, don't hold me to a precision of language,
The first related to the problem of. Malaysia.
Now this, of course, has tremendous importance for us and I made a
number of contributions on this point, emphasising the importance
of Malaysia and emphasising the fact, which I said was beyond
question, that Malaysia was not only recognised by the Prime
Ministers themselves, because we had done that at the earlier
meeting, but had been recognised by and admitted to the United 
Nations, and that Malaysia was therefore an independent country
within the Commonwealth, as entitled to the preservation of its
own political integrity and physical integrity as any other member
of the Commonwealth, or indeed as any other free nation in the
United Nations, and that we ought to say so, but above all things,
we ought to make it clear that the aggression against Malaysia was
to be condemned and that we supported Malaysia in her resistance
to it. Now that may seem simple enough but there was some
difficulty over it because some of those represented believed that
much might be done by negotiation with Soekarno or by negotiation
of a general kind. What I was emphasising was that although only
some members of the Commonwealth would find it within their power
to give military aid to Malaysia, at least everybody should give
moral aid to Malaysia, not only inside the United Nations but
round the world in the posts in which they were represented.
ltimately, we got a result or that which I -hcught pretty good
because after a good deal of discussion, it was agreed in t. u
communique not only and I am looking at the words of it that
efforts would be maintained to resist aggression from without or
subversion from within, but the conmunique then went on to say
" In this connection they ( that! s the Prime Ministers, all of
them) assured the Prime Minister of Malaysia of their sympathy
and support in his efforts to preserve the sovereign independence
ana integrity of his country,"
There was a good deal of discussion about the word " support" to
which there was opposition originally in some quarters. It was
made clear that support didn't necessarily mean kil. tary supporG,
of course. It might mean moral support for some people might
give their support diplomatically, others in other ways. Finally,
without labouring the matter, we had a unanimous agreement on the
words I have lust quoted and I am sure that this sent the Tunku
Abdul Rahman away with a good deal more comfore in his mind about
the attitude of the Commonwealth.
The other problem was the problem of Southern Rhodesia
and that perhaps is worth a little explanation. It was agreed
from the very beginning, and indeed it had to be, that the problem
of Southern Rhodesia and the accession to independence of Southern
Rhodesia was one to be handled by the Government of the United
Kingdom. It is, for this purpose, the colonial power and it must
deal with that problem in discussion with the Government of Southern
Rhodesia and any other groups in Sohthern Rhodesia who may be
brought into conference. Now that was important. This was a
problem for the United Kingdom. Well then, of course, there was
at once a division of view. I maintain what is apparently the
old-fashioned view that if Great Britain is accepted as the
negotiating power and the only one at the table competent to carry
on the negotiations, she ought not to be handicapped by a lot of
advice or as I put it myself riding instructions. Certainly
not to receive orders from a number of governments without the
responsibility or authority to deal with the matter.
The African countries, broadly, most of them took the
view that this was so important that they ought to have their
views recorded. Well, a very curious thing happened about that.
~ h had a little discussion as to whether these things ought to
be done in formal meeting, as if we were laying down the rules, or
in an informal meeting. So we had an informal meeting on Southern
Rhodesia. You must understand that there is a mystique about
things. If you sit in the big room and you have microphones in
front of you that's a formal meeting, and if you move into the
next room and you don't have microphones, that's an informal / 3
I 
meting. These are things not to be understood readily by the
laity, So we went into the small room just the Prime Ministers
with one adviser, and we had a discussion about Southern Rhodesia
and views were expressed. One of them was that there ought to
be no independence on the part of Southern Rhodesia until there
was a provision for majority rule. In other words, until the
African had a vote as well as the European. The answer to that,
very simply, was that the United Kingdom Government had made that
clear long since and indeed it is implicit in the pesEit
Constitution of Southern Rhodesia. However, it never prevents
us from hammering away at a point to discover that it has been
conceded before we start, and the communique ultimately recorded
the fact that the United Kingdom had made this statement and that
it was received with approval.
In the second place, it was said that there ought to be
a constitutional conference. Well, no doubt, that is a very
sensible thing to have and it has usually occurred in the past
when territories or colonies have received their independence,
but whether we should say so in a communique is a different matter
because that might look liie an instruction, and I saw no reason
why we should be giving instructions to the only Government that
had to handle the problem. A very delicate problem because
there are very strong feelings in Southern Rhodesia which one
can understand and I am no great believer myself in giving what
may appear to be instructions to a negotiating party wiLich has
a very delicate negotiation on its plate. However, that is a
difference of approach. Ultimately in the communique., it was
set out as the view of some of the Prime Ministers and I would
say that it wasn't the view of every Prime Minister in substance
but some required that it should be stated in the communique
for their own good local reasons,
Then it was also said that the political p2isoners
because there are one or two of them who are in gaol or held
incommunicado in some way ought to be released. Now, of
course, that's an interesting matter. I woiJd think that if
you are going to have a negotiation with somebody he ought to be
out of gaol when you have it, but the question was whether the
communique should say that these people should be released.
Well, they are in prison under the order of the Government of
Southern Rhodesia. The British Government can't release them
because Southern Rhodesia is in full control of all these
matters herself and has been for a long time. All the British
Government could do would be to try to persuade the Southern
Rhodesian Government to let them out, at any rate for the
purposes of a conference. But that again seemed to me to be
a matter for the United Kingdom itself, depending on how their
negotiations with Southern Rhodesia were going.
I got into a little trouble over this. I was going
to say " I'm sorry to say" but I'm not sure that I am sorry to
say because I said thC.-' in the communique it ought to be made
clear that this was not a unanimous statement by Prime Ministers
because I did not believe in giving instructions or advice
publicly in a communique to the British Government on a matter
which was the British Government's business and not mine. Some
people present thought and offered to say that I was advocating
the imprisonment of political opponents. I regret to tell you
I took the opportunity of saying that I was one of the few at
the table who didn't imprison his political opponents.
Therefore my position was not to be misrepresented. However,
as you have seen in the communique, these particular views were
stated and as there was perhaps some attempt to misrepresent
my position, I have stated it here. I don't advocate the a e / 4 
imprisonment of political opponents. I don't advocate not holding
a conference on a matter of this kind but above allthings) I do
advocate not cruelling the pitch for the man who hi: s to do the
batting on it in negotiations. However, the commuunique very
fairly states that that view was expressed. I just indicate that
it wasn't a unanimous one.
That took an awful lot of thrashing out, particularly
when we got to the communique because, very understandably, a lot
of the new African countries have commitments at home and they
have strong views in their ovmn countries and I, myself, had no
objection to them stating those because they needed to be understood
in their own countries, but I don't want my position to be
misunderstood either.
That reminds me that there was an interesting aspect of
this conference, You know, Prime Ministersf conferences are held
in private and all the papers th-at you receive~ and all the re cords
of the proceedings are heavily marked. " Private and Confidential",
but I found that in a great number of cases the speeches that were
being made were written and handed out even before they were
delivered which no doubt was very convenient from the point of view
of the London Press but seemed -to me to be a little difficul;* to
reconcile with having a private meeting, and as I don't read my
speeches at these conferences, there was nothing to hand out. Sc
if you read the London Press, you wou~ ld be hard put to find out
if I had said anything, but I said a good deal, but in private, in
a private conference.
Again, I don't com,, pILain about this. I think what we
have to understand is that this is a very different Commonwealth.
This is now a meeting of a large nuimber of communities axnd governmenL
s which have different histories and different ideras about
how these things ought to be done. We can't -impose our somewhat
old-fashioned views on these matters on new people. We have to
remember that the agitation about political independence these
emerging colonies has been hard and strong, that it continues after
they hav! e received their independence, and that political factors
persist to a degree which would be impossible for us to understand
because we have been accustomed to political independence for many
years and we realise that our main business relates to matters
other than the securing of independence from some colonial control,
but the newer ones are very much taken up with this matter still
and the result is that in a group of eighteen people, seventeen
of whom represent what were once colonial territories, we still
hear about colonialism and imperialism. W-yell, of course, everybody
who was there was there because in his particular case colonialism
had ended, and from a reasonable point of view, I didn't find it
necessary to discuss colonialism very much. It seemed to me to be
a matter of past history, but it still exists not only in their
vocabulary but in their minds.
The first thing that a Prime Minister of the old Commonwealth
has to adjust himself to is that although this is not his
vocabulary and these are not his ideas, they do exist and they must
be received and understood. Indeed it was one of the fascinating
things about this conference that although these matters give rise
to great passion in some of the countries concerned, and although
the debate was extremely vigorous in London, there was at no time
any personal conflict at all. The personal relations between all
representatives were extraordinarily good.
Another matter perhaps I ought to mention, because it
concerns us here. You will have seen in the communique that there
is a somewhat brief reference to China. Two or three of us had
devoted a good deal of attention to explaining the outward thrust
a 1 
of China and the aggressive nature of Chinese communism and its
impact on South-East Asia. There was a tendency to brush this
aside, particularly on the part of the Africa-n countries because
it was-said that was cold wa-r talk and the cold war was an irrelevant
thing to the Commonwealth and Commonwealth considerations. This
is based upon some idea that the cold war is a sort c' domestic
conflict between the United States and Communist powers. Well, I
did my best to explain that matter; I am afraid not with very much
success. I even venture to say that if the Western powers had
not been successful in the cold war so far, we might not have been
sitting there having a conference. But I wouldn't have you take
that as the universal view. In fact, the reference, ' he nature of
the reference to China in the communique rather reflects -' Vhe
predominance, for this purpose, of the view that the cold war ought
not to be brought int-o our statem: nt and ought not -to be referred
to as a live issue. Well, that is not a matter that one argues
about forever bec ause I am pecrfectly free to state my views on the
cold war whether they are in the communique or not, and of course
the same goes for a number of the other Prime Ministers who -, e: e
there. Well, now, so far I have spoken to you about some of the
turning points in the conference, all of them happily resolved so
that we were able to get an agreed-upon document at the end which
was very good, but beyond that, I think that the Conference produced
some positive results.
Now take the Commonwealth Secretariat. It is quite true
that the form of the Secretariat isnit yet determined. The official
committees are to go to work to discover how you set up the
Secretariat. its functions are very broadly described in one
passage that some of you may have in your minds. I have it here;
" They therefore instructed officials to consider the best
basis for establishing a Commonwealth Secretariat which
would be available, inter Iaj. ia, to disseminate factual
information to all imember countries on matters of common
conceirn, to assist existing agencies ir the promotion of
Coninonwealth links in all fields, and to help to co-ordinate
the preparation of future meetings of Commonwealth heads of
government."
Now this was a very interesting thing because back before the war,
I suggested a Commonwealth Se. retariat and later on, during the
war and shortly afterwards, this received no support. I felt that
we ought to have a small central body which could help to prepare
these meetings and see that we were well informed about each otherrs
problems before we met, There is nothing more exasperating than
to have somebody raise a problem in relation to his own country,
a country of which you know nothing and therefore you are in no
position to assess the significance of the problem. If all this
were done ahead and circulated, I think we would have better results
and perhaps better results in a shorter time.
On this occasion, this proposal was put forward by the
African countries themselves and received general approval, with the
result that work is being done to establish a Commonwealth Secretariat,,
When I look back and I recall that in a week or two before the
meeting there were gloomy prophecies that the whole thing would
break up, this meeting would be the last meeting indeed I was
very conscious of its difficulties -and dangers myself it is
very interesting to realise that one of the things that has come
out of the meeting is that for the first time in the history of the
Cor~ onwealth thqre is to be established a Secretariat whicha is based
on the proposition that the Commonwealth is a continuing thing
an enduring thing and that the machinery ought to be made available
9 9 a 9 */ 6 
-6-
to enable it to continue more effectively. That, I think, was quite
a remarkable achievement and a very powerful answer to the pessimists.
And in the second place, the Government of the United
Kingdom put forward a series of concrete proposals for mutual aid
in development, for a Commonwealth Foundation, for a medical
conference for a variety of matters of that kind, and these were,
in principle, completely accepted by the conference. I suppose
that if there hadn't been so much debate on Southern Rhodesia
and matters of that kind, a good deal mere discussion might have
occurred on these points, but at least it is interesting to note
that they were in principle accepted all round the table and that
machinery is in course of being established to work out these
matters so as to reduce them to sonme sort of concrete form. At
the present time, some of them are a little vague of necessity.
But I believe myself that a great deal of good will come
out of these positive proposals. That is anuther positive achievement
of the conference. I would like it, myself, to have pernaps
gone on further, but you know, in the present year of grace, if a
couple of Ministers come along as they did Mr. Heath came along
and Mr. Maudling the Chancellor of the Exchequer and they talked
about economic aid and economic development most of us had a
tendency to assume the posture of a fellow who is on the receiving
line which, as we were reminded once or twice, makes it a little
difficult for the United Kingdom which has its own problems of a
financial order. But at the same time, I think that when these
matters have been analysed and some of them go into effect, wo
will find that this has been a real step forward in having inside
the Commonwealth something that doesn't necessarily apply to other
people, some joint undertaking, some practice, some e:: peLience in
co-operative work between Commonwealth countries as such, which
can do nothing but good for the future.
Well, now, I am sorry to be talking so long on this
matter, but I think that if you don't mind I would like to tell
you that there are one or two things that are to be learned from
a conference of this kind. I know that I am in process of learning
them and I think that we will all have to learn them.
The first is that we must become accustomed to the fact,
for some little time, that the newer countries will continue to
hammer at matters which we regard as closed issues. I will just
mention one of them, this question of colonialism and imperialism.
I made an innocent enquiry at one stage as to whether it
might be thought fit the next time somebody passed a resolution
about imperialism if they said this means Russian imperialism,
Chinese imperialism and Indonesian imperialism. I think this
jeu d'esprit of mine wasn't altogether successful. But these
things will go on and I don't mind, and I hope nobody will mind;
they are the aftermath of what h. s been in some cases very
painful experiences and therefore one musn't be surprised to find
them manifesting themselves at a time when you and I would have
thought the issue had been concluded in favour of freedom.
And the second thing is this: That words don't always
mean the same thing. Well, we are familiar with that aren't we,
in some ways? But it comes as a little bit of a shock to realise
occasionally that a lot of expressions that are with us almost
cliches are completely misunderstood or understood in a different
sense. Fro example, in the communique you will see a reference to
" representative institutions" in Southern Rhodesia. The United
Kingdom Government had said that they would not grent independence
until fully representative institutions had been established. I
9. */ 7 
-7
think I can put my finger on that
" They welcomed the decision already announced by the
British Government that as in the case of other territories,
the existence of sufficiently representative institutions
would be a condition of the grant of independence to
Southern Rhodesia."
Well, one or two of my colleagues said, " But, we don't understand
that. We dcn't have institutions." You know, as if one were talking
about the Institution of Manlagement or something of this kind. This
is a simple illustration of how you can &amp; o wrong. And therefore,
what's the use of talking about " rerresentative institutions?"
" Do you want institutions that will be represented?" You see?
And it had to be explained fromn our point of view that the
representative institution of a nation is parliament and that this
meant an elected body which would be concerned with the government
of the country. Well, it's wor~ h just tucking that away in tri3
corner of the mind.
And then it wan~ without its amusing aspects there
was a constant demand that in Southern Rhodesia there should be
one man one vote. And. I said, " Well that is, of course, an
expression with which we are very familiar in my country one man
one vote. This of course is the very d'-finition of democracy,
but with us i~ t means one free man, one free vote with a choice.
You can't have one man one vote in a one-party State." This
proposition of mine was reCeiv~ ed with horror, naturally, by one or
two or three people who hiave one-party States and to whom one man
one vcte if it means anything, means something quite different
from what we have in mind. I was hoping, as I told them, that this
might be cleared up so that Southern Rhodesia would know in which
interpretation the phrase was to be employed. But there again, we
must just accommodate ourselves to this.
It is very foolish to imagine that you are dealing with
eighteen democracies at this conference because you are not Tf
you were to say to us in Australia, " Let all parties except one be
prohibited," you would say, " Well no longer are we a emocracy" l and
yet that is the rule in some of the countries represented around
the conference table, and I always hiave to say to myself as I say
to you, it is not for us when we have granted freedom to a country
to determine what system of government it will employ. It will
adopt the system it likes best, and in the early days, particularly
of new countries, there is a greater tendency to authoritarian
control, to a strong central administration than there is in a
politically older country with an older experience of political
affairs. So that there are these things to be learned and to be
obtained out of the conference.
But going back to where I started, I would say that taking
it on the whole, taking the difficulties with the results, taking
above all the personal atmosphere that existed at the conference,
this conference was a success and although it of course doesn't
guarantee the future of the Commonwealth, it I believe, makes a
very strong contribution to the continuance of the Commonwealth and
I believe that as time goes on, Prime Ministers' Conferences will
be able to direct more and more of their time to matters of material
substance in relation to the well-being of the countries and
perhaps a little less time to these problems of political independence
which attracted a good deal of our attention on this occasion. e / 8 
8-
Well, I am sorry to have taken so long over that. I am
now in your hands.
Q, Sir Robert how do you feel about the future of the
Commonwealth? There have been a lot of reports that the
Commonwealth won't succeed.
A. But this is what I've been saying. I think that the
Commornwealth has come out of this conference stronger than
a great number of people expected when the conference
met and I think that the omens are good but as I said at
the end of my remarks, the real test will come when we
concentrate more of our attention on matters of current
economic substance, for example, than we were able to do
on this occasion.
Q. Sir Robert Sir Alec Douglas Home has said that when the
Commonwealth Prime Ministers expressed sympathy and support
for Malaysia they were unanimous, but you hava been quoted
as saying that we got a pretty fair degree of agreement on
this subject, does this mean that you disagree with Sir
Alec?
A. Of course not. I don't see any inconsistency between. us.
What is stated here is unanimous. What is stated in the
communique is unanimous. I just went to the length of
pointing out that there were arguments on the journey,,
There was a little different emphasis on my part from what
there might be on somebody else's, differences of method,
but in the long run, yes, we got unanimity.
Q, Sir Robert, do you consider that you have reason to be
optimistic about the future peaceful relationships between
the coloured and white races in the world?
A, Yes, I saw no reason in this conferenco to become pessimistic
about that. I think that you put your finger on this
point and I think it i~ s worth emphasising that if we are
to avoid conflict " avoid" is perhaps not the right word
because it suggests that it is a liability I don't know.
But if there is not to be conflict inside the Commonwealth
for a start between the white races and the coloured races,
we will all need to get to understand the other man's
point of view a good deal better. That is one of the
values of these conferences. We will also need not to
assume that when we speak about certain matters in a certain
way that they are understood in the same sense by the other
man, There is a tremendous exercise in tolerance and
understanding to be engaged in here and I think we saw a
good example of it in this conference. Now I do' feel
at all pessimistic about that problem.
Q, Sir, you described the result of discussions on Malaysia
as pretty good but would you say that you were completely
satisfied yourself or that the Tunku was satisfied at
the expression of sympathy and support and no additional
material aid?
A. Oh, I didn't anticipate that there would be material aid
promised by everybody. What I was after was to get beyond
the point of mere sympathy to a positive expression of
support. That support, as was said at the time, might
in the case of Australia and the United Kingdom and New
Zealand, be military and financial. In the case of somebody
else, it might take a financial form. In the case of
most, it might take the form of being active in and around
the United Nations in presenting the case for Malaysia.
In other caces. it r4iht be don. e thln. ugh diplomatic action
to try to persuiade Soeka':: no, for example, to pull his
troops off. Each one is to employ his own method. 
-9-
Qo Has the fresh supply of Soviet arms, the Soviet arms
agreement altered this picture at all, Sir, in your mind?
A, No. That picture is as I have just stated and I wouldn't
want to alter it.
Q. Did any countries in addition to Britain, Australia and
New Zealand indicate that they would assist Malaysia
materially.....
A. I would prefer not to answer that one.
Qo As a European nation close to Asia, is Australia satisfied
that Britain and the United States still suppor-our
general Asian policy?
A. Yes, I am, we are, and I am told that at the ANZUS meeting
this was confirmed, I don't lknow, at first hand.
Q. Did you seek from President Jchnson the declaration that
I understand has cone from ANZUS of support for Malaysia?
A. Look, when I was there, in discussions with both the
President and Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, I was at
pains,.... I wasn't anticipating the ANZUS meeting oecause
my colle ague was going to that, but I did want to know
first whether C, s; atment on the ANZUS pact in the
Parliament, which was one made with great care oas accepted
by them, and the answer was yes, it was accepted by them
completely and so far as tne State Department was concerned,
it had circulated it aml ong its people as a definitive
statement of the position, There is no ambiguivt between
us at all,
Q. Does the Australian Government intend any representations,
diplomatic or otherwise, to the Russians in protest againist
their intervention in this Malaysian dispute?
A. I don't know, I have only just got back home. I have not
even had a chance to discuss that matter.
Q. Sir, speaking of President Johnson, does his probable
visit to this country depend on his re-election in November
or upon some other issue?
Ao Well, let me make a profound remark. He won't come before
November, I think that's certain. If he does win the
election, I think he'll come during his new term. If he
doesn't win the election then he will not come as
President of the United States. ( Laughter)
Q. Sir Robert, in your discussions with President Johnson,
was there any mention made at all of greater Australian
participation in South Vietnam?
A. No.
Q. Were you hoping there would be some censure of Dr.
Soekarno's actions in Borneo and against Malaysia
generally? That there would be criticism as well as
support for the Tunku? That they would criticise Dr.
Soekarno?
A. Well, I'm a bit of an optimist but I knew that that might
be playing it a little hard and therefore what 1 wanted
to get as far as I was concerned and speaking also for
the Tunku was a positive statement of support for him and
what he is doing. I think that involves a criticism 0 
10
because you can't uphold the defence against aggression
without condemning the aggression by implication. But
there are people who are a little nervous about defining it.
I am always satisfied with the substance.
Q. Sir, as a result of these past arduous few weeks, can you
see any prospect of any political settlement appertaining
to Indonesia, Vietnam, Laos, end the Indo-China region in
general?
A. That's a question I don't think can be answered. I don't
despair of it. I think it is intensely difficult, I think
it is going to take a long time and it will be affected,
of course, by a number of other circumstances, including
some of the military factors in Vietnam. But I wouldn't
want to make a pronuncJ. amento on that one,
Q. In a military sense,~ would you describe it now as grave, Sir?
A. Well, that's your word. I think it is serious. Yes,
seri9us.
Q. Did you form an assessment, Sir, of the degree of lamerican
determination in Vietnam? How determined are they to
maintain their position there?
A. I think they are very determined to maintain it. Of course,
all this is on the assumption that the President remains
President. I don't uimow what will happen in the alternative.
I'm still reading the papers.
Q. Would you say that these declarations of lamerican and
British Commonwealth support for Malaysia were the principal
objectives of your trip overseas, Sir?
A, Not necessarily the principal, but it was one matter that
was very prominent in my mind and about which I spoke
perhaps more than on any other single topic. If that's
what you have in mind, I feel very strongly about it.
Q. Are your talks with the Tunku, Sir, likely to result in a
consideration of further material aid by this country for
Malaysia?
A. I didn't have any discussion with him about that, As a
matter of fact, we were all due to have a talk in London
on the afternoon of the Thursday, but we went on talking
instead in the conference. We were supposed to finish our
communique by one o'clock on Thursday and then I was to have
some further talks on other matters, but we sat until nine
o'clock at night, after which none of us was fit to talk
to anybody about anything.
Q. You were reported, Sir, to have forecast a pretty sharp
increase, I think of the order of fifty per cent., in
Australian defence spending. Does this imply any new
defence projects or is this the cost of
A, Oh this was the ultimate mount-up of the current programme.
Buof course, past experience has shown that defence
programmes are by no means static and these last changes
we made were quite massive and I daresay there will be
others in future. a / 11 
11
Q. Sir, will there be further consultations with the Tunku on
material aid for Malaysia, following his visits to Washington
and Canada?
A. You mean on the Prime Minister
Q. I mean more on the Government level.
A. Well, I can't tell you that. The officials are in constant
touch with each other. It usually comes up from the official
level.
Q. Would you be happy ' o see more moves towards another summit
meeting, Sir?
A. A summit meeting about Malaysia?
Q. Yes sir.
A. Well, you know, a summit meeting which takes place between the
President of Indonesia who doesn't admit that Malaysip exists
'. out who, strangely enough, then offers to crush it, and at the
same time maintains active trooos on Malaysian territory, seems
to me to be a funry kind of summit meeting. If a summit
meeting could be preceded by a statement that his military
aggression would cease in fact and that his forces wo-uld be
withdrawn and that Malaysia would be recognised by him as it
is by every other country in the world could be a very useful
one. Not that the Tanku has anything lo withdraw. I don't
know what he would take to a summit meeting, but if it led
to a better mutual understanding, some element of friendship
with each other and with the Philippines, well, yes, a summit
meeting would be good. I very largely share the Tunku's views.
To be asked to go to a summit meeting when your territory is
under active military attack by the other parties, who persist
in it and who continue in it while the meeting is on. this is
a contradic. ion in terms. This is no kind of conference.
This would be only a kind of appeasement.
Q. Is it your impressicn, Sir, that Philippines support for
Indonesia has drifted away somewhat from its former position?
A. Well, I haven't been in the Philippines, except the other night
on the airport, so I wouldn't know.
Q, Sir Robert, did you feel that there was a fee ing of sympathy
by the African leaders on the Malaysian question or were they
too preoccupied with their own problems?
A. Oh, no, they sympathised with it. They know that independence,
the preservation of your owm integrity is just as much essential
in Asia as it is in Africa. I'm sure they know that because
I took the opportunity of saying it a few times. But I think
that's quite right. They vary of course.
Q. Sir Robert, getting away from the Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
discussions and Malaysia for a moment, did you take an
opportunity in London to discuss the possibility of another
Royal Visit next year?
A. No. You mean a visit by The Queen?
Q. By The Queen.
A. No. 
,12
Q. Sir Robert, did the Common Market raise its collective head
at the conference at all?
A. No. Ted Heath attended the conference but I think lie got
out unscathed without any discussion on the Common Market.
Q. Would you say that Britain's entry into the Common Market
is dead?
A. No, out I think it sleeps.
Q. Sir, did you raise the question of a visit by some important
personage for Anzac Jubilee next year?
Yes, I have had that under discussion but there is nothing I
can say about it yet, but we will have one.
Q. Did any of your Commonwealth colleagues, Sir, make any
overt or covert cracks about Australia's immigration laws or
policy?
A. No.
Q. Have you, Sir, examined the position of a successor to
Lord De L'Isle?
A. Oh no, that's a long way off. No discussion of any kind,
directly or indirectly. That matter doesn't arise yet.
There is only one fellow who is out cf the picture and that
is myself.
Q. How do you feel about the Republicans' choice of a
Presidential candidate?
A. I have no comment to make. That's their business.
Q. Sir Robert, has there been any request from the South
Vietramese Government for bodies of troops rather than
military advisers?
A, Not that I know of, but you must remember that I've been
away for a month. I know of none.
Q. Some of Dr. Nyrere's Ministers are rather pro-Dr. Soekarno,
aren't they? Did he have anything to say about this?
A. Well, look, I don't want to be quoting what Nyrere had to
say on this. You have to remember that Tanganyika has now
entered into holy matrimony with Zanzibar and that Zanzibar
is very largely controlled by people who, if not communist,
are very much in that direction and therefore Nyrere is in
a position of some complica. tion, shall I sny, in this
matter. I found nothing unsatisfactory about his views
and when you ask me about his other Ministers, I don't know.
I didn't meet them.
P 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 56/ 1964
AUSTRALIAN FORESTRY COUNCIL
Statement by the Prime Ministerg the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies,
announced today that agreement has been reached between all
Australian Governments to set up an Australian Forestry Council
as a national advisory body on forestry matters.
The Council will provide the means for the mutual
exchange of information and views between the State and Commonwealth
Governments. It will co-ordinate research into problems
affecting the establishment, development, management and fire
protection of all forests and the utilisation of forest
products, and thus help to ensure the maintenance and improvement
of the quality of forests and forest products. It will assist
in co-ordinating the work of State and Commonwealth Governments
and also private enterprise in the development of Australian
forestry. Sir Robert said that many of our forest areas fulfil
an important function in that they protect the catchment areas
of many of our major rivers and water storages. Moreover, the
Australian forestry industry is an important one in the Australian
economy; the annual factory-door value of sawn timber, plywood
and veneers, fibre and particle boards, pulp and paper
manuf'actured from Australian forests is about œ C220M.
The Council will enable Australia to make the
best possible use of resources in men, technical knowledge,
available land and money and to co-ordinate activities in the
field of forestry practice and forestry research.
The Council will coim. prise the Minister for National
Development as Chairman, the Minister for Territories and the
Minister in charge of forests from each State. Provision has
been made for Ministers responsible for closely related
activities to be co-opted when problems of particular concern
to them are under discussion. The Council will be assisted by
a Standing Committee of Commonwealth and State officers.
CANBERRA, 23rd July, 1964. 



FOR PRESS P. M. 57/ 1964
STATE FUNERAL
DEATH OF THE HON. CHARLES WILLIAM FROST
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Commonwealth Government is arranging a State
Funeral for the late Mr. C. W. Frost of Hobart, Tasmania,
Minister for Repatriation and War Service from 1941 to
1946, and Aiistralian High Commissioner in. Ceylon from 1947
t. 1950. He represented the Federal electorate of Franklin
from 1929 to 1931 and from 1934 to 1946.
Mr. Frost died in Hobart on Wednesday and the
funeral service will take place at St. David's Cathedral,
Hcbart at 10 a. m. on Saturday, 25th July, after which the
c,: tege will leave for the Cornelian Bay Cemetery.
The Prime Minister will be represented at the
funeral by Mr. C. W. J. Falkinder, M. P.
CANBERRA, 23rd July, 1964
BACKGROUND NOTE: Mr. Frost is survived by his wife, Mrs.
Ruth Frost, two eons Mr. Stewart Frost, M. H. A. and Mr.
Alan Frost, and one daughter, Mrs. Clare Mc~ arthy. 



FOR PRESS s P. M. 58/ 1964.-
SIR JOHN LATHLAM
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir John Latham wasn one of the outstanding
Australians of our time and he will not easily be forgotten.
He gave a lifelong example of what could be done by a man
of lofty and tenacious character whose devotion to duty
was always backed by uncommon abilities and unflagging
energy. It was my good fortune to be a law student
under him and thereafter his junior and opponent at the
Bar and his successor in Kooyong and in the Commonwealth
Attorney-Generalship. I had good reason to know him well. To know
him well was to understand the full nature of his contribution
to our life as a nation and the deep springs from
which that contribution came.
CANBERRA, July, 1964.
The Prime Minister waid that under normal circumstances
Sir John Latham would have been accorded a btate
? uneral by the Commonwealth Goveriment. However, some time
ago Sir John made it known that this would be against his
wishes, and this has since been confirmed by Sir John's
family. The Prime Minister said instructions were being
issued that flags on Commonwealth buildings throughout
Australia should be at half-mast from sunrise to sunset
on the day of the funeral, Tuesday 28th July. 



FOR PRESS The following question and answer ( in themselves
complete and verbatim) from a press conference given by
President Lyndon Johnson on July 24 may be of interest
Mr. President, will you give us your
reaction to the attacks being made on
Senator Goldwater by foreign officials
and the foreign press?
A. I think that the Amrerican people are perfectly
capable of making their own decision with
regard to the parties and the candidates, and
I think that they will do that without the
necessity of advice from anyone abroad."
The exchange throws some light on the American
attitude towards the sort of critic.. sm made by Mr. Calwell
of the Republican candidate, Senator Goldwater, and Mr.
Calwell's criticism of the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
for withholding comment on the United States eloction.
R. CI MAkTEY
Press Secretary to Prime
Minister.
29th July, 1964. 



TIE CA1D1NAL'S DINNER
S E -14 N S I.-3OT JU1Y64
Seech byte Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
My Lord Cardinal, My Lords Bishops, Parliamentary Colleagues
and Ladies and Gentlemen This is really a most embarrassing occasion
for me. There is nothing I enjoy half so much as a hostile
audience. ( Laughter) Tinignt I have been listening to speeches,
eminently true about her, and deplorably exaggerated about me.
( Laughter) I think this is rathebad for me. I doi.' t think
a politician ought to be too much praised in his own lifetime.
Well, I'll put it this way to you, in the worst moments of my
unpopularity with this writer or this paper or that, I have
been perfectly certain that the obituary notice will be pretty
good. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
aSince we are in Shakespearian mood, I am bound
to tell you at once that i am no orator as Muldoon is ( Applause)
but I hope that somebody has recorded what he said ( Laughter)
and I will arrange with my solicitors to have this sent with a
compliments slip on thie day of my demise, and it will read very
rell then and my grandchildren will enjoy it. My children will
read it with a slightly lifted eyebrow ( Laughter) and my wife,
God bless her, will in her charity say, " Ah, if they only knew".
( Laughter) ( Applause) Now, your 1 ninence, it's a little late and I
don't want to take up too much of your tJme, but one thing I
did think about as I contemplated this evening and that was that
it is not so lcng ago oh, in the last year or two tht I
encountered a telegrLaph messenger on a bicycle, You inow, that's
not such an uncommon phenomenon a telegraph messenger on a
bicycle. He'd come to the Lodge, probably to deliver a few
abusive telegrams. hnd i stopped him and with a quiet face
I said to him, " My dear bcy, what are you going to be in the
long run? A Cardinal? A Minister of the Crown? A Director-
General of Postal Services?" And he looked at me with a blank
face and rode off. i don't think he has ever come back to the
Lodge. ( Laughter) I think he went back to the Postmaster and
said, " The old fellowts a nut". ( Laughter) And yet it's
perfectly true. A Cardinal, Sir9 Ministers of the Crown,
Directors-General, they all began life as telegraph messengers.
( Laughter) The one thing that really upsets me as a sound
Presbyterian and Protestant in this deplorable gathering tonight
( Laughter), the one thing that upsets me is that there is no
record of a Moderator-General having been a telegraph messenger.
( Laughter) ( Applause) Anyhow, Sir, there is a great significance.
I say no more about your over-kind remarks. I wish only that
I merited them. But i do want to say something to you about one
or two prooblems. The first thing to say about them is that
there is too much time wasted in this world on side issues.
There is too much time wasted by people who have the end in
common taking time off to fight each other about the methods
of achieving the end, In other words, to put it quite bluntly,
there is far too much intolerance in the world, and in Australia. ø/ 2
( Dame Pattie) 
If I come here tonight, as I have, there will be some
alleged Christian who will say I'm cultivating your vote.
You know? ( Laughter) PJell, it's a little bit too late to
do that, at the moment. But there is this nagging idea
in so many minds that although we are all the children of
God and hope to serve His purposes in this world, there is
an unbridgeable difference between those who do it this
way and those who do it that way.
Your Eminence, we are all members one of
another. This is something we must never lose sight cf,
and whether we be Catholic or Protestant or Jewish or
Muslim, the end remains clear: Vie have an overwhelming
duty to serve cur country on the highest level and to the
best of our talents, and so what I want to say to you is,
first of all, a little plea for tolerance.
Tolerance does not mean flabbiness.
Tolerance of each other does not mean that we condone evil
things or that we are not prepared to fight against evil
things. Tolerance is mutual understanding, forbearance, a
desire to assemble ourselves every time there is a common
cause to be served. And we need tolerance not only
religious tolerance political tolerance, social tolerance.
I suppose i' is one of the signs of the fact that we are a
rather young country that there is still too much intolerance
and bitterness. If I were asked at the end of my political
life to say, " d/ Jell, Menzies, do you think you ever did anything
that was any good?" I would pause for a reply, but I
think one thing I would like to say for myself would be that
I had never lent myself to any bitter disputes between people
on the basis of their religion, their political views or their
social position. ( Applause) In other words, Sir, I believe
that there is a chronic need in our cuuntry, and indeed in all
countries, for cool, objective, dispassionate discussion,
thought and utterance, My friend, Sir Charles McDonald, who rather
overplays me, I think, in his speech, is a classical scholar.
3very time I meet him I am reminded cf this because he takes
me promptly out of my depth by some profound classical
allusion ( Laughter) but I would like him to know that there
is a famous passage in Horace which I will do into English
for the benefit of those educated at the Sydney University
( Laughter) and that is, as he will recall " I remember
always to keep a calm mind in difficult matters". This is
a profound truth " I remember always to keep a calm mind in
difficult matters". This is the greatest advice that could
be given to anybody. We would solve our problems more quickly
and soundly if we remembered that observation all the time
something cool, dispassionate, objective.
Now I am mentioning that to you because
one thing that I wanc to say something about tonight is
that there has been a little controversy going on I
believe it is still going on about my famous proposal, now
in operation, that the Commonwealth Government not by
reason of any obligation but as a contribution to education
in Australia would find œ 5M. a year, for science teaching.
I will use a comprehensive expression for science laboratories,
science equipment in secondary schools. Now this,
in my innocence, I thought was a sensible idea. I didn't
know when I pronounced it, that it was so loaded with sinister aspects. / 3 
Five millonpoundsa year yes, it's a great sum of money, and
particularly if it is each year, a useful sum of money, and why
did we do it? iell, we had various things in mind. In the
first place, Australia in this scientific technological age,
needs more people trained in science, better trained in science.
The Australian universities need to have better equipped students
coming up to them in science. Ve need to have, so far as we can,
in the secondary school stages, such an encouragement of talent
by teaching and equipment and every other way as to produce more
people who will teach in these universities, maintain the standards
of the past and increase them, improve them, as they ought to be
improved for the future.
The greatest shortage in the forward look in universities
is the shortage of trained and competent staff. All these
cther things are material things money, bricks, mortar. I am
not saying that there is no limit to these things, but they are,
* viewed in comparison, the smallest aspects of the problem, and
if we are to have more and more people being trained in science,
trained through some aspect of science in medicine, trained in
engineering and if we are to have this done in universities
that are not third-rate universities so that we won't have bad
* money driving out good, then everything that can be done to
improve the standard of the student in the secondary school, many
of whom will go to the university, many of whom will go into
other fields of applied jcience, anything that we can do seems
to me to be all to the good,
Therefore, in my innocence, I thought: " lell, this
is a pretty good. idea, We'll do it." And we've done it and
we will go on doing it, ( Applause) Then, apparently, some
dispute arises. Should you do this for church secondary schools?
That's the first question.
SWell. I had the numbers typed out for me today and
the position is chat in the secondary schools of Australia as at
present, we have 674000 students and of these :-92,000 are in
Government schools, 120,000 ( I am taking it to the nearest
thousand) in Catholic schools and 62,000 inn: n-Cathoic schools.
Well, those are very interesting figures. The first question
that presents itseli is: Should the Commonwealth confine its
aid to science and equipment to the Government secondary schools?
Well, now, I am not going to buy into fields so much
more competently handled by some of my friends here tonight as to
what a State ought to do. Not a bit, because if a State which
has the direct responsibility for primary and secondary education
decides that it will have one system of education that the State
will conduct, that's the State's business. Don't treat me as
intervening in that field.
But when the Commonwealth comes along, with no
obligation, making a grant in aid for a particular purpose, then
the Commonwealth is bound to recognise that in fact there are
two systems, that in fact there are Government secondary schools
and there are non-Government secondary schools, and therefore
the first thing that the opponent finds himself putting up is,
" All right. IWell, now I don't mind the Commonwealth finding œ XM.
a year for science laboratories in State or Government schools,
but you are not to extend this to non-Government schools, whatever
they may be." Well, now, this seems to me to defy not only the facts
of life which are that a very substantial percentage of students
in secondary schools are in non-Government schools, but it also / 4. 
would involve me in saying, " I'm not running the State educational
system-I'm producing a grant in aid by the Commonealth. Now
on what principle do I say this may go to the Government of New
South Wales but no portion of it may go to the Sydney Grammar
School, or name any non-Government school you care to mention."
And, quite frankly, whether: it is through stupidity or otherwise,
I just don't understand how any such distinction can be made.
For us to discriminate in making a grant in aid fcr a purpose
ofo high national significance, for us to discriminate between
Government schools and non-Government schools, would open up a
world of discrimination in other fields to my mind equally
unjustifiable. Then, of course, there are those who say, " Well,
whatever you do, if you decide you won't discriminate, you can't
fail to discriminate between Protestant schools and Roman
Catholic schools", And the answer is that if I hiad to do that,
I wouldntt want to be in public life,, ( Applause)
Now, I think that a good deal of this confusion
that has arisen, has aciser because these elementary facto that
I have been referring to haven't been understood and I repeat
them for emphasis. What a State dces about its educational system,
what it decides as to which sy3tem it will support i. s its business
and there is a long history behind these things. Buat the
Commonwealth Government coming in to give some special assistance
for a speciol purpcse has no right to discrimi. nate. The benefit
of its aid must go all round for the purpose that has been
indicated. ( Applause" And, Sir, I am happy to say, rightly or weonqly,
Ive ben acting on this principle for a long time, becalse it
was my own Government which introduced tax rebates on school
fees, and I don't remember at that time any argument gci. ng on
to the effect that a parent could have a deduction from income
tax for school fees paid to a State high school but not for school
fees paid to the Methodist Ladies College. I didn't hear any
argument to that effect and I think if it had been put, it would
have been laughed out of court. Anyhow, it never was put.
And then right back in 1950/ 51, I began my own
exercises which I am happy -o say have been not unfrui'ful in
the universities field because we are not responsible for the
universities except for our own in Canberra. A Committee was
put up to make a very quick investigation and I was told at a
certain stage that the Committee took the view that the residential
colleges at the universities ought not to be in the picture
because presumably a university could exist without them or
alternatively, they were not really part of a university. ft
gave me singular satisfaction at that time to say to the Comnittee:
" Unless there is some recommendation in your list for the
residential colleges at the universities, I will ignore your
report" and so we got a little toe in the door I think that's
the expression. Then when the Murray Committee came along, all
this was established, and from that time on, as you know, we have
found very substantial sums of money for residential colleges,
and the interesting thing is that I don't remember any residential
college refusing ( Laughter). IJe didn't discriminate. Thore
are colleges connected with the churches in the University of
Sydney. I don't remember any one of them saying, " Sorry, we
can't take this." Of course they took it, because they understood
quite clearly that this was something extra being put in by the
Commonwealth, not of obligation, but as a national contribution, 
every penny of which is provided by the people of the nation,
whatever their religious denomination may be. ( Applause) And so
that has gone along very successfully, very happily, and as I go
into the universities, I realise, to the very great advantage of
the universities. Look, ladies and gentlemen, there is one thing that
all of us here tonight must bear in mind all the time. Everything
I say is about what the Commonwealth does in this rather extra
operation that it performs. But I have always been a tremendous
believer in schools and in colleges at universities which have a
background of religion and the reason for that the overwhelming
reason for that is that I would get no satisfaction in thinking
that we had pledged ourselves to a highly intellectual, if you
like, but highly pagan future. ( Applause) The world is full of
talent. Not quite so full of character.
The world is full of the most tremendous skill,
inventive genius the things that have gone on in my lifetime are
unbelievable. Nobody would ever have believed them in 1900 when
I was a boy of five. Nobody would have. But the whole century
has been marred, time after time, by man's inhumanity to man, by
a failure of the spirit, and a failure of the spirit is a failure
V of the character, and if we are going to have a high spirit and a
high character, an enduring character, then it is all nonsense to
say that I must engage in these almost absurd discriminations that
have been suggested. I am all for character. I am all for the
man whose character is rooted in eternal beliefs because he is the
man, she is the woman who will assure the future of this country.
( Applause) My Lord Cardinal, I am very grateful to the Bishop
for that speech of his. I am sure ha must have spoken it with a
slight mental reservation. ( Laughter) I don t want to engage in
theological arguments but it was all, you know, rather true in
a sense. Flattering in more senses than one. but very heartwarming.
But I wouldn't like him to think he was bound to go on believing
it for the rest of his life. ( Laughter)
0 Your Eminence, I began by a little glancing reference
to your earliest days. I vas very amused when you told me tonight
that at the last meeting in Rome the debate was conducted in Latin
but there were people who spoke Latin with a French pronunciation
and some with a German and some with an Italian pronunciation in
which they say " in c( h) aelo". I never quite understood... but
anyhow...... And others with different pronunciations. Well this
must have been extraordinarily difficult because even with us there
is the old pronunciation on which Charles McDonald was brought up,
no doubt, there is the new pronunciation on which a mere boy like
me was brought up ( Laughter), there is a law courts pronunciation
which is one of highly enlightened illiteracy. ( Laughter)
All I know is that on one occasion, one year, my wife
and I were in Malta. We visited Malta for a day and one of the
things to be done in that hectic day was for me to be given not
for the first time an unearned increment, an honorary degree at
the Royal University of Malta. Just as we set out on our journey,
they put into my hands the Latin that I had to pronounce at a
faldstool in the course of getting this degree. It was about
two or three hundred words. For a fellow a littly rusty in his
Latin, this was a grim prospect. However, I read it through and
thought about it a bit, and when we entered ultimately the
university, the Vice Chancellor who was a lively character met me
a o e / 6 
6.
and I said," Quickly, quickly before we go up there, what is
it? New pronunciation or old?" He said " It doesn't matter.
None of them will know. You just mumcle. ( Laughter) So to
the great puzzlement of my wife and my staff, there I ws kneeling
and mumbling. ( Laughter) My wife said to me afterwards, " Never
heard you mumble like that before". And I said, " No and you
have never heard me mumble in a better cause." ( Laughter)
Sir, ladies and gentlemen, you have beer more than
kind. We've enjoyed this very muh. I hope to get the written
record at some time. It will come in handy for me, not only
with my fellow politicians important though that may be but
occasionally uFeful with my wife ( Laughter), always useful with
my children and. beyond rubies with my grandchildren. 



JOURNALISTS' CLUB 2' TH ANNIVERSARY DINNER
SYDNEY. N. S. W. 31 st JULY. 1964+
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir, It is a very difficult and dangerous thing for a
politico to make a speech to newspapermen. ( Laughter)
Something you said reminded me of the fact that quite a number
of years ago, but after the occasion to which Ken Slessor
referred I was given a dinner this seems most improbable
but still it's true by some newspapermen when I was in
Melbourne. It was a very, vezy good dinner7 and there was
a certain amount of lubricant ( Laughter) available and I was
no doubt adequately lubricated but others were more so, and
at a certain stage in the night I remember a well-known
newspaperman coming along and standing over me as I sat in an
armchair and saying " You and he was rather tedious
abcut This, He kept on. ( Laufh er) He kept on, he kept on.
It was like a slipped disc. ( Laughter) " You know the trouble
with you is that you don't suffer fools gladly." ( Laughter)
( Applause) Much to my credit, I found myself saying, " And
what do you think I've been doing for the past fifteen minutes?"
( Laughter) Well, the Press and I have always understood each
other. i4e've always been a bit hostile. ( Laughter) We've
enjoyed a ceetain amount of hostility. We've loved it, and
every now and tiien I found myself reading one of my favourite
columnists and Ive read him and I haven't dared to say how
good he was because I knew that in that field, fur every friend
you make, you make three enemies, ( Laughter)
But I'm delighted to be here. I had forgotten that
it was twentyfive years ago that as a young and promising man
but perhaps not so promising as I am now,( Laughter) ( Applause3
Itd gone to Pfahlerb's Hotel..... Do you mind if I tell you
something about PfahleriTs Hotel? ( Laughter) Not that I
pretend to qualify as an extremely bibulous creature, but many
years ago, as it seems to me now, I was a great friend I am
happy to say, of Lionel Lindsay and I had met Norman Lindsay
a few times and we had a natter about this and that and there
was a dinner of some learned society you know, the artists
and architects and what-have-you, at Pfahlert's and I was a
guest. That afternoon I was around talking to Norman Lindsay.
He wasn't a guest, and I having that degree of impudence w. hat
maker a man a Prime Minister ( Laughter) said " Norman, you must
come tonight to Pfahlert's hotel. " Oh, no," with the wellknown
Lindsay voice. " But", I said, " You must come Norman,
you must. Lionel is going to be there." ( Laughter3 And he
said, " Oh, well, yes, old man," and I dragged him along.
Whoever was presiding at this dinner, he was as kind
as he could be. He just put it down to the eccentricity of a
politician, and I arranged with him that I would sit here and
Norman would sit there and Lionel would sit there. Well, now,
truth be admitted, they hadn't spoken to each other for about
five or six years, and I had an idea about this, so thoro they
were. With a suitable interjection by me? like a fellow putting
a rather stupid question at a press interview ( Laughter), ( you
all know what I mean by that) ( Laughter) they got cracking. 
-2-
They were going fifty to the dozen, right through the dinner.
The next day I went out to see Lionel, who was a particular
friend of mine, at his house at dahroonga and I said, " Lionel,
I thought that went rather well, last night, you and Norman."
" Oh yes, old man," he said, and you won't understand this unless
you know the Lindsays, he said, " Quite right. Very good fellow
Norman, but the only tñ' ouble is that he talks too much." ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, the second thing I want to say is that by the
great kindness of my deplorable press secretary, Ray Maley
( Applause) whose restoration to health pleases me beyond words
( hear, hear) ( Applause), I was given a copy of the journal
what was it called " Copy", a rather restrained title, so unlike
the headlines tc which I am accustomed but anyhow, I read this
with loving care and therefore I am able to tell you that I share
your pleasure in the fact that since 1941 Snakey Smith has not
been with us. ( Laughter) I didntt know Snakey Smith. I suspect
he was a fellow a bit like me. ( Laughter) Anyhow, Snakey Smith
was turfed out, I don't remember reading in the newspapers
about Snakey Smith being turfed out ( Laughter); I dontt remember
a great cause c6lbre having arisen over Snakey Smith's
expulsion. I donut remember about the rules of natural justice
having been violated, ( Laughter) You know really, you are
terrible, except, I suppose, that you have to take orders.
( laughter) Anyhow, Snakey is not with us.
Then I began to say to myself " Well now, I have had a
good deal of experience of this and that anA I began to think
about that greai; art of reporting now so neglected ( Laughter) and
my mind went back to earlier pulitical days, Now there are
very few of you here who don't know and recognise hive Turnbull
( hear, hear) ( Applause). Now would you allow me to say that I
think Clive Turnbull was one of the greatest reporters. I know
that he is a man of singular talent in many fields and one of
the greatnst reporters in my lifetime. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
The moment I began to think about it, I remembered that
in 1932 there was an election in Victoria this is before some
of you were born. But anyhow, there was an election in Victoria
and my crowd were about to win. It does happen occasionally.
( Laughter) For the oni_ time in my life, I was returned
unopposed a rather depressing experience for the electorate
of Nunawading in Victoria. Therefore, Sir Stanley Argyle who
was the leader of my side said, " Well, would you go out and do
a series of meetings around the country?" This was my first
barn-storming tour.
In those days, of course, the perquisites of office were
not all that good ( Iaughter), and so I drove my own car and I had
my wife with me in the front seat, and in the back seat a spare
wheel and Clive Turnbull. ( Laughter) Clive was sent ouZ by the
Melbourne " Argus" which was then in its heyday, and so there we
were. We went around, we drove to Warnnambool, Hamilton, Ararat
and Great Western and Stawell, and Clive was there at the back
with that rather humorous chuckling sound of his. The amazing
thing about this man was that although we had gone to meeting
after meeting and I had said all the usual things and the
audience had either been bored or not so bored, as the case may
be olive would send in a column for the " Argus" which not
only-and I would like you boys to make a note of this
contained a fairly accurate idea of what I had said with a
commendable brevity that I couldn't coimand ( Laughter but also
by a few little brush strokes this was brilliant conveyed
the atmosphere of the meeting. Now this seemed to me to be / 3 
-3-
the greatest exercise in reporting I'd ever known, and looking
back on it I still think it was. The few little smudgy strokes
which let the reader know something of the quality and character
of the meeting. So as the time went on on this journey, I
conceived quite an alfection for Clive. There he was in the
back seat of the car with the spare wheel ( Laughter) on the
left, and my poor wile sitting there, and I am sitting here
driving. I made a powerful speech in the morning at Ararat, If
you have been there, you will know Ararat no not JeDarit but
at Ararat the platform, the stage is the highest in the world.
It's about as high as the wall, so that when you spoke tc your
audience being lucky to get one ( laughter) you peered over,
like a man peering over the precipice. It uas really terrible.
Anyhow we got through it. I made a powerful speech. It perhaps
didn't mean very much, and then we drove on.
The afternoon meeting was to be at three o'clock at Great
Western. You know, Gr3au Western champagne..... Great Western
this and that, and Great Western is a lovely little hamlet on
which th'e sun falls pleasantly, in which, so far as I have been
abJe to observe, nothing ever haopens tut on my paper it said,
" Three o'clock Gre&amp; t Western." So eing the :, lave of the
clock. I arrived at five to three. I pulled up my car with my
wife ' the spare wheel anc' Clive Turnbull, and we identified the
local hall, wnich is not difficult in a place like Great Western,
and at about ten past three, I said, " Well, it doe.-. ntt loolk like
a meating" and at twentyfive past three, a very earnest-locking
man arrived. It might have been a Journalist for all I Imew, but
anyhow, he was very seriousø He walked to the place and he
unlocked the door so I hopped out of the chariot and said, " Well,
excuse me, but there is a meeting, isn't there?" He said,
" 0h, yes, a meeting this afternoon. Wbat is your namesir?"
I said, " My name is Menzies" o He said " Oh yes, youtre speaking,"
I said, " You couldntt be more right, but is there a meeting?"
" Oh yes," he said, " That's all right," I said. " The moting was
for three o'clock and it is now twentyfive past, what about it?"
He said, " Oh, don't worry about that. Come in." So I walked
in and there was this little anteroom of the Great Western hall
with seats for twelve per. re. In those days, I was more
ambitious than I am now, and I said, " Twelve people?" He said,
" Yes, that's right. Twelve people. They'll be here." " uat" 9
I said, " Now, wait a moment. It's now half past three." " 0h,
well," he said, " You know. The boys dontt hurry along in these
parts. This is a wine-growing district,"
Well, now, I must tell you I was supporting a rather
battered veteran of my party who didntt quite know what it was
all about at this time and therefore had to be concealed and there
was a Country Party candidate I refer to this with great
deference and there was a Labour man. Well, we went in and
I had a look and I said, " Well, yes, twelve people." Then at
about a quarter to four, the audience began to arrive and believe
it or not, by four oclock, we had eleven people there and my
poor wife was there and Clive Turnbull with a pad, you know,
already to report this exciting event. Then the local man said,
" Excuse me, Sir, I will go and get the chairman."
He galloped along the road a hundred yards and collected
the chairman from the bar parlour ( Laughter). The chairman
arrived and I must say that the chairman had been rather overtrained
( Laughter) because he came in between a hiccup and a
hiccup and he sat there in the chair. Then he said, looking at
me, " All right, ladget going" and the lad got goingand I made
0000/ 1+ 
a speech. You must it doesn't matter whether the audience is
eleven or a thousand, you must speak your piece. But each time
I said this is a long time ago, you understand " a thousand",
he used to give a little hiccup and say " millions" ( Laughter)
and so I went along this millionaire course in this speech and
then I, very courteously, as my habit is, said " Any questions"
and two of the eleven had a question to put and eachi time my
answer was amended by the chairman who increased it quantitatively
by saying1 " No, no, Make it millions" and so we finished. At
the end, the chairman, who by this time war quite incapabla, of
rising from his chair ( I have a feeling most of you will
understand) ( Laughter3 said " Ladies and gentlemen. Tile besh
young candidate I ever hearA' and~. I gave a bit of a smirk, a..-id
so we got out and we went to T* Uhe footpath where I had my car,
with my wife, and Clive Turnbull andi the spare wheel,
This old boy came over and said, " Excuse me Mr. Mac,
but would you like to come along and have a bit of a Arink Cat
the corner?" I said " Well, it's very kind of you, : M~ t I am
due to make a speech In Stawell tonight". Oh, I'm sorry, Mr.
Mac but you know, Mrs Mac? you are the test candidate I ever
stood l'r." 1 You knaow, I in not very accustomed to this kind
of flattery ( Laughter) and thereforo I gave t1,9 nearest approach
to a smirk that a fellow like me can make. So I said, " 1Itm
terribly sorry" and we drove off and a quartar of a mile along
the road. to Stawell I pulled up the car and said, " Gosh, I
just remembered, Do you know that my candidate for this seat
is old So-and-So who has held it for some reason or another for
some time, and then thiere's a Labour man and then therets a
Country ' Party candidate whose name is MacDcnala." ( Laughter)
( Applause). I said to Cli. ve Turnbull having then more faith
in you wretches than I have now ( Laughzel,) I said, " What
should I do? Go back and put it a2. l right;" And he said,
1Oh, no ev ta hat. Pus. on to 14tawell," 1 Do you know
that when polling day came, and the results were out the next
day, I had secured the record of the vote Great Western.
I looked at the previous election and the current election, and
we had got exactly the same vote to a man. All I need to say
to you about that is that the following election wtan I dldntt address
the electors of Gre9t Western, Mac won. ( Laughter)
Now, might I tell you one other thing, because this
is really of historic importance. In Washington there are
two press groups. There is the National Press Club which is
replete with quarters, bottles, glasses. Itts a magnificent
place, and when you go there to speak, you are received on the
sidewalk and you are taken up and you are plied with various
liquors and then you go in and you make a speech. Then you
are asked questions,. The chairman has them all put on paper
and Le picks out the oncs that you think that he thinks you
can answer. I find this very advantageous.
Well, I must tell you because this will add to your
store of knowledge, that a few years ago, when Percy Spender
was our Ambassador in Washington, I was made a guest of State.
This is something rather important. You common herd wouldnt
understand this. I once was a guest of honour in Paris and
half the French guards were out on the streets and all sorts of
things happened. In America I was this time the guest at
Blair House, which is something. At Blair House, I must say
that the provision was adequate. But I had accepted an
invitation to make a speech at lunch time at what I thought in
my stupidity was the Press Club, but turned out to be the Press
Association whatever it might be. Well, Percy Spender who
Dos 
was much shrewder on these matters than I was, called along
about twelve o'clock at Blair House and bounced upstairs and
saw me and said, " dell, now, before we go to this thing, perhaps
we ought to have a drink." I said, " Percy, nonsense
you know these boys. They'll give you so much to drink belore
lunch that you are very lucky if you make a speech at all."
He raised a query, I must say, in his favour about this but I
said, " Oh no you can't do that." So we ultimately went down,
bone'dry, and we fomd ourselves driven to the Hilton Hotel and
we were ? hen put into that floor that exists between the ground
floor and the first floor, the entresalle or something. Anyhow,
we went there and we met all the most worthy creatures in the
world, but nobody had anything to drink,
Then we went into the large diningroom and there they
had five hundred people and we marched in and I went to my
place. There was a magnificent old man in tne chai from
Florida. He was really a gorgeous person. Old he was as
old as I am. Therefore he was an old man, and he sat there and
I sat here, and I looked down and I saw two tired pieces of
cold potato and a glass of iced water ( Laughter) and I thought,
well, well, this is not the Press Club. ( Laughter) And then
this nic: e old man, whom I shall always recalllouked arouna at
me. He was really a fine old Southern gentleman. He said,
" I'm terribly sorry, you know, but you've been at the Press
Club and they are very rich and we are very poor. We just can't
afford to do these things.': So I said, " Oh, foe-get about it."
Then all of a sudden it occurr3d to mo2 and I aid)
" Now, wait a moment, I'm not complaining, You must forget about
me. Didn't Winston Churchill speak to ycu fairly recentlyT,
about a ycear ego?" And he Said " Yes, he did." " Well," I
said, " Don't tell me that you fobod Winston off with a little
iced water" ( Laughter) and he said, " Well, no, sir". From now
on, if you don't mind, I will say what Winston said in Winston's
own voice as iiearly as I can do it. Ke dida't, ho was a most
courteous chap from Florida. He said, " Well, you know, sir,
we knew that Winston Churchill liked a little alcoholic liquor,
so we sent down below and we got a double scotch and we had it
brought up." I said, " I know exactly what a double Scotch means
in this country. You fill an enormous glass with lumps of ice
and water and all this kid of thing, so that you wouldn't know
what it wasø" " Well now, sir," he said, " you've got something
th3rel because when the old gentleman picked it up and he tasted
it, he said, " You know, it's very remarkable how the flavour
of good Scotch whiskey dissipates itself.'" ( Laughter) He said,
" You know, sir, I don't know Winston Churchill as well as you
do sir but I got the hint and so we sent down below and we
got neat, without any additions, a doutble Scotch and it was
brought up and poured into the old gentleman's glass, and he
took it up and he tasted it and said ' Mm Yes. I can
distinctly taste the flavour" ( Laughter).
I mustntt be too frivolous any longer because I am a
very serious-minded fellow. Did I make a note of anything
else? Now let me have a look. You know, I'm flogged on by
this fellow Maley who every now and then says to me, " Have you
had any bright ideas" and I very seldom have. Oh yes. There
is one other that I thought I would say something to you about.
This is of great importance to you newspapermen because you
know, don't you, that you are the greatest suckers in the world.
( Laughter) Anybody who starts an old story afresh sells it
as if it were a new story. Now this is right, isn't it? / 6 
-6-
There was a great and good man in England called
Birkenhead and I have had the great pleasure to know a number
of witty and distinguished lawyers in England but every bright
remark that anyone of them ever made is now attributod to
Birkenhead. This is the rule of life. You chaps live on your
own legends. The othar day in Canberra, which is a little
provincial city which you -know but which now publishes a
national newspaper ( Laughter), a gentleman wrote a letter to
the press. Now the letters to the newspapers are fascinating,
aren't they? Unbelievable. I read them with immense joy.
This gentleman, if I may so desci. ibe him, had a very witty
movement in his mind and he wrote a letter$ having discovered
that there was one man in Canberra where we now ave a lake,
and this man wanted to buy a gondola. Now in Melbourne, my
own city, they have a thing called " Moomba". I have never quite
understood it. but there it is. And somebody had a gondola
brought out f6r Moomba and my distinguished compatriot in
Canberra said, " Well 11ll buy the gondola". I wouldn't know
at what price. It might have been quite cheap for all I know.
Anyhow, he decided to buy P gondola and then a witty fellow
must have been from the National University ( laughter) wrote
a letter to the " Canberra Times" wiiich is now, of course, you
understand, under very highbrow control ( Laughter) and said,
" I take great exception to somebody buying a gondola. Why not
a pair and breed from them."
Now this was recited to me in my own household as
almost a paroxysm of wit. A gondola, yes, why not
Until I remembered fiftyfive years ago, literally, whan I was
a schoolboy in Eallarat the stock joke in Ballarat was that
one of the local councillors, when told by another that they
ought to put a gondola on Lake Wendouree satd, " WV not have
a pair and breed from them?" ( Laughter) Ncw really gentlemen,
this is something that you ought to pay great attention to
because'it shows that all humour is a folie circulaira and that
wit is repetitive. I will always be indebted to this learned
gentleman in the " Canberra Times" because I will quote him when
in my own household cir-le I tell a little story so full of
wit, so full of point and the family say, " Cut it out, Dad,
you told us that twenty years ago." ( Laughter)
Now, could I say perhaps one other thing because so
far I've been a little irresponsible. We've just had a Prime
Ministers' Conference, and whatever else happens at a Prime
Ministers' Conference, it does recall you to the basic problems
of the modern world. It certainly does. You don't sit down in
rather halcyon fashion and say to yourself, " How like we are"
but you find yourself saying, " How unlike we are. How different
we are" and therefore a Prime Ministers' Conference is something
rather exciting, quite different from the Conferences of the
past, and if there is one thing that sticks out in my mind about
this last one, it is that we are different. I wouldn't dare to
give my complete impressions of all the people who were there,
but there is just one aspect of this matter that I might just
say something to you about and that is that we have Africa, a
series of countries Nigeria, Ghana Uganda, Tanganyika, Kenya,
Sierra Leone etc. and these present their own problem in the
most difficult way and they produce people of a most different
kind. Now, without making any odious comparisons, may I say 
-7-
to you this that the Prime Minister, the head of the Government
of Nigeria Nigeria with 36 million people, the largest single
country in the African continent is Sir Abubakar Balewa.
I would think I was lucky to go through the rest of my life and
meet another man so wise, so full of' character, so understanding
of the problems of the day as Abubakar Balewa. This is a great
man. ( Applause) And I wouldn't say that about everybody else. But
why do I say this about him and not about others? The answer
is that the great problem in today's worldI a problem that we
must all give great thought to, is the problem of countries
surging to their independence politically but economically
dependent on other people. This is a tremendous problem. So
much time is devoted to being able to say, 1-le are politically
independent" whereas to be politically independent and economically
and commercially dependent on the next man is almost a
contradiction in terms. Abubakar Balewa understands this
perfectly. He devotes much of his time to developing his own
country, to strengthening his own country, to making his own
country a self-surviving unit in the African 3ontinent and
when some of his more impetuous colleagues from other African
countries put all their weight and emphasis o political
independence and rather disregard tne economic problem, he
looks at them and occasionally says to them words which
indicate that there are first things that have to con'e first.
I am a great believer in the Prime Minister of
Nigeria ard I fear very much the almost rabid desire or the part
of some people to assert their political independence while
attaching small importance to ho-r they are to live and whether
they are to live at the mercy economically of some other country,
they having forgotten that if you are economically at the mercy
of Country B then you are in a fair way to be -he political
servant of Country B.
Gentlemen, it would be a great mistake for any of us
to be dogmatic about these matters. It would be a great mistake
for any of us speaking for myself as a Prime Minister to
huddle to ourselves the 7rirment of an old Cormonwealth and wash
our hands of new ones. We can't do that. We are all members
one of another. We must do our best, and one of the things that
has to be done is to make it understood, in the most friendly
and helpful way, that no young emerging nation can be a young
and genuinely independent nation unless it has within itself not
only the formalities of political self-government but the
essences of local self-government, of economic welfare of a
capacity to endure whatever anybody e) lse does. Now, we overlook
this in. Australia becnuse we are not only politically independent
but we are economically independent. iJe stand on our own feet.
This is, of course, of tremendous importance, We take for
granted, no doubt, a great deal, I am not saying we can live by
ourselves because any nation that today says it can live by
itself is a fool of a nation, but within those limits, we are
economically self-contained, we arc politically self-contained
and we now have, as I realised when I was in London this or this
nation, politically independent, proudly independent, politically
and economically in an enormous moss of problems. One of the
things we will have to do is not to be superior, not to talk down
but to say to them all, " Well now, we realise your problem, we
value your independence politically, what can we do to help you
with trained men, experts with techniques?" This is not all a
matter of so many millions of pounds. It is a matter of human
understanding and human assistance, and came out of the London
Conference feeling that whatever A or B or C might say back home,
the truth was that it is in terms of human assistance and human
understanding and technical encourigement and the reception of
people to be trained in administration cr . ihatever it may be that
we have our great contribution to make to the new Commonwealth.
41 4 



FOR PRESSP. M. 59L19
FORESTRY EDUCATION PT THE AUSTRALIAkN NATIONAL
UNIVERSITY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, announced
today that the Government, following agreement with the
Australian National University, has approved that the functions
of the Australian Forestry School will be carried out by the
Australian National University.
The Australian National University will establish a
Department of Forestry in the Faculty of Science of the School
of General Studies. The Department will teach all years of a
four-year forestry degree course for its own students and will,
by arrangement with State universities accept students for the
final two years of the course who havecompleted the first two
years of an approved course in any Qf those universities. It
will also engage in research and post-graduate training. The
Australian National University will establish a body to advise
the Faculty of Science on the professional aspects of forestry
education which will include in its membership the heads of
forest services of the participating States and other persons
knowledgeable of forestry education and the forestry profession.
The Univerwity has advertised for a professor who will
be head of a department of forestry. It is hoped that an appointment
can be made before the beginning of the 1965 University
session. Arrangements for the University to take over the
functions cf the School will be put in hand immediately, but
the University does not wish to make firm decisions en the
development ef forestry education before a prrfessor of forestry
has been appointed. The existing teaching and supporting technioal nad
clerical staff cf the Australian Forestry School will be offered
appointments at the appropriate level in the School of General
Studies at the University. The physical plant and equipment of
the Forestry School will be transferred to the University, and
for the period of three years at least the Univereity will use
the teaching and residential buildings at present used by the
Fcrestry School at Yarralumla, Canberra.
CANBERRA, 2nd August, 1964.
BACKGROUND The Australian Forestry Sohool is a branch of the
Forestry and Timber Burea, which is now a Division of the
Department of National Development. It was founded by the
Commonwealth Government in 1925 at the request of the Premiers
of the States to provide a National centre for higher forestry
education. It replaced the Forestry Sehool at the University of
Adelaide, which University provided the only Australian degree
course in forestry from 1911 to 1925. The University 4f Adelaide
generously consented to transfer this function to the Commonwealth
Government. / 2 
2-
The Forestry School gives the third and fourth years
of a four-year course in forestry. Students accepted at the
School must have completed at least two years of basic science
training at one of the State universities, or have an equivalent
background. Each of the older State Universities makes use of
the School to give the third and fourth years of their fouryear
degree course in forestry. Students who complete the
course are awarded a degree in forestry from their home university
and also a Diploma in Forestry by the Commonwealth
Government. Since the establishment of the School of General
Studies within the Australian National University, Commonwealth
and State Governments have thought it appropriate that the
functions cf School should be associated with the University.
The Australian Forestry bohool has gained a signifioant
reputation throughout the world and forestry is widely accepted
as a suitable academic subject in many of the world universities.
Discussions with the State Governments have shown that all of
them except Victoria are prepared to make use of the Department
of Forestry in the Australian National University to meet their
needs for a basic degree in forestry for their Forest Service
officers at least until 1969. It is understood that in Victoria
the practice will continue that some officers &amp; f the State Forest
Service will crmplete a forestry degree by a course at the
University of M: 1elbourne after completing their course at the
Victoriam School of Forestry, Creswick. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 61/ 1964
ESTABLISHMENT OF A JOINT AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN
EDUCATIONAL FOUNDATION
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, announced today
that the Governments of the United States and Australia have
agreed to establish a joint Australian-American Eduational
Foundation. It will succeed and be modelled upon the Fulbright
Scheme. Beginning with the present financial year, the two
countries will contribute equally to provide an aniual budget not
exceeding œ 180,000 to finance the exchanges between the United
V States and Australia. The Prime Minister recalled that the Fulbright
Programme came into being in 1949 as one of the elements in the
settlement of Australia's debt to the United States under the
final accounting of the var time lend-lease and reciprocal lendlease
arrangements. At that time, the United States generously
agreed to apply part of the money it received in settlement of
these debts to financing the United States Educational Foundation
in Australia. As a result, a Trust Fund equivalent in Australian
pounds to five million dollars was set up. This Fund together
with interest has since been used by the Foundation to fin, 3nce the
Fulbright Programme of educational exchanges between the United
States and Australia. It is now nearly exhausted and the two
Governments, conscious of the great value that has been derived
from the Fulbright Programme, and of the desirability of continuing
with something similar, readily agreed to establish as equal
partners a scheme to succeed it.
Under the Fulbright Programme, Australians have
received travel grants to enable them to visit the United States
where they have taken up awards and posts made available by
American institutions. Some of them have been lecturers and
research scholers and others have been post-graduate students.
The scheme has also provided travel grants to enable Australian
teachers to exchange with American teaohers. Under the Fulbright
Programme also, United States citizens in similar categories have
been assisted to visit Australia by the provision of travel grants
and allowances. The new Foundation will be controlled by a joint
Australian-American Board of Directors, which will be established
in Australia. The Prime Minister said that he had every confidence
that under the new arrangements the educational exchange programme
would at least match the great success of the present programme.
The money available annually to the new Foundation will be above the
annual expenditure in any year by the United States Educational
Foundation in Australia. The Prime Minister added that this was only a
preliminary announcement corresponding with one being made in
Washington at this time by the United States Government. In due
course there would be more detailed announcements of the terms of
the agreement, and of the membership of the Board of Directors of
the Australian-American Educational Foundation.
CANBERRA, August, 1964. 
2
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Since 1949, when the Fulbright Programme was established,
1396 academic grantees have been exchanged between the two
countries: 801 Australians and 595 Americans.
Categories of grants made to Australians were
University study 373
Teachers 132
Professors and
Research scholars 296
Corresponding figures for Americans were
University study 243
Teachers 88
Professors and
Res3arch schol. ar,-264 



PRESENTATION OF HOOVER AdIARDS FOR MAKTING
A~ T OTEL hiX-AT-CANBERRA4 CANBERRA
Speech bU the Prm Mln-trh Rjt. Hion, SirRoberU enis
Sir, I begin all my speeches by a couple of preliminary
remarks. One is that when I was invited to come to this
enterprise, I burst into loud moans and said, " Oh, no. Look
I have to prepare about eight or ten speeches over that period,"
and then somebody said to me, " vK6,1l, of course, Professor
Baxter has invited you" and, do you know I must confess, I am
a little frightened of this chap. ( Laughter) In adidition to
being frightened of him, I have a very great respect for him,
and so I said, in that grudging voice with which my staff is
familiar ( Laughter) " All right, well, if Baxter wants me to
go1 I suppose I must*" You know, with falling infloxion,
An~ then I said, " Well, what dope have you? You know, " dope"
is the professional term. ( Laughter) And I was given a certain
amount of " dope" and then T found that my distinguished
colleague, Mr. McEwen had written or spoken I've forgotten
which something on Lhis matter. That wretclied fellow,
" Iesterman, will know. ( Laughter)
This afternoon in the Cabinet, well, we were discussing
other prcblems not without difficulty and at about
twenty to six John McEwen said to me, ' Y9ould you mind very much
if I didn't turn out to be there tonight?" ( He had a very good
reason for nct coming) and I said, " My dear boy, I will be
delighted if you don't come because I have read your statement
and I. propose to cannibalise it in what I have to say tonight."
( Laughter) So with apologies from John MzEwen, I am delighted
that he is no~ t here because at any given moment he might have
looked up and said, " No, no, no. You've misunderstood me.
( Laughter) Anyhow, I was then given a handsome book, a splendid
book, which contained all sorts of things in it, and I read a
passage which I will take leave to read to you. It said this:
" The Hoover Award for Marketing expresses the
conviction of the Hoover Organisation that progress
in marketing, comparable to that in production
techniques and organisation, is vital to the development
of the Australian as of all free economies."
( Up to that time, I was right, I agreed, which I seldom do)
" Progressive improvement in the standards of living
is dependent on greater efficiency in all marketing
functions, both within Australia and overseas." 1
Now, Sir, I am not always profoundly moved by what I read in a
book, but I was profoundly moved by that because I thought,
" Now that's it. This is true," because you know Sir, we
donlt always realise do we, that in our own lifehimes and
most of yours are a little shorter than mine there has been
a revolutionary increase in the complexity of government and
in the complexity of economic affairs, 9 ea 9 / 2 
-2
Now, I have very little reason to have any vanity
about myself except that the people in a sort of occulting
fashion have supported me for a long time, but I can remember
what nobody else here can remember, namely, what it was like
to be the head of' the Government in 1939 that's twentyfive
years ago and to remember the kind of problem that came on to
the table at that time. I very well remember, in my vanity, in
1939 saying, " Well, V11l be Treasurer and I'm going to make a
Budget speech without writing it in advance." You know, this
was a mere exercise in vanity and of course I had my reward
because no newspaper ever published it. ( Laughter) But one
thing I do recall and it is wrorthwzhile recall~ ing it to your
own minds and that is that there it was in 1939 not all that
long time ago and I -as Prime Minister and Treasurer produced
to the Commonwealth Parliament the first Commonwealth Budget of
a œ C10014. Now, of' course, for you juveniles here tonight, this
gives you the horse laughi, doesn't it: The first Commonwealth
Budget of œ 1001. I recalled that in Gladstone's last Budget in
England, he produced the first fœ 100M Budget in Great Britain.
Well, of course, things have happened since then. I don~' t want
to anticipate what my colleague, the Treasurer, will say tomcrrow
afternioon, but let us say, in a very loose way that tomorrow
night it will be about œ C2,500M. I rememaber that because I remember
that the economic problems were less complicated; that we had,
to use the modern jatrgon, a rather less sophisticated economy.
Yt, you know Sir, in sp te u f all this vast experience-we do
thn, don't we every now and then of our problems as if' they
were problems ol A or B or C, problems in separation, problems
of' one bit at a time, instead of realising that they are problems
of an entire character in which the whole pattern of tha3 economy
and of life must be considered.
Now, Sj. r, all I can say about that is there have been
developments in the modern world. In my earliest days in
Parliament. and as a Prime Minister, everything was simple;
you know, simple but difficult, but simple in a sense, and ever
since then in our own country we have come a cross the complexity
of life, the complexity of the economy, the complexity of national
life, the necessity of reconciling the development of' our country
with the stability of' our country, with all sorts of other matters
involving interiiational relations. All this is perfectly true.
Now, it was said and very interestingly I think
by the famous author of' " The Affluent Society" that the world
had been devoting itself' to production and that he doubted whether
production was the main problem. W4ell, he may have had something
to be said for him. M1ost of us who have been concerned with these
affairs have for year after year wanted to develop production and
productivity. Why? Because we have known that all the talk in
the world about rising standards of living doesn't mean much
unless you have rising standards of' production, that you must
develop what is available to the people, develop it and develop
it and develop it before you can give way to eager ideas on the
distribution of what is produced and so, very properly I think, we
have had our minds fixed on productivit-y, on production.
Then, in the last few years perhaps, we have found our
minds directed to how you encourage production, how you make
production effective and this has brought us tho great problem
of marketing, of salesmanship, because after all, you may produce
all the things in the world but unless people want to buy them,
unless people get them and use them and live with them, there is
eo a */ 3 
-3-
no real increase in the standard of living of the people. Now
this is quite true, Somebody, in an idle moment some years
back, made me a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, I hope
you gentlemen will treat me with proper respect when you know
that. The Royal Society of Arts produces from time to time a
Journal containing their proceedings, the reports of what goes
on and in the last number that I received and in one of my
multiple hours of leisure at the weekend, I read this. It
produced a number which was devoted to advertising. Now, of
course, there are gentlemen here who know more about this than
I do. I am always a little alleigic to advertising unless I've
settled the photograph ( Laughter, but on this occasion, Mr.
John Hobson, speaking on the social and economic context of
advertising said, among other things, two very interesting
things. Some of you may know him or know of him.
First of all, he said increased production presupposes
increased consumption but increased consumption can't be achieved
merely by making an increase of goods available. This is
something you will all understand. It can only be achieved by
making the products wanted. This raises the question of
salesmanship which cn a mass scale is what advertising is.
Now, with very great respect to Mr. John Hobsoq I think that
was a profoundly wise remark and it posed a problem which the
author of " The Affluent Society" had not really coped with,
Then later on he went on to say: " The economic phencmencn of
abundance at1 mass level has a natural com~ plement in what
historians will, I think, recognise as one of the social
phanomena of the century -the rise in importance of salesmanship.
In the eyes of a limited intellectual and upper-class minority" t
( such as I am addressing ( Laughter) here tonight), he said
" salesmanship is not quite respectable. In the eyes of the great
majority of the public, it presents vary little problem. On
the whole, o know, people enjoy being sold. things." Now
that, I thought, was pretty wise.
But this brings me, doesn't it to the problem
producti. on productivity, the development of our resources
all these things which are vital to the future of the country
and yet they could all be defeated unless what we produced we
could sell, unless what Australia can grow tind produce Australia
can sell. Therefore salesmanship has become, if it wasnt
always one of the great tasks, one of the great techniques in
the modern economy.
Now, of course, I am so old that I can remember Major
Douglas and I met him once and I thought he was very amusing.
He had a simple theory. He said that if you are to sell all the
things you produce, then all you have to do is to produce money.
Well, we've produced money, Heaven only knows. Here we are
living in a country in which the state of the liquidity is almost
without precedent, in which the people of Australia, man, woman
and child, have hundreds of pounds in savings bank accounts.
But how do you marry these two things? How do you marry enormous
productivity, all the good foi-tune that we have had, good
harvests, good seasons, great overseas markets how do you
marry these things with the people who have the money to spend
and perhaps are not so much disposed to spend it. Now here,
gontlemen, is where you come into this picture, because I believe
that just as we have attacked and not without success, the
problems of productivity just as we have encouraged productivity,
just as my own Government Heaven help it has devised ways and
means of increasing productivity, we must develop ways and
means of getting bigger and better, more enduring, more expanding
ma rke ts. eee
I 
4-
Now I know, Sir, that there is a great disposition
in some parts of the country to raise an eyebrow which few
people can do as well as I can I'm told ( Laughter) to raise
an eyebrow about the civil servant, about the bureaucrats, about
this Department or that. I want to tell you, and 1 reserve all
my rights to have a first-class argument with any Department,
but I just want to tell you, reserving that right, that if
somebody objectively sits down to write the history of the last
ten years, he will find most remarkable events because he will
find that this country, through its Government, through its
Departments, has set out to win m-qrkets, to instruct markets
to have trade comissioners, to have trade m-Issions, to do all
these things which are designed to marry our own rare capacity
for production with the eager demand, much to be encouraged, of
people in the other countries of the world. This is quite true.
This is, I think, of tremendous importance.
The more we produce, the more we must sell. The
more we need to sell, the more we need to have people. who are
experts in selling. We must get over this silly idea that a
salesman is a rather dv. bious character. We must get ovEr this
idea that advertising is, in a sense a curiously dishonest
exercise, because the truth is that If we are going to bchireve
what we want to achieve in Australia then we must produce anci
we must sell. We may produce by cajoling people. -Je may produce
by having, what I've become familiar with now, some stabilization
scheme Westerman knows all about this. Vie may do that, at that
end. At the other end we must have people who will sell what we
produice. And one of our dangers is that the producer may say,
" Well, Itve produced this. Itts up to somebody else to sell"
and that the seller may 11say, " W4ell, I don't know, there is a
limit to what I can do." The truth is the sulvency of this
company in the long run depends not only on production and I
give that a high plac; e in my world but on solesmanshil). This
is why tonight is so important.
It's a very curious thing, I think, that we should
fall into doubts and difficulties about these matters. I don't
know why we should. The truth is that we are all and don't
forget this members one of another. The old idea that I grew
up with when I was a boy in the bush that you were either a
primary industry man or you were a secondary industry man; you
were either a free trader or a protectionist all these lovely,
simple, simple rules these simple dichotomies are always so
false. I grew up wiLh them when I was a boy. Whatever success
I have had in life is due to the fact that before I was much
older I regarded them with utter contempt because in reality we
are ail members one of another. You can have the greatest
productive genius applied to what goes on in Australia and unless
it is married to the greatest salesmanship on behalf of Australia,
we will be no better off and indeed much worse off than when we
started. Therefore, let us get to understand that we are all
members one of another, that nobody can really succeed in
Australia if the other man9 in a big way, fails. We must work
together. Therefore, Professor 3) xter, you who sit in the middle
of all this and occasionally give me my orders, now much more
audible that my old colleague, Sir William Spooner, has come
from under your grasp ( Laughter) therefore, Sir, I want to
say that I in reality came here, believing as I do most a. a 
faithfully that the art of selling, the business of selling,
the Trade Commissioner service, the Trade Mission, the
advertising of our own products has, in this day, become
the most important complement of all to the drive for
production in our own country.
Therefore, Sir, I can say to you as I would say
if I were addressing the Primary Producers? Uniob., who
would regard me with modified rapture ( Laughter) and I can
say to you Sirg as I would say to them because I believe
profoundly in what they are doing, tha this is a splendid
occasion on which to recall that there is a balance in life,
a balance in our own economic de-velopment. a balancing of
factors in our o m growth which. we must always remember, and
as you represent one aide of that balancel then Sir I want
to say, thank you very much. I will be delighted to hand
out a prize and, of course, as a pol. itician, no less delighted
because tthe Hoover organization, I gather, is finding it.
and I'm not,.
I ' d 0 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
9INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS.
( From the " Parliamentary Debates 13.8.64.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 11 propose to sacy
something at, perhaps, some little length
about the events in and around Vietnam,
but before I do so, I think I should make
a reference to one or two points that have
been made by the Leader of the Opposition
( Mr. Calwell). I think the honorable gentleman
has almost a fixation about me. I
appear to pop up like King Charles' head in
all his speeches. I can understand that. But
.' jNoyI just make a reference to what the
~ nrable gentleman said about my alleged
views on summit conferences? It is quite
true that I made a speech in New York.
It was a lunchtime speech and if anybody
reDgdarod s soth. at as riotous living, he is welcome
Mr. Peters-It depends on the lunch.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-You do not
get much if you are going to make a
speech. What I was putting to that audience
in New York was that there was no virtue,
in itself, in having a summit meeting. A
necessary condition of a summit meeting
was that people on both sides--or on three
sides in this case-should approach the
matter in good faith and with a genuine
desire to arrive at a settlement. I made the
point that if one side-as in this casewent
through the motions of saying: " Yes,
10256/ 64. we will have a summit meeting and while
the meeting was actually on, weakened the
position of the other negotiators by military
action-and that is the position along the
frontiers of Borneo-then that is not a
genuine summit meeting at all. it would be
a dangerous kind of meeting to ' have
because, by its implicit concession to force,
it would * be a form of appeasement. That
is what I said in New York, and if the
Leader of the Opposition disagrees with
that, he is welcome to do so. I certainly
have ho apologies to make for those views.
The Leader of the Opposition then said
something of the usual kind to the effect
that instead of talking in military terms, we
ought to be increasing the aid we give to
under-developed countries. It is very interesting
' to, recall that we have two underdeveloped
countries in our immediate
neighbourhood and for which we have an
immediate responsibility-Papua and New
Guinea. If you take our net expenditure
there-because we get no exploitation of
these territories-and what we pay through
the Colombo Plan and the aid of an economic
kind ' that we give under the South
East Asia Treaty Organisation agreement
in all its various forms and through certain
specialised agencies of the United Nations,
you find that Australia today is providing
the equivalent of 100 million American AUG m4G~ 
dollars a year for these purposes. In anybody's
language-and certainly in minethat
is a very substantial sum of money.
Therefore I put these facts on the -record
because I would not have it believed that
this country is falling down in its human
responsibilities. I propose to say something now about
Cyprus. I will not speak at any great length
on this subject because it is more a matter
of giving some information to the House.
I propose, then, to address myself to the
nub of this matter-the argument that goes
on about Vietnam and our relations to it
and the activities of certain small Australian
forces in South Vietnam. The Republic of
Cyprus-I want to get this matter out of the
way first-was established as an independent
state in 1960 following negotiations between
the Greek and Turkish Prime Ministers. As
honorable members know, the outcome of
those negotiations was accepted by Great
Britain. The settlement brought an endor
so it was believed-to a long-drawn stalemate
which had been caused by the preceding
Greek Cypriot campaign for Enosis,
or union with Greece, in the face of Turkish
refusal to contemplate Cyprus falling into
Greek hands and the consequent difficulties
of Great Brtain as the governing or colonial
power. The settlement made in 1960 provided
for special constitutional safeguards. These
were, in effect, a veto on certain legislation
for the Turkish minority and for the right
of the guarantor powers-Greece, Turkey
and Great Britain-to intervene if the terms
of the settlement were contravened.
That settlement was received at the time
with some hope. It has not worked out.
In the opinion of the Prime Minister of
Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios, the Constitution
has failed. Disputes have arisen between
the Turkish minority and the Greek
Cypriot majority while Greece and Turkey,
from the outside, have maintained,
great interest, and from time to
time, activity. These troubles began at the
end of 1963 when Archbishop Makarios
said the Constitution was unworkable.
Attempts to settle the dispute were made,
first, through the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation-because both Greece and
Turkey belong to N. A. T. O.-and then when
they failed, attempts at a settlement were
made through the United Nations Organisation. Through the Security Council which
acted on this matter, the United Nations
arranged in March of this year for a United
Nations force -to go to Cyprus to restore
order. The United Nations also appointed
a mediator and requests were made for
certain financial assistance to which we
made a small contribution. A request was
also made for a police force for ordinary
police purposes and Australia, through the
courtesy of the various State Governments,
has made a contribution to this force. The
Security Council passed a series of resolutions
concerning these arrangements on 4th
March and 13th March and again on
June of this year.
In spite of these actions, the positio'&gt;
has remained difficult and perhaps hat...'
become more difficult. It is very hard
to say that and I do not want to say
anything which would appear to allocate
any blame because I do not think it is for
us to do that. I believe, as I am sure a'
honorable members believe, that jiiL
this complex affair-and it is immeasurably
complex-it is important to stand
behind the United Nations Security Council
and to do all things possible or to encourage
all things possible to be done to
avoid civil war or a continuance of it and
to bring about a peaceful settlement of the
problem. This was the position when the Prime
Ministers of the Commonwealth of Nations
met in London. After considerable discussion,
a statement on this matter w2-
made in a communique and I quote froish..:
it-The Prime Ministers expressed concern about
the situation with regard to Cyprus. They reaffirmed
their full support for the United Nations
Security Council resolutions of 4th March,' 13t.-
March and 20th June 1964. The Prime Ministel
asserted that the Cyprus problem should be solvewithin
the framework of the United Nations and
in accordance with the principles of democracy
and justice.
They appealed to all countries concerned to
refrain from any action which might undermine
the task of the United Nations peacekeeping
force to which a number of Commonwealth countries
are contributing, or might prejudice the endeavours
of the United Nations to find a lasting
solution in conformity with the Charter of the
United Nations.
T his, I venture to say, was impeccably
correct. The United Nations Security Council
met again in emergency session, things
not having improved very much, on Sunday
last. The President appealed to the Turkish 
and Cypriot Governments to cease hostilities.
Now a resolution has again been passed.
I was going to read it in its full terms, but
it can be summarised by saying that it calls
for an immediate cease fire by all parties,
it calls for their co-operation with the United
Nations peace keeping force and it calls
upon all States to refrain from any action
which could exacerbate the position. I think
it will be agreed by all honorable members
that we will not help a settlement of this
extremely difficult matter by offering observations
from the sidelines or by taking
sides, because without a great deal more
knowledge than any of us can have it might
be very difficult to apportion all the blame
one party and none of it to the other.
all want a peaceful settlement, and the
greatest prospect of that settlement will
come from backing the actions of the
Security Council.
Now I would like to turn to the matter
ich was the subject of the original state-
-nent by my colleague, which has given rise
to most of the debate, both outside the
House and in it. My colleague's statement
was a clear and objective one. It did not
go in for fireworks. It put the House in
possession of whatever official knowledge
we had of these matters. I therefore do not
need to repeat what he said. If it is any
comfort to anybody to know it, I can say
that before he made his statement he discussed
the matter with me and we agreed
that he was the appropriate Minister to
ake the statement. So he made it.
The Australian Government thoughf that
the action of the United States of America,
under attack in the Gulf of Tonkin, under
attack in international waters, was well
,-warranted and ought to be supported, and
said so. Many people in different parts
of the world said so. Oddly enough, I did
not wait, as I am occasionally charged with
waiting, to find out what the majority were
doing. We were the first people to make a
public announcement after the President's
speech and after his indication of what he
was going to do. Not for the first time, we
were the first to speak. Does anybody seriously
quarrel with what the President did?
I almost pause for a reply, because the
O) position, as I will show without any difficultv,
has occupied the most ambiguous
position on this point. It is a bitterly disappointing
fact that the one sour note that
reached the public print should have come from the Leader of the Australian Labour
Party, the great alternative governing party
in this country, accompanied by a sort of
lecture to the President on his duty not to
extend the struggle and to see that he had
resort to the United Nations-he having
publicly stated that he wanted no such
extension and that he would seek such
resort, and having acted accordingly.
It is just as well, I think, to recall what
the President said. My colleague quoted the
language of the resolution of Congress, and
I want to quote from the text of the President's
nation-wide statement which preceded
that resolution. After referring to the attack
and the orders he had given, he said-
This new act of agression aimed directly at our
own forces again brings home to all of us in the
United States the importance of the struggle for
peace and security in South East Asia. Aggression
by terror against the peaceful villagers of South
Vietnam has now been joined by open aggression
on the high seas against the United States of
America. The determination of all Americans to
carry out our full commitment to the people and
Government of South Vietnam will be redoubled
by this outrage.
Without anticipating in detail what I will say
a little later, it will be observed that the
President referred to " our commitment to
the people and Government of South
Vietnam", which does not arise from a
treaty. He has no treaty with South
Vietnam. I will explain a little later, if it
needs -to be explained, how these things arise
and flow from the South East Asia Treaty,
but it is worthwhile just reminding honorable
members opposite the America does not
feel it necessary to talk about a formal
treaty before going to the aid of South
Vietnam, and that America recognises a
commitment that has not been drafted by
a lawyer. This is a very important statement.
Then the President went on-
Yet our response for the present will be limited
and fitting. We Americans know, though others
appear to forget, the risks of spreading a conflict.
We will seek no wider war.
Then he went on to say-
; I have instructed Ambassador Stevenson to
raise this matter immediately and urgently before
the Security Council of the United Nations.
He ended by saying-
It is a solemn responsibility to have to order
even limited military action by forces whose overall
strength is as vast and as awesome as those of
the United States, but it is my considered conviction,
shared throughout your Government, that
firmness in the right is indispensible today for
peace. That firmness will always be measured. Its
mission is peace. 
I venture to say that that was an historic
and important statement, and it was followed
by a resolution in Congress which
was carried in one House with one dissentient
vote and in the other House unanimously.
I propose to refer to that resolution,
which my colleague read to the House
earlier. I believe that the resolution has no
direct precedent in American history. We
are living in a most historic period. I will
quote just the operative passages of the
resolution, if I may do so without wearying
the House-
The U. S. regards as vital to its national security
and to world peace the maintenance of international
peace and security in South East Asia.
This is the American Congress speaking.
Now, Sir, if I may interrupt the reading of
the resolution, if we cast our minds back,
particularly those of us who have been
seised of the responsibilities for the Government
here, we will remember very vividly
how anxious we were only a few years ago
about the possibility that in the conflict of
ideas between the Western powers and the
Soviet Union, and in the building up of the
nuclear deterrent to armed hostilities in that
connection, South East Asia might be overlooked.
There was a very strong feeling at
one time that perhaps it was a little in the
background. The answer to that anxiety is
in the passage I have just read.
In all my discussions with the late President
Kennedy and with President Johnson
and with the Administration of the State
Department 1 felt there was a growing
realisation of the importance of South East
Asia. This was a matter of some satisfaction
to us because although we knew all too well
the vital significance of the relationships
across the Atlantic, we also felt that the
problems of South East Asia came very near
home and that our immediate security in
Australia was much involved in them.
Therefore, I repeat that this resolution by
Congress is of historic importance. The
resolution continued-
Consonant with the Constitution and the Charter
of the United Nations and in accordance with
its obligations under the South East Asia Collective
Defence Treaty, the United States is therefore
prepared as the President determines to take all
necessary steps, including the use of armed force,
to assist any member or protocol State of the
South East Asia Collective Defence Treaty requesting
assistance in defence of its freedom.
In this resolution we see the constitutional
process referred to in the A. N. Z. U. S. Pact and in the South East Asia Collective Defence
Treaty at work affirming the power
of the President to take action as commander-
in-chief. The importance of this cannot
be overlooked by any Australian unless he is
bemused by academic and unreal ideas.
After all, the matter of substance -is the
defence of freedom in South East Asia. I
would sum this up by saying that the congressional
resolution removes constitutional
restraint on the President's freedom of
action. Of course, -he still remains subject to
the practical restraints which arise from his
need to have in Congress broad support for
whatever he does. But the important thing
is that the resolution has affirmed that the
. maintenance of peace and security in tl'-. V
region-this region immediately adjoins _ j'
-is in the vital interests of the United
States. We would indeed be blind, Sir, if
we did not realize and acknowledge that it
is also in our vital interests.
The South East Asia Collective Defenr
Treaty ought to be referred to. I shoul,-'
have expected its provisions, in the broad,
to be very well known and not matters
which needed to be recited every week,
every year, or once in any other period of
time. However, I think I should mention
them, because they have been overlooked
by some of the spokesmen opposite. The
Treaty was made in September 1954 and
was ratified early in 1955. It was negotiated
on behalf of Australia by my Government.
The parties to it were the United States, the
United Kingdom, Thailand, the Philippines
Pakistan, France, Australia and Ne/
Zealand. The Treaty -itself paid proper
attention to the promotion of the economic
wellbeing and development of all peoples in
the Treaty area. If honorable members care
to look at Article IM, they will find that thiidea
of economic advancement is not
and has not been suddenly discovered by the
Opposition. Mr. Uren.-Name it. It is only peanuts.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-It has been
of substantial assistance. It reads-
The Parties undertake to strengthen their free
institutions and to co-operate with one another in
the further development of economic measures, including
technical assistance, designed both to promote
economic progress and social wellbeing
and to further the individual and collective efforts
of governments towards these ends.
The parties to the Treaty were well aware
of these points. The Treaty acknowledges
that one of the facts of life was that unless 
there was resistance to Communist aggression
there would be no opportunity for
economic advancement, peaceful life and
peaceful development. Article II reads-
In order more effectively to achieve the objectives
of this Treaty, the Parties, separately and
jointly-In other words, there is a joint and several
obligation; it is not necessary to have a
unanimous decision to discharge the obligationby
means of continuous and effective self help and
mutual aid will maintain and develop their individual
and collective capacity to resist armed attack
and to prevent the counter subversive activities
directed from without against their territorial
integrity and political stability.
) ticle IV reads-
1. Each Party recognises that aggression by
means of armed attack in the treaty area against
any of the Parties or against any State or
territory which the Parties by unanimous agreement
may hereafter designate-
-lat is, the protocol States, including South
,_ etnamwould endanger its own peace and safety, and
agrees that it will in that event act to meet the
common danger in accordance with its constitutional
processes. Measures taken under this paragraph
shall be immediately reported to the Security
Council of the United Nations.
As I have just indicated, the Treaty provided
for the designation by unanimous vote
of nations as protocol State South Vietnam,
like Laos and Cambodia, is one of the
protocol States.
The Treaty contemplated, therefore, that
protocol States might have to be
J.; fended against aggression. It stated with
particularity-It is understood that no action on the territory
of any State designated by unanimous agreement
shall be taken except at the invitation or with
consent of the government concerned.
., are in South Vietnam to the extent that
we are ' there by the invitation of the Government
of that country. The U. S. A. is there
by the invitation of the Government of
South Vietnam. We have no subsequent
treaty with the protocol State; neither ' has
the U. S. It is very disturbing, to say the
least, that the Australian Labour Party
should choose this period in international
history to assert 1ihat Australia, which is
acting at the request of South Vietnam,
should not do so without some new and
special treaty with the Government of South
Vietnam. What a b-. arren performance that
would ' be of the obligations of the South East Asian Collective Defence Treaty. The
Leader of the Opposition said that people
had not been sufficiently informed. I should
have'thought that these matters were almost
as familiar in the minds of people as anything
could be. They have been referred to
very frequently. I remind the House that
extensive statements about our activities in
South Vietnam have been made at the time
of each performance on our part-first, by
the late Mr. Townley when he was Minister
for Defence, and later by Senator Paltridge
as Minister for Defence.
I am sorry if I seem to overdo it, but
the point I want to make is that what is
going on in South Vietnam through us in a
small way, and through the U. S. in a large
way, is the direct consequence of a treaty
to which we are one of the parties. As a
matter of fact, in 1961 South Vietnam
appealed to the U. S. to increase military
aid because of the violation of its territory
in the north and the U. S. responded, but
without a military alliance and without a
treaty. It is interesting to recall that the
Opposition-the Leader of the Opposition
repeated the claim this morning-has long
made it a matter of pride that when in
government it invited U. S. forces to come
here during the war. Did it make a treaty?
Did the United States require a treaty? Did
Australia require a treaty? No, because the
realities of life were so overwhelmingly clear
that this poor academic nonsense about
having a treaty was never even thought of.
But today we are told that -this is exactly
what ought to be done.
I have already taken quite a long time,
but I just want to mention one or two
other aspects of this matter quite briefly. I
notice that the Opposition, including the
Federal Executive of the Australian Labour
Party, is saying that the right way to
handle this matter is to reconstitute the
Geneva Conference. Of course, the Geneva
Conference established the cease fire and
the ' boundary at the 17th parallel, and declared
for a cessation of armed hostilities.
What is it to be reconvened for? The
Leader of the Opposition said the other
day that the powers should meet to resu
bscribe to and honour the agreements.
But who has broken the agreements?
Is it suggested that somebody not in the
Communist zone is conducting a war of
aggression? Does anybody think such nonsense
for a moment? The -people who are 
violating the cease fire and the essential
substance of the Geneva accords are the
people from the north, the north Vietnam
forces, the Vietminh, backed as they
unquestionably are at suitable times by the
Communist Chinese, and having as their
agents the Vietcong in their pockets of
activity around South Vietnam. If there is
any reaffirmation of belief in a cease fire to
be made, it ought to be made by the people
who are violating the agreements. The
powers may, for all I know, have another
conference in Geneva or elsewhere, and it
will be a very good thing if a precondition
is that there is a cessation of hostilities,
a termination of these guerrilla activities,
because, for the reasons I mentioned at
the beginning of my speech, I believe
firmly that good faith is an essential to
any conference that may be called.
The Leader of the Opposition has a
general view which he puts. He appears to
think that Australia is unnecessarily buying
hostility with the Asian people. He is
always fond of trying to create some
division between the past and the present in
this Government. He says we are buying
hostility. Does he really believe that we
would cultivate the respect of the Asian
people if, as I rather think he would like
us to do, we abandoned our support of
Malaysia, which is vigorous in all respects,
or if we said to South Vietnam and to the
South East Asian Treaty countries that we
were quite happy to have an agreement with
them but that -we were very reluctant to
perform an agreement? Is this the way to
acquire the respect of our Asian neighbours?
Sir, international goodwill is not to
be firmly established on a basis of a denial
of treaty obligations or a denial of the
overall importance of resisting Communist
aggression. But the Leader of the Opposition is not
the only spokesman for the Labour Party.
I think I have some right to expect that his
most prominent colleague in the victory of
the left wing in Victoria recently, a person
whom I might describe as his running mate
-the honorable member for Yarra ( Dr.
J. F. Cairns)-a prospective deputy leader
at least speaks with some authority on behalf
of the Labour Party. If he does not,
then the party has a curious way of disowning
him. On 9th August, the honorable
member for Yarra made a powerful speech, I gather, to 2,000 people at a
Hiroshima commemoration rally in Sydney.
He had, of course, an audience
of people who advocated nuclear disarmament,
ignoring the fact that if nuclear
disarmament proceeded alone, the
Communist powers would have overwhelming
military strength. These people
also apparently carried slogans about
no war in Vietnam, a consummation
devoutly to be wished for, I must say. But
the pleas ought to be addressed not to our
side, but to the other side if they are to
have any true value.
The honorable member for Yarra is
reported, I hope accurately, as having said
that Australia should not follow the Uni,,
States line-of course, we have heard hn..
say that many times-which he defined as
pursuing a policy of war which had no basis
in morals or justice. He was not talking
about some war of the 19th century; he wasx
talking about these incidents that have b7_)
engaging our attention; he was talking about
these activities of war in the Gulf of Tonkin
and, by the way of counter attack, on the
shores of North Vietnam.
I ' have reminded the House, and, I hope,
the people, of what the President of the
United States said, and the manner in which
he dealt with the matter and the manner in
which Congress dealt with it-the high
level on which the whole thing was put and
the immense importance of it to the future
of this country-yet a prospective leader of
this country is heard to say that they Ei')
pursuing a policy of war which has no bas-"
in morals or justice.
If that is not the view of the Oppositionand
I do not believe for one moment that
it can be-then I hope there will be tho---
who will be willing to say so in their
It was really an extraordinary summary
of American policy. It is apparently both
moral and just that aggressive Communist
powers should seek to strike down free
people but immoral and unjust to resist
them. The honorable member for Yarra
went on to say, according to the report, that
the United States could not claim that it
was being attacked in the present Vietnam
crisis-I think the crews of the American
destroyers would be fascinated to know that
-or that it was acting in self-defence. He
says that the United States cannot say that.
The U. S. has said it. The honorable member
for Yarra is challenging the veracity of 
the head of the American Administration.
He is challenging the intelligence and information
of the entire Congress of the United
States which has every avenue of inf ormation
available to it.
The honorable member for Yarra elaborated
this astonishing proposition by saying
that the North Vietnamese torpedo boats
-I like that, because it admits that they
were North Vi etnamese-had been within
a few miles of their own shores when they
came in to attack the United States ships.
Does he really deny that they were 30
miles off shore, as has been stated authoritatively
in America?
1d. Pollard.-Do the Americans deny
 t they were involved in the attack on
Cuba? Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-The honorable
member for Lalor ( Mr. Pollard) has
a singular talent for changing the subject,
I sympathise with him. If the honoremember
wants now to set up another
attack on the United States over Cuba,
over what I thought was a remarkable
effort on behalf of freedom by the late
President Kennedy, let him say so. If we
are to have a symposium of hatred and
criticism of the United States, let us have
it. At least we will know then where the
Opposition stands. But to resume what I
was saying: Is it really denied that the
American destroyers were 30 miles offshore?
Does the honorable member for Yarra or
I~ body else assert that the warships of
: 1,) nation when steaming in international
waters may be attacked with impunity?
The honorable member went on to
charge the United States with helping to
. prevent political, economic and social
&gt; hnges in South Vietnam. This, of course,
. a monstrous falsehood. But he ended
up by saying that Australia should call
immediately for a ceasefire in Vietnam,'
to be followed by talks between all countries
involved in the conflict. He is unaware,
presumably, that the President of the
United States has already put all these
courses of action in train. We, Sir, do not
direct ceasefires. This is not our function.
The honorable member overlooks the
obvious fact that no country has a greater
interest than we have in the cessation of
armed hostilities in South East Asia, provided
that that cessation does not yield the
field to the onward sweep of Communism. The honorable member also overlooks
the fact that President Johnson himself took
the earliest opportunity to encourage action
by the Security Council. I have already
referred to what the President said in his
Address to the Nation. We in Australia are
in a position in the world in which we have,
no doubt, great opportunities, but equally,
no, doubt, face great risks. The Opposition,
in more recent days, has been rather fond
of saying what we ought to be doing about
defence. I do not resent any criticism in
that field, because I do not regard our
provision for defence as static. It must go
on, develop and march with the times. The
plea from the Opposition would be more
eloquent if we had heard it over any considerable
period of time. The fact is that
we are, as the Treasurer ( Mr. Harold Holt)
pointed out in the Budget Speech, spending
50 per cent, more on defence than we were
four years ago. And, as I say, that is not
-the end of the story.
I do not want to occu. py time on this, as
it will no doubt be debated, as some one
was suggesting earlier today; but let us suppose
that the Opposition, being in office,
spent much more on defence. Why would
it do it? This is a question that the Opposition
really should put to itself. Why would
it do it? Would it do it because it thought
that Australia's defence was -a matter for
Austra-lia alone? Does it have that isolationist
view? I could not believe that. Does
it really believe that if we were attacked by
a great power we could defend ourselves
without allies and without mutual systems
of defence? It could not believe such nonsense
as that. Therefore, presumably, it
would do it so that we might be in a position
to make an effective contribution, worthy
of us as a nation, to the common defence.
But if we are to do that there must be some
system of common defence. If we are to do
that we really must have these alliances in
substance with the people who have the
greatest power to preserve freedom and
who carry the major burden of its
preservation. Surely the Labour Party must agree with
that. If it does not, presumably it would
never, if it had been in office, have tried to
secure the A. N. Z. U. S. Pact or the South
East Asia Treaty. But suppose it had
entered into these pacts, and suppose it
realised that the defence of Australia, and
indeed of freedom generally, were a matter 
of community of effort, of broad alliances
with, to use the phrase that the honorable
gentleman objects to so much, " great and
powerful friends in the world Suppose it
understood that. Are we really to understand
that, having made those treaties, having
done whatever it thought proper in the
defence field, having perhaps more forces
than we now have, it would have said in
those circumstances, when Vietnam, a
protocol country, asked for help: No. We
are very sorry. We cannot give you help.
We know that America is doing so. That is
all right for America, but we cannot give
you help unless you now sit down and
thrash out a special mutual treaty with us."?
I end there, because I referred to it earlier.
This, to me, is the most fantastic evidence
of the utterly unreal and utterly academic
approach that these people have when they consider these great problems. When they
did have the responsibility of government,
when there were real things happening that
they understood, they had no such
approach. They did not talk about treaties
then, but now they do. Now they want to
put a clog in the operation of the machinery
of the South East Asia Treaty. Why? Is it
because they believe in the Treaty, or
because at heart they do not believe in the
Treaty? Or is it because, which seems most
probable, they have such deep divisions of
opinion between soberminded right wing
members of the Labour Party Who, I will
undertake to say, have agreed with almost
everything I have said today, and a left wing
which, in its heart, is not hostile to Cor~,
munism but, in its heart, is deeply hosti._ j
to the United States of America, the greatest
free power in the world?
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



FATHER OF THE YEAR 1964
PRESENTATION AT HOTEL AUSTRALIA, SYDNEY 14th AUGUST, 1964
Speecha by the Prime Minister; the rit. Hon,, Sir Robert Menzies
Sir and Chief Justice
I say to the Chief Justice that on behalf of
my wife T thank you for this handsome souvenir. For the
first three or four days I will begin to think that it's
mine. A little later my wife will be saying to me, " Where
are those silver trays of ours?" ( Laughter) and then in a
year's time she will say, " Where is my silver tray?" kLaugnter)
Now I mention this fact to you because this r. roves that I am
not only married but a father0 I know what goes on.
T think I ought to tell you Sir that when I
received the invitation1 to be the Father of ih(. Year it
struck me as Laving a slightly hilarious undertone. [ Laughter)
I was n bed ill, I was in a weakened condition, I had a couple
of doctors looming at me over the foot of the bed and discussing
whether I ought to be allowed to go ibroad. if they had left
that to the electors it might have been a different result
( Laughter) tut they were discussing it purely on medical
grounds. It was at this stage that I received an invitation
to be th Father of the Year, and at first I th. ought somebody
was having a bit of fun with me Father of the Year. As far
as I can recall. itts thirtysix years since I last found myself
a father ( Laughter) and you know, that's a long time for some
of you young chaps not very long fcr ire. So my instinct
was to say, 10h, no, no, no." Then they brought me the list
of the Fathers of thie Year and this really put me back in my
bux. There was Sir Edward Hallstrom I'm sorry he is not
here today but he knows all about zoos and other things. And
there's Harry Jensen who went uncomfortably ( Laughter)
if you know what I mein. I can't allow Harry Jensen to be
something that I'm not. " Laughter) So that was a good step.
Then there was Joe Cahill who was an old political
sparring partner of mine, and a great friend of mine. Then
the copper Colin Delaney. ( Laughter) I've always felt
uncomfortable in the presence of the police ( Laughter) except
when he sits next to me at some function, and then I realise
that, really, the police are friends of everybody and probably
that explains why so few people get arrested but, anyhow......
There's Adrian Curlewis. I read his name with profound respect.
He's a District Court Judge and, what is much more important,
he is a lifesaver. ( Laughter) Well, your District Court
Judges here are County Court Judges in Victoria and I never
knew one of them to be a lifesaver. ( Laughter) On the contrary,
I had great trouble with them when I was a Junior at the Bar.
And so I went Norman Gregg. Well, of
course, Norman is one of the great eye men in the world. He
deals with people in such fashion that whenever they look at
him or anybody else thereafter, they look at them in a kindly
light. He does things to the optical affair you see. And so
I understood why he should be the Father of ? he Year. / 2 
-2-
Then as for the Chief Justice, there's nothing I can
do about a Chief Justice. Chief Justices are very difficult
people. Even when I was at the Bar myself, Sir, not appearing
before you but appearing before a State Chief Justice and a
Commonwealth Chief Justice I found myself under enormous constraint
by about three o'clock in the afternoon, so that instead of looking
at His Honour, the Chief Justice, and saying, " You knew, old boy,
you're talking nonsense" ( Laughter) I would in fact say, " With
infinite submission, if the Court pleases" so that I kn* ow about
that. So apart from that, my qualifications are very sketchy.
If I had been named the Grandfather of the Year, I
would have taken this as a nice compliment because within the
last twelve months well, you must picture me in my bed at
Canberra at half past seven on Sunday morning. This is not a time
of day on Sunday that any of you care to contemplate, nor do I,
but my wife was away somewhere and I was there and the telephone
rang and, inadvertently I answered and it was my elder son who
said to me, " Congratulations Da you have five grandsons" and I
said, " Oh, what did you say?" You know the mind moves slowly
at half past seven in the morning on Sunday ( Laughter) and I said,
" Son wha. did you say?" He said, " Yes, Dad. Twins. Twin
granAsons." Now that, I think, was a great thins, but I hasten
to say that except by indirection, except as a very remote cause,
Sir, I had nothing to do with it.
Well why does one like to be a father? Why does one
like to be a grandfather? By and large, you knw, grandcdiliren
I say this to some of you are rather more engaging than sons and
daughters. I speak with reluctance about my own daughter who is
the most marvellous creature in the world. But, anyhow, sons you
know, you rebuke them, you send them to school, you try to instruct
them when they get back. If you had my experience, you frequently
found that your corrections were different fr'om the corrections of
their schoolmaster, which gave me a very low opinion of schcol-
S masters. ( Laughter) But you know, you havn all the to and fro,
haven't you, of your own family. With grandchildren) yru see them
at their best. When they get a little damp, when they get a
little difficult, you hand them back to their parents and say,
" Aren't they absolutely sweet?" ( Laughter); so, on the whole,
this grandfather business -ppeals to me. If you could arrange
for me Sir, to live for another twenty years, I would like to
be nominated as the Grandfather of the Year. But as it turns
out, you will have to do it post mortem.
There is just one serious thing I would like to say
to you. I hope not too serious. But we are here we are
fathers, some of us are grandfathers. In other words we are
here because we have something in common and that is he continuity
of the race. This is the tremendously important thing the
continuity of the race. We don't always pay as much attention to
this perhaps as we should. I very well remember, and I have more
than once referred to it the first time I read Walter Scott
read " Ivanhoe". I remember the archers' contest in " Ivanhoe's
and the bowman saying, when he was asked to fire " a twinkling,
willow wand," " Well$" he said, " my grandsire drew a stout bow at
the Battle of Hastings and I trust not to dishonour his name".
Now you may say this is rather saccharine, this is a little
sentimental. It stuck in my mind; it must have stuck in the
minds of many people " My grandsire drew a stout bow". I would
like to think I was the kind of grandfather about whom under
different circumstanccs, in different terms, my grandsons might
speak some day because I think this would be a guarantee of
continuity of what we all believe to be the right spirit. / 3 
-3
You know, when Winston Churchill wias making those
speeches of his those immortal speeches of his, those
marvellous broaa~ casts and doing that job of his that nobody
will, I hope, ever forget, at that time if somebody had taken
the speeches of the Younger Pitt ndo in the beginning of the
nineteenth century, 11+ 0 years before, if anybody had looked at
the Younger Pitt's speeches at a time when it wasn't Hitler
but Napoleon, at a time when invasion was thought likely, at
a time when martello towers were springing up all around the
invasion area as again in 194+ 0 and 194+ 1, and had read them,
he would have found that the language was different but each
great leader was pronouncing a feeling and a fervour which
related to the morale of the country,
Pitt was no doubt tkie greatest of statesmen at the
turn of the nineteenth century, just as Winstcn Churchill is
the most significant figure in history in our time. But this
was because they had a sense of continuity. Winston Churchill
was not unc~ onscious of what Pitt had said. Winston Churchill
was not unconscious of what John Marlborough had done at the
beginrnizzg of the eighteenthi century, he wasn't unconscious
of what his ancestors had done, of what all the great men in
our history had done, All he had to do was toa translate this
to the current state of affairs, I am an immense believer in
continuity, I believe that a sense of history, a sense of
what has been done in the past and what may happen in the
future does more to produce sanity of mind and ' udgment and
s-6ability of spirit thin anything else that -you can thirk
about. The sense of continum. ty.
If ve ever get to that deplorable state, Sir in
which we think we are here today and gone tomorrow and ihat
nothing matters very much, there wim'Li be no continuity in our
history and there wontt be a Father of the Day in fifty years'
time, a Father of the Year. And therefore I feel that what
you are doing is to contribute something to the rense of
continuity the sense of history which has produced In our
veins and In our mindis and in our hearts, the great causes in
our lifetime of our survival and of our success, 



THE FEDEiZATION OF PARENTS AND CITIZENS' ASSOCIATIONS
Y. V. C. A. S YDNY 14-th AUGUST. 1964
Speech_ bL_ the Prime inistetEe. n-et enzies
Mr. President, Mr. Minister, the Director and Ladies and
Gentlemen If I haven't on a former occasion appeared before
you, or those vho work with you, I can assure you that it isn't
the fault of your former President, because Sid Liebert and I
were at school together; he was known as " Skinny", and I Has
skinny; so you can tell it was a long, long time ago. Welve
remained great friends, and I know rather more about the
Parents and Citizens than I would have known perhEaps but for
him. Now I want to say at once that I think that the
work that you do is of tremendous importance I've a few
reasons for saying that. nne is that we live, don't we, in
a period, in an age in which there is a dispositicn to think
that governments ought to do everything, and that all we need
to do is pay our taxes, and complain at the way the government
spends them. vihen one encounters the supplementing of public duty
by private voluntary effort, one is greatly encouraged about
the future of the country, and you, ladies and gentlemen here
today, represent in the most striking fashion that spirit of
self-help and of help to others which must never be allowed to
die out; we must never become so regimented that we regard
our duties as confined to our obligations. Now, that's one
reason why m very glad to be here.
Now what is it that you do? I was a schoolboy
once, believe it or not, and a State schoolboy in the State of
Victoria we call them State schools there a little country
school first of all, and then a larger State school in the City
of Ballarat, and then a private secondary school, and then what
we call a Public School in Victoria, and the University. I've
had a fairly versatile experience and perhaps because of that,
I've maintained all through my life the most passionate interest
in the educational development of the country. But in those
days, in those State school days, using the Victorian term,
I don't remember any Parents arid Citizens bodies. You went to
school, you gazed with profound awe at your teachers who gazed
at us correspondingly with profound contempt, and then we went
back home, and iient along to school nexIt day. No-r, what you've
done, and what you are doing on the most extraordinary scale
and in an expanding way, is not only to add to the facilities
that the government provides other things, other human things
that will help to round out, to fill out the life of the
school boy and school girl, and in the course of doing that,
you come into contact with regularity, I venture to believe,
with the schoolteachers. Now, Ilve a very great respect for schoolteachers,
and we all have, but you know, we must never allow them to
become a race apart. We must never allow them to become a race
apart. 4e must never allow them to get into that state of
detachment in which they tell children what they must do, or
ought to do; and not come into adequate contact with the
parts of Australia al:: eady very higbiy Caevei. opec ana urw-t; ore
others that are just crying out for it. But we can't discriminate
tinder the constitution between one State and another. We can,
if we make a grant, Wle can't discriminate in our taxation
laws. We can't say, "' Yell, all right, you can go without paying / 3 
-3-
taxes. Je want to encourage you." Mind you, we've tried to.
' Ie've got a rather unlawful statute operating at the present
time, but as a strict constitutional principle, discrimination
is barred. Now. I just give you that very simple exaiaple of
why the passion for uniformity can be a serious menace to
national growth. And I believe it would be a serious menace
to individual growth.
Today, education, in particular primary and secondary
education, are within the domain of the States, and not within
the domain of the Commonwealth. Now, this is an excellent
thing in my opinion. I would violently resist a proposal
that the whole business of education should be passed over to
the Commonwealth, and put under some central legislative and
administrative control because I believe that would be a very
bad thing for education. And why? Because I don't think it
is necessarily true that the curriculum or circumstances
appropriate to a child north of Cairns is necessarily the same
kind of thing that is appropriate to a child south of Hobart.
This is an enormous country; it has all sorts of differences
of climate and conditions and industrial growth all the
varieties in the world can he fcund in Australia. To say that
every child in Australia must go through exactly the same process
of tuition and be controlled by an all-wise Parliament at Canberra
seems to me to be hopelessly wrong and, indeed, vary dangerous.
Uniformity in education has little to commend it
in my eyes. IPm all for variety, a variecy of schools, a variety
of curricula standards to be observed, yes standards to be raised,
but above all things, never let us lose sight of the fact that all
men ( I say nothing about wcmen for this purpose) but all men are
not the same, and all men are not equal, except in the eyes of
their Maker and I hope, in the eyes of the law, But otherwise
we're individcais, all different: some have great inborn talents
for one thing, some great inborn talents for anothcr some with
moderate talents., and some with ncne beyond -he routine of life.
We know this. Our great function when we approach the problem
of education is to equalise opportunity to see that every boy and
girl has a chance to develop whatever faculties he or she may have,
because this will be a tremendous contribution to the good life
for the nation, and to their own good life, because there's an
immense personal satisfaction in accumulating some of the treasures
of the mind, But we're never to fall into the error of thinking
that we are all equal in talents, in aptitudes, in industry, in
ambition, in energy, because if we are obviously not all identical,
one or the other, in this way, it follows that what may be a very
proper course of education for one may be inadequate for another,
or inappropriate to a third.
I recently had occasion to be reading something about
what has been called the mechanistic approach to life the
system of rather heathen philosophy which was practised by Karl
a-x and. expounded, b. Kar Marx and-by. Engels te idea that
rmn voJ. liion, ind vill pul mnai lilton renily. oi no momunt,
that the whole of history moves along to the exercise of muchanical
forces by material eircumstnces which, of course redces
human respoiiiility to a minimum, and reduces in te human brain
the necessary consciousness of having some command over his own
destiny. And this is to be contrasted with our more civilised
ideas which concentrate upon freedom for the individual, and the
development of the individual the encouragement the opening
of doors, where doors may now be locked and barred but if we
accustom ourselves too much, too easily, to a highly centralised,
uniform, almost authoritarian control over the process of
education, then we will be moving more towards that bad philosophy
to which I referred, and away from the good philosophy in which
I think all of us here this morning most firmly believe, 
Now, Sir, I don't want to hold you up at any
length, but I wanted to say those things because every now
and then I detect a temptation in people's minds to say that
if we're going to have a proper, effective, one hundred per cent.
satisfactory educational system it's the Commonwealth that must
do it. Jell there's a very old proverb about the man who pays
the piper calling the tune, and it's pretty deep-seated in human
nature, I'm the last man to complain about the Commonwealth
being called upon to make contribution where contribution is
necessary. I, in fact, have the great honour of having instituted
a system of advances in the tertiary field, in the University
field, which have now amounted to very large sums of money paid
out by the Commonwealth every year, and I don't complain of it,
I'm proud of it. I think it was right, because I think the
universities would have gone hopelessly bankrupt if we hadn't
come in. In a week or two I'm going to receive a report, I'm
told, from a special committee set up to investigate tertiary
education, and this report will most obviously though I've
not seen a word of it but I know will contain recommendations
of a far-reaching kind, which will produce, no doubt, a few pale
and wan countenances in the Treasury. But that's in the future,
though it's in the very near future.
We have recently intervened in the secondary fiald
to the extent of our provision of scholarships and of science
teaching facilities both of these things of tremendous
importance if, firs t we're going to maKe the best use of our
universities and if, second, we're going to increase the resources,
the scientific and technological resources of this new world
into which we move,
But all I want to say to you is this, that if the
habit develops of saying that the Cemmonwealth ought to take over
the financial responsibility for education as a whole ( and we
now carry quite a handsome percentage cf it. I may say), but if
the Commonwealth is to be told time after times " You must take
over the financial responsibility for education", then don't
you think that it's quite likely that the Commonwealth Parliament,
or the Government of the day may say: " Well, if we're to have
all the responsibility we must have all the control. If we're
to pay the piper in full, we must call the tune in full." Look,
this is a very great danger. It's not a danger with me, I may
say, but then, of course, I won't, strange as it may seem, last
forever. It would be no danger with me, because I have the
most violent objection to the Commonwealth interfering with the
States in the exercise of their powers because they do their
jobs very well, and I have no shadow of complaint about it.
But in the long run, if you take a broad view of
constitutional growth, and compare it with the history of other
countries, you will realise that in every Federal system ( and
that's the most difficult system in the world it's the most
legalistic system in the world), that in every Federation you
either have a movement away from the centre, so that the
Federation tends to break up, or you have a centripetal movement
so that more and more power goes to the centre, sometimes without
constitutional amendment at all; so that you may finally say:
" Well, the States have become mere shadows the whole power is in
the central Parliament and administration. Now, this is
elementary, constitutional history, I am bound to say.
In modern times, we've seen two new Federations
established: one in the West Indies, and one in Africa the
Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Each of them broke up
within a few years; neither of them lasted I think the one in
e 
Africa lasted for ten years, the one in the West Indies for
almost a matter of months. And that's because the instinct
for central government was weak and the parts came apart,
separated into their original form. Now in Australia the
process is different. The whole movement here has been rather
to strengthen the position of the central administration,
particularly in financial matters; and this is, perhaps, an
inevitable part of history. But I don't want, myself, to see
that centralising process in terms of power, authority, control,
carried to a point . where the States no longer manage their own
educational programmes and affairs. Nothing could be worse.
You must have a proper respect for politicians,
but you must also have a certain healthy distrust of ua. lTe're
not always to be entrusted with great pouer. It's a very good
thing to have a division of power, if you're going to preserve
liberty. Give any political orgnisation full power, and you
are taking the first step in the direction of a tyranny which
will be based on the idea that as all of those whom we control
must obey us, then they must all be uniform, they must just be,
so to speak, pawns in The power game. Don't, don't ever permit
yourself to get into a position where there's a strong movement
to hand over education to the Commcnwealth.
I, speaking as the beneficiary of the educational
systems of my own country, of all sorts, would regard it as a
bad day for Australia if we ceased to have this variety of
authorities, this variety of curricula in the schools, this
immense variety of parents visiting the schools, t2ling to the
teachers, producing a broad attitude of mind, encouraging the
teacher by their interest, learning from him, and at the 3ame
time, all the time, contributing; to this variety in human
nature which, when you consider it, is the essence of life,
isn't it? Just thirnk of it: suppose we wore all the same,
suppose you looked all the same. I would h., ve gone mad instantly,
and I nevor would have received my award as the Father of the
Year. Sir, I have the greatest pleasure in the world in
declaring this Conference open. 5 



DINN'ER IN~ HONOUR OF THE RT. HON. SIR GAR~ FIELD BARWICK
IN M. L. CO BiUILDING NORTH SYDNEY
ON 1 5TH AU3UST, 1964
The aigh limramble the pstme I~ thowr. iit
The Prime hilaisutios pts to Maha-a few rmsef beefm we
drink Sir Gaifi 6 bealth. 64/ 099
Well, Sir. I dot waut te. 9 s. R761mg to Pawev the level ef so
princiWa teast od &amp; a eyoubig but I am.% to dB soe ' 01 OwO.
civilised am&amp;= 2 70% 4 &amp; a f arn a" half a dosaz.. wouUA be
iterested to heWW At. 60. latest se ( Mr. L&amp; Wey halrba
meraifUfy beesm Utar fIVm Us) i wWatsI ~" 1 ric.
We've bees sitin aver* he. with rather œ RuctMoat9 cOmuq@"@ as
ym kow. and a= r canvereatim tboned up= s great morn and is
particuar. am. glanelag refersmp Was mod to an 0* 901c
' WellzilSt and I Wvr. a to POWhis 0 907018" As al
grea men cihistoy t, = y pWlit haviog elboed Beir
way into tat noew~ a" d 0hM I rnebeared tha a n= Gane"'
Phili Guedalla wrote. a. booh de Well-agtas Re Calle UI " The
Duke-. I ased to have has han=* frt editlon 4d it bet
I had relatives = 1 *&amp; Vfar. I so OS have Ut-GNt edlla
fa Nos pretace to. that bac saidd OWt Wellisgtie repatatiom had
be= s rater danaged by e fact. 0thathewas 1 iinifomnlyesuccesfMl
tat an &amp; ae whole. the 9: 201-1 griferred thi hees to ba
associated wMt speDidM fagsu" hme CorunaM ad Reske's
Drift = A all &amp; hea. utters~ ac i th hind Well ) dp by Mhal
eatmrwaairhd Oiasra filur. Bes ho ifo Pe
wonderful sccess, and haea all staess I tk 400 grSWUM
creat to this, CciMUay.
It is salker a dlspositikm &amp; ni= 3 advanced tdhkar to suppase Gis
People who achieve a grt PC" t lowe ti geatest Cd legal posts is
fte world, the Chie 3usatcsbi of Australia. = unt be there because
they have Cenvd privilege or itnium, have beern pushadikew,
nudged 1here. is &amp; hrai VervVulgw Cc6ptias. The fact is
that al the pecyle that 7M ca think 09 VerY. radil who haV6
~ chev aitese result hae* ha som irn dia mselves which,
viwim iVaeic. widu wealth, without any qi thes ez~ m
aids. has brougbit a 4t80 r tinsh" itpt. Pa" ow, wbatever
they way y a u six. Garfed BaRWICh. the Chief justice of
Australia, awly wast be able to ace him of 1he v. 1gVV error 4
being born a wILlir. Well ils 86ginddtto bebe= a
-iioasroe I am told but he Is a me Wbe. L an UvORY.
begtmzlns ba forg e is 1sc areer
It w~ e aao= Siskenbesayr cw a, and I think quit truly. OWa
when ho was invited to say what Nos cost ad arm would be. stia
he weat to thq Lords. he said " Well I thnk I wasld 1i0a to have
( bis == rn bet" g Swit) " Awtificer searM= The 9= ith
of his owm fortun.' Now this wa= good.--it was a braVUra, S
statee that ft was very $ Mod. 
celebrated for' Me sUUl tn Uf anybody supose GM do cM
legend of the bwrief idlo sOil bas somn validty. let bhm fget
it The gootoidaOmsnwbvi ave cmto Owt opml~ ig n
Wei prelessionhbl.. r er. by bard a el md work by boring
pes" at mat lasts, Ie"* but by bard woo ai be Ad hin bawd
work and he achieved in dise coves. a position at Ob. Australimn
Bar wbich I vmeno to say bae. if We sev e hequalled ( which
I docbt), bas noev been surpssed ia She hIatoW of legol practicm
He have remained Omee he might have gonema and on from
on. Wrwnph to another but ame day Bill Spone ( M1W. be". % okgh
yo7u know@ thisdubious character be I Itiked ot f &amp; oa
Cabinet). DIll whoe always bean a wise cousselier amid to me.
" What about'Darwieh?." -And-so said finally,. NWell, well, yes
I might be able to talk him in golig . into6 PATliaaL Well. h
first problem haw to fid Shze coisweentsagate
Ume. He was ftnally tracked down, " oh, moin' ground on the
sout casat somewhere sao dansmg y or someting
OfE that kind". an aeUp to SyOasYw and-i d. a tMlkwlt him.
Whether that had. anything to &amp;@-with It or DOiia doint know but In
the long run, and in fact in the-not s eyln m~ edcddh
wocl om intoIPRaAl amn. Wellnine-ainlaht er he va my
Attorne-Generwal and.: wilthooi making too low an obeiance becaose
properly wi" nnem s ewsMy Atre-eea.
Wws I1 4enture toW say, h greates AtoreG al-&amp; ae Common-
Siftig i n. my dm 1n6 1 Ca1bb as B1oo11, a cbir ubch I have bowed
dain how* fo. &amp;, very. etnmber* af y anmd s11ll boilng my
ancient pasion for the law, an a4 l rim b n Sa few veSages at
Oka -law. which I usead to-as. Iusted Wo look across as him and
wvelat Go vrsatlit bhiigs nowled, at thecomplete up-In-
-datmaeso-of hisg weg imle to me becomse I
foun, bfor lon, han al yMnstrtak God,' whao used to
come. to me and saPM. tese is. a 4nestion. ad law hare, what
do you thfiik? 0. and getitiag. some highly ambigmusi reply from met,
Were all. going to him and coming asway. refrsd. ela Gar
looko back on' his * ifet he canto back onc~ his peidas Allorney.
. General with mmens prdlnI oeoy says " What is he
reso ft the jad?" I( I! anispil aliv)-will beilliiagly
call" as a witUese8 1o supoti because ibis waswa very remarhaol
Well then. as -you kwv' he6 becam Chieof Justice of the. High Court.
I under stad from -the press. thMI. rvesaned him -and I said, " Look
hDerea, r wick, a~ easyou tbeat me properly IIlIaeyo he
Justice of Australia." Yes. -well you know: these are ludicrous
Ideas, althoug ae eiul ocsionally by'peopld wv ough
to know beter! He w'ias th oibvios man to be , ChiefJusftce of
Australia and I wvoudnt wa may of the non-lawyers here tonight
to suppose for a moment thtbeing Chief Justlce of Australia Is
Jut Wnor= Poot that thi is Just anohe cm% because* I say this
with complet dogmatism, that for year*. nd years now te HIgh
Court of Australi has been Ow. greatest -court Lu the English.
speaking world; and now he presides ever that court this is a.
tremendous thing. . I hope you donS mind mesaying In a sort all
melancholy W" y, I evY him &amp; bis poet -reall I do. To be the hand 
I 1'
I
ii
ft * 43
' us
I:
41 II
Ii
ii
Ii 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
AOMN ELI PRIME MINISTERS'
D CONFERENCE,
[ From thre Parliamentary Debates," 18.8.64.)
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister)-by leave-After I
returned from my overseas visit, and Parlia,-
ment not being in session, I gave a long
Press and television interview. It is not
my purpose to repeat all that I then said
-the verbatim tape record will be availleto
honorable members-but I do proeto
say something about some of the
highlights of my work.
For the record, I will say at once that
I propose a little later to lay on the table
if~ the House the text of the final cornhunique
of the Prime Ministers' Conference.
I had intended to pay a visit to Israel.
Indeed arrangements for this visit were well
advanced when, by reason of illness, I
-found, with ~ very great regret, that I -had to
cancel my journey to that country. I hope
to make it on a future opportunity. In the
result, I had made sufficient recovery to
go to the Prime Ministers' Conference in
London via Washington. I't was necessary
for me to leave London the day after the
Prime Ministers' Conference, in order to
be back in time for important Cabinet
discussions on the Budget.
Two matters emerged from my talks in
Washington. The first wvas that I was keen
to discover from the Administration whether the statement I had made in this
House on the A. N. Z. U. S. Treaty was one
with which they agreed. I should, I think,
quote the substance of what I said in the
House because there had been some controversy
about the position inside Australia
and there had been, indeed, some misrepresentation
of what the then Minister for
External Affairs had said on this matter.
In this House on 21st April, I said-
The treaty is between the United States,
Australia and New Zealand. Article IV reads-
Each Party recognizes that an armed
attack in the Pacific Area on any of the
Parties would be dangerous to its own peace
and safety and declares that it would act to
meet the common danger in accordance with
its constitutional processes."
Of course, this should be in accordance with
constitutional processes. Very few countries go
automatically into a state of war. They all have
certain procedures to go through but, subject
to constitutional processes, which can operate
here just as much as they can anywhere else,
there is a clear statement that the parties ' will
act to meet the common danger in accordance
with their constitutional processes.
The article goes on-
" Any such armed attack and all measures
taken as a result thereof shall be immediately
reported to the Security Council of the United
Nations. Such measures sh~ lI be terminated
when the Security Council has taken the
measures necessary to restore and maintain
international peace and security."
10543/ 64. 
Article V reads-
For the purpose of Article IV, an armed
attack on any of the Parties is deemed to
include an armed attack on the metropolitan
territory of any of the Parties, or on the island
territories under its jurisdiction in the Pacific
or on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft
in the Pacific."
Those words do not produce automatic hostilities,
because reference is made to constitutional processes,
but they contain in the clearest terms a
high-level acceptance of responsibility. It is not
for us to assume that any great ally of ours wvill
avoid that any more than we will avoid it.
There is a contract between Australia and
America. It is a contract based on the utmost goodwill,
the utmost good faith and unqualified friendship.
Each of us will stand by it.
I was happy to find in Washington that
my statement was accepted as a completely
accurate interpretation and that the State
Department had, in fact, circulated it as a
definite statement on the point. This, I
think, revealed a state of affairs eminently
satisfactory to Australia. It has, as I pointed
out last week when we were debating these
matters, been powerfully reinforced by the
recent statement of President Johnson, and
the terms of the resolution of both Houses
of the Congress. In the second place-and
I think I should report this having regard
to some comments that have been made-
President Johnson very promptly, at the
beginning of our discussions, stated his
pleasure and the pleasure of the American
people at our contribution to the defence of
South Vietnam. He expressed pleasure both
with the content of our response and the
prompt way in which we had made it.
It is sometimes thought that Australia's
efforts in these fields, being relatively small,
are either of no significance or must provoke
some American criticism. This is not
so. The United States is the greatest power
in the world. It has given enormous aid to
other countries. It must occasionally feil
somewhat isolated. It would be more than
human if it did not occasionally feel that
it was being cast for the role of the world's
gendarme with the major responsibility for
keeping the peace. It is because of these
things that in Washington contributions by
other countries are welcomed as an identification
by other countries of their world
interests with those of the United States.
I have repeatedly said that while we
rely and will continue to rely very much on
the collaboration of the great powers in our own defence, that collaboration involves
mutual obligations which we will
at all times be prepared to honour. This
is well understood. I have not been able
to detect any mental reservations about
the friendship of the United States for Australia
or-and this is of broad importance
-the determination of the United States
to do all in its power to preserve the
peace in South East Asia and to prevent
the spread of aggressive . Communism.
This attitude of mind has, in fact, been
illustrated vividly ' by recent events.
When I went on to the conference inK
London, I was quite convinced that som)
thing should be said to strengthen the)
position of Malaysia and to make it clear
that, as a Commonwealth country, it enjoyed
the support, physically or morally or
both, of all the Commonwealth nation-
Honorable memb~ ers will be familiar wi)
what I will call the new vocabulary'
There is a strong opposition to
1colonialism and to imperialism"
and to what is now called neocolonialism."
As I understand it, " neocolonialism
" is an expression which relates
to a new or derivative form of
" 1colonialism It is, as honorable members
know, an expression frequently used by
the rulers of Indonesia to support their
allegation that the creation first of Malaya
and then of Malaysia did not represen*
the termination of colonial rule bt9
represented an attempt by the former
" 1colonial power to use the new independent
-body and thus to deprive it cf
some of the attributes of complete political
indpedencbe play has been made of t.
fact that the military and paramilitary and
economic aid given to Malaysia * by the
United Kingdom, Australia and New
Zealand represents some desire on the part
of predominantly European nations to
maintain a position of influence and thus
to treat Malaysia as not fully free. This
notion seemed to me-and I believe that
I will have the support of honorable members
in this view-to have a somewhat
dangerous quality. I therefore had a very
great desire to secure in the conference
some general support for Malaysia, a
support which should include that of the
West Indian, African and Asian members
of the Commonwealth. 
3
A -great deal of discussion occurred on
these matters with, at one stage, some
divergence of opinion but in the long run,
I am happy to say, a satisfactory result.
There was no disagreement about the
statement in the communique that they
will maintain their efforts to reduce the
areas of international disagreement with all
the means within their power, while maintaining
both the strength and the resolution
to resist aggression from without or
subversion from within But there was a
difference of opinion as to whether, having
said this, we should give some assurance
_ the Prime Minister of Malaysia of our
1mpathy and support in his efforts to pre-
-serve the independence and integrity of his
country. Some thought that an expression
of sympathy was enough. My own view was
that it was inadequate; that one might well
,-mpthis with people without agreeing
9th them or in any way backing them
-up. I pointed out, and so did others, tat
the word support did not necessarily
connote military support or even material
support, since the nature of the support
to be given would be for each member of
the Commonwealth to determine.
I did my best to point out that every new
African nation represented at the Conference
was jealous of its owni independence and
would strongly resent any interference in
it by outside people. This, indeed, had been
__ Imonstrated in the case of Kenya and
anganyika, each of which had, after independence,
been happy to receive British
military aid against aggressive movements.
I said as strongly as I could that what was
true in the case of African countries was
&gt;-qually true in the case of Asian countries
that Malaysia was entitled at the very
least to our strong moral support at the
United Nations and around the various diplomatic
posts in the world. I expressed the
view that. a Commonwealth which was not
prepared to -take a public stand in favour
of the political independence -and territorial
integrity of all its members would be a
strange kind of Commonwealth. From our
point of view in Australia this is, of course,
extremely important. We are not supporting
Malaysia, as we do in the most practical
terms, because we have some colonialist
point of view. We have not. But we do
believe that we have obligations to sister
members of the Commonwealth while, of
course-and this may be stated quite frankly -we have some particular interest in the
preservation of Malaysia having regard to
the threat from Communist aggression
which presses down upon us or in our direction
from the north. I am happy -to say that
agreement was finally secured upon an expression,
not only of sympathy, but of support.
This was to me one of the crucial
matters in this Conference. The fact that it
was resolved in the manner contained in
the communique, a unanimous document,
is one of the facts which has enabled me
to say, as I have said publicly, that the
Conference achieved valuable results.
It will, I hope, be remembered-and I
repeatedly invited the Conference to remember
it-that when Malaysia was created it
secured the unanimous approval of an
earlier Prime Ministers' Conference, it
secured admission to membership of the
United Nations by a unanimous vote and
that, later on, when it was alleged by
Indonesia that the people of the Borneo
territories had been ignored, a special mission
set up by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations had found that there was
approval in those territories of what had
been done.
It follows from all this, as I said to the
Conference, that the validity of the existence
of Malaysia cannot sensibly be challenged.
The challenge to it-in other words the so
called confrontation policy of Indonesiafinds
its expression in actual military aggression
across the frontiers of Malaysia. This
being a clear case of military aggression, the
argument that there were unsettled disputes
has a somewhat hollow sound. The plain
fact is that Malaysia is defending itself
against aggression and therefore comes
plainly within the Commonwealth statement
that there should be a resolution to resist
aggression from without or subversion from
within. It became clear, as the Conference proceeded,
that the problems of the new Commonwealth
must be approached patiently
and without illusions. An example of this
fact is to be found in one reference in the
communique. It is as follows-
They discussed the great significance of China
for South and South East Asia. They also discussed
the question of relations with China and
of her membership of the United Nations.
This, it will be seen, conveys very little.
The reason for this is that there were deep 
divisions of opinion and of emphasis, and
that these rendered a more positive statement
impossible. I must recognise that from
the point of view of most of the African
countries, Asia, particularly South East
Asia, seems a long way off. They do not
feel that Communist China presents any
threat to them. When I presented views
which are based upon the aggressive policies
and activities of China in and around Laos
and Vietnam, I was told that this was
cold war talk, and that the cold war was,
for purposes of a Prime Ministers' Conference,
an irrelevancy. In some quarters there
even seemed to be an assumption that the
cold war had been created by the West, and
a failure to understand that but for the
tenacity and success of the great Western
powers in resisting the cold war and deterring
a hot one, the Prime Ministers might
have been meeting, if at all, in very different
circumstances. I mention this not by way of criticism but
by way of explaining some of the atmosphere
of a new Commonwealth meeting.
New nations, with different histories and
backgrounds and emotions, cannot be
expected to fall into our inherited patterns
of thought, or to see world conflict in the
same light as those of us who have treaty
associations and obligations and indeed
special regional problems of security and
survival. But I am not at all despondent.
The greatest value of these conferences is
that we are all conscious of our special,
though undefined, relationship to each other,
that we exchange our experience and views
with great vigour, but with personal goodwill,
and that we learn something from each
other. The Conference having noted-I am sure
with great satisfaction-that since the war
more than 20 countries, with a total population
of some 700 millions, had been brought
to self-government by Great Britain,
and that others will shortly be added to
the list, became involved in a discussion
about Southern Rhodesia. Now, we all
agreed at the outset, and reaffirmed
-unanimously in the communique, that the
authority and responsibility for leading the
remaining colonies to independence must
continue to rest with Britain". In spite of
this, and of the further fact that under the
agreed Soufhern Rhodesian Constitution of
1961, there will be an African majority of electors within a period variously estimated
at from five to ten years-I think I heard
somebody say it might be twelve-some of
the African leaders said they wanted a
discussion. It was pointed out to them that
as any further negotiations must be conducted
by Britain and as there were strong
political views and differences in Southern
Rhodesia itself, advice or instruction to
Britain might well complicate a task already
sufficiently delicate and difficult.
In the result, it was agreed that the
Southern Rhodesian problem should not be
discussed in full conference, but in a closed
session with restricted membership.
At the end of the Conference, it was
agreed that the matter could be referred
to in the communique, in the terms which
I now quote-
At the same time, Prime Ministers of oth
Commonwealth countries expressed their vieJ
to the Prime Minister of Britain on the question
of the progress of Southern Rhodesia towards
independence within the Commonwealth. They
welcomed the decision already announced by the
British Government that, as in the case of other
territories, the existence of sufficiently representative
institutions would be a condition of the grant
of independence to Southern Rhodesia.
We all agreed about that. It continues-
They also noted with approval the statement
already made by the British Government that they
would not recognise any unilaterial declaration of
independence-We all agreed about thatand
the other Prime Ministers made it clear that
thc would be unable to recognise any such
declaration. The view was also expressed that an Independence
Conference should be convened which -the leaders
of all parties in Southern Rhodesia should be fre
to attend. The object would be to seek agreemen.
on the steps by which Southern Rhodesia might proceed
to independence within the Commonwealth
at thile earliest practicable time on the basis of
majority rule. With a view to diminishing tensions
and preparing the way for such a conference, an
appeal was made for the release of all the detained
African leaders. The Prime Ministers called upon all
leaders and their supporters to exercise moderation
and to abstain from violence; and they affirmed
their belief that the best interest of all sections of
the population lay in developing confidence and
co-operation, on the basis of tolerance, mutual
understanding and justice. In this connection, they
recognised the necessity for giving confidence to
the minority community in Southern Rhodesia
that their interests would be protected.
The Prime Minister of Britain said that he would
give careful consideration to all the views expressed
by other Commonwealth Prime Ministers. At the
same time he emphasised that the Government of 
Southern Rhodesia was constitutionally responsible
for the internal affairs of that territory and that the
question of the granting of independence was a
matter for decision by the British Parliament.
Frankness requires that I should tell the
House that I, for one, did not associate
myself with this public tendering of adviceadvice
which might be interpreted in some
quarters as instructions-to the Government
of the United Kingdom, which alone, as was
expressly conceded, had the power and the
responsibility. I want to put my position on
record to my brother members of this House.
So that there may be no misunderstanding,
I should make it clear that-
" ja) The Australian Government had
already offered friendly advice to
the Government of Southern Rhodesia,
stating our belief that the
end result to be arrived at, if
Southern Rhodesia wished to be
admitted to the Commonwealth,
was a voting roll which would
provide an African majority.
We took the view that if this result
was not achieved in due course, it
would probably be impossible for
the United Kingdom to grant
independence and therefore
Southern Rhodesia could not be
admitted to membership of the
Commonwealth, the Commonwealth
being an association of
independent nations.
A unilateral declaration of independence
before the necessary conditions
existed had no chance of
Commonwealth recognition, and
would tend unhappily to isolate
Southern Rhodesia from Commonwealth
affairs.
Those are all views that we ourselves had
put, through me, to Southern Rhodesia.
On the other hand, I indicated to the
Conference that I thought it would be a
dangerous precedent, and an invasion of
domestic jurisdiction, for the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers to get into a
position of sitting, as a body, to examine
the affairs of other members, and pronouncing
public judgments. I said that it was not
difficult to foresee circumstances in which
any one of us might find this intolerable.
This difference of view explains some of
the language of the communique. I was,
of course, as I hardly need to say, not opposed to the idea of a constitutional
conference about Southern Rhodesiaindeed,
that is inevitable--or the
adequate representation of the African
citizens; this is completely proper. But I
felt strongly that the Government of the
United Kingdom should not be handicapped
in its negotiations by public statements
which could increase its difficulties
by stiffening resistance. After all, the problem
is not easy, and needs to be solved
in an atmosphere of mutual understanding.
It is proper to remember that there are
many thousands of settlers in Southern
Rhodesia, frequently of long standing and
with no other homes, strongly British in
their allegiance and with legitimate rights
to be protected, who will be unhappy at
becoming a minority in what is now a
fashionable African concept-a one party
republican state.
But, Sir, I am sure that most of them,
watching the tides of events in other former
African colonies, realise that there must be
an accommodation, and that in due course
-and not too long a course-an accelerated
movement towards adult suffrage
must be completed, or the alternative
accepted, of mounting internal disorder, of
hostility among neighbours, and of a result
finally achieved in an atmosphere of hostility,
not friendship, with racial hostilities
unfavorable to the continuance of
European settlement and out of harmony
with those inter-racial relationships for
which the new Commonwealth has come
to stand.
In the course of the general survey of
world affairs with which we normally begin
in Prime Ministers' Conferences I thought
it proper to make some reference to the
still current dispute between India and
Pakistan over Kashmir. This is a dispute
which has considerably embittered relations
between these two great countries and has
led to circumstances which do not aid
the presentation of a common front to
common dangers. Naturally, I had nothing
to say about the merits of the dispute,
about which there are deep differences of
opinion. All I was concerned to say was that,
if the dispute could be solved by some
mutual accommodation, it should be of great
advantage to all of us. In view of what
has been subsequently said, I should make
it quite clear that the Conference did not 
debate the merits or nature of these
d-ifferences of opinion. But it did happen
that the distinguished President of Pakistan,
Field Marshal Ayub Khan, and the Minister
for Finance in India, Mr. Krishnamachari
who, in the absence of Mr. Shastri, most
ably represented India, both made speeches
of a helpful kind. We all hoped that if the
atmosphere so created continued we might
see a settlement. But quite clearly the
problem is one for the two countries concerned.
I repeat that, as a meeting of Prime
Ministers, we were not sitting in judgment.
We thus by implication re-affirmed our
belief, to which I have referred elsewhere,
that we are not an arbitral body, that we
do not sit in judgment and that we
recognise that there are very important
domestic or intra-Commonwealth problems
in relation to which we should not seek to
impose our views.
We had some discussion, perhaps not
enough, looking back on it, on the importance
of and the problems associated with
economic development in the Commonwealth.
I say not enough, because I felt that
rather too much of our time was devoted
to the problem of Southern Rhodesia. In
the result, the economic problem might
have been dealt with in too general a way
and without useful definition if it had not
been for the fact that the Government of
the United Kingdom put forward a series
of positive proposals. These were put forward
as practical ways in which the
Commonwealth could be given added
vitality, meaning and purpose, as a sort of
co-operative association so as to be able to
help both its own members and the world at
large, and thereby contribute to world peace
by the raising of living standards and the
achievement of economic progress. As the
Communique records, various proposals
were advanced. They were in a broad way
accepted in principle. The final decision was
that they were to be put into study by
officials in the first instance to determine
how best they could be carried into effect.
Some of the proposals were as follows-
That technical assistance on a co-operative
project basis within the Commonwealth
should be provided to aid the development
and use of resources.
I pause here to say that, as I said in
the Conference itself, it is a mistake to
think of the Commonwealth as an association of rich countries. Some indeed are
very poor. Some, like our own country, are
far from poor but are still heavily involved
in the importation of capital and technical
skill for our own industrial development.
Great Britain alone can be described as a
capital exporting country; but, as the Prime
Minister of Great Britain pointed out more
than once, sometimes with a wry smile,
there is a limit to what a nation with its
own balance of payments problems can do.
We were, therefore, not so much talking in
terms of massive capital assistance as we
were in terms of technical assistance, in
which field so much may be done by orfor
another. I return to the proposals--
The encouragement of closer contacts
between professional and other bodies
within the Commonwealth to strengthen
the links between us.
This is, I think, an attractive propositio"-
It is quite true that nobody can attend
modern Prime Ministers' Conference without
realising, sometimes with a shock, that
we have very different ideas about the
institutions of government, and indeed, very
different ideas about democracy itself.
Quite a few of the newer Commonwealth
nations have one-party systems in which
the principle of one man, one vote becomes
quite ironical. Some have different ideas
on the rule of law from those which we
entertain. Some have different ideas about
the treatment of minorities from tho'
which we entertain. It would indeed b,.
qu'ite impossible today to make a speech
about the Commonwealth in which the
point was made, as it used to be made
years ago, that we all had great constitutional
ideas in common; that we all believt.
in Parliamentary democracy, in th'
sovereignty of Parliament, and in the rule
of law. The sober fact today is that some
of us do and some of us do not. But this
is not a matter about which we are to
lecture each other. Indeed, I have constantly
opposed any idea that we are to
interfere in each other's domestic affairs.
Such interference violates the most classical
precepts of foreign policy; it is quite contrary
to the Charter of the United Nations;
and it is in my opinion a matter which
could seriously damage intra-Commonwealth
relations. For these reasons, I was
very glad to find some attention directed
towards the establishment of closer contacts 
on matters in which we do have some
common interest and some common desire
for advancement. Examples of these are
obviously to be found in the establishment
of closer contacts between professional and
other bodies in relation to which there is this
community of interest.
Incidentally, Sir, I noticed recently that
the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell)
seemed to be * under the impression that I
lectured the Prime Ministers on the
advantages of private enterprise. I can
relieve his mind; no such incident occurred.
, Nobody has been more careful than I have
) nto make it clear that each member of
mne Commonwealth is entitled to adopt
whatever system of government it likes,
and whatever economic principles or
policies seem best to it. I have attended the
,-. tnine Prime Ministers' Conferences. In
, at time, there has never been a discussion
o6n private enterprise or socialism. The
proposals continue-
The proposal that we should aim at the
provision of financial assistance to the
developing of higher education in
Commonwealth countries.
Here again there is no doubt a limit to
financial aid. We know from our own
experience in Austiralia that higher educationl
is not cheap. Indeed the cost of university
education in Australia is mounting at a
-m ost formidable rate, while we have
' cently received a report in relation to
-a/ apua and New Guinea which recommends
further developments of this kind in those
territories. Yet there still remains a field of aid
~ ih we all thought should be explored.
I ay well be t-hat Australia can aid some
other Commonwealth country or countries
by providing expert advice in the universities
field; by the provision of visiting professors,
lecturers or administrators. For similar purposes,
we must continue to receive in our
own universities students from other countries
and particularly from Commonwealth
countries with whom we have such a special
association and such close engagements.
The next proposal was-
The encouragement of specialised training
and research in public administration
with special emphasis on the needs of
developing Commonwealth countries.
This, I venture to say, is of prime importance.
That wise man, the Prime Minister of Nigeria, who presides over the destinies
of the largest of the African nations, has
more than once said to me that the great
shortage in all these countries is a shortage
of competent administrators. Here, I think,
we can help each other a good deal. The
Government of the United Kingdom had in
mind the establishment of some special
teaching or training body in London or in
connection with some university. I by no
means reject this idea, but I do feel that
in the long run the best training in administration
that can be given to people from
other Commonwealth countries is that they
should be, so to speak, fitted into the public
service of a more experienced nation so that
they may learn something of the rules and
practice of admninistration and something
of the mental and moral attitudes which
distinguish an advanced Civil Service in a
politically advanced country. The last proposal
I wish to mention was-
The convening of a Commonwealth
Medical Conference in 1965.
This idea fits into what I was saying
earlier about professional bodies. Such a
conference would do good, because the
problems not only of personal medicine but
of public health are of immense importance,
more particularly in new nations where
medical services may be scanty and the
problems of public health extremely
complex. . These various proposals, and there were
others, the nature of which is broadly stated
in the communique, must be converted from
vague expressions of principle into practical
schemes. Our officials will willingly contribute
to this result. If, in some or all of
these matters, an effective result is achieved,
we will, I think, have done a great deal to
put substance into a Commonwealth
relationship the nature of which has so
changed in recent years, and to counter the
scepticism which is frequently expressed as
to the capacity of the new Commonwealth
to endure.
The proposal for a Commonwealth Secretariat
is of course not a new one. It had,
over a period of years, been put forward
in general terms by Mr. Curtin and myself
and others. On this occasion, the idea was
first mentioned in the meeting by some of
the African Prime Ministers. The suggestion
was that there should be established in 
London " a central clearing house In the
first instance, it was suggested that it should
prepare documents on trade aid and
development and should circulate information
on these matters to all the members
of the Commonwealth. Then, by way of
further or alternative suggestion, it was
proposed that the Secretariat might assist in
the preparations for the meetings of Prime
Ministers in the sense of receiving and
circulating papers, which would make us
all much better informed of other problems
when we arrived. I myself drew
attention to the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association and the small and useful
secretariat which it has. I felt that a
Secretariat for the Commonwealth on the
Parliamentary Association model might encourage
members to put forward papers and
proposals for circulation, information and
consideration in advance of Prime
Ministers' meetings.
After general debate amongst the Prime
Ministers, it was decided to ask an official
committee to go into the proposal further
and to report back to the Prime Ministers
on what functions a Commonwealth
Secretariat should perform. The view I
stated was and is that the task of the
Secretariat should be to pool and coordinate
and disseminate information of a
factual kind. There should be no question
of a policy or executive role. As the
examination proceeds, there may well be
considerable differences of opinion as to
what a Secretariat should do. Some may wish to have something resembling the
office and ' functions of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, with considerable
executive significance. We must, I put to
the House, be astute to avoid constituting
the Commonwealth as a sort of committee
of the United Nations, with resolutions and
votes. If we are to achieve and maintain a
special significance, it will be by preserving
the informality of our association, and
the basic independence which each Commonwealth
country brings to the conference
table. It was at all times important that
this Conference should produce constructive
results and thus contribute to
future of . the Commonwealth. I think th.)
I should, therefore, pay tribute to the
invaluable work of the Chairman. Sir Alec
Douglas-Home exhibited at all stages great
tact and fairness and admirable flexibility
of mind, a broad wisdom and a compl-"
knowledge of the subjects under discussio,./
Without these elements, I would have
doubted more than once whether the Conference
would have a satisfactory conclusion.
It is proper, therefore, that I should
say that what were sometimes acute
differences of viewpoint were in a large
measure reconciled and that in the result
there was a general feeling that the new
Commonwealth had great usefulness and
could make a powerful contribution to
human destiny.
I present the following paper-
Meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministe,-,
1964-Final Communique dated 15th July
1964.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR. COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



ZOR PRESS P. M. Ho. 63/ I964
AIR TRANSPORT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Ht. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
After recent airline litigation, the position
of the Commonwealth x was carefully considered.
In the result, I wrote to each Premier
offering certain views and suggesting certain future
action. It has never been my practice to publish
letters to the Premiers until they have had ample time to
receive and consider them.
Sir Thomas Playford, alone, has now thought
fit to make public my letter.
In the circumstances, I will now approach
the other Premiers who have made no statements to ask
whether I heive their permission to publish the terms of
the letter.
CANBERRA, 19th August, 1964.
x ( in relation to intra-State aviation) 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. &amp; Z+/ 1g9Q+
VISIT OF HER ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCESS
MARINA, DUCHESS OF KENT
Statement by the prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that Her Royal
Highness. Princess Marina Duchess of Kent bad agreed to open
the new Defence Headquariers building at Aussell Hill at the
time of her visit to Canberra in September.
Sir Robert said that the ceremony would take
place on Monday, 28th September, following Princess. Marinavs
visit to the Australian War Memorial.
The Prime Minister added that Her Royal Highness
had also agreed to plant an oak tree on the shore of Take
Burley Griffin, This would take place after the Russell H1ill
ceremony and before Her Royal Highness returned to Government
House for luncheon.
CANBERRA, August, 1964.
BALCKGROUND The oak tree would be the first of two groves of
such trees to form part of the Commonwealth Gardens landscape
on the northern foreshcres of Lake Burley Griffi..
Some time ago the British Government through the
High Commissioner, Sir William Oliver, presented 1,000 acorns
gatbhezed from the Royal Park, Richmond, Surrey to Canberra,
These have been raised in the Yarralumla. Nursery and the groves
will be established in the next planting season, 



FOR PRESS: P. M. 6a/ t9
VISIT OF ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCESS MARINA,
DUCHESS OF KENT
Statement by the Prpiie Minister, the Rit. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The following appointments in relation to the
visit of Her Royal Highness Princess Mlarina, Duchess of Kent,
have been made To be Commonwealth Director
Mr, J. H. Scholtens,
Director of the Ceremonial and
Hospitality Branch of the
Prime Minister's Department
To be Commonwealth Press Relations Officer-
Mr, C. G. Hartnett of the
Premier's Department in the
New Southi Wales Government
To be Assistant Private Secretary to
Her Royal Highness
Mr, W. Heseltine
CANJ3ERPI August, 1961+.
BACKGROUND, Mr. Scholtens has been associated with the arrangements
for a series of Royal visits and was Chief Executive
Officer for the visit of Her Majesty The Queen last year,
Mr. Hartnett has been the Press Relations Officer
for the New South Wales Royal Visit Organisation over a period
of years. With the approval of the New South Wales Government,
he will be on loan to the Commonwealth Royal Visit Organization
for the visit of Princess Marina.
Mr. feseltine is to take up duty at Buckingham
Palace early next year as Assistant Information Officer. He will
be attached to Princess Marina's Household as Assistant Private
Secretary during the time Her Royal Highness is in Australia from
26th September to 8th October. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRLIA.
SPEECH64/ 099
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
YUGO SLAV IMMIGRANT
ORGAMISATIONS.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT.
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 27th August 1964.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister)-by leave--For some time,
there have been references both in the
Parliament and elsewhere to the activities
of certain Yugoslav immigrant organisa-
-ions. The Government is, and over a period
) as been, in possession of considerable
information on these activities. Certain of
this information is embodied in replies which
are being made separately to the series of
questions on the matter which were asked
pthe previous parliamentary session. This
.4pplies to questions asked by the honorable
member for Yarra ( Dr. J. F. Cairns), answers
to which he should get today. However,
I feel I should also take the opportunity to
make some observations to the House about
the Government's general policy in
relation to migrant organisations and about
immigration from Yugoslavia.
In the years since World War II, Australia's
immigration programme has brought
to this country people from all parts of
Europe with a diversity of historical and
cultural backgrounds. Many of these people
were refugees from oppression. Many
derived from happier circumstances. This
flow of new citizens has played an import-
11142/ 64. ant part in building the nation. It is something
which has given us great satisfaction
and we wish to see it continue. However,
it is basic to our immigration policy that all
these new citizens should be integrated as
fully, and as quickly, as possible into Australia's
national life. The people of Australia
endorse this approach and, as part of
its mnigration programme, the Government
has enlisted the help of community and
public bodies throughout the Commonwealth
in the vital work of assimilation.
There has been a very gratifying response
in this regard and on the whole the programme
of integration has met with great
success. The Government is not taking an attitude
against immigrants from particular countries
joining in their own associations. We
do not expect newcomers to turn their backs
on their original heritage. On the contrary,
it is wholly understandable that immigrants
should establish organisations amongst themselves
for a variety of social and cultural
purposes. It rather follows the precedents
of the Irish and Scots in this country. These
organisations, as honorable members will
know, can also be a most valuable means 
of assisting migrants to become fully integrated
into the Australian community. I
have no doubt that the great majority of
organisations and societies to which
migrants belong come within the category
to which I have just been referring. However,
the Government looks with disfavour
on any activities of any migrant organisation
which tend to frustrate integration.
The possibility always exists that at some
point, the activities of a particular immigrant
organisation, or the activities of individuals
within that organisation, may transgress
the law. As necessary, investigations
are made, and will be made, into the
activities of various organisations including
some which are not organisations of
migrants alone or even primarily. If, as a
result of these investigations, there is evidence
of illegal activities on the part of an
organisation, or individuals within an
organisation, evidence which would be
receivable in a court of law, then steps
will be taken promptly, as may be appropriate
to the particular case, to appeal to
the law of the State or to invoke the relevant
Commonwealth legislation. I add however,
by way of reminder to the House,
that it is not and never has been the practice
to make details of security investigations
available or public.
I turn now to the matter of immigration
from Yugoslavia. To understand the attitudes
of these migrants it is necessary to
remind ourselves that this part of Europe
has an exceedingly complex and troubled
history. Yugoslavia emerged from the political
settlements of World War I. It brought
together as a union a number of southern
Slav peoples including Serbs, Croats and
Slovenes, under the Serbian King Alexander.
The Serbs obtained their independence from
the Ottoman Empire during the nineteenth
century and were numerically the largest
group in the new State. The Croats had
formerly enjoyed a degree of autonomy
within the Austro-Hungarian empire and
retained a national identity dating back as
early as the ninth century. Deep differences
of religious, cultural and historical kinds
have existed between the groups despite
kindred racial origins.
Within the new State, the Croats sought
a federal concept of government with a
large degree of local autonomy. In 1928, the leader of the Croats, Stjepan Radic of
the Croatian Peasant Party and two of his
colleagues were assassinated in the Parliament
in Belgrade. This precipitated a
profound breach between Serbs and Croats.
The Croats developed strong agitation in
support of independence. Peasant Party
leaders taking their cause to the League of
Nations. Some Croat Parliamentary representatives
were arrested, others, among them
Dr. Ante Pavelic, went into exile.
It was at this time that a revolutionary
movement called Ustashi, meaning " insurgents"
was founded, both in Croatia and-.,
abroad, Pavelic being one of its first leaders
This movement, in common with other
Croat organisations, took as its symbol the
traditional Croatian emblem of a white and
red check shield but associated with this
emblem the letter The traditiona'-
emblem, both with and without the " U'
is to be found in extensive use today by
Croatian migrant groups throughout the
world. It is difficult for people coming to Australia
easily to forget their historical backgrounds.
Since the war a number of organisations
opposed to the present Government
of Yugoslavia have developed throughout
the world amongst refugees and migrants
from that country. It is understandable that
some Yugoslav migrants of Croatian origin
should continue to hope for the estab
lishment of an independent Croatia antL
within a democracy like Australia they have
a right to advocate their views so long as
they do so by legitimate means. I wish to
make it perfectly clear that the vast majority
of the migrants from all parts of Yugoslavi
who have settled in Australia have provecr
to be law abiding, hard working citizens
and a real asset to this country.
Commonwealth and State authorities are
continuing their investigations of Yugoslav
and other organisations. Recently the Acting
Premier of Victoria issued a statement on
police inquiries in that State. He said that
the police had found " that isolated acts
of assault and misbehaviour had occurred
but found no evidence whatever to support
allegations of Ustashi violence towards
individuals of Yugoslav nationality from
which systematic or organised attacks could
be inferred". That I take to mean that
individual attacks have been noted but not 
an organised or systematic series of attacks.
Similar allegations made in Cairns also were,
I understand, found by the Queensland
police to be unsubstantiated. The Commonwealth's
own investigations so far have not
produced any evidence which would warrant
legal proceedings.
I wish to make the Government's position
in this regard quite plain, however,
Sir, and that is the real purpose of this
statement, as well as to intimate at the
same time that the particular questions asked in detail have been answered in detail,
though not in this statement. So I make
the Government's position quite clear: This
Government will not interfere with freedom
of opinion. Equally, it will not tolerate any
activities which constitute a breach of the
law. I present the following paper-
Yugoslav Immigrant Organisations-Ministerial
Statement, 27th August 1964-
and move-
That the House take note of the paper.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON.
APPROPRIATION BILL 1964-65.
Second Reading.
( BUDGET DEBATE.)
[ Fromn the ' Parliamentary Debates," 25th August 1964.]
Sir ' ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 8.311.-Mr. Deputy
Speaker, I am glad that the honorable member
for Barton ( Mr. Reynolds),-at the conclusion
of his remarks, has thought fit to
remind us that we are considering what
amounts to a motion of censure, because,
otherwise, this may have been overlooked
during the debate of the last week. I do
not propose to take up time discussing the
honorable member's impassioned remarks,
excepyt to suggest to him, in a friendly way,
that, since -he is so upset about interest being
charged on revenue moneys for capital purposes-
being' advanced-to the Post Office, he
DSsnhoowulyd pMerohuapnsta ilnoso k Hinytdor ot-heel epcotrsiict ionS cohfe mthee.
In that ; Scheme, the Commonwealth is not
aiming at profit. It has provided the overwhelming
-bulk of the money for the
Scheme out of revenue. That has been found
by-the taxpayers. In the calculation of the
price to be paid by the States concerned
for the. power provided by the Scheme,
interest on that money is taken into account.
There is , nothing new about this. Indeed,
the-honorable member, if he takes the next
opportunity to talk to any Labour Premier
whom he can find, will discover that this
has been accepted by -all the Premiers.
whatever their party affiliations may be. it
11003164. has been accepted for a very good reason:
There is no particular reason why a State
should secure power in perpetuity at a cost
that loads the whole of the capital burden
on to today's taxpayer. This is perfectly
proper. Therefore, I suggest to the honorable
member, in a friendly way, that he
should look into the financing of the Snowy
Mountains Scheme.
I wish primarily, Sir, to say something
abbut the attack made by the Leader of
the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell) on this Budget
in the guise of an amendment that may -be
said to amount to a censure mortion. He encountered
some difficulties, because, if ever
there was a Budget which was well balanced
and in which stability, growth and action to
counter inflation were -nicely blended, it is
this Budget. I know of no completely
responsible commentator who -has not
admitted this. All I can sa'y -for myself and
my colleagues is that we subscribe to every
line of this Budget. The Leader of the
Opposition, of course, felt that as usual he
must launch an attack. He received, no
doubt, suitable advice. Indeed, for some
time during his speech last week, I thought
he was -almost in a brown study, if honorable.
* members can follow me in that
allusion. He garnished bis~ sppegh 1withjg 
few flourishes of his own. I shall say a
little about them later, I -hope in a tender
way. There were a few phrases that struck me.
For example, the honorable gentleman said
that this was a stop growth Budget. I1 suppose
even he became a little tired of saying
11stop-go So he just made this rather
pleasant variation on a theme and said that
this is a stop growth Budget. Stop growth!
Why, the honorable member for Barton has
just delivered a eulogy on the growth of
this country that I could not imagine to be
surpassed in any quarter. However, his
Leader said first that this was a stop
growth Budget. His Leader then said that
this was a deflationary Budget. All I can
say is that you cannot win with the Leader
of the Opposition. At any rate, I cannot. I
am like King Charles's head: I keep
popping up.
But what does the honorable gentleman
mean by a deflationary Budget? Does he
mean a counter to inflationary Budget or
does he belong to that school of thoughtif
it is to ' be called thought-which holds
that there is no middle course between
inflation and deflation? The whole purpose
of this Budget, as was made abundantly
clear in the most lucid terms by the
Treasurer ( Mr. Harold Holt) in presenting
it, is to produce not a deflationary result
but an anti-inflationary one-to avoid
inflation and to preserve that stability in
the country on which the honorable member
for Yarra ( Dr. J. F. Cairns) was kind
enough to compliment me when he spoke in
this debate, though I do not know why
he did so. All these things are the purpose
of the Budget. To describe it as deflationary
is to give it a fantastic description. Indeed,
the Leader of the Opposition very soon
abandoned that proposition. There is one
thing about him: He i s never so consistent
in his attack that you can detect no flaw
in the armour. On this occasion, having
explained that this Budget was deflationary,
and having -painted a picture of impending
misery and depression, as he did when last
year's Budget was presented as well as during
the last election campaign, he then
forgot what he had just done and said-
I venture to suggest that this Budget will prove,
as last year's Budget did, to have underestimated
revenue by at least as much as last year's Budget
or by at least œ 50 million. The Leader of the Opposition went on to
say, referring to the Treasurer-
If this proves to be the case the effect
on the economy may well be much more drastic
than he foresees.
So he says that we are -underestimating the
revenue. How is the revenue estimated by
the Treasury? It is estimated -by making the
best possible forecast of the state of the
economy, of prosperity, of rates of earnings,
of prices, of export earnings and so
on, and then working out the sums. If
revenues exceed estimates by œ 50 million,
this will mean that the economy has been
expanding more than had been estimated,
in that employment, earnings, sales and
imports will have risen more than the
Treasury had estimated. If that represents
deflation, we must get another dictionary.
Now that I think of it, I shall come back
to the dictionary a little later for another
purpose. What I have just mentioned is a
plain contradiction by the Leader of the
Opposition of himself. First, he says that
this Budget is deflationary and then, in
effect, he says: " No, that is nonsense. We
are to have a very expansive year."
The honorable gentleman then attempted
to show, with the aid of a table that he
incorporated in Hansard that the
incidence of taxation has changed. If I may
interrupt myself, let me point out that the
incidence of taxation does commonly
change if income grows. This is not an
uncommon experience. The Leader of the
Opposition said that the incidence of taxation
relative to prices and incomes has changed
consistently to the detriment of those on
lower incomes. This constitutes ' his case.
This is one of the great points that he sets
out to make in support of his censure
motion. With the aid of a table that he produced.
he attempted to show that a basic wage
earner with a wife and two children had
found his position deteriorating in the last
ten years under the administration of this
Government, which the honorable member
for Yarra described as unhappily popular.
The Leader of the Opposition declared that
in the last ten years the tax paid by a basic
wage earner with a wife and two children
has risen from 5s. a week to 10s. 6d. a
week, or from œ 12 8s. to œ 27 7s. a year.
These a-re the figures he cited. Let us assume
the existence of this man on the basic wage.
The honorable gentleman forgets that this 
man's wages have risen by œ 187 a year, out
of which he pays an additional œ 14 or œ 15
a year in tax. He also forgets that, in addition
to the increase in his actual earnings
this man has been receiving, over this period
of time, increased social service benefits,
which can never be left out of this calculation,
and to which I shall refer again in
a moment. But I would like to carry my examination
of the honorable gentleman's table a little
further. I want to consider the increases
that have occurred in the 10 year period
from 1954-55 to 1964-65. The income of
the basic wage earner-this somewhat
mythical being-increased in that period by
œ E187. His income tax increased by œ E15, so
that of his increased income he has retained
92 per cent. The income of the average
wage and salary earner, given in the honorable
gentlemen's table under the heading of
" Income of average earnings increased
over the period of 10 years by œ E485. His
income tax increased by œ 79, so that he
retained 83.7 per cent. of his increased
income. The income of a third group is
given in the table under the heading of
" Income of four times average earnings
The increase in money income amounted
to œ 1,940. Income tax increased by œ 933,
so that the man in that category retained
51.9 per cent, of his increased income.
Let me repeat these results briefly so that
they may be considered in relation to the
charge that everything is altered to the
detriment of the lower income earner-92
per cent, retained by the basic wage earner,
83.7 per cent. by the average earnings man,
51.9 per cent. by the man in the third group
selected by the Leader of the Opposition,
which comprised those earning four times
the average earnings. If this indicates that
there is a constant pressing down on the
position of the lower income groups, then
I fail to understand the meaning of
elementary facts.
There has been no justification for the
charge made by the Leader of the
Opposition. However, as I said just a while
ago, I would like to talk about certain other
advantages that have been provided. Let
me say a word about the increased benefits
provided all the time, mark you, from the
proceeds of taxation, which go materially
in the direction of the lower income groups.
It is very proper that they should do so and
I am not complaining about it; I just want to state as a fact that they do so. The period
with which I shall concern myself is that
which covers the whole term of office of
this Government. The appropriation for age
and inv alid pensions has gone up-taking the
figures to the nearest million-from
œ 45 million to œ 215 million. No change in
the value of money can explain that away.
The amount for widow pensions has
increased from œ 4 million to œ 23 million,
for child endowment from œ 30 million to
œ 86 million, for hospital benefits from œ 6
million to œ 29 million, for pharmaceutical
benefits from one-third of a million pounds
to œ 30 million, for medical benefits from
zero to œ 18 million and for pharmaceutical
benefits for pensioners from zero to
10 million.
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if figures can have
any eloquence at all, it is perfectly clear
that the benefits of the proper social
measures for which we have been so largely
responsible do not go to the rich in the
community but to the people who need them
primarily. Therefore, this allegation that
there is a sort of policy of grinding down
the lower income earner is pathetic nonsense.
I am shocked to think that the
honorable gentleman could have obtained
any more or less academic support for it.
Now I come to the next point made by
the Leader of the Opposition: This point
was made, indeed, last year by the honorable
member for Yarra, who is a thoughtful
speaker and does a lot of work on these
subjects. The Leader of the Opposition said
that the country is slowly recovering from
the artificial depression of 1961-this depression
wickedly brought about by this
Government. Considering the results, I just
take leave to say that this is far from true.
I do not want to add to the many things
that have been so well said previously on
this side of the House, but I suggest that
to answer the -honorable gentleman's
argument the right thing to do is to compare
today's position with the position in
the boom year, because he has said: Oh,
yes, you cut down on the boom year, and
all we are doing is recovering." So I will
compare the boom year with the one which
we have the acute misery to live.
Civilian employment in June 1964 was
I1I per cent. higher than in June 1960. In
that period of time private employment
rose by 249,000 and public authority employment
by 85,000, an increase of 11 per 
cent.. in each sector. Just recovering," says
the Leader of the Opposition. We are
recovering-plus, this enormous increase.
Total wage and salary earnings in this last
financial year were 27 per cent. greater than
in 1959-60, the year that we refer to as the
boom year. Average male earnings since
that year have risen by 16. per cent, and
since the consumer price index rose by
something less than a third of that the
increase in real earnings has been considerable
and notable.
Farm income increase is, of course,
explained by a variety of circumstances.
One of them is a tremendous increase in
production. There has been good fortune
in seasons and good fortune in prices, but
never leave out of account the increase in
production which is the result of the efforts
of the man on the land. Farm income
increased between the boom year and the
last year by 46 per cent. Cash social service
benefits increased in the same period by 39
per cent. and other forms of personal
income by 23 per cent. The gross national
product increased by 27 per cent.
Then let me talk about concrete matters
and get away from purely monetary considerations.
In the same period, production
of steel rose by 35 per cent., electricity 38
per cent. and cement 28 per cent. I need
not go on. I could talk about motor vehicles
and the enormous increase in the number
of houses and flats commenced. In the
boom year the number was' 91,000, which
was a record at that time, and in 1963-64
the number had increased to 107,000.
Savings bank deposits have increased by 50
per cent, since the boom year. They have
risen to an average per head of population,
men, women, children, grandchildren-I
must stick to my last-of œ 200 a head, while
in the boom year the average per head was
œ E148. Those are phenomenal figures. Anybody
who can look at them, acknowledge
their truth and be heard to say that all we
are doing is struggling out of the trough of a
depression created in 1960 and 1961 is so
far gone in partisanship that he will never
really be able to take an objective view of
anything. it is quite true-1 venture to say this and
I think the public will agree with me-that,
but for sound budgeting, sound monetary
management, sensible economic policies and
the preservation of a healthy climate, those figures that I have quoted would have produced
an inflationary pressure much more
serious that the one at which we have been
looking. I was delighted that the Leader of the
Opposition, is his speech, had a little of
his own when he said-
And when we delve deeper into this Harold
in Wonderland speech, things grow curiouser
and curiouser
He quoted the words of Alice. I thought
this was rather ' agreeable. In fact, it so
stirred me that I re-read " Alice in Wonderland"
I am indebted to the honorable
member for having given me this literary
refreshment. Mr. Falknder.-Were you thinking of
the white rabbit?
Sir ROBERT MEENZES,-No, no; I was
thinking about the March Hare. When the
honorable member began his speech, with
all the hint of a censure motion, I thought
that we were going to have something pretty
powerful, not weak tea.
Mr. Pollard.-Some people are thinking
about the Mad Hatter.
Sir ROBERT MENZ[ ES-I am thinkinig
of both, old boy; but I was going to leave
you out of it. I am sure honorable members
will recall what was said. In fact, I was
thinking of it, without having checked the
precise words, when the honorable member
was promising this powerful, pungent attack.
I am sure honorable mem bers, remember
these words-.'
" Have some wine," the March Hare said in anJ
encouraging tone. Alice looked all round the
table-For this purpose I am Alice-the Mother
of the Year. but there was nothing on it but tea. " I
don't see any wine," she remarked. "' There isn'tJ
any," said the March Hare.
That is not a bad summary of the speech
made by the Leader of the Opposition. I
also remembered-as I am sure many of
us did-as the honorable member kept
repeating some of his erroneous conclusions,
that he was doing it on the well known
principle that Lewis Carroll expressed-
" What I tell you three times is true I
recommend to the honorable member the
further pursuit of these studies. Having said
that, I will go. back to the point that he
thought he was making. 
Mr. Peters.-Go back to " Alice in
Wonderland Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I will continue
to quote his speech. And you listen
to this, my boy; you will learn from it.
Your leader-I regard him in that sense
-went on to say--
Strangely enough, we can nowhere find in the
estimates any allocation for the instalment payments
on the TFX bomber. Last year. we allowed
million; this year nothing. Why? Will the
Treasurer say why? Will the Prime Minister say
why? Will the Minister for Defence say why?
Will the Minister for Air say why?"
This is a fine rhetorical phrase--
According to the promise made last November,
this bomber was to be delivered by 1966. Despite
heated denials in this place, the former Minister
-' for Airassume that that is correctly reportedsurreptitiously
inserted into a general
statement on the TFX the fact that it could not
now be delivered before 1968.
I had always regarded the Leader of the
D pposition as something of a purist in
-language. Everybody knows that surreptitiously
means secretly or by stealth. How
a Minister is clever enough to introduce
into a public document, by stealth, a plain
statement of fact, I just do not understand;
but the word surreptitiously" is used.
Let me remind the House that in October
of last year I myself spoke about the TFX.
I have forgotten whether I did it surreptitiously
or not; but I am usually audible in
the House, I hope. I said-
The Government of Australia has agreed to
purchase from the United States two squadrons
FIIIA aircraft, which used to be called the
TFX. By special arrangements with the United
States of America, the aircraft will be available
to Australia at the same time as deliveries are
made to the United States armed forces, which
will be from 1967 onwards.
_ 1hat was my statement-not 1966, but
1967. Then on 18th June, my colleague,
the Minister for Defence ( Senator
Paltridge), in this so-called stealthy"
statement, said-
The latest expert advice available to the
Government makes it clear that the Canberra will
not begin to be phased out of Squadron service
until 1970. Doubts about its stated fatigue life
have been resolved and it will continue to be a
useful operational aircraft. In the light of advice
from its professional advisers, the Government has
decided to accept deliveries of FlllA aircraft in
1968. These aircraft will embody modifications
made as a result of United States Air Force
squadron trials, thus providing Australia with a
fully tested aircraft. In other words--Ithought all honorable
members understood this-the choice was
between getting in 1967 a type of aircraft
which we would have to handle and which
we might have to modify, and waiting one
year longer and getting aircraft after they
had gone through the whole of their
squadron testing in the United States and
had received their ultimate modification. So,
showing very good sense, the Chiefs of
Staff all said: " The second choice is a good
bargain. Let us play it that way".
Finally, the Minister for Defence, in his
statement, said-
Information from the United States shows that
the development of the FIllA aircraft is proceeding
satisfactorily.
I thought all of that was pretty well known.
But the Leader of the Opposition is troubled
because there is nothing about it in this
year's Budget. I just want to say that I am
delighted about that; and I will tell the
House why. The reason why no payment
is being made for the TFX aircraft this
financial year is, quite simply, that the
United States authorities do not require any
payment. The provisional schedule of payments
which was negotiated by my late
friend, Mr. Townley, is being revised in
consultation with the United States to reflect
the Government's decision to take deliveries
of the aircraft in 1968 for the reasons I
have mentioned and not to accept the loan
of the B47 bomber as an interim aircraft.
The Minister for Defence announced the
reasons for these decisions in June.
The revised schedule of payments has not
yet been finally drawn up, but it is clear
from discussions with the United States
authorities that no payment is required
during 1964-65 to supplement the amount
of just under œ 9 million paid by us last
year. In the meantime, that amount is earning
interest until such time as payments are
made to the United States contractors for
our aircraft. Putting it in brief, Sir, we have
a year's holiday from payments, and during
that year we receive interest on the money
that we have paid already.
Future progress payments will be determined
in consultation with the United States
authorities. The estimated total cost to Australia
of the 24 aircraft remains at the
figure of œ 56 million announced by Mr.
Townley in November of last year. Current
advice from official United States sources
is that progress on the project is on
schedule, and firm assurances have been 
given that there is no reason at all to doubt
that deliveries will be made to the Royal
Australian Air Force in 1968. This is up to
date advice and it may be relied on.
I do not want to trespass on the time
of the House but I will just add one
remark on this matter as a result of something
that was said by the honorable member
for Yarra ( Dr. J. F. Cairns). He went
to some trouble in the course of his speech
to establish that we did not need the TFX; that we did not need this kind of aircraft.
On the contrary, he said, the kind of war
that might have to be dealt with by Australia
was one in which a bomber of this
order, of this range, of this capacity, would
be entirely irrelevant. So, not for the first
time the Leader of the Opposition says one
thing and the putative Deputy Leader of the
Opposition says another. Anyhow, it has
been a pretty futile attack and I do not say
any more than that we reject it.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR. COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS. 640/ 91
PORTRAIT OF LORD DInROSSIL
The Historic Memorials Committee yesterday accepted
for the Commonwealth Collection a portrait of the late
Viscount Dunrossil, former Governor-General of Australia
painted by Mr. Rex Bramleigh of Melbourne. The Chairman of
the Historic Memorials Committee is the Prime Minister and the
members are; the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the
House or Representatives, the Vice President of the Executive
Council, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the
Opposition in the Senate.
The portrait will be hung in King's Hall, Parliament
House, Canberra. It was painted by Mr. Bramleigh from many photographs
made available by Lady Dunrossil. Rex Bramleigh is 40 and was
born in M1elbourne. He trained at the Victorian National Gallery
School and then under A. D. Colquhoun. He has painted portraits
of several prominent Australians including Lir. Justice Barry of
Victoria, the President General of the Methodist Church of
Australia and Emeritus Professor T. 1. Cherry. He also painted
a portrait of Viscount Slim on commission from an Indian Regiment.
CANBERRA 27th August, 1964. 



THE
WALLACE WURTH INAUGURAL MEMORIAL LECTURE
THE PRIME MINISTER
( The Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies, M. P.)
at
THE SCIENCE THEATRE, UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES, SYDNEY,
on
Friday, 28th August, 1964.
THE UNIVERSITIES SOME QUERIES" 
THE UNIVERSITIES SOME QUERIES"
Wallace Wurth was a civil servant. I am occasionally
told that I use this expression wrongly, and that I should refer
to people like him as " public servants", working under what in
Australia are called the Public Service Acts.
However, I believe that there are many people who are
public servants who are not under the Public Service Act at all,
and I therefore have fallen into the habit of calling people civil
servants when I intend to refer to those who are in the direct
administrative service of government.
Because he was a civil servant, Wallace Wurth was a
member of a class of people who constitute a recurrent theme of
criticism, usually by those who are not well-informed.
I have heard civil servants referred to with monotonous
regularity as " bureaucrats", as " clock watchers", as " red tape
merchants", as repetitive and costly " tea drinkers".
My experience shows that such citicisms come most
loudly from those with the least information. When I cast my
eye around the upper brackets of the Commonwealth Civil Service
and realise the devotion and talent and experience and objectivity
which they bring to their work, I could laugh to hear them
dismissed with a sneer. There are, in fact, few people who work
harder and who think more assiduously. They are in a very real
sense among the custodians of continuity and sanity in goVernment.
It is now many years since I first heard a friend of
mine say, with a certain touch of irony, that " the Civil Service
produces a level of efficiency below which no sensible government
can fall". This is, of course, not to say that politicians, and in
particular Ministers, should become the mere spokesmen of their
departmental officers. This would be all wrong. Indeed, it
would be seen to be wrong by their senior officers themselves.
It is the duty of those civil servants who are in the position
of advising Ministers and of administering policies subsequently
created to give the most objective advice and the most intelligent
service that they can. When they have done that, they have
discharged their task. 
It is for governments to determine policy. It is
then for the Civil Service to give effect to those policies
whether they assume legislative or administrative form, and to
do so without fear, favour or affection.
For myself, I have never wanted to know the Party
political alignment of any officer of mine. Indeed, I would
resent it if he told me. For the truth is that whatever Party is
in power, it has exactly the same right to expect honest,
disinterested, and competent work from the Civil Service as any
other Party should expect if it came into office,
These general remarks are by no means irrelevant to the
late Wallace Wurth. He was, as his record showed, a man of
most versatile talents, of rich character and personality,
and great achievement, There was, indeed, something elusive
and yet compelling about him.
For ten years, until his death, he attended Loan Councils
amd Premiers' Conferences at Canberra, as Chairman of the New
South Wales Public Service Board. From my place at the top
of the table, my eye would frequently catch the sight of Wallace
Wurth sitting calmly on the front Treasury bench as to the
manner born hearing all, but, so far as I could judge, steeped
in silence, At first I used to wonder vaguely what he was doing
at the conference as a member of the New South Wales team. After
all, I had known a few Chairmen of Commonwealth Public Service
Boards but had seldom found it necessary or appropriate to take
up with them such matters, financial or otherwise, as come to be
argued when the State Premiers march on Canberra-
The Chairman of a Public Service Board has great
responsibilities, but they do not commonly fall into the arena
of the political cut and thrust of a Premiers' Conference.
What then, I used to say to myself subconsciously, was
Wurth doing in this galley? And then the answer dawned on me all
too slowly. Wallace Wurth was not, except in name, Chairman of
the New South Wales Public Service Board in the restricted or
orthodox sense at all. He was the friend, the consultant, the
universal provider, the wise and upright judge of issues. He
was in a sense a muted noise off stage, He was, to vary the
metaphor, armed yet disarming, the eminence grise of the New
South Wales Government. In short, he was present, not as
Chairman of the Public Service Board, but in a wider capacity.
He was, of course, as his whole record shows, a superb
administrator, and I. at no time, doubted that he managed the
New South Wales Public Service very well. But his essential 
contribution came through his pervasive influence on general
policy and action, an influence made possible and perhaps
inevitable by his luminous intelligence, his great force of
character and his unbiased integrity.
In my long experience of public life and affairs,
Wallace Wurth was, in his own right and in his own fashion,
unique. Bearing all these facts in mind, it was a happy stroke
when he was made Chancellor of this new University. For a good
Chancellor, if I may say so, should be a wise and experienced man
with enough knowledge of academic people to understand their
problems, but also to be able on proper occasions to treat them
lightheartedly. He should, in these days when governments have
the major responsibility for universities in Australia, know
something about governments and how they think, something of the
qualities and something of the oddities of politicians, and,
at the same time, enjoy wide respect from people, many of whom
have never been inside a university at all, but who represent
some of the great currents of knowledge and experience which
animate modern social and industrial life
The significance of Wallace Wurth in relation to the
University of New South Wales could perhaps best be expressed if
I say that one of the functions of a university is to produce
individuals who can develop and preserve their individuality while
still playing in the team, This, after all, should be one of the
great purposes of a university; not uniformity but developed
individuals. When I was invited to deliver the Wallace Wurth Memorial
Lecture, I had a vagrant thought, built upon some previous
experiences, that I would be allowed to select any topic and take
the opportunity of saying what I thought about it.
This was not unimportant for me, because I do as a rule
one of these lectures a year, and sometimes, through inadvertence
on my part, two. I like doing them for the very good reason that
in public affairs we can accustom ourselves all too readily to
somewhat general thought and speech and succumb to the endemic
disease of politics, which is a dislike of precision, I have,
therefore, found it a very good thing for me to have to sit down
over a period of many weeks, do some research, analyse some ideas,
and produce them into a degree of clarity of which I would hope
not to be ashamed hereafter. 
Full of these ideas, I said to my secretary " Find out
whether I am at large in the choice of a topic". The answer
came back with all the inevitability that one expects from a
great physicist like Professor Baxter, " We would like the Prime
Minister to speak about some topic connected with the universities."
Well, Mr. Chancellor, I have for some reason or another,
or perhaps for no reason, been the recipient of, I think, 18
honorary degrees around the world. That has meant 18 speeches
about universities, I have made quite a number of such speeches
in the Parliament; I have delivered others at the opening
of buildings or schools in various Australian universities. I,
therefore, said to myself, with some feeling of despair, that, as
no doubt some of my political opponents would say, I was an
exhausted volcano. What was there with the faintest degree of
novelty that I could say about the universities? Under these
circumstances I decided on heroic measures. I would put some
queries and perhaps answer them,
I settled on two queries; in each case because I thought
they related to something important about which comparatively
little is said, but about each of which there may be considerable
misconceptions. So, having said something all too little, about the late
Wallace Wurth, I will proceed to deal with my two queries.
The first relates to the new axiom or dogma that
university education ought to be regarded as a right and not as a
privilege; in other words that it should be available to all
persons, male or female, who pass what I will broadly call the
entrance examination. Now in my younger days, this was neither
axiom nor dogmaScholarships were few and had to be battled for
in a highly competitive field. A university education was
not a right, nor indeed was it the perquisit of the sons and
daughters of the rich. In my own time as an under-graduate,
great sacrifices were made by parents, including my own, to
give their children the opportunity for a higher educational
attainment. But times have changed, and, for reasons to which
I will refer a little later, for the better.
Could I start by referring to the celebrated Robbins
Report on higher education in Great Britain? In paragraph 31
of that report the committee said
" Throughout our Report we have assumed as an
axiom that courses of higher education should be
available for all those who are qualified by ability
and attainment to pursue them and who wish to do so.
What type of education they should get and in what
kind of institution are questions we consider later
on; and the criterion by which capacity is to be
judged is clearly a question on which there may be a 
variety of opinions, But, on the general principle
as we have stated it, we hope there will be little
dispute." This statement has been referred to with approval by
our own Universities Commission, and by quite a few educational
publications in Australia., Yet, of course, it is not completely
definitive. You will have noted the phrase " Those who are
qualified by ability and attainment to pursue them", and you will
also have noted that " the criterion by which capacity is to be
judged is clearly a question on which there may be a varity of
opinions" Whether this means that the simple test, to apply it
to Australian conditions, is the passing of the Matriculation
Examination, I do not profess to know.. For myself, I would like
to believe that the real point is that finance should not be the
limiting factor where the intellectual capacity and the personal
ambition are adequately high.
On this matter I have had my own mind improved by my
perusal, by courtesy of Professor Connell, of a recent study
made by the Department of Education in the University of Sydney,
under the title of " The University and the Community". I am
much indebted to this publication and would like to quote one most
interesting passage from it
" Tertiary education in the past has been thought of
largely as an education of an elite or specially talented segment
of the community, The falsity of this position is now becoming
more apparent every day. The more talented and productive the
elite, the more it becomes necessary to have it built upon a highly
educated community. This is the only way to ensure the continuance
of first rate education for the best brains in the community There
are three good reasons for this. First, the talented perform
best, generally speaking, in a climate of sympathetic understanding
among people who have some reasonable idea of what they are doing,
and take an intelligent interest in their success. Secondly, the
higher education of the talented is an expensive business, and
it will receive-adequate financial support only from public monies.
These will be forthcoming only if there is a sufficient body of
soundly educated people who can see the value of such an education.
And, thirdly, by increasing the number of highly educated men and
women in the community, you not only ensure stimulation and support
for the specially talented, you also increase the pool of individuals
who aspire to further education, and from whom large numbers of
specially talented may be drawn for a higher education. These 
arguments suggest that if we are to educate even our gifted
successfully, we must provide opportunity for as wide a segment
of the community as possible to proceed into some form of higher
education, and at the same time raise the general level of
educational achievement throughout the whole community"
Accepting these views, I would like to say that they
not only present a statement of desirable rights, but they
present an enormous challenge. When I attended earlier this year
the University of Birmingham to receive a degree there at the hands
of my old friend, Lord Avon, I said a little about this problem
in my speech of acknowledgment. The Vice-Chancellor of that
university later gave me a copy of his report to his University
for 1963. In this he referred to the implications of the initial
proposition in the Robbins Report,
In the course of this he said " The universities' task of
sustaining quality is more important in the long run than-numbers".
He also went on to say that " Another consequence of the new
philosophy will have to be watched. The attitudes of students
who come to the universities, claiming their places as of right,
will be different from those of students coming to enjoy and use
a hard won privilege." I
He had other things to say which seemed to me to be of
great importance, But, speaking now for myself, and accepting
the new philosophy as an ideal to be aimed at, I do want to point
out a few practical considerations which cannot be ignored in the
enthusiasm of a new vision,
Far too many people in our country, when they urge the
creation of a new university, seem to think of it in terms of
financial provision by governments, and the bricks and mortar of
practical construction-Yet the fact is that the value of a
university depends primarily upon the standard of its research
and its teaching. In short, the greatest problem about the
expansion of universities is of seciirinpa a i fh!'
qualified staff, Any man who has any share of responsibility
for the general national balance and prosperity cannot fail to
be conscious of such problems as the pressure of numbers on
financial resources, the pressure of numbers and demand on
physical resources, because these things form part of the economic
problems of the nation. They have to be considered.. They can
produce some limitation upon the financial provision by governments.
But, in the ultimate, the capacity to establish new
universities or to expand old ones is primarily to be judged by
reference to the maintenance of the quality of research and
teaching and the value of the degrees to be awarded.
Gresham's Law applies to universities and their degrees
just as much as it did and does to money. In short, we have
occurring under our eyes a tremendous explosion in the numbers of
those who seek tertiary education. Our task is to see that they
get it without lowering the standards. 
The last thing that I want to do is to encumber you
with statistics, but I would ask you to carry in mind just a few
figures which I derived from the last report of the Australian
Universities Commission.
In 1960, which is, after all, not long ago, the number
of students at Australian universities was ( and I will quote figures
to the nearest thousand) 53.000 By 1963 this had grown to 69,000.
The prediction of the Commission ( and it is not likely to be bVer
the mark) is that by 1966 the figure will be 95,000
These figures represent an enormous increase in what
I will call demand for tertiary education. They must be accompanied
by the observation that graduation rates, either in total or in
minimum time, were, over the period from 1951 to 1956, deplorably
low The figures seem to be improving, but they are still not as
good as they should be. This is, of course, important because
the amount of money spent and the amount of teaching energy put
forward in the training of students is wasted to the extent that
the result is not achieved. Any community like ours, which
accepts large financial burdens for universities, cannot afford
this kind of waste.
The reasons for what I have called wastage are, I think,
clear enough. We have not yet reached a completely adequate level
of training in the secondary schools, and, therefore, too many
matriculating students go to university with a considerable risk
of failure, This has deeply impressed me ever since Sir Keith
Murray, now Lord Murray, presented the original report. It
explains why my own Government has initiated schemes for secondary
school scholarships designed to give extra time in secondary
studies, and for science teaching facilities in the secondary
schools so that on the science side students may, if they decide
to go on to the university, go on much better prepared. Again,
most universities have felt inadequately staffed and that the
staff-student ratios were unsatisfactory What I have said
means that I believe that before we become too rhapsodical about
the increase in numbers and the rights of people to have university
training, we should face up to the problem that the greatest task,
and in a sense the most difficult one, is to find the necessary
trained and competent staff.
There was a time when quite a number of professors and
lecturers came from overseas. That time has come to an end.
We must, as never before, generate in our universities our own
future staff. 
This is a problem by no means overlooked by our own
Universities Commission, It must not be overlooked by governments.
Unless we can, by one means or another, encourage and
produce an increasing percentage of university students who aim
at higher degrees and research work, then we will do a gross
disservice to university education by concentrating our minds
exclusively on numbers and on money,
I would sum up my own views on this matter by stating the
new rule in my own fashion. I believe that we should aim at a
state of affairs in which all young men and women capable of, and
likely to benefit from, a university education are not denied their
opportunity for want of means. But I believe that this opportunity
will find them pursuing false lights unless they'can go through
a period of training and inspiration which can come to them only
through the work of teachers of the highest order,
My second query relates to " academic freedom".
For various well-known reasons, there has been, during the
last few years in Australia, considerable discussion about the nature
and extent of the academic freedom to be enjoyed by academic
people. I want to say something about the problem tonight, for
two reasons, The first is that I think that I am at liberty to
express an objective view, for, although I have had, fortunately,
much to do with university developments in Australia over the last
decade, I have at all times been careful to maintain my own belief
in the autonomy of universities and in the utter undesirability of
governmental executive directioz. to the universities as to what theyare
to study and teach, It is, I think, well to remember that in
Australia the universities are in a substantial sense government
universities relying to a major extent upon monies provided by
governments. Under these circumstances, it might be feared that
the governments which find the money might wish to call the tune,
and might interfere with those university activities which it is
the function of the university to promote. As I think it will be
agreed that I have at no time sought to interfere with university
autonomy, I may feel justified in offering some views about
academic freedom. My second reason is that I think that a good deal of
what has been said in the press and otherwise about academic
freedom has been over-emotional; it has, I fear, promoted more
heat than light. It is, therefore, I think, a valuable exercise
to pose the question " What is academic freedom?" and to endeavour
to answer it, 
The first element in academic freedom is the liberty
of thought. This has never been better defined than by
Charles Morgan in his remarkable book " Liberties of the Mind".
I quote his words
" I mean by it the mind's freedom from any external
pressure designed to drug, intimidate or otherwise reduce its full
exercise of natural capacity"
I would also like to quote with warm approval the words
of the report of the Murray Committee on Australian Universities
" In the middle of the twentieth century universities
are very much in the public eye and in most countries they receive a
good deal of attention, and also very substantial financial support,
from governments In most parts of the free world they are
accorded a high degree of autonomy and self-determination on the
ground that the particular services which they render, both to
their own country and to mankind in general, cannot be rendered
without such freedom. Even in time of war and national danger,
the nations of the West have sought to honour, so far as they
humanly could, the right and duty of the universities to pursue
new knowledge without fear or favour and to educate in a liberal
spirit and with integrity; and even in times of economic depression
they have shown increasing signs of seeking to maintain the life
and work of universities in full vigour".
The integrity of the scholar would be under attack if
he were told what he was to think about and how he was to think
about it. It is of the most vital importance for human progress
in all fields of knowledge that the highest encouragement should
be given to untrammelled research, to the vigorous pursuit of
truth, however unorthodox it may seem. It is for this reason
that in Australia we have established the autonomy of universities,
and have, so far as I know, consistently refrained from intervening
in their work with what I will call political executive directions.
If no limits can sensibly be put to the search for new
truths or the better understanding and expression of old ones,
it follows that the scholar must work in an atmosphere of freedom
and with a free mind. True, in a democracy, Parliament, acting
within its constitutional jurisdiction may, under some circumstances,
pass legislation which limits the rights of expression, Such
circumstances may arise in time of war or other special times
where national security may require, under an appropriate law, some
limitations upon freedom of expression or of individual activity.
But I know of no law in a modern civilised country which has made
it an offence to think. There is, of course, in some philosophies 
in the world, an attack made upon the mind in order to constrain it
into habits of thought which are agreeable to the rulers.
There are philosophies in the world which aim at reducing the power
and significance of human volition in order to pave the way for
what has been called a mechanistic conception of life; in which
people are to be pawns in the game of economic and material
conflict. But I think we may say that in Australia we have
never accepted these philosophies and that we still retain our
passion for freedom and for the development, not only of the'
individual, but of every faciilty that he may possess for
investigation and discovery.
Now I said just now that some discussion has appeared
to me to be over-emotional, I have, indeed, if I may say so
prudently in this assembly, detected some disposition on the part
of some academics to claim a freedom which puts them outside the
substance and procedures of the ordinary law. Now, quite
frankly, this is a claim that cannot and must not be sustained,
Freedom is one thing. Privilege is another, and cannot be claimed
unless the law recognises it. There are, indeed, some privileges
recognised by the law. For example, the privilege, under some
circumstances, of communications between patient and doctor and
between the priest and a confessing member of his communion.
But these, I repeat, are within the law.
But, putting such matters on one side, freedom is to be
seen as a faculty enjoyed by all citizens, not because they are
academic or because they conduct a newspaper, but because they are
citizens. The freedom of the press, for example, like yours or
mine, is a freedom within the lawo It is subject to all the
legal rules relating to defamation or sedition or violation of the
criminal codes. A rich private citizen achieves no new or special
freedom when he purchases a newspaper and controls its policy and
utterances. Similarly, a barrister practising his profession at
the Bar and enjoying the normal freedom of mankind and the special
legal privilege which attaches to what he says in court, does not
acquire a new body of either freedom or privilege if he becomes a
Professor of Law at a university. It is, I think, well to
remember some of these basic truths,
The whole matter has been somewhat confused for
Australian minds, I venture to think, by the great masses of litigation
and debate which have occurred in the United States, the
reasons for which are, as I will point out later, largely
peculiar to the United States. But before I come to that let me
consider what the position is under our own legal system and that
of England. I will give one example; the famous trial of
Thomas Paine, the author of " The Rights of Man", He was, in the
course of that trial, ( a strange trial for the defendant was not 
11.
present, and a stranger trial because a hand-picked jury had been
in fact bribed to produce a verdict of guilty), defended by Thomas
Erskine. This, I hasten to say, was before Erskine succumbed to
those ambitions which led him to the House of Lords; before
he had entered into that process of deterioration in which he rose
in favour but fell in grace. But his speech in defence of
Thomas Paine remains a classic. He did not attack the law,
for that would have been futile., He did not claim that Paine,
as a thinker and writer, had some special immunity from the law,
On the contrary, he said this:-
" If I were to ask you, Gentlemen of the Jury, what
is the choicest fruit that grows upon the tree of English liberty,
you would answer SECURITY UNDER THE LAW. If I were to ask the
whole people of England the return they look for at the hands of
the Government, for the burdens under which they bend to support
it, I should still be answered SECURITY UNDER THE LAW"..
The whole basis of this famous passage was that Paine's
freedom to write was consistent with, and protected by, the law;
not that it was superior to the law.
I will make one more citation. It is from a play, but
it expresses with great accuracy the spirit of the law, My former
colleague, and our recent Ambassador to the United States, Sir
Howard Beale, has directed my attention to it, The play is
Robert Bolt's play about Sir Thomas More " A Man for All Seasons".
More, as you all remember, was the Lord Chancellor, and,
in those days particularly, the Lord Chancellor was more than the
head of the judiciary, he was a man of immense and, in some
respects, arbitrary power. In the play, his wife Alice is protesting
to him because he will make no move to arrest a man named Rich, who,
although pretending to be a friend, she thinks and believes is
preparing to change sides and become a dangerous enemyz She is
joined in this argument by William Roper and so the dialogue
proceeds
ALICE: While you talk, he's gone'
MORE: And go he should if he was the Devil himself until he
broke the law!
ROPER: So now you'd give the Devil benefit of law!
MORE: Yes, what would you do? Cut a great road through the
law to get after the Devil? 
12.
ROPER: I'd cut down every law in England to do that!
MORE: Oh? And when the last law was down, and the Devil
turned round on you where would you hide, Roper, the laws
all being flat? This country's planted thick with
laws from coast to coast man's laws, not God's
and if you cut them down and you're just the man to
do it d'you really think you could stand upright in
the winds that-would blow then?
To continue, I would venture to say that a professor or
lecturer at a university is an employee of the university acting
through its governing body, and that, as an employee he is subject
to the normal rules relating to master and servant, to dismissal
without notice if his employer can prove good cause, and to all
the risks of not being re-appointed if his original appointment has
been for a specific term. To deny this proposition would be to
say that he is taken out of the usual Common Law relating to
master and servant and put into a category which is above the
law or which is subject to no law. This is not a tenable
proposition. I hasten to add that any university, which treated a
professor or lecturer as if he was just a man hired to study as
directed and to teach in accordance with rules laid down by
other people, would be an extremely strange university;
it would have failed to understand the immense importance of true
academic freedom. There is, of course, great scope for discussion of the
rules of practice that may properly be applied in a university;
rules of practice which may warrant consultation and exchange of
views on the facts between the lecturer and the governing body
before some action affecting the lecturer is taken.
These are matters which fall within the principles of
natural justice, which are not inconsistent with the law, and may
freely tend to the improving of academic morale. But it still
remains true that academic freedom is within the law, subject to
the law, and that if recourse is made to the law, the ordinary
rules of law will apply. For all these reasons I am convinced
that it is a disservice to academic freedom, a freedom to which
I attach the most tremendous importance, to seek to promote it
into a doctrine of privilege outside the law; a privilege which
sets the academic free from obedience to the ordinary legal rules
which govern the lives of all the rest of us.
It is perhaps because these things are pretty well
understood in countries familiar with the rule of law and not so
familiar with special constitutional provisions, such as those which
appear in two of the amendments to the American Constitution, 
13.
that, so far as I can discover, there have been no notable
instances in the United Kingdom of interference with academic
freedom. I recently read an article by Lord Chorley in a
compendium on academic freedom, published by the School of Law
at Duke University. He says that academic freedom is taken for
granted in the United Kingdom. He, of course, concedes that
there have been other pressures or dangers of pressures, religious
or political, in the course of history. But, on balance, he thinks
it is safe to say that academic freedom is enjoyed as fully in
English universities as anywhere else in the world, He points
out, as indeed I endeavoured to point out a little earlier in
other words, that " in the modern age there can be no doubt that
the main enemy to academic freedom has been the powerful State".
I turn now to the United States of America where academic
freedom has been, in contra-distinction to the state of affairs in
Great Britain and Australia, much discussed in the courts and
particularly in the Supreme Court the highest tribunal,
To understand how such a matter can fall for judicial
decision, it is necessary to look at two provisions of the
American Constitution, It will be recalled that the Constitution
of the United States was amended very early in the piece. The
first Congress, when it met in 1789, submitted to the States ten
amendments to clarify certain individual and State rights not
named in the Constitution. These amendments were ratified.
The ten original amendments are always referred to in the United
States as " The Bill of Rights". I will just quote two of the
Articles Article 1 provided that " Congress shall make no law
abridgifg freedom of speech or of the press
Article 5 made a general provision, that is, not one
directed at Congress only, but of wider application, which was
that " no person shall....., be deprived of life, liberty or
property without due process of law".
Many years later, in 1868, the 14th amendment came into
operation. It was stated in more comprehensive terms and
affected both the Congress and the legislatures of the States.
It said: " All persons born or naturalized in the United States,
and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the
United States and of the State wherein they reside, No State
shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or
immunities of citizens of the United States, nor shall any State 
14,
deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due
process of law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws".
It will be seen that these celebrated Constitutional
provisions, commonly referred to as " the due process" provisions,
have brought into the arena of judicial determination matters which
in another Constitutional structure would not reach a Court at all.
I do not propose to engage in a close examination of the
decisions of the American Courts, but I think there are a few things
which can be said with advantage,
In a fairly recent case, Mr. Justice Harlan, whose
name is greatly respected among Australian as well as American
lawyers, summed the matter up and explained the reason for judicial
proceedings in a single paragraph. He said: " When academic
teaching-freedom and its corollary, learning-freedom, so essential
to the well-being of the nation, are claimed, this Court will always
be on the alert against intrusion by Congress into this constitutionally
protected domain".
After a considerable review of the decisions of the
American courts, I have come to the conclusion that they have
been astute to protect the universities against any violation of the
freedoms guaranteed by the American Constitution. The protection
has not been given to a privilege claimed outside the law, It
has been given to a freedom guaranteed by the constitutional or
basic law of the nation. As one American writer has said
" In the United States freedom is not an academic privilege; it is
a right constitutionally guaranteed to all residents,"
In 1952, that very great judicial lawyer, Mr. Justice
Frankfurter, put the whole problem in a single paragraph.
" It is the special task of teachers to foster those
habits of open-mindedness and critical inquiry which alone make
for responsible citizens, who, in turn, make possible an enlightened
and effective public opinion. Teachers must fulfill their
function by precept and practice, by the very atmosphere which they
generate; they must be exemplars of open-mindedness and free
inquiry. They cannot carry out their noble task if the
conditions for the practice of a responsible and citical mind are
denied to them, They must have the freedom of responsibility
inquiry, by thought and action, into the meaning of social and
economic ideas, into the checkered history of social and economic
dogma. They must be free to sift evanescent doctrine, qualified
by time and circumstances, from that restless, enduring process of 
extending the bounds of understanding and wisdom, to assure which
the freedoms of thought, of speech, of inquiry, of worship are
guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States against infraction
by national or state government.
The functions of educational institutions in our
national life, and the conditions under which alone they can
adequately perform them, are at the basis of these limitations
upon State and national power".
Here we have stated with clarity the whole reason for
academic freedom and the reason why, in the case of the United
States, special constitutional provisions were established to
protect it. But the point that I want to emphasise, though it
ought to be trite enough, is that in America itself, with these
special constitutional provisions, the guaranteed freedoms belong to
the community as a whole, and are not in some particular or exclusive
way sectional privileges outside the law. It is one of the
glories of a civilised democracy that we enjoy out freedoms in
common; that we are born with those freedoms, and that they can
be limited or taken away only by the principles of the common law
or by constitutionally competent statutory provisions made by
Parliament. In the absence of specific legal provisions, no
man way claim a greater freedom than another. Yet, and I come
back to it, the freedom of the enquiring mind in a university is
of vital importance, not only for contemporary society, but for
a developing future. For this reason it is important that academic
people should not set their claims too high, so that they appear
to be claiming privileges unrecognised by the law. But they
certainly should, in their university community life, insist,
within the law, upon the maintenance of the freedom of their minds;
and should at all times resist unauthorised political interference
with their work, or &amp; dministrative procedures within the
university itself which could frustrate them in the kind of work
they are in a university to do.
Interestingly enough, there has been a good deal of debate
in the United States about the position of a practising Communist in
a university. Some responsible and liberal-minded people have
queried the employment of practising Communists in a university,
for the intelligible reason that the whole philosophy of Communism
and the whole discipline of the Party are opposed to that complete
freedom of thought and objectivity of mind which it is one of the
functions of a university to maintain. I will not try to pursue
that argument to its conclusion, because the boundary line is
very hard to define. 
16.
One other matter that has engaged a good deal of
attention in the United States is the problem of the tenure of
members of university staffs. There can be no doubt that professors
or lecturers appointed at will could be much more liable to
executive interference or pressure than those who are appointed
for a substantial term. Even those appointed for a term of years
may find themselves complaining that a failure to renew their
appointment at the end of their term has been due to some
objection to their exercise of their academic freedom. These
are, of course, very important matters. I, for one, would offer
my own view that an academic appointed after due consideration
should not feel himself to be at the risk of arbitary treatment if
his enquiries lead him to conclusions which are, in some quarters,
unpopular. But it still remains true that, whether the staff member
has a fixed short or long term or no term at all, the rules which
control the right of the university to dismiss him are the same as
the rules that apply in any contract of employment, and that,
if he is dismissed without notice, the onus will, as in any other
case, be on his employer, the university, to justify in law the
action that has been taken.
To sum up, you will see from what I have said that when
we speak of academic freedom, we are not speaking of a privilege
given to academic people and denied to ordinary men and women.
It merely happens that, as universities are increasingly in what
I might call the limelight of current history, there will at all
times be two temptations. One will be a temptation on the part
of partisans, including partisans outside the university, to seek to
control the universities in what they think and what they say,
irrespective of the law. The other will be a temptation,
occasionally encouraged in circumstances of emotion or heat, for
university people to claim that those rules which apply to
ordinary men and women in the eye of the law, do not apply to them.
I would prefer to think of academic freedom as a precious and
shining example of that kind of freedom which all thinking men and
women in our community want for themselves, and will not abandon
without a struggle. 



No. 147, OCTOBER, 196.
A. I. D. A. OFFICE BEARERS
The election of office bearers from A. I. D. A.' s Council
Members, elected at the Annual General Meeting
held on 26th May, 1964, was conducted at the August
Council Meeting. The following is the complete list
of Council Members and office bearers.
President: * Mr. F. M. Wiltshire.
Immediate Past President:
* Mr. B. G. Ross.
Senior Vice-Presidents:
* Dr. E. Barraclough ( Victoria).
* Mr. W. W. Pettingell,
Vice-Presidents:
* Mr. E. R. Beattie.
* Mr. G. G. Foletta, C. M. G.
Mr. S. G. Herron.
* Mr. C. G. McGrath, O. B. E.
* Mr. H. P. Weber.
Council Members:
* Mr. W. H. Anderson, C. B. E.
Mr. E. P. Breheny.
Mr. R. W. Burge.
Mr. T. R. Davey.
Mr. E. P. Draffin.
Mr. E. E. Dunshea.
Sir Alexander Fitzgerald, O. B. E.
Mr. G. Haile.
XMlr. L. J. Hartnett, C. B. E.
* Mr. A. C. Hatrick.
Mr. J. V. Inglis.
Mr. F. G. James.
Sir John Jensen, O. B. E.
Mr. H. Kinnear.
Mr. P. H. Morton, M. L. A.
Mr. P. S. Moss.
Mr. H. M. Sleigh.
Mr. R. N. Stokes, M. L. A.
Mr. Keith Storey.
Sir Fred Thorpe.
Hon. Sir Arthur Warner.
Chairman of Committees:
Mr. W. H. Anderson, C. B. E.
Director: C. P. Puzey.
Manager, New South Wales:
Mr. J. E. Logan.
* Executive members. Australian Industries
D[ D
Development Association
N -o
' b 1-Mr. F. M. Wiltshirc, President, A. I. D. A.
DINNER IN HONOUR OF
PRIME MINISTER
A. I. D. A. were hosts at a dinner which was held in
Sydney on 7th September, 1964, at which the guest
of honour was the Prime Minister of Australia, the
Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies. Some 240 of Australia's
business leaders in secondary industry, banking and
commerce attended to hear the Prime Minister's
address. The major purpose of this dinner was to
further the exchange of opinions, and to promote
closer undersanding of mutual problems, between
private enterprise and government.
Sir Robert Menzies was welcomed and introduced
by the President of Mr. F. M. Wiltshire,
whose remarks are summarised as follows.
" It is my privilege to welcome our guest of honour,
the Prime Minister of Australia, the Rt. Hon. Sir
Robert Menzies. The Prime Minister has done great
honour to this Association in finding time in his significantly
busy life to address us tonight. We are
proud of the distinction he has conferred upon us,
and we thank him for it. I am glad to say that there
are representatives from every State in the Commonwealth
here tonight.
" in being with us, Sir Robert follows something
of0 family tradition, because, in consulting our
October, 1964. 
records, we find that a Mr. James Menzies joined this
Associati ' on in 1937, and Senator J. W. Leckie in 1929.
The late James Menzies was the father of the Prime
Minister, and a great fighter for Australian industry.
The late Senator Leckie was the Prime Minister's
father-in-law, and acted in this Association's affairs
for a number of years.
" As to the Prime M'vinister himself, we have never
had any doubt about where he stands on industrial
development in Australia. From time to time we have
agreed to differ in detail but we have always known
where he stands in principle.
" What' can one say on an' occasion like this about
the Prime Minister. I have before me a condensed
record of the Prime Minister's achievements which
covers five pages. It would take an hour or longer to
read it to you, and elaborate upon it. Nevertheless I
cannot let this opportunity pass without making some
reference to this magnificent record a record vast
in its scope, a record of a great talent applied in a
field which has been described as the most worthy profession
a man can follow that of Legislator. It is
an inspiring record, a record of which Australia must
justly be proud, a record known round the world,
where Sir Robert is regarded as one of the great
figures of our time."
The Prime Minister opened his address in ininmitably
witty fashion, with an exchange of pleasant personalities,
but he did refer, in passing, to a subject of
some significance to ' the textile industry*. Major
extracts from his address are given below.
" Mr. Wiltshire, your reference to my father and
my father-in-law has touched me very much. My
father was not only possessed of strong views, but was
very vocal about them and, in those days,' it took a
certain amount of courage for a man to be a protectionist
in a free trade area. My father was a violent
protection ist,. and the first arguments I ever heard
were those of my father explaining what nonsense
free trade. was * and how important it was to have a
protective tariff. . Those were the days when great
arguments went onl about protection or free trade.
At the turn of the century, this was the great free
trade State, and Victoria was the great protectionist
State and that was one of the reasons why they
inserted ( to the great profit of the legal profession)
Section 92 in the Constitution. For a long time after
that, the party position in Australia tended to be on
the issue of free, trade or protection. I am happy to
say that those days are as dead as the Dodo. Now
there is nobody who is a free trader because
smugglers have almost disappeared and the only
argument now is not whether there ought to be protection,
but what the degree of protection ought to be.
I have lived long enough to find that all sorts of
p~ eop~ le are high protectionists who were once regarded
as low tariff men. In other words, we have got to the
* Sir Robert spoke of a conversation with Dame Pattie
Menzies, in which she referred to her Inability to obtain
Australian made fine woollen textiles In retail emporiums.
( This is not the fault of Australian manufacturers.) point where most people believe in a protective tariff
and in the development of Australian industry.
" But at the same time, we still have argumentsthe
longer we live the.* more sophisticated we become
politically, the more we find things to disagree about.
I thought, tonight, I would like to talk to you about
three or four of what I regard as the fallacies so popular
to economic thinking. Before 1 do that, I ought to
say at onice that my own views are not destructive
ones on this matter, they are entirely' constructive. I
beli eve in the growth Of this country. I believe in
the secondary industries of this country, because they
can do things in relation to immigration and in relation
to national development that perhaps nobody
else can.' I believe in those things, but I also believe
that in the long run the national balance of Australian
development will depend upon two or three
things. One is that there should be a constant expansion
of secondary industry. One is that there should
be a constant consideration for the provision of primary
industry, which still p) roduces the overwhelming
bulk of our export income and is therefore primarily
responsible for our international solvency. A third
thing is that I believe in growth it would be a
strange thing for a man who has had the great fortune
to be Prime Minister of this country so long not to
realise that it is the growth of this country which
determines the future of this country. That is growth
in all fields. But also I happen to believe that one of
the great enemies of growth is instability instability
in the monetary world an inflationary boom, followed
by burst, and acute counter-inflationary
action. A lot of people seem to think that this is -due
to the mischievous, wrong view of the politicians. It
is not it is primarily due to the fact that, in a young
country which is expanding enormously, we may have
these Lips and downs. Whenever -there -is an " up"
somebody is delighted, and whenever this is a " down"
somebody is a bit peeved. It is. the humble, necessary,
task of the politician to try to reduce the uips and
downs by producing a climate which will enable
uis to havre stability to an adequate extent and growth
to an adequate extent. This is the great task of
economic policy. Having all these things in my mind,
I thought to offer you a view or two on some of the
Current fallacies.
" Every year I read ( and quite recently I read it
again) that there is something wrong with the Commonwealth
Government paLying for its works programme
out of revenue.. Somebody will say, with all
the air of a new discovery: % Vh71y don't you take it out
of loan money?' This, I believe, is absur-d. I have
lived long enough to know that facts are more formidable
than theory. One must always have a theory.
One must always have a set of principles in his mind,
but one must never allow them to overwhelm the facts,
because facts have something indomitable about
them. Why does the Commonwealth pay, to our works
programme, a couple of htundred million pounds out
of revenue and ask the taxpayer to produce the
money? The answer is quite simple. The whole of
the loan raisings in Australia, ( though theoretically
October, 1964. 
the Commonwealth is entitled to a fifth of them under
the financial agreement) go to the States for their
works programmes. It would be well worth remembering
that, when the financial agreement was made
back in the twenties, the whole theory was that the
Loan Council would have one simple task: how much
money can be borrowed on reasonable terms and conditions.
1 can remember attending a Loan Council
meeting ( not as a Principal but as an assistant) many
years ago, and at that time the whole loan works programme
for Australia was about œ E20m. Mvr. Lyons
was Prime Minister at that time, and I was his Deputy
in his own party and Attorney-General. Now, of
course, it is two or three hundred million pounds,
and everybody is accustomed to. these figures. But
one of the things that has never been properly understood
is that, whereas the Loan Council under the
financial agreement began by determining how much
could be borrowed on reasonable terms and conditions,
that question no longer arises. When we meet
there is a great argument with each State putting its
plan, and ultimately we end up by saying: the States
Works Programme is to be œ E335m. ( or whatever it
might tturn out to be). If the Commonwealth agrees
to this, then the Commonwealth does its best to
borrow that amount of money. But if it does not, it
finds the short fall. In my own time as Prime Minister,
we have, over a period of years, found hundreds
of millions out of revenue to make up the short fall,
because at a time when there was a powerful inflationary
movement and the loan market was
obviously very sick, we might borrow 180rn. one year
and find ourselves, involved in .; 200m. by a form of
underwriting of the States works programme. Thanks
to stability in costs and prices ( and we have had a
good deal of that in the last five years) the loan
market has been very healthy, and still remains firn;
but the whole of the proceeds of the loan market go
to the States works programme and the Commonwealth
does not get anything. I am not complainibg
about that. The only time I want to complain is
when somebody comes along and says that on the
proper basis of accotuntancy you ought to be spending
on your works programme only the proceeds of loans.
But if we did, then I dto not know what would happen
to the State works programme. This is not a matter
of theory this is just a matter of simple, practical
hard facts. The truth is that today and, as far as I
know, for years to come, the Commonwealth, if it
wants the States to have the necessary financial pr'ovision
to do their works programmes, accepts the
responsibility ( always an unpopular one) of carrying
its own works programme on the Budget. Nothing
would suit me better than to be able to transfer the
1200m. of Commonwealth wvorks onto some
mysterious Loan account, so that I could reduce taxes
with not very mtuch trouble, but the facts are to the
contrary. That is one thing I described as a fallacy
the fallacy of carrying the Commonwealth works
on reventue when they ought to be carried on loans.
" There is a second fallacy, and that is that in 1963-
4, the financial year just ended, all that happened in Australia was that some or all of the ground lost in
196 1-62 was recovered. This is not true. The fact is
that between 1960, the boom year, and the year just
closed the change in Australia has been phenomenal.
I do not like to hear people crying down their own
country or saying that we have not developed, or saying
that we have not improved our productivity. Between
what was a boom year in 1960 and the last
financial year, the improvement in Australian condisions
has been, I think, quite phenomenal. To me
this is a proof that you can have stability, as we have
had over that period in the consumer price index,
and still have the most astonishing growth. Between
these periods it is idle to say that there has been no
improvement in productivity. Public employment
employment by government between 1959-60 and
1963-64 rose by 85 thousands. In case somebody says:
' There you are this is the preference given ' to the
public sector!', I hasten to add that private employment
rose by 249,000. 1 think that it is not bad to
have an increase in that period of time of about 335
thousand people in employment in Australia. Wage
and salary earnings rose by 27% in that time, and
the total increase in the consumer price index over
the whole of this period was only about Wage
and salary earnings rose by 27%, average male earnings
rose by 16%, farm income ( for reasons partly
attributable to the yield of farmers and scientific
improvement, and partly due to seasons and partly
clue to the recovery of overseas markets) rose by 46%.
Gross national product rose by 27%, all this was between
1959-60 and 1963-4. These I think are very
stimulating figures. In terms of quantity, steel produiction
rose by 25% electricity by cement by
28% 7, and so on. As for motor vehicles I very well
remember that after the " little budget" something
happened to motor car production. About 18 months
ago we had one of our conferences with the Chamber
of Automotive Industries, and the estimates that were
given of the optimum that was being looked for was
358,000 vehicles each year. ' Well in 1960, in this
boom period, there were 295,000 vehicles and this
year 400,000. My young colleague, Leslie Bury, Minister
for Housing, would be able to recall that in 1959-
60 ( the then record year) the number of houses and
flats commenced was 91,000 and in 1963-4 they were
107,000. Is this the year of gloom does this make
peop~ le feel that there is some pess imism does this
make anybody feel that all that has happened is that
we have somewhat recovered the ground that was lost
in 1961-62? With great respect, that is just absurd.
This country is going forward in the most remarkable
fashion. Savings bank deposits in Australia since 1960
have increased by œ 715m., on average for each man,
woman and child from œ 148 to œ 200. Another point
I want to make is this: nothing will matter so much
in the next fiv'e years as a feeling of pride and confidence
and enthusiasm among our own people. If
p~ eople are going around crying poor mouth, that is
the surest way I have ever heard to bring about some
recession. " There is another fallacy, which is: that expenditure
October, 1964. 
always goes up in the public sector, but what about
the private sector. I am no great lover of economists
I read them but I don't love them. They have a
certain jargon no people have done more harm to
the purity of English than the economists. One of
these things is that they divide all expenditure on
the capital side into the public sector and the private
sector. Does this mean that the public sector is going
to do what the stupid politicians want to do to please
their constituents, and that the private sector is the
health giving investment for private business? Nobody
is a greater believer than I am in the fact that
private enterprise, and the spirit of adventure, and
the spirit of youth, are the driving forces in this country
( or in any other). But as I look over the field of
expenditure in the public sector I venture to say that,
for the most part, there would have been no private
development at all but for the expenditure in the
public sector.
" Let me give you an example or two. Take the
Snowy Mountains Scheme. There expenditure would
be getting near 12O0m. ( and it is * all out of revenue
except for a little loan from the World Bank) and by
the time it is finished, on the present plans, it will be
about 14O0m. What is it for? Quite true, it will produce
some electric power and light for the capita]
territory; quite true it will produce some for governmental
services* in N. S. W. and Victoria, but overwhelmingly
on the power side it will provide power
for industry in N. S. W. and Victoria and not provide
it at extortionate rates, because the whole object
is to produce power at cost, not to make a profit. The
Commonwealth will never make a shilling profit out
of the Snowy, and as'time goes on the cost of power
will be, of course, a diminishing factor. This means
that there will be hundreds and hundreds of industries
in Australia which will be assured of electric
power and light who might not have been able to get
it but. for the operation of the Snowy. In short, this
is primarily a powerful contribution to private. enterprise.
There is* the other aspect of it. The storage of
water in the Snowy Scheme is going to produce irrigation
right down the Valley of the Murrumbidgee
and the Murray which will put thousands of people
on to irrigated farms and those are p~ rivate people,
who want to develop their own production. Therefore
I think I might be. as right as a politician is
expected to be if I say that 90%, of the expenditure
on the Snowy, and the dams, and the later reticuilation,
will be in aid of private enterprise in Australia.
if that is so what is the use of saying less in the public
sector and more in the private sector. Let us. on the
contrary, try to think of it as something that comes
in aid of both, and in partictular in aid of private
industry. I believe that it is in the encouragement of
private enterprise, in putting at the elbow of the private
enterprise the kind of resources that it needs,
that the whole future of this country depends.
" I have mentioned the Snowy, I could equally mention,
for example, the'standardisation of the railway
between Kalgoorlie and Perth and Kwinana. This goes into the item expenditure in the public sector,
and yet what is it? There they have great deposits of
iron ore, and a great steel company has said: if we
can have that iron ore hauled along this long route
in up-to-date rolling stock on an up-to-date railway
line we can establish an iron and steel industry at
Kwinana in Western Australia. This is a magnificent
conception, and this is a conception of private enterprise.
So the -Commonwealth has undertaken great
financial responsibilty; it is all put down to the public
sector in this rather artificial division, but only to a
tiny p) ossible fraction does it have some effect on the
Commonwealth's own interest in a railway line. Primarily
it will open uip a new world for private enterprise
in Western Australia. The moment they have
an iron and steel industry, all the ancilliary industries
will begin to expand. It is -quite likely that in
Kwinana and Perth and Fremantle you will have the
kind of development that you see here in Newcastle
and Wollongong. This is, I think, tremendous and
imaginative. " We will be spending an enormous amount of
money this year on beef roads in the North, so that
there may be -an encouragement to people who are
growing cattle there, and to enable them to -bring
them to market in good condition and at the right
time. " I could go on for a long while, with all sorts of
examples of that kind. I must confess that if I were
in charge of somne great business enterprise I would
want nothing more than to-know if I expanded my
business I would see the housing, the roads, the transport,
the light and power, andi so on, provided.
All this adds up to this: just as, when I was a boy,
there was a power of energy and enthusiasm wasted
on whether You were a free trader, or a protectionist,
so there may be too much wastage today on some
alleged conflict between business and government.' I
CIO hope that we will not fall into that error too much.
Business and government are in the same cause. We
will occasionally disagree, but aboOe all things w . e
mu1Lst'at all times seek to understand each other' and
to co-operate with each other. I know of no s ingle
economic factor in the country which p) roduces an
irresolvable difference between the man who is doing
the work in the market place, and in the facto * ry, and
the man looking after the broad principles of governmnent
in Canberra ( or wherever it may be). This is a
co-operative Government. XWe have done a little
perhaps not enough in the way of having consultations
with p~ eople in industry. I venture, as years
go on, we will have more and more of this. As years
go on, wve will hav'e more and more p~ eople in politics
struggling to understand the problems of the businessman
and, what is equally important, we will have
more and more businessmen struggling to understand
the problems of politics. But it is not enough to say
what is the use of going to the politicians because the . y
do not understand our problems. The politicians are
strangely human people. Frequently you do not know
the problems that come to the government, with not
only its responsibility to individuals, but responsibility
October, -1964. 
for the great movements of international scale, which
can never be solved on a sectional basis, responsibility
for international -financial movements, which
always involve domestic budgeting policy in this
country itself.
" We do not know enough about each other. I have
never assumed to tell any man of business how he
ought to run his business because I have had a sneaking
idea that, nine times out of ten, he knows more
about it than I do. Let us get over this rather childish
differentiation. Let us understand that we are all adult
people and we are all patriots, and want to do the
best thing for our country, which quite permits doing
the best thing for our company or for our own selves.
Let us be patriots, and the right way to be a patriot
is to get to understand what the other man is doing,
and to see how far, in co-operation, we can achieve
the greatest degree of growth with the greatest ever
achievable degree of stabilty in our monetary system
that form of stability which means so much."
The vote of thanks to the Prime Minister was proposed
by Mr. W. W. Pettingell, Vice-President of
who spoke as follows.
" Tonight I feel that we have been reminded that
this relationship, which we have at some time entered
into, is as yet hand-in-hand and possibly ! has not been
consummated by that more respectable relationship
of marriage. But you and I, as practicing marriages
in various aspects of industry, do not achieve the
eminence of many economists who have a more vocal
approach to the problem. I am sure you will agree
with me that the Prime Minister has pointed to that
hand-in-hand relationship, which implies at least
some medium of understanding, and an effort to
uinderstand the problems of the other, at least to
bring about a more happy state in the future. I
think you and I have indicated the fact that this
country has an enornous potential.
" Tonight, we have here a group of the elder statesmen
of industry in New South Wailes, and, tlhink,
in Australia, and some of the younger men who in
the course of time will take over the task and leave
their imprint on the future history of this country.
They look to the future as one of wonderful challenge.
We have under our feet a country rich in resources,
as yet largely unscratched; one which lends
itself to an extensive application of knowledge, of
capital, and of endeavour, with the richness of reward
which will follow the application of, at least, those
three resources. Undoubtedly we who practise management
of our business concerns should, in the interests
of this wounderful country of ours and the people
who will follow on, apply ourselves more to the
understanding of the problems which lie ahead of us.
X\: e know that we are a country wide open to exploitation,
in the full sense, by the resources of knowledge
and capital that exist in different parts of the world.
We know that there are tremendous problems of
policy and principle and practice which derive from
this overall task. But this tremendous challenge, I
feel, in the course of time, we can hand on to those
that follow us with a great deal of confidence and pride in what they might achieve. Tonight I think
you have given us a very great stimulus in thinking,
and one which we will take with us and pass on to
those who share the responsibilities with us."
The vote'of thanks was seconded by Mr. R. G. C.
Parry-Okeden, whose remarks are summarised as
follow. " Apart from thanking you for talking to us, and all
of us enjoy listening to you, I want to say just one
thing. You are, to my knowledge, the first Prime
Minister who has recognised that industry exists to
the extent of making a Ministry of Industry. We are
grateful to you for that. We have suggested for some
time, both this Association and other special groups,
that there should be such an establishment created in
Canberra. We only pray to you that you appoint to
it the very best of your permanent staff that you can
find. You do not need me to tell you that you have
a wealth of talent in your public service at Canberra
to draw from. Thank you very much indeed, Sir, for
yet another of your wonderful speeches."
TOURISM INVESTMENT
A. I. D. A.' s Director recently returned from a holiday
tour of Central Australia, Arnhem Land, and the
Kimberley and Pilbara Districts of Western Australia.
Some aspects of the vast economic development potential
of the area will be discussed in later issues of
" Director Reports."
Apart from those aspects, however, these areas contain
some of the most fascinating, colourful, impressive
and distinctive scenic attractions to be found anywhere
in the world.
Alice Springs and its surrounding districts are probably
the best known, ( both in Australia and overseas)
and understandably so Ayers Rock is not only
unique geologically but its particular connection with
aboriginal legends and beliefs are a source of absorbing
interest. The beautiful Stanley Chasm ( 45 miles
from Alice Springs) is no less rewarding to the tourist
although less widely known.
There is the remarkable Gorge area around Wittenoom
( where blue asbestos is mined) Dale Gorge,
Yampire Gorge, Wittenoom Gorge, Joffre Falls, etc.,
to name a few -where climate and scenery combine
to provide ideal conditions for tourism.
The Kimberley/ Pilbara districts of Western Australia
contain some of the oldest known land areas in
the world, where centuries of erosion by wind and
water have reshaped the surface contours and left
only the bare bones of a stony country, compensated
by the beautiful colourings of deep mauves and
purples, sun-bright yellows, heliotrope and vivid reds
and ochres.
All these and many other areas provide attractions
which could form the basis of a valuable tourist trade,
October, 1964. 
both Australian and overseas. At present, however,
this is only an unexploited potential. Facilities in
most areas are primitive if any exist at all. Accommodation
at Alice Springs and Darwin is available in
reasonable quality and quantity, and Wittenoom has
a modern comfortable hotel. Apart from these, however,
the standards of service and accommodation are
poor, and certainly not adequate to attract visitors
even if they were prepared for some lack of amenities.
it is important to these areas that adequate tourist.
facilities be provided. Unless people can be induced
to visit and see for themselves the great potential
which exists, then development will be retarded and
opportunities lost.
New hotels, motels and other tourist facilties must
be provided before tourism can be actively promoted.
One of the major problems, which emerged from the
Director's discussions with the W. A. Tourist Department
and the Licensing Court, is an acute shortage
of long-term finance. It is suggested that a special
fund, along the lines of the Development Fund,
should be established to make long-term loans ( say
to 20 years) to people willing to develop tourist
facilities in these remote areas. Unless Australia makes
a positive effort to develop these resources, overseas
interests will step in.
The National Travel Association has estimated that
overseas tourists will spend nearly œ 30m. in Australia
during the current financial year. The exploitation
of the unique attractions of the north and north-west
of Australia could attract more overseas travellers, as
well as tourists and business men from within Australia,
and could help quicken the pace of development
in these areas. OPPORTUNITIES
BELL BAY/ GEORGETOWN, TASMANIA
This is the first of a series of brief articles A. I. D. A.
intends to publish to draw attention to the need for
a better balance between light and heavy industry,
and male and female employing industry, in specific
areas around Australia. Suich areas offer an opportunity
to lighter industries, particularly those employing
a predominantly female workforce, to establish
themselves where all necessary facilities power,
water, transp~ ort, etc. are readily available and, as
well, a stable, btmt at present idle, supply of labour.
Bell Bay and its " dormitory" town Georgetown are
Situated approximately 40 miles north of Launceston
on the estuary of the Tamar River.
The total resident population of the Bell Bay/
Georgetown area is approximately 4,000 persons. The number of males and females in
groups are the working-age
Population by Age Group and Sex
Mvales Females
No. No.
15-19 years 160 150
20.29 years 270 270
30-39 years 00 320
40-49 years 290 230
50.65 years 295 128
Total 15-65 years 1,415 1,098
This means there is a total potential workforce of
2,513 persons.
Industries already operating in the area employ a
total of 1,155 persons, mostly males. The major enterprise
is the aluminium smelting p~ lant of Comalco
Industries Pty. Ltd. at Bell Bay. Approximate
employment in each of the existing establishments,
and their activities, are
Firm Activity Employment
Comalco . Aluminum 960
Temco, ( a subsidary
of Ferro-manganese
Phoenix Foundry Steel fabricators
Hydro Electric
Commission Electricity Supply
Georgetown Council Local authority activities
H. T. Bernhardt Painting Contractor Total 1,155
Other local activities retail shops and other services
would employ a further small number of the
available workforce, but there still remains a large
potential, particularly to employ female labour.
Bell Bay has good deep-water harbour facilities,
and is one of the terminals for the " Bass Trader," the
" roll-on, roll-off" vessel operated by the Australian
National Line, which carries cargo and loaded cornmercial
vehicles between Melbourne and Tasmania,
going direct to and from Bell Bay one clay each
week. Other freight ships also use this harbour, of
course. There is a fine bitumen highway between
Bell Bay/ Georgetown and Launceston ( and from
there to the rest of Tasmania~ s cities).
There is plenty of good, fiat industrial land available
in the area, in a pleasant natural rural setting.
Tasmania is the only State in Australia where power
comes from hyclro-electric generation exclusively. It
offers the cheapest cost for industrial uses of electricity
in any State, which, in itself, provides a major
attraction to many industries. The most recent of
many new hydro-electric stations completed in recent
October, 1964. 
years is the Poatina Scheme which is located not far
from Launceston.
In the Bell Bay area two of Australia's largest companies
Conzinc Rio-Tinto ( through Comalco) and
B. H. P. ( through Temco) and particularly the
former provide employment opportunities, in a
variety of occupations, for a large proportion of the
local male population. Their workers have the opportunity
to make a permanent career with a major Australia
company, which is conducive to a stable, good
standard type of family population.
However, the lack of lighter industries capable of
employing the female population of the area is a sad
waste of one of Australia's most valuable resources
people. The Bell Bay/ Georgetown area, therefore, offers
labour, land, a good deep water harbour, cheap electricity,
reasonable proximity to one of the major
mainland markets ( Melbourne), good transport facilities
and, for a suitable user industry, primary aluminum
( ingot, billet and rolling block) in the immediate
vicinity as a raw material.
RESEARCH
At the invitation of the Minister for Supply, the
Hon. Allen Fairhall, a party of A. I. D. A.' s Council
members visited the Woomera Rocket Range
and Tracking Station and the Weapons Research
Estabishment at Salisbury, South Australia, in September.
The Woomer-a Range is being used as an international
testing station by European Launcher
Development Association in which
seven countries, including England, France and Germany
are combining their research and development
work in the field of guided missiles. The use of
Woomera, manned entirely by Australian technicians,
also brings Australia into this combined operation.
There is no cost to Australia involved in this aspect
of Woomera's activities and in addition Australia will
share in the benefits of any experiments. Currently
a " Blue Streak" Rocket is being assembled for firing.
The American " Black Knight" has also been tested at
Woomera. Of course, Australia's own equipment,
which is of the highest technical quality, is also tested
here. The tracking station at Woomera is one of three
which have been set up in Australia in co-operation
with the government of the United States of America.
Of the other two tricking stations one is located near
Canberra and one in the North West of Western Australia.
All are manned by Australians, but the cost
of building and. maintaining them is borne by the
U. S. A.
The Weapons-Research Establishment at Salisbury
is the working organisation behind Woomera, where
the actual research and experimental and development
work is carried out. Discussions were held in
both places with the administrative and technical leaders, including aspects in which industry could
participate, particularly in the field of applied
research. Both industry and defence in Australia
could benefit from the application in industry of the
productive techniques and knowledge developed at
Salisbury and Woomera.
Australian defence establishments under the control
of the Department of Supply have been responsible
for the export of equipment and know-how to a value
of œ 14m. over the past six years. The Minister for
Supply recently announced the following highlights
of his Department's recent export activities:
The sale of the Jindivik pilotless target aircraft
to Britain, Sweden and U. S. A.
The sale of the Malkara ground-to-ground
guided weapon to Britain.
A wide range of engineering products, technical
processes and developments.
The expenditure being undertaken by the Government
for research into defence problems in certainly
paying dividends. Similar profits could be expected
from the promotion of research in industry.
A. I. D. A. SCIENCE TEACHERS' AWARD
The A. I. D. A. Award for 1964 in Queensland was
recently presented to the Rev. Bro. R. M. Slattery,
B. Sc., Senior Science and
Mathematics Master, St. Joseph's College, Brisbane.
Extracts from Bro. Slattery's citation are given below.
" As in previous years the Referees found the task
of comparing the contributions to science teaching by
the nominees a very difficult one indeed. It was pleasing
to find that the number of nominations had grown
considerably this year and that the standard of the
nominees was uniformly high.
" Although the task of selection was a difficult one,
the Referees were completely confident with their
final decision. It was clear that Reverend Brother
Slattery possessed the qualifications sought after to a
pre-eminent degree.
" Brother Slattery received primary education from
the Sisters of St. Joseph at St. Therese's School,
Lakemba, a suburb of Sydney, and his secondary education
from the Christian Brothers at St. Patrick's
College, Strathfield. On completion of his schooling
he worked as a chemist for Lever Brothers in their
research laboratory and while there studied for a
chemical Engineering Diploma at the Sydney Technical
College.
" Joining the Religious Order of the Christian
Brotheri, Brother Slattery was enabled to complete. a
Science Degree at the University of Sydney. Majoring
in Inorganic Chemistry, he obtained, in 1954, two
High Distinctions in final year chemistry and First
Place in the University. Brother Slattery was awarded
the Walter Burfitt Memorial Bursary, but decided
not to continue studies for a higher degree, although
October, 1964. 
the path was left: open to him to do-so by his
superiors in the Order.
" Shortly after completing his degree, Brother Slatter)
was admitted as an Associate -of the. Royal Australia ii
Chemical Institute and he also became a member oi
the New South Wales Science Treachers' Association.
In 1955, he was posted to St. Joseph's College, Rockhampton,
where he taught Chemistry, Physics and
Mathematics at all levels up to and including Senior,
During the two years at Rockhampton he joined tlit
Queensland Science Teachers' Association and th(
Catholic Colleges Science Teachers' Association.
" Early in 1957, Brother Slattery was transferred tc
St. Edmund's College, Canberra, and ther
filled the triple post of Senior Science Master, Senioi
Mathematics Master, and Sports Master. Brothei
Slattery helped to establish a branch of the New Souti
Wales Science Teachers' Association in the Australiar
Capital Territory. This soon became the A. C. T. S. T. A
and Brother Slattery was its first Vice-President. Ii
1959 he represented the Association -at thi
A. N. Z. A. A. S. conference in Perth and presented
paper in a Symposium on . the teaching of Physics
With the financial support of C lectures wern
also given at Melbourne, Adelaide, Kalgoorlie an(
Albury. " In 1960, Brother Slattery was posted to St. Joseph'
College, Gregory Terrace. Rejoining the Scienc,
Teachers' Association of Queensland he became
member of the Executive in 1961 and 1962, whils
he has also been. President of the Catholic College
Science Teachers' Association since 1962. A membe
of the Chemistry Sub-committee of the Board of Pos
Primary Studies for the last two years he helped asses
junior Physics papers in 1961. and 1962, Senio
Chemistry and Senior Mathematics II papers in 1962
and is this year one of the three people associate
with the setting of junior Chemistry papers.
" Ever since arriving in Queensland, Brother Slatter
has been very active indeed in all of those time-con
suming but important tasks that require interest ani
energy of a high order, on behalf of science teachinE
As President of the Catholic Colleges' Scienc
Teachers' Association, the recipient of this year'
Award assumed his greatest responsibility in organi!
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIES
DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
406 Lonsdale Street, Melbourne, VICTORIA.
I Telephone 67 7021.
17 O'Connell Street, Sydney, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Telephone 25 5358.
Manager J. E. Logan.
Cables and Telegrams:
I AIDIND, Melbourne or Sydney. ing the in-service training of Science teachers in the
Catholic schools of this State..
" It was the nature and scope of this in-service training
work that perhaps impressed the Referees most
of all, for it was clear that Brother Slattery not only
bore the brunt of much of the organisation it required
but that he was also responsible for a good deal of
the initiative in establishing the Seminars in the first
place. He has surely set an excellent example of
devotion. to the cause of Science teaching in one of
the most valuable of all ways; by helping to
improve standards of teaching throughout a great
many schools in this State.
" Reports of Brother Slattery's classroom teaching
that had come to the attention of members of the
Committee indicate that he is first-rate in every way.
r He played an important role in the design of th~ e new
1 Senior laboratories recently opened at St. Joseph's
I College and. they reflect his obvious enthusiasms for
individual practical work, his knowledge of good
laboratory facilities, and his skill as a constructor of
apparatus. " Modest as he is, anyone who knows Brother Slattery
must soon be aware that his thoughts are never
S far away from science teaching and its cause, not only
I on behalf of his own pupils, nor even those of the
Catholic schools, but for all learning science in schools
s throughout the State and the Country. Basic to this
e is an obvious dedication to the welfare of school
S pu~ pl whose interest in science he works hard to
t achieve with efforts well beyond the call of duty.".
s r LABOUR SHORTAGE
s The Consulate of Switzerland in Melbourne records
r in its " Economic News" a method of overcoming the
" labour shortage in Switzerland. " Three large firms
I in Basel appear to have found a solution worthy of
notice: they have formed a pool which ensures their
y customers prompt and caref ul service for relatively
small orders. At present this pool makes available to
I its clientele a painter, two electricians, a carpenter,
S two sanitary installation fitters and an experienced
e all-round worker. Fast service is ensured thanks to
' s five telephone lines and five cars carrying fully
equipped workshops on wheels. In operation since
last spring, this is a service which might profitably be
imitated in other towns in Switzerland, especially as,
it may be added, no patent has yet been taken out
on it-476 ' 2W Director.
ARBUCKLWEA DDELL PTY. LTD. 


&nbsp;P.M. No&nbsp;65/1964
Mr. Bolte is a capable, experienced&nbsp;and successful&nbsp;Premier. The preparation of his budget for the State of Victoria is his responsibility in which he needs no advice&nbsp;from the Commonwealth.
The proposals which he has made for the imposition&nbsp;of income tax will be the subject of study by the appropriate&nbsp;officers in the Federal Treasury who in due course will&nbsp;report to me as&nbsp;Acting Treasurer.
I hve been asked by Mr, Bolte&nbsp;to discuss the&nbsp;proposals with him and I will do so shortly at a mutually&nbsp;convenient time.
Melbourne10&nbsp;September, 1964,
&nbsp;



PLEASANT SUNDAY AFTERNOON SERVICE AT
WESLEY CHURCH, MEL43OURNE 13TH SEPTEMEER. 1964+
Speech by the Prgime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert-Menizies
Sir, Your Excellency and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I think I might be permitted, as usual, to engage
in a few vagrant thoughts at the beginning of my talk. One
is that I was delighted to hear from the, distinguished Chairman
that Governors in the State of Victoria keep on improving.
( Laughter) Now Sir Irving is such a master of English that
I was surprised to find myself left in doubt. Did he mean that
each JIovernor was better than the previous one? Or did he
mean that each individual Governor, himself, keeps on improving?
And by interjection he tells me that he meant both. All I
want to say, Your Excellency, is that I shall watch you with
loving care ( laughter).
The second preliminary remark I want ID make is that
I think it is a very agreeable compliment that a fellow who
was at school in Ballarat should have the privilege of listening
to singers from Ballarat. This was not always a pleasure.
It has been this afternoon a most undiluted pleasure. I thought
they saing beautifully. But when I was a schoolboy in Ballarat
and was living in the house of my Scottish grandmother, somebody
had in some way produced a ticket for a Saturday afternoon at
the South Street competitions. Now some of you may know about
the South Street competitions. They were then in their heydayperhaps
for all I know they still are, But I went as a matter
of duty because the tickets cost nothing ( Laughter) and I found
myself sitting in a row of women. They terrified me, There
were four or five to one side and four or five to the other
I had no kiope of esca ping, and that afternoon they had what
they called Set Piece Competitions.
F'ifteeni young men came out stood on the same little
chalk marks on the platform and recited that most marvellous
jury speech in the world, which none of them understood, the
speech of Mark Antony over the dead body of Caesar. ( Laughter)
A.. Ld each of them did it exactly the same way. In those days
they didn't wear double-breasted coats like old-fashioned
fellows like me ( Laughter), and they dropped the thumb and
forefinger into the left waistcoat pocket and raised the right
hand and said, " Friends, Romans countrymen... 0 tt You know.
Well, I have lived long enough o have reread that specch and
indeed all of Shakespeare many times with immense joy, but I
want to confess to you that at the ripe intellectual age of
fourteen, I found it pure horror. ( Laughter)
And then the next item was the Set Piece -Song
and the song was " Who Is Sylvia?" ( Laughter) They don't
remember it because it is before their but " Who Is
Sylvia?" and I heard thirteen or fourteen people sing " Who~ Is
Sylvia?" until I don't mind telling you that at the end of that
time I didntt care a hoot who Sylvia was. ( Laughter) All I
do know is that the South Street Competitions made Ballarat
over the years a centre of singing, and I've been as delighted
as you have been to hear the YWCA choir from Ballarat singing
so beautifully, Now since I saw you last indeed since last year,
( when I wasn't here) Itve been in London that won't surprise
** 0900/ 
-2-
you because that happens and we had a Prime Ministers'
Conference. Many of you have observed the results of the
Conference and have seen I hope with great satisfaction
that after many difficulties in the course of discussion
we arrived at conclusions which I believe will lead to
increasing co-operation between Commonwealth countries.
But I have thought more than once that perhaps many people
still think of the Commonwealth in rather old terms. It is
only a few years ago that I could hear eminent politicians
say, " Well, of course I refer to the Commonwealth but I
like the expression tthe Empire'. I'm an old-fashioned man."
I might have said that myself many years ago for all I know.
But what I want to put to you this afternoon what I want to
tell you about this afternoon is that we must accommodate our
thinking about the Commonwealth.
We must accommodate our thinking about our relations
with other countries to the realities and changes of life,
because in 1964, at the last meeting that I have attended
the ninth consecutive meeting that I have attended, the sate
of affairs was fundamentally different from the state of
affairs thirty years ago because, believe it or not9 I attended
my first meeting of what was then called the Imperial
Conference in 1935 not then, I hsiston to say, being a Prime
Minister but being Deputy to the late Mr. Lyons, and he being
ill, I attended. 1935, and here we are in 1964.
Now, Sir. perhaps it might be useful for me to
recall what our imperial/ Dominions/ Commonwealth relations
were at that time, just tunder thirty years ago, Well, for
a start, there were fiv people present, There was the Prime
Minister of Great Britain, the Prime Minister of Canada, Prime
Minister of Australia, Prime Minister of South Afriua and the
Prime Minister of New Zealand. And we were all, in a sense,
much of a kind. We spoke the same language, we had the same
sort of background, we understood each other, we found it not
very difficult to arrive at common conclusions and we were
all the subjects, the loyal subjects of the Crow. at that
time, of King George V, and so a conference didntl take very
long and we usually came out of it with a few joint ideas which
we thought might be useful to the world.
Now at that time, $ ir, and indeed until just after
the last war, we had all sorts of things in common. I hope
you won't mind if I point out some of these because this is
a time in history when if we are to be tolerant and understanding,
we must know what the facts are, Now at that time and,
indeed, until 1948 we were all bound together by a common
allegiance to the Throne, This indeed was the whole essence
of the famous Balfour Declaration independent countries,
equal in all things, governing themselves in all things and
united by a common allegiance to the Crown. And, of course,
Australia, New Zealand, Canada Great Britain are all still
united by a common allegiance to th3 Crown9 but that doesn't
apply any longer in a general sense . in the Commonwealth
because in point of fact, beginning n 1949 1948/ 49 when
India became a Republic, and it was agreed India could remain
in the Commonwealth, the great majority of the new nations who
have been created out of the old colontal system have elected
to be republics, and indeed, this led to a nuw formula for how
could a republican be united to another country by a common
allegiance to the Crown,, It was impossible,, And so they
invented a formula, rightly or wrongly of referring to The
Queen as the Hend of the Commonwealth tut eliminating the
requirement of the common allegiance to the Throne. 00 ./ 3 
-3
Now we were five in those days, At the last Conference
in London, there were eighteen Prime Ministers. You, of course,
may frequently think, God bless you, that one is too many
( Laughter) but there were eighteen of us, and the great bulk
of those present, republics, and therefore not within the
allegiance to the Throne. Now it's worth remembering that
because there is something about being a subject of The Queen
which really does give you something, doesn't it? This
distinguishes you in a material way from other people,
And at that time, and afterwards, it was permissible,
indeed it seemed occasionally almost compulsory for people in
after-dinner speeches particularly and I warn you there is
n~ othing more devastating than the habit of after-dinner speakingit
was the habit of people to say, " Well, look at all the great
elements we have in common," and indeed we had them then. The
sovereignty of Parliament.
Now Parliamentary self-government is commonplace to
us, isn't it4 Parliamentary self-government is the whole
essence of political life, and people may grumble at it, growl
at it, and have great and partisan feelings about this candidate
or that caniidate, but without Parliamentary self-. government
we would not be a democracy and, as we believe, and as I believe,
half our freedoms would disappear. And so it was said with
great tr1u th one time that we were bound together by our common
belief in the sovereignty of Parliament.
I just want to tell you that's no longer true, We
practise the sovereignty of Parliament in Australia and they
do in Canada and they do in New Zealand and they do in. Great
Britain and they do in two or three or four or perhaps five of
the new Commonwealth countries but not in all, not in all,
We have lived long enough to be able to recognise a species of
dictatorship In one country and a one-party system which is
a kind of dictatorship in this country or that country.
There is no longer that common belief that unites, the common
be*.. ef in the sovereignty of Parliament, That's not to say that
we must give up our faith in it, but it does mean to say that we
are to understand that we are now thinking about a Commonwealth
which has lost one of its old unities indeed, more than one
and that we must struggle to understand the point of view of
those who have entirely different ideas,
We have responsible government. Well, I know, ladies
and gentlemen., that every now and then you are a little tempted
to believe that governments are irresponsible, Even my
Government, I believe they tell me, puzzles you occasionally,
but we have responsible government, because the people you send
into Parliament can throw a government out if they feel that it
has fallen into some cardinal blunder. And every time we have
an election and you elect Members of Parliament a Cabinet emerges
and Cabinet is responsible to the Parliament ancA therefore to
you. This is the whole essence of our system of government.
And ever since responsible government was created by the
resignation of Walpole in 174+ 2 because he was defeated on a
vote in the House of Commons over sIRnce then this has been
one of our glories and one of the guarantees ol human freedom
responsible government,
You are not to assume that there is any such thing as
responsible government in five or six or seven of the new
Commonwealth countries, and I am not saying that critically,
All I mean is that these are new countries, newly-won to their
independence and that we will err very grievously if we expect
aO # a 
that their standards of government, their institutions of
government, their basic thinking about government will be the
same as our own, because after all, ladies and gentlemen , you
and I are the inheritors of the richest tradition of' Parliamentary
and responsible government the world has yet produced.
Some of these countries, as I say, don't have the
party system except in a highly-simplified form, that is to
say, one pariy; there is only one party you can belong to and
therefore only one party you can vote for. This is quite true
in two or three of the new African countries, and we have had
distinguished spokesmen for these countries, explaining why
they think this is a good thing and T wontt argue with them.
All I know is that I hope we will never havre a one-party system
of government in this country, though at a reception at
Canberra to Mr. Mboya from Kenya, two or three of my friends
of the Opposition in Canberra tapped me on the shoulder when
ho was talking about a one-party Government and 11said, " Don't
worry, old boy, youtve had it for fifteen years."( agtr
Well, I hope I will not have it when it becomes necessary to
destroy it. But two parties a government and an opposition,
the hammer and the anvil this is the way in which the truth
emerges. We have lived, fortunately for ourselves, for many
years under the rule of law, urdor a. system in which however
much we may wrangle, if we go before the judge, we all believe
we are going to have a fair hearing and an equal deal, end
we have had a wonde-6-ul judiciary, and so they have in Great
Britain, and so they have in many other count'~ ies, but the
rule of law, as we understand it, with all people equal before
the Bar of Justice is not a coinmonplace thing in some of the
new countries. We, of course, have a common htstoriaal background.
Indeed, it is our common historical background that makes it
so easy for us to be on terms with the Americans bu~ t never
let it be forgotten, that if you are going to talk about the
history of a people, with ours going right back to the ancient
Britons and to the Romans and to the Angles and the Saxons
-nd the Jutes and the Norman invaders and so on until the Scots
took charge. ( Laughter) If we are going to think about that,
then we must remember that up to the late eighteenth century,
this was a history we had in common with the people of America.
This is frequently forgotten our historic paths diverged
at the Declaration of Independence, That's only a few days
ago thatts towards the end of the eighteenth century. And
therefore in all the Parliamentary countries, as I will call
them, we have a tremendous body of common historic tradition.
This is not true, necessarily of countries in
Asia or in Africa. It is very difficult f'or people who have
reached my age and who have lived and moved and had their
being in this historic tradition and have taken all these
inherited things for granted very difficult for us to
understand that there ar-o other people who are just as good
as we are who don't have th-Is tradition or background at all
but who have their own and we must struggle not to be superior
about ours but to understand theirs and the right way to begin
to understand anybody is ' to discover what your differences are
so that you may perceive them, think about them and try to
reconcile theme 00 0 D ae1 
We've had, many traditions indeed for a long, long
time. We've had our language and our literature. w4e take
all these things for granted, don't we, I think so, I know
I find myself constantly taking -them for granted. We regard
language as a sort of instrument of communication as indeed
it is and as for literature we read either by compulsion or
choice, and we may take it l'or granted that all this is the
ki~ nd of-thing that happens to other people. But you know, my
friends, it isn't. It isn't, W3 just happen to be British
people, Australian citizens British subjects, and we have a
literary tradition the tradition of language which we share
with hundreds of millions of people in the world, twio hundred
millions of them being in the United States of America, and we
have great fun with each other because there are about twentyseven
different accents in the United States of Amprica and at
least twenty.-seven in Great Britain, and so it goes on and
everybody is prepared to say, " Oh, yes. He has an Australian
accent" as no doubt he has " and he has an American accent,"
although that might be one of many ( Laughter) but allowing for
all that, we do knowa don't we, that in our rough and ready
fashion, we are speaking the same language and that we can
communicate with each other on terms and can, so far as communication
will bring it about, understand each other. This is one
of the great things -in the world in the New Commonwealth, which
is in a sense the new world, thai we have to become more
toleralit, more understanding, a litt2e less dc-E;_ aatic about these
things, a little more inclin~ ed to believe that -the fact that
a man speaks in a language not ours is no evidence that he
doesn't have high intelligence and great understanding and
great capacity. And therefore those Pr'ie Ministers? Conferences are
becoming nowadays a liber&amp; I exercise in patience and understanding
in debates, yes, sometimes quit'-e fiery but at the end
with a desire to arrive at an accommodation with the othor man
for an overall cause that you both think is worthwhile and has
sign~ ificance in thae world.
Therefore, Sir, we have come to a new Commonwealth in
which there are now people, ne~ w methods, new problems, new
thinking. The only time I have ever wanted to be younger than
1 am because I am happy to -tell you that I have no grievances
about my ago the only time that I've ever wished that I were
younger than I am is when I have occasionally thought not that
I would like to see what is going to happen in the world in the
world of science, though of course I should be interested, what
is going to happen in the development of armaments what is
going to happen when people go to the moon and fina. it is a
rather dusty spot ( Laughter) these things really don't induce
me to want to be an old, old tiresome man of one hundred-but
I would occasionally like to take twenty years off' my life, just
conditipna lly, able to put it on again later on but just for a
while take twenty years off my life in order to see how this
tremendous task of reconciliation is going on, how the new
Commonwealth is going to work out, how far we will be able to
submerge the occasional irritations in the interests of
kindliness and understanding and a mutual strength, because
believe me I ha-Ve lived long enough to know that he fact ihat
a man is different is no evidence against him. On the contrary,
it may be the greatest evidence in his fivour, * a Ga. 9 e e/ 6 
' 0 -6
Here we are, at the end of an old empire
which 0there it at the end of the older
Commonwealth and at the beginning of a new one. If the
new one succeeds by producing understanding and tolerance
and charity of mind and anxiety to succeed, then it will
turn out to be one of the great new experiments in human
life but if we allow ourselves to be impatient, to look
unduly at the past, to yearn for the old state of affairs,
to tal~ k about the good old times, then perhaps the new
Commonwealth will not last long and perhaps indeed I
would have thought certainly Lhe world will be poorer
for it, 


DOWN MEMORY LANEBy Sir Robert Menzies
This is an address given by the Prime Minister, to the National Press Luncheon Club at the Hotel Canberra, on September 14, 1964
I'VE been misled and I've been misled by that deplorIable character, Maley. ( Laughter.) I understood from him that today was my 30th anniversary. I am no doubt quite wrong, but there you are. But I thought it was I didn't look it up, and when I had people coming to see me earlier and saying " Many happy returns of the day", a somewhat fantastic wish, you will agree, I was still under the illusion that it was today, but now it's tomorrow. So I suppose I'll have to make a little speech and then make it retrospective to tomorrow, hoping that I survive so long.
Now I was told that what you would like to hear, as briefly as possible, would be some retrospective views of affairs, people, since I came here first in 1934. Or as Ray Maley, with that exquisite capacity for an original phrase that characterises the Press, said to me-" Wandering Down Memory Lane". ( Laughter.)
Well, I will first of all wander down it about Canberra itself because at that time, in 1934, Canberra had 6000 people, and you could positively stroll around the whole, beat the bounds, in two hours with no difficulty. Now it's a large place and getting larger. In 1934, it did not have municipal self-government, a state of affairs that still continues. ( Laughter.)
Back in 1934, in the Lyons Government, we had a Budget I haven't had a chance of looking up the precise figures but I would say something of the order of œ 75 m. for the year, the Commonwealth Budget. 1, myself, in 1939, by a temporary but speedily corrected error, became Prime Minister and introduced the first œ 100 m. Budget. Happy days!( Laughter.)
Even then, I have no doubt that some of the newspapers here represented complained of the gross extravagance of public expenditure and said that it ought to be cut down. We spent in a delirium of excitement in 1935-6-7, around that time, œ 15 m. a year on social services and it's now somewhere between œ 400 m. and œ 500 m. and is conceded by everybody to be grossly inadequate ( Laughter), but that was the position at that time.
We had, in theory, an External Affairs Department. We didn't really have a department, we had a Minister for External Affairs, because George Pearce, about whom I will say something later on, was Minister for Defence and Minister for External Affairs. Instead of masses of young men and women who now have their being in the External Affairs Department and who are the masters of all the most subtle intricacies of the United Nations' procedure, so important for somebody, in those days, George Pearce, the Minister, " Hoddy"Hodgson he was the department, and there was the stenographer and she was the other part of the department. ( Laughter.) We had a High Commissioner in London. We had no other diplomatic representative anywhere in the world. Those were days of noblesimplicity. Today, of course, as you know, we have High Commissioners and Ambassadors around the world and we have an External Affairs Department of a fully sophisticated kind, with all sorts of aspects of international affairs being dealt with. Very hard to believe that when I was first here in this very place, in this hotel, we had none of these things.
I DON'T think we had any Trade Commissioners at that time. If we had, they existed in perhaps New Zealand and Canada, but we had no organised Trade Commissioner service of the kind that we now have. In other words, these were days of almost Spartan simplicity in administration. The complexities of international trade, the complexities of international affairs had not yet fully developed, they had not yet been complicated by all the explosive effects of the Second World War and those events that happened after the Second World War, and I think the result was, in those days, with fewer Ministers than we now have, it was found possible to have a certain amount of civilised leisure Ministers were well known to be seen on the late lamented golf course, playing golf. Indeed their fraternity with the heads ofdepartments on the old Canberra golf course postponed the introduction of the lake for a long, long time. ( Laughter.) Which reminds me that of course we had no lake. We had none of these things that we are now beginning to take for granted.
Now I just said to you that there was a certain simplicity about life. That's quite true. If there was a conference in London, it was a conference between a limited number of people, all of whom understood each other. It had none of the complexities that have come with the new Commonwealth. Indeed, nobody in those days could have envisaged what was going to happen as colony after colony came to self-government and to independent statehood.Well, of course, inevitably, moving over 30 years, the complexity of matters to be dealt with by governments has expanded almost by geometrical progression. I can give evidence about this because I am the only extant creature who was a Prime Minister in 1939 and 1940 and 1941 and who is still a Prime Minister in this year of grace. " Grace", I think, is the right word.&nbsp;
( Laughter.) But, anyhow, I thought that I had plenty to do at that time and indeed I did. I worked seven days a week and there are only seven days in the week.I would say that the complexity and mass of matterscoming across my table today is double or treble whatit was at that time, 25 years ago. This goes for everything.The sturdy individualists in the country who resentany political interference apply for it every week. Themanufacturers who oh, I must be careful because Ihave to speak to them this week sometime ( Laughter)PROSPECT, No. 3, 1964 what I will call the sturdy believers in privateenterprise who think the Government ought to keepout of it are with us every week or with the TariffBoard every week or with something or other everyweek. There is hardly a section in the community todaythat doesn't in one breath protest its undying hostilityto Government activity and in the next breath, prayfor it.
It isn't a wonderful or a remarkable or a regrettablething that the number of Ministers has perhaps almostdoubled since I first came to Canberra, it has beennecessary and I venture to say that if the complexityof modern affairs and the demands made on governmentsboth continue their pressure, there will be moreMinisters and more Ministers in time to come, and abigger and bigger Parliament in time to come.I mention it to you because I know it is not of yourown malice but under the instructions that you will begiven, or your successors will be given, that you mustcriticise every increase of any kind, and say that it isnonsense; that what the Government needs is fewerMinisters and not more. Well, all I can tell you is thatif we had fewer there would be one interesting consequence,because if you reduced the number of Ministersand you thereby increased the responsibilitiescoming to each Minister, you would make him moreand more dependent on his departmental officers. Youhave only to reduce the number of Ministers farenough to create ultimately a complete bureaucracy.It's worth thinking about.A Minister must have sufficient opportunity andtime, if he is a seriously minded person, to master theproblems of his department, and if he does, he will beable to place the proper value on the highly competentprofessional advice that he will get from his department.But if he is so pressed, always against the clock,that he just has to say, " Well, look, I haven't time toanswer this problem, So-and-so, my departmental head,is a very wise and experienced fellow and he recommendsso-and-so, I'll say Now this is worththinking about. It is worth thinking about.CABINETS don't cost much. Really they don't ifyou look at the broad sweep of national affairs.I would sooner have too many than too few.The best kind of government arises when Ministershave enough energy and time to think about their ownproblems and to form views, and enough time to putthe proper value on the advice they will get, as theywill get it, from what in my opinion is one of thegreatest civil services in the world. But we must havebalance, and that's why, looking back over this time,I see an enormous increase in numbers and I believethat it's been justified.Well now, I must push on. I've said to myself forthe last two or three days, " How does the standard ofdebate in the House compare now with what it was30 years ago?" Well, I think on the whole it's better.There are two reasons which make me interested tofind myself admitting to myself that it is better. One isthat there are two very good reasons why it should bew ors e.One reason is that people, constituents ( I have nocomplaint about my own; they have remarkable 17
patience and endurance), but people, constituents, willwrite an enormous amount of correspondence to amember, a private Member of Parliament, and if he isgoing to answer them and deal with all the details thatthey want him to deal with and go to the variousdepartments and get the necessary answers, then he'sgoing to have a pretty small amount of time to sitdown and do that good hard sweat and study that isnecessary if anybody is going to make a considerablespeech. TgHrEo wvsol ume of constituency work grows andevery year because we are always havingsome new proposal, there is some newsocial service, there are some new changes in the rulesof social services, there are changes in trade treaties,changes in the tariff schedules. There are masses ofthings of this kind, and on all of them, the member isgoing to be at the receiving end. Therefore, when Iconsider their constituency and correspondence andinterviewing work, I would have expected, as a more orless detached observer, to find that the standard ofdebate had fallen since those more spacious andleisurely days when I first came to Canberra. Now, Iam happy to say I don't think the standard of debatehas fallen, on the whole. I can hear, I think, a higherpercentage of thoughtful contributions to debate than Icould have at that time.
I was a bit nervous about broadcasting. Very nervous about it because broadcasting, of course,has one great advantage which all you gentlemen of the Press will understand perfectly. It does mean thatif anybody cares to listen to you, he does know what you said. ( Laughter.) You understand me perfectly.But I gather that only about one or one and a half per cent of the people listen. That's, as a correctivefactor, not perhaps as great as it might have been. But in the early days, I felt that it was almost ludicrouswhen the broadcasting came in and we had these things standing up you know, these microphones. Somebodydescribed it as looking like the petrified forest.
In those days, gentlemen, private members who sat round here, would be seen to be moving very anxiouslyto the nearest microphone when they were about to deliver a speech. There was then a non-technical theorythat you had to be close to the wretched instrument to be heard by your constituents. And, indeed, some ofyou will remember that on one celebrated occasion, one member of happy memory was having a littledifficulty with his upper denture in the course of making a speech. There was a certain clatter and occasionallya hissing and a certain amount of obscurity which produced, I regret to say, some laughter in the House.He said, " It's all right. It's my upper set. By the way, Doe. ( addressing his dentist who lived in some place500 miles away), by the way Doe., don't forget I've got an appointment with you on Saturday morning."( Laughter.) Well, there's another comment I'll make on that. I thought that broadcasting with this business of gettinginto line with the microphone would produce more and more set speeches and less and less debate. I think inthe long run that hasn't happened. It did in the start.
It was quite clear that it didn't matter what Jones, Brown or Robinson had said, Smith was going to sayhis piece into the nearest microphone and his constituents,as he hoped, would be listening to him and they would then understand. I think all that has ratherdied away. I think on the whole there is more debatingin the true sense, more cut and thrust, more answeringof arguments to and fro now than there was in the twoor three years after broadcasting was introduced. Andfrom that point of view, I think there is much to bethankful for.
I would think, on the whole, the average level ofdebate, yes, has risen. There are many thoughtfulspeeches. I was tempted to think that might be due,particularly in recent years, to a rising level of educationalattainment, until I remembered myself thatformal education let's remember it has hardlyever been the test of distinction in the political field.George Pearce, about whom I will speak a little later,who was a very great Parliamentarian, was a bushcarpenter. His formal education terminated, no doubt,when he was 13 or 14 years old. You can't go by that.Some people have talents and improve them all theway through their lives and some people have sometalents and improve them early and neglect them later.The real test is whether a man has a continuing mentalattack on the problems that he deals with. And fromthat point of view, I think that the debate which hasimproved, I think, has not improved solely because offormal education, though that's of great assistance, buthas improved because it is increasingly seen howserious a matter the government of the country is.Now I wish I could say that I thought the standardof reporting had risen. I don't think it has, quitefrankly. I remember saying to John Curtin, when hewas Leader of the Opposition, " You know, John, youcan speak, why do you read?" And he said, " Well, Iam an old journalistic sweat, but you know, if I want tobe reported, I must hand it out." Now, there is a bit oftruth in this, isn't there? A bit of truth. A recent debatein the House that I listened to with great interestconsisted of one speech that was read and a reply thatwas brilliant and destructive of the whole argument,but it was the first one that arrived. I don't think, ifyou will allow me to say so, that the standard of reportinghas been maintained, and that is, I think, to asubstantial extent, the responsibility of Ministers whoread out Second Reading speeches and of other peoplewho read out speeches in the course of debate and findit convenient to hand them over.
The whole glory of Parliamentary debate is that itis debate, that it has cut and thrust and nobody everproduced any cut or thrust by the mere process ofproducing a piece of paper. This is the clash of minds.It is the debate which swerves from one side to theother under the pressure of events, which accommodatesitself to a new argument, to a new thought. Thisis the most fascinating thing in the world.It is because of this, you know, that Winston, whenthe House of Commons was to be rebuilt after theWar, said, " We will not have it any bigger. We willnot have a House of Commons that can hold all theMembers of the House of Commons." People,strangers to his way of thinking, thought, " Well, howcrazy." But they did it, because the whole idea wasPROSPECT, No. 3, 1964
that if you have a place so vast and wide that all theintimacy of discussion disappears, you might as wellhave Parliamentary debate conducted by a series ofessays printed and distributed and a division list at anappropriate time. The importance of Parliamentarydebate is, I think, something, weUl, in my mind, it issomething essential to the continuation of democracy.And that's why I am glad to say that I think, on thewhole, the average level of debate is better now thanit was when I came up here.' NTOW I've been going a long time perhaps I mightjust say a few words to you about some of' th ose who have been here and who are nolonger alive. It would be impertinent of me to discussthe living. But there have been some very interestingpeople here and I have time only to mention four orfive of them to you.There was Mr. Lyons himself, the first PrimeMinister under whom I served. He had a blandmanner. He had a genial manner. He was the perfectfamily man. This has great appeal in Australia, andvery properly, but it is sometimes not realised thatLyons was a positively brilliant Parliamentarian. Idon't think I ever knew a better. Let me explain to youwhat I mean.You fellows have all known, you've seen this. Questiontime, and So-and-so has got a curly one and unlessa Minister knows what it is about, he may easily foozieit a little or he may be driven back into a series ofrequests to put it on the Notice Paper; this is a testingtime, Question Time Without Notice. I remember ontwo or three occasions when I was his Attorney-General, going to Mr. Lyons and saying, " I just hearda vcry nasty question, a very difficult question is goingto be put to you today. It is a rather complicatedmatter and there is no earthly reason why you shouldhave heard of it." And he would say, " Well, no, Ihaven't, but do you know about it?" And I would say," Yes, I've managed to." And he would say, " Well, sitdown and tell me." Then I would explain this matteras best I could. And then I went away in my thenyouth and innocence, saying to myself. " I hope heremembers what I've told him." This was a stupidthought of mine because, sure enough, up came thequestion and, sure enough, up Lyons got and made areply, so charming, so bland, so accommodating, whichdidn't answer a single point ( Laughter) that I hadmentioned, that when he sat down, the questioner whohad begun full of malice, would be seen smiling andsaying, " Thank you very much." ( Laughter.) Now,this is not to be sneezed at. ( Laughter.)When they say a man is a great Parliamentarian, youmust never just think that means he has been inParliament a long time. It means that he knows everynoise and every creak in the machinery and he understandsthe human beings who are in Parliament and isable to proceed without becoming involved in avoidablearguments or talking himself out of his own Bill.We've seen all these things happen, haven't we? Ithink that Joe Lyons was a great Parliamentarian. Ilearned a lot from watching him and listening to him.Not enough, but a lot.Well, then, the next man I want to mention is thelate Mr. Scullin. Now, he was Prime Minister beforePROSPECT, No. 3, 1964 I came here. He was Prime Minister from the end of1929 until the end of 1931, beginning of 1932, and Icame here about this time in 1934, and when he hadbeen defeated and when the United Australia Partycame in, Scullin became the Leader of the Oppositionas a former Prime Minister and he held that post foroh, I've forgotten two or three years perhaps.Then he announced he was retiring from it. I wasstaying in this hotel ( which then, of course, I hastento say, was not as good as it is now) and so was he,and we walked down together to the House, and Isaid, " Sir, why are you retiring, or is that an impertinentquestion?" He said, " No. I don't mind telling you.You see, I had a short but very torrid time as a PrimeMinister." ( He encountered the whole blast of theDepression.) " Well, I know what happens in the PrimeMinister's Office. I know how many matters are thesubject of despatches, of cables with other governmentsand other people and there are some things youwould love to be able to talk about which you can'ttalk about because they are in a certain stage ofnegotiation. Now ( he said) the only man who ought tobe the Leader of the Opposition is a fellow who hasnever had that responsibility so he can put all theembarrassing questions in the world. I can't and I won'tbecause I know what is going on inside the Administrationand so, I am disqualified by former office."IWAS very impressed by this, though I didn'tfollow the example ( Laughter) later on myself.This was completely illustrative of Jim Scullin.He was a very fine man. He was a man ofsensitive honour and integrity. He was indeed. I don'tthink he was a very great thinker, if I may say so, withrespect, you know. He wasn't one of the great statesmenin that sense, but he was a man of intelligence andactivity and an acutely conscientious man, and I thinkthat the Labour Party was indeed fortunate to have aman of his quality, even for this brief period in whichit was in office in 1930 and 1931.Now, of course, no talk about these people wouldbe complete without mentioning Billy Hughes. Well, Ican't say too much about this because I saw Hughesonly in his declining days 1934, well, he was nevergoing to be Prime Minister again. He had a beautifulwaspish wit which could be produced out of a bluesky in Cabinet, but quite frankly, his ideas were nolonger constructive and his estimates of public opinion,an element to which he attached a great deal ofimportance, were not very frequently right. Now, Idon't know. I am going to read Fitzharding's book onBilly with loving care because I would like to discovera few things about him. All I want to say is that inmy time there was nothing about that he had to do orsay which would exhibit more than a gleam of what hemust have been at an earlier stage in his life. But hiswit was devastating, and his use of his deafness,masterly. ( Laughter.)I remember on one occasion, for example, hebrought up a proposition in the Lyons Governmentwhich was so hopeless that even the rest of us, in ourignorance, realised how hopeless it was; he didn't get asupporter. Everybody said " No" for a variety ofreasons. Now in those days, those old days, we didn't
have a Secretary to the Cabinet, we didn't have JackBunting sitting around or somebody making notes. TheJunior Honorary Minister we even had those at thattime, illegally but the Junior Honorary Ministerwas supposed to retain some memory, and the Ministerconcerned would put his submission over and get thePrime Minister to say " approved". This was therecord. I remember one day when Billy had broughtup some proposition which was really too bad forwords, you see ( Laughter), and we all picked it topieces, but he had taken his little machine out of hisear and so at the end of it all, he picked up his submissionand passed it over to Lyons and said, " Well,I take it you can sign this." ( Laughter.)ISAID something about George Pearce. Youknow, there was a great legend about Pearce.Because he had gone in almost at the sametime as Billy, though from another State, because hehad followed Billy's fortunes in crossing the floor ofthe House, the ' sadition was that George Pearce was asort of Vicar of Bray. I would just like to tell you thatin my opinion, speaking about Canberra, I have neversat in Cabinet with an abler man than George Pearce.This needs to be said in justice to his memory. He wasa man of 6xtraordinary experience, of course, and hehad great wisdom and he wasn't just somebody whocould say, " Oh, well, you know, I remember." Hewould analyse a problem just like that, and havinganalysed it, he didn't leave all the loathesome bits andpieces on the table as so many people do, if theyanalyse a problem, but he always knew which one topick out and say, " Well, now, that's the thing. That'sthe determining factor," and give you his reasons for it,and his influence on these matters was tremendous andnot negative but positive at all times. Some day, justicewill be done to George Pearce. As it is, I look back onmy great good fortune to have sat in a Cabinet withhim for three years, as one of the things in my life.Well, then, I have just time to mention quite brieflytwo men who deserve far more than some mention.One is John Curtin and one is Ben Chifley. I can speaka little about them because they have gone.Curtin and Chifley will never be understood untilyou realise that they were utterly different. I havenever known two men more unlike. They were greatfriends, but two men more unlike I would neverexpect to see, because Curtin's instincts were towardsa sort of broad philosophical approach to matters. Heliked nothing better than to sit down and put his feeton the table and have a talk to you about somethingthat didn't bear on the Bill before the House, but boreon the general philosophy of politics or indeed of theworld. He was not the greatest speaker in the world,with great respect, because he leaned too much to longLatin endings which rather blurred the fine edge of hisspeech. But he was a very good speaker, of course,and would have been greater but for that. This waspart of his makeup. He did have the kind of mindwhich liked to range over a wide variety of problemsand if he had had the opportunity in his life of professingone of these subjects in a university, he wouldhave done it with great distinction. He was, of course,a charming man, a delightful man, and a good friend.
Chifley was just about the opposite because his mind didn't range over a wide variety of objects. He dealtwith the economic problems and financial problems. He had had no preliminary training for them. Heachieved a complete mastery of them. He didn't aspire to be a great speaker because his voice was againsthim, but he still spoke to the point, and he was a great man to be able to sit down with and discuss matterswith. I would say that he had immense strength in a narrow field. Curtin's strength was distributed over avariety of fields. I think that if John Curtin hadn't had Ben Chifley as Treasurer, his Government might havefallen earlier or something else might have fallen out differently. Two utterly different men.
Now, it is easy to say that Chifley well, he was an engine-driver and he lacked formal education. True enough, and yet, you know, one of the interesting things about that man was that I discovered over a period of years that he had what I thought, at any rate, an almost immaculate literary judgment. He read widely, his judgment was good, he could determine what was shoddy and what was not. It was an illuminating experience to sit with him on the Literary Fund, when from time to time we advised about publications and fellowships and the like. He had clear views, strong views; I thought tremendously informed and sound views on these matters and it was entirely to his credit that while I was thinking of some very periphrastic way of explaining this, you know, so as not to hurt anybody's feelings, he was quite capable of sitting up and saying. " Well, if you don't mind, Miss So-and-so, I think it's all bloody nonsense" ( Laughter), which shows the immense advantage in life of having for a time been an engine-driver and not a barrister.( Laughter.)
So there they were, two different men. The Labour Party, if I may say so, has great reason to be thankfulto them and I venture to say that each of them in his turn contributed to making this Parliament a place ofsome distinction. Let me say, gentlemen, it is a place of some distinction. It has had, over the whole of itshistory, a number of men of great distinction and we do well to recognise that. I get pleasure out of it as Ilook back over these 30 years. Indeed, as I look back over the 30 years and remember all the people whomattered, who emerged like that, I take leave to doubt whether I will have many happief memories at the endof my life than recalling them and the work that they did.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



NATIONAL PRESS CLUB LUNCHEON,
HOTEL CANBERRA. CANBERRA 14TH SEPTEMBER 1964
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt, Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
Mr. Chairman I've bean misled and I've been misled by that
deplorable character Maley ( Laughter). I understood from him
that today was my 301h anniversary. I am no doubt quite wrong,
but there you are. But I thought it was I didn't look it up,
and when I had people coming to me earlier and saying " Many
happy returns of the day", a somewhat fantastic wish you will
agree, I was still under the illusion that it was today, but
now it's tomorrow. So I suppose I'll have to make a little
speech and then make it retrospective to tomorrow, hoping that
I survive so long. Now I was told that what you would like to hear,
as briefly as possible would be some retrospective views of
affairs, people, since I came here first in 1934. Or as Ray
Maley, with that exquisite capacity for an original phrase
that characterises the Press, said to me " Wandering Down
Memory Lane" ( Laughter). Well, I will first of all wander down it about
Canberra itself because at that time in 1934, Canberra had
6,000 people, and you could positively stroll around the whole,
beat the bounds, in two hours with no difficulty, Now it's a
large place and getting larger. In 1934, it did not have
municipal self-government, a state of affairs that still continues.
( Laughter) Back in 1934, in the Lyons Government, we had a
Budget I haven't had a chance of looking up the precise
figures but I would say something of the order of œ 75 Mo for
the year, the Commonwealth Budget. I, myself, in 1939 by a
temporary but speedily corrected error, became Prime Minister
and introduced the first œ 100M. Budget. Happy daysl ( Laughter)
Even then, I have no doubt that some of the newspapers here
represented complained of the gross extravagance of public
expenditure and said that it ought to be cut down, We spent in a
delirium of excitement in 1935-6-7, around that time, œ 15M. a
year on social services and it's no-. w somewhere between œ 400M,
and œ 5OOM. and is conceded by everybody to be grossly inadequate
( Laughter) but that was the position at that time.
We had, in theory, an External Affairs Department.
We didn't really have a Department, we had a Minister for External
Affairs, because George Pearce about whom I will say something
later on, was Minister for Defence and Minister for External
Affairs. Instead of masses of young men and women who now have
their being in the External Affairs Department and who are the
masters of all the most subtle intricacies of the United Nations'
procedure, so important for somebody, in those days, George
Pearce, the Minister," Hoddy" Hodgson he was the Department,
and there was the stenographer and she was the other part of the
Department. ( Laughter) We had a High Commissioner in London.
We had no other diplomatic representative anywhere in the world.
Those were days of noble simplicity. Today, of course as you
know we have High Commissioners and Ambassadors aroun the
world and we have an External Affairs Department of a fully
sophisticated kind with all sorts of aspects of international
affairs being dealt with. Very hard to believe that when I was 
-2-
first here in this very place, in this hotel, we had none of
these things. I don't think we had any Trade Commissioners at
that time. We may have had. If we had, they existed in
perhaps New Zealand and Canada, but we had no organised Trade
Commissioner service of the kind that we now have. In other
words, these were days of almost Spartan simplicity in administration.
The complexities of international trade the complexities
of international affairs had not yet fully developed,
they had not yet been complicated by all the explosive effects
of the Second World War and those events that happened after the
Second World War and I th-nk the result was, in those days,
with fewer Min. sters than we now have, it was found possible to
have a certain amount of civilised leisure Ministers were
well known to be seen on the late lamented golf course, playing
golf. Indeed their fraternity with the Heads of Departments
on the old Canberra golf course postponed the introduction of
the Lake for a long, long time, ( Laughter) Which reminds rne
that of course we had no lakeo We had none of these things
that we are nw beginning to take for granted.
Now I just said to you that there was a certain
simplicity about life. That's quite true. If there was a
conference in Iondon it was a conference between a limited
number of people all of whom understcod each otheri It had
none of the complexities that have come with the new Ccmmonwealth.
Indeed, nobody in those dayz could have envisaged
what was going to happen as colony after colony came to self-
Governm-nt and to independent statehood,
Well, of course inevitably, moving over thirty
years, the complexity of matters to be dealt with by governments
has expanded almost by geometrical progression, I can give
evidence about this because I ii the only extant creature who
was a Prime Minister in 1939 and 1940 and 1941 and who is still
a Prime Minister in this year of grace '" Grace", I think, is
the right word. ( Laughter) But anyhow, I ghcught that I had
plenty to do at that time and indeed I did, I worked seven
days a week and there are only seven days in the week. I would
say that the complexity and mass of matters coming across my
table today is double or treble what it was a-that time,
twenty-five years ago,, This goes for everything,
The sturdy individualists in the country who resent
any political interference apply for it every week. The
manufacturers who oh, I must be careful because I have to
speak to them this week sometime ( Laughter) what I will
call the sturdy believers in private enterprise who think the
Government ought to keep out of it are with us every week or
with the Tariff Board every week or with something or other
every week. There is hardly a section in the community today
that doesn't in one breath protest its undying hostility to
government activity and in the next breath, pray for it.
It isn't a wonderful or a remarkable or a regrettable
thing that the number of Ministers has perhaps almost doubled
since I first came to Canberra, it has been necessary and I
venture to say that if the complexity of modern affairs and the
demands made on governments both continue their pressure, there
will be more Ministers and more Ministers in time to come, and
a bigger and bigger Parliament in time to cone.
I mention it to you because I know it is not of your
own malice but under the instructions that you will be given, or
Sa e * a./ 3 
-3-
your successors will be given, that you must criticise every
increase of any kind, and say that it is nonsense; that what
the Government needs is fewer Ministers and not more. Well,
all I can tell you is that if we had fewer there would be one
interesting consequence, because if you reduced the number of
Ministers and you thereby increased the responsibilities coming
to each Minister, you would make him more and more dependent on
his Departmental officers. You have only to reduce the number
of Ministers far enough to create ultimately a complete
bureaucracy. It's worth thinking about,
A Minister must have sufficient opportunity and
time, if he is a seriously-minded person to master the problems
of his Department, and if he does, he will be able to place the
proper value on the highly competent professional advice that
he will get from his Department. Eut if he is so pressed
always against the clock, that he just has to say, " Well, look
I haven't time to answer this problem, So-and-so, my Departmental
Head is a very wise and experienced fellow and ho reccmmends
so-and-so, i11' say eyes'", Now this is worth thinking about,
It is worth thinking about.
Cabinets don't cost mucho Really they don't if you
look at the broad saeep of national affairs. I would sooner have
too many than too few, because I believe that the best kind of
government arises when Ministers have enough cnergy and time to
think about their own problems and to form viewJ, and enough
time to put the proper value on the advice they will get, as
they will get iz, from vhat in my opinion is one of the greatest
civil services in the world. But we must have balance, and
that's why, looking back over this time, I see an enormous
increase in numbers and I believe that it's been justified.
Well now, I must push on. I've said to myself for
the last two or three days, " How does the standard of debate in
the House compare new with what it was thirty years ago?" Well,
I think on the whole it's better. There are two reasons which
make me interested to find myself admitting to myself that it
is better. One is that there are two very good reasons why it
should be worse. One reason is that people, constituents ( I have no
complaint about my own; they have remarkable patience and
endurance) but people, constituents, will write an enormous
amount of correspondence to a member, a private Member of
Parliament, and if he is going to answer them and deal with all
the details that they want him to deal with and go to the various
Departments and got the necessary answers, then he's going to
have a pretty small amount of time to sit down and do that good
hard sweat and study that is necessary if anybody is going to
make a considerable speech.
The volume of constituency work, of course, grows
and grows and grows every year because we are always having some
new proposal, there is some new social service, there are some
new changes in the rules of social services, there are changes
in trade treaties, changes in the tariff schedules. There are
masses of things of this kind, and on all of them, the Member
is going to be at the receiving end. Therefore, when I consider
their constituency and correspondence and interviewing work, I
would have expected as a more or less detached observer, to find
that the standard of debate had fallen since those more spacious
and leisurely days when I first came to Canberra. Now I am
happy to say I don't think the standard of debate has fallen,
on the whole. I can hear, I think, a higher percentage of
thoughtful constributions to debate than I could have at that time.
08o 0 
I was a bit nervous about broadcasting. Very
nervous about it because,...... broadcasting, of course has one
great advantage which all you gentlemen of the Press will
understand perfectly. : It does mean that if anybody cares to
listen to you, he does know what you said, ( Laughter). You
understand me perfectly, But I gather that only abou* one or
one and a half per cent, of the people listen. That's, as a
corrective factor not perhaps as great as it might have been,
But in the early days, I felt that it was almost ludicrous when
the broadcasting came in and we had these things standing up
you know, these microphones. Somebody described it as looking
like the petrified forest.
In those days, gentlemen, private members who sat
round here, would be seen to be moving very anxiously to the
nearest microphone when they were about to deliver a speech.
There was then a non-technical theory that you had to be close
to the wretched instrument to be heard by your constituents.
And indeed, some of you will remember that on one celebrated
occasion one member of happy memory was having a little
difficulty with his upper denture in the course of making a
speech. There was a certain clatter and occasionally a hissing
and a certain amount of obscurity which produced, I regret to
say, some laughter in the House. He said, " It's all right. It's
my upper set. By the way, Doc., ( addreasing his dentist who
lived in some place 500 miles away), by the way Doc, don't forget
Itve goc an appointment witn you on Saturday morning," ( Laughter)
Well, there's another comment I'll make. on thar, I
thought that broadcasting with this business of getting into
line with The microphone would produce mo-e and more set speeches
and less and less debate. I think in the long .' un that hasn't
happened. It did in the start. It was quite clear that ic
didn't matter what Jones, Brown or Robinson had said, Smith was
going to say his piece into the nearest microphone and his
constituents, as he hoped, would be listening to him and they
would then understand, I think all that has rather died away.
I think on the whole there is more debating in the i; rue sense,
more cut and thrust more answering of arguments to and fro now
than there was in the two or three yeals after broadcasting was
introduced. And from that point of view, I think there is much
to be thankful fore
I would think, on the whole, the average level of
debate, yes, has risen, There are many thoughtful speeches, I
was tempted to think that might be due, particularly in recent
years to a rising level of educational attainment, until I
remembered myself that formal education let's remember it
has hardly ever been the test of distinction in the political
field, George Pearce, about whom I will speak a little later,
who was a very great Parliamentarian, was a bush carpenter.
His formal education terminated no doubt, when he was thirteen
or fourteen years old. You can t go by that. Some people have
talents and improve them all the way through their lives and some
people have some talents and improve them early and neglect them
later. The real test is whether a man has a continuing mental
attack on the problems that he deals with. And from that point
of view, I think that the debate which has improved, I think has
not improved solely because of formal education though that s
of great assistance, but has improved because it is increasingly
seen how serious a matter the government of the country is.
Now I wish I could say that I thought the standard of
reporting had risen. I don't think it has, quite frankly. I
remember saying to John Curtin, when he was Leader of the
Opposition, " You know, John, you can splak, why do you read?"
and he said, " Well, I ar an old journalistic sweat, but you know,
0 0 01 
if I want to be reported, I must hand it out.', Now,, there is a
bit of truth in this,, isn't there? A bit of truth. A recent
debate in the House tat 1 listened to with great interest
consisted of one speech that was read and a reply that was
brilliant and destructive of the whole argument, but it was
the first one that arrived. I don't think, if you will allow
me to say so, that the standard of reporting has been maintained,
and that is, I think to a substantial extent, the responsibility
of Ministers who real out Second Reading speeches and of other
people who read out speeches in the course of debate and find it
convenient to hand them over.
The whole glory of Parliamentary debate is that it
is debate, that it has cut and thrust and nobody ever produced
any cut or thrust by the more process of producing a piece of
paper. This is the clash of minds. It is the debate which
swerves from one side to the other under the pressure of events,
which accommodates itself to a new argument, to a new thought,,
This is the most fascinating thing in the world.
It is because of this, you know, that W inston, when
the House of Commons wasi to be rebuilt after the W~ ar, said,
" We will not have it any bigger. de will not have a House of
Commons that can hold all the Members of the House of Commons,
Peoples strangers to his way of thiinking, thought, " Well how
crazy.' 3 But they did it.~ because the whole idea was tha if you
have a place so vast and wide that all tho intimacy of discussion
disappears, you might as well have Parliamentary debate corducted
by a series of essays printed and distributed and a division list
at an appropriate time. The importance ol' Parliamentary debate
is, I think, something, wel~ in myrid, it is something essential
to the continuation of democracy. And that's why I am glad to
say that I think, on the whole, the average level of debate is
better now than it was when I came up here.
Now, Itvo been going a long time and therefore
perhaps I might just say a few words to you about some of those
who have boen here and who are no longer alive. It would be
impertinent of me to discuss the living. -But there have been
some very interesting people here and I have time only to mention
four or five of them to you.
There was Mr. Lyons himself, the first Prime Minister
under whom I served. He had a bland manner. He had a genial
manner. He was the perfect family man. This has great appeal
in Australia, and vory properly but it is sometimes not realised
that Lyons was a positively brilliant Parliamentarian. I don't
think I ever knewr a better. Let mne explain to you what I mean.
You fellows have all known, you've seen this. Question
time, and Se-and-so has got a curly one and unless a Minister
knows what it is about, he may easily foozle it a little or he
may be driven back into a series of requests to put it on the
Notice Paper; this is a testing time, Question Time Without
Notice, remember on two or three occasions when I was his
Attorney-Generaol going to Mr. Lyons and saying, " I just heard a
very nasty question, a very difficult question is going to be put
to you today. It is a rather complicated matter and there is no
earthly reason why you should have heard of it." And he would
say " Well, no, I haven't, but do you knew about it?" And I
would say, " Yes, I've managed to." And he would say, " Well, sit
down and tell me." Then I would explain this matter as best I
could. And then I went away in my then youth and innocence, saying
to myself, " I hope he remembers what I've told him." 1 This was a
.6
5 
-6-6
stupid thought of mine because sure enough, up came the question
and, sure enough, up Lyons got and made a repy so charming, so
bland, so accommodating, which didn't answer a single point
( Laughter) that I had mentioned, that when he sat down, the
questioner who had begun full of malice, would be seen smiling
and saying, " Thank you very much." ( Laughter) Now, this is not
to be sneezed at. ( Laughter)
When they say a man is a great Parliamentarian,
you must never just think that means he has been in Parliament
a long time. It means that he knows every noise and every creak
in the machinery and he understands the human beings who are in
Parliament and is able to proceed without becoming involved in
avoidable arguments or talking himself out of his own Bill.
We've seen all these things happen, haven't we? I think that
Joe Lyons was a great Parliamentarian. I learned a lot from
watching him and listening to him. Not enough, but a lot.
Well, then, the next man I want to mention is the
late Mr. Scullin. Now, he was Prime Minister before I came here.
He was Prime Minister from the end of 1929 until the end of 1931,
beginning of 1932 and I came here about this time in 1934, and
when he had been defeated and when the United Australia Party
came in, Scullin became the Leader of the Opposition as a former
Prime Minister and he held that post for oh, I've forgotten
two or three years perhaps. Then he announced he was retiring
from it. I was staying in this Hotel( which then, of course,
I hasten -Lo say, was not as good as it is now) and so was he and
we walked down together to the House, and I said " Sir, why are
you retiring or is that an impertinent question?" He said,
" No. I don't mind telling cu. You see I had a short but
very torrid time as a Prime Minister." ( Ho encountered the whole
blast of the Depression). " Well, I know what happens in the
Prime Minister's Office. I know how many matters are the subject
of despatches, of cables with other governments and other people
and there are some things you would love to be able to talk about
which you can't talk about because they are in a certain stage
of negotiation. Now ( he said) the only man who ought to be the
Leader of the Opposition is a fellow who has never had that
responsibility so he can put all the embarrassing questions in
the world. I can't and I won't because I know what is going on
inside the Administration and so, I am disqualified by former
office." I was very impressed by this though I didnt
follow the example ( Laughter) lateronmyself. But let it be remembered,
this was completely illustrative of Jim Scullin. He was a very
fine man. He was a nan of sensitive honour and integrity. Ho was
indeed. I don't think he was a very great thinker, if I may say
so, with respect, you know. He wasn't one of the great statesmen
in that sense, but he was a man of intelligence and activity
and an acutely conscientious man, and I think that the Labour
Party was indeed fortunate to have a man of his quality, even
for this brief period in which it was in office in 1930 and
1931. Now, of course, no talk about these people would be
complete without mentioning Billy Hughes. ' ell, I can't say
too much about this because I saw Hughes only in his declining
days 1934, well, he was never going to be Prime Minister again.
He had a beautiful waspish wit which could be produced out of a
blue sky in Cabinet, but quite frankly, his ideas were no longer
constructive and his estimates of public opinion, an element to
which he attached a great deal of importance, were not very
frequently right. Now, I don't know. I am going to read / 7 
-7-
Fitzharding's book on Billy with loving care because I would lile
to discover a few things about him. All I want to say is that in
my time there was nothing about that he had to do or say which
would exhibit more than a gleam of what he must have been at an
earlier stage in his life. But his wit was devastating, and his
use of his deafness, masterly. ( Laughter)
ii rnenii2El on onk u cujlcn, fuL-axaaple, he brought
up a proposition in the Lyons Government which was so hopeless
that even the rest of us, in our ignorance, realised how hopeless
it was; he didn't get a supporter. Everybody said, " No" for a
variety of reasons. Now in those days those old days, we didn't
have a Secretary to the Cabinet, we didnit have Jack Bunting
sitting around or somebody making notes. The Junior Honorary
Minister we even had those at that time, illegally but the
Junior Honorary Minister was supposed to retain some memory
and the Minister concerned would put his submission over and get
the Prime Minister to say " approved". This was the record.
I remember one day when Billy had brought up some proposition
which was really too bad for words you see ( Laughter) and we
all picked it to pieces, Out he had taken his little machine out
of his ear and so at the end of it all , he picked up his submission
and passed it over to Lyons and said, " Well, I take it you can
sign this." ( Laughter) I said something just a while ago about George
Pearce. You know, there was a great legend about Pearce. Because
He had gone in almost at the same time as t3illy, though from
another State, because he had followed Billy's fortunes in
crossing the floor of the House, the tradition was that George
Pearce was a sort of Vj. car of Bray. I would just like to tell
you that in my opinion, speaking about Canberra, I have never. sat
in Cabinet with an abler man than George Pearce. This ne~ ds to
be said in justice to his memory. He was a man of extraordinary
experience, of course, and he ' had great wisdom and he wasn't just
somebody who could say, " Oh well, you know, I remember." He
would . analyse a problem just like that, and having analysed it,
he didn't leave all the loathsome bits and pieces on the table as
so many people do, if they analyse a problem, but he Ilways knew
which one to pick out and say, ,, Vell, now, that's the thing.
Thats'sthe determining factor," and give you his reasons for it,
and his influence on these matters was tremendous and not negative
but positive at all times. Some day, justice will be done to
George Pearce. As it is, I look back on my great good fortune
to have sat in a Cabinet with him for three years, as one of the
things in my life. Well, then, I have just time to mention quite
briefly two men who deserve far more than some mention. One is
John Curtin and one is Ben Chifley. I can speak a little about
them because they have gone.
Curtin and Chifley will never be understood until
you realise that they were utterly different. I have never known
two men more unlike. They were great friends but two men more
unlike, I would never expect to see, because Curtin's instincts
were towards a sort of broad philosophical approach to matters.
He liked nothing better than to sit down and put his feet on
the table and have a talk to you about something that didntt bear
on the Bill before the House but bore on the general philosophy
of politics or indeed of the world. He was not the greatest
speaker in the world, with great respect, because he leaned. too
much to long Latin endings which rather blurred the fine edge of
his speech. But he was a very good speaker, of course, and
would have been greater but for that. This was part of his I
so. o./ 8 
0 
8-
makeup. He did have the kind of mind which liked to range over
a wide variety of problems and if he had had the opportunity
in his life of professing one of these subjects in a university,
he would have done it with great distinction. He was, of course,
a charming man, a delightful man, and a good friend.
Chifley was just about the opposite because his
mind didn't range over a wide variety of objects. He dealt with
the economic problems and financial problems. He had had no
preliminary training for them. He achieved a complete mastery
of them. He didn't aspire to be a great speaker because his
voice was against him but he still spoke to the point, and he
was a great man to be able to sit down with and discuss matters
with. I would say that he had immense strength in a narrow
field. Curtin's strength was distributed over a variety of
fields. I think that if John Curtin hadn't had Ben Chifley as
Treasurer, his Government might have fallen earlier or something
else might have fallen out differently. Two utterly different
men. Now, it is easy to say that Chifloy.... well, he
was an enginedriver and he lacked formal education. True
enough, and yet, you know, one of the interesting things about
that man was that I discovered over a period of years that he
had what I thought, at any rate, an almost immaculate literary
judgment. He read widely, his judgment was good, he could
determine what was shoddy and rwht was not. It was an illuminating
experience to sit with him on the Literary Fund when from
time to time we advised about publications and fellowships and
the like. He had clear views, strong views; I thought
tremondously informed and sound views on these matters and it
was entirely to his credit that while I was thinking of some
very periphrastic way of explaining this, you know, so as not
to hurt anybody's feelings, he was quite capable of sitting
up and saying, " Well, if you don't mind, Miss So. and-so, I
think it's all bloody nonsense," ( Laughter) which shows the
immense advantage in life of having for a time been an enginedriver
and not a barrister. ( Laughter)
So there they were, two different men. The Labour
Party, if I may say so, has great reason to be thankful to them
and I venture to say that onch of them in his turn contributed
to making tnis Parliament a place of some distinction. Let me
saLy gentlmen it is a place of some distinction. It has had,
over the whole of its history, a number of men of great
distinction and we do well to recognise that. I get pleasure
out of it as I look back over these thirty years. Indeed, as
I look back over the thirty years and remember all the people
who mattered who emerged like that, I take leave to doubt
whether I will have many happier memories at the end of my
life than recalling them and the work that they did. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
ON TUESDAY, 15th SEPTEMBER, 1964
LOSS OF H. M. A. S. " VOYAGER" 
LOSS OF H. M. A. S. " VOYAGER"
On August 26, I presented to the House the report of
the Royal Commissioner on the circumstances attending the loss
of HMAS " Voyager". On that occasion I read out the Terms of
Reference which I therefore need not repeat. I also indicated
that the dovernment had taken steps to obtain advice from the
Naval Board through the Minister for the Navy upon the Commissioner's
findings and the implications of those findings. The Naval
Board, presided over by the Minister for the Navy, consists, in
addition of the First Naval Member, Vice-Admiral Harrington,
the Second Naval Member, Rear-Admiral Smith, the Third Naval
Member, Rear-Admiral George, the Fourth Naval Member, Rear-
Admiral Peek, and the Secretary of the Department. I indicated
that the Board had already begun this task, and had in fact
begun when evidence was still being taken. I then said " when the
results are to hand the Government will give prompt consideration
to them and will then put itself in a position to make a further
statement to the House".
In reply to an observation by the Leader of the
Opposition, I made it clear that I did not undertake to present
to Parliament the observations of the Naval Board since that
body, through its Minister, advises the Government. This is
true of all the Service Boards. For the effective discharge of
their responsibilities they must be able to know that their
relationship to the Government is one of great confidence and
indeed secrecy-When the Government after receiving advice
announces a decision or makes a statement of fact or of policy,
it takes the responsibility for what it does.
In the present case, we have been assisted by an
elaborate examination of the matter by the Naval Board. After
careful consideration, we are not prepared to establish what
would be a harmful precedent, by publishing the report of the
Board. Honourable Members will I think agree, particularly
those with Ministerial experience, that if the Service Boards
came to believe that their reports, to their Minister and
through him to the Cabinet, would be made public there could in
all human probability be some change in the nature of the reports.
Human experience shows that where a document is designed for
publication it may very well be written in a somewhat different
way and perhaps be a little less frank than it would be as a
confidential report. 
However, what I am about to put to the House has
been greatly assisted, though of course not controlled, by
the views and comments of the Naval Board, a body which I will
hardly need to say is as much concerned by these tragic events
as all the rest of us, and has displayed a marked willingness
already to make changes in the light of the facts elicited by
the Royal Commission. It will be recalled that although the Royal Commissioner
places the primary responsibility for the collision upon " Voyager",
without feeling able to apportion individual blame among its
bridge officers, he did make critical remarks about three of
those on the bridge of " Melbourne".
In the case of Captain Robertson, the Commissioner
said that in his view when " Voyager" turned to port her action
should have created some doubt in Captain Robertson's mind as to
what her intentions were and the moment the movement to port
passed beyond what would have brought her back on course,
Captain Robertson should have made some enquiry or passed some
signal, whether by whistle or otherwise, to " Voyager". He
went on to add " Whether action of this kind would have avoided
the collision I am unable to say, but I feel that the chances
of a collision occurring might have been lessened if some such
action as I have indicated had been taken by Captain Robertson".
In the case of Acting Commander Kelly and Sub-Lieutenant
Bate, both of whom were on the bridge of " Melbourne", the
Commissioner said " the conclusion I reach is that the watch which
was maintained on the bridge of " Melbourne" by the Officer of
the Watch and the Navigating Officer was in the circumstances
inadequate". These observations by the Commissioner were made
in the light of the evidence given by the three officers themselves
and of Captain Robertson's report after the collision.
The question at once arises as to whether charges of
negligence or neglect of duty could or should be laid before
Courts Martial. This question was made the subject of legal
advice, both from Counsel and the Crown Law Department, and
from the Attorney-General. That advice is against Court Martial.
The principal reason for this view is that, as a matter of law,
statements made by any witness in answer to any question before
a Royal Commission are not admissible in evidence against him
in any civil or criminal proceedings, and that this rule,
established by the Royal Commissions Act, should also apply
to proceedings before a Court Martial. 
In the result, it became necessary for our legal officers to
consider what evidence, if any, other than the evidence given
to the Royal Commission, could be adduced on a Court Martial.
Their short answer is that the evidence given by these three
officers before the Royal Commission being excluded and
Captain Robertson's report excluded, there would be no evidence
at all available to what might be described as the prosecution.
As this may seem strange to those who are not lawyers, I will
explain it. At a trial by Court Martial, in which the officer
concerned would be in the position of an accused person, the
prosecutor could not tender as part of his case the
transcript of evidence before the Commissioner;
could not call the accused to give evidence for the
prosecution, hoping to convict him out of his
own mouth. For a man is deemed innocent until
he is proved guilty: it is not for him to prove
his innocence. This is one of the basic
principles of the normal criminal law.
Honourable Members will therefore agree that it
would be grossly unfair and indeed completely improper to
institute a Court Martial if competent advice was that not only
would there be no evidence which could establish an offence
beyond reasonable doubt, which was not the standard of proof
which the Commissioner had to apply, but that there was in fact
no material admissible evidence at all. Strictly speaking,
it would, of course, be possible to amend the legal provisions
retrospectively, so as to make the evidence of the officers
concerned, and any report made by any of them, admissible against
them. I am sure that nobody would support such an astonishing
course. I do not propose to elaborate this. None of us
would wish to conduct some form of prosecution against those on
the bridge of " Melbourne" when such a prosecution would fail at
the outset and would therefore achieve no result except the
somewhat inglorious one of creating an unproved slur upon their
names. The Government accepts the advice that has been given
and confidently believes that there will be wide support for
the conclusions I have just stated.
Indeed I think that Honourable Members would agree
that the important questions which arise are not to be answered 
by arguments about whether individuals made errors of judgment
or observation. What we must do by all the means in our power
is to ascertain whether in a general way there was or is
something wrong with naval efficiency or in the procedures
followed in the Navy. This, I think, is a legitimate enquiry;
and, as I will indicate later, we propose to take steps to
pursue it. But justice to a very fine Navy requires that a proper
perspective should be established at the outset. In all armed
services, particularly those which must train and operate under
circumstances of special difficulty, there will from time to time
be human errors. This is, of course, true in every aspect of
life. It is specially true of every Air Force, of every Civil
Aviation network, of every Navy. I do not seek to minimise
the tragic nature of the " Voyager" collision, with its appalling
consequence in lives lost. That is why we instituted the most
searching public enquiry in the whole of our Defence history.
But I think I should point out to the House that experience in
other and older Navies supports the view that naval life has its
own dangers and that, in spite of every precaution in selection
and training, accidents will happen. For example, in the
calendar year 1960, the Royal Navy had 17 collisions at sea and
groundings. The United States, whose records are not public,
is known to have had collisions, including one of a similar nature
to the Melbourne-Voyager collision, in which there was a very
much greater loss of life. Every year, around the Australian
coast, there are, in the mercantile marine, ship mishaps.
None of these excuse the error or errors which led to
the " Voyager" loss, nor should we excuse any deficiencies in
training, efficiency, or discipline that can be shown to exist.
But the facts do emphasise that life at sea has its hazards,
and that this is plainly true in the case of the Navy, which
must prepare itself to fight by day or by night in all sorts of
circumstances and weather and whose preparations can be effective
only by practising by day or by night every sort of manoeuvre
which may be needed in war. I therefore invite the House to
look at the Navy as such, and not be led into what might be
described as a campaign against individuals, some of whom indeed
are no longer able to speak for themselves or to explain what
circumstances of emergency or errors of observation or
communication led them into the courses they pursued.
But in the interests of justice'some individual
observations must be made. Some criticism has been directed
against what has been called Captain Robertson's inexperience 
in the handling of an aircraft carrier or in tactical command of
an operation involving an aircraft carrier and another vessel,
We have discussed this matter with the Naval Board in
order to ascertain the facts. As Honourable Members will recall,
comments concentrated on three points; that Captain Robertson,
though a very experienced Naval officer, had joined " Melbourne",
his first Carrier Command, only a month before the collision;
that he had just finished three years ashore; and that he had
never had tactical command of an aircraft carrier and another
ship. In fairness to Captain Robertson, it should be stated
that he had in fact been the executive officer and second-incommand
of an aircraft carrier for 16 months, during which he
was, as part of his duty, understudying the captain.
Three years ashore between commands has been common
practice in the R. AoN. and is dictated by the need to give a
number of officers command experience at sea while securing
the great benefit of using recent sea experience in shore
appointments. This has applied in each case of a carrier Captain.
It is interesting to learn that in the United States
Navy, the careers of nine of their better-known Admirals reveal
that the average time they spent in shore duty before assuming
command of a carrier was 3 years and 4 months.
The practice in the Royal Navy is that of carrier
Captains ( as here) have only one carrier command, and that the
average time spent by each ashore before assuming command of his
carrier is 3 years.
Of the general capacity, not only of Captain Robertson
but of Captain Stevens, there cannot be any real doubt. Each
had a splendid record and very considerable naval experience.
The judge found specifically that the ships and their
equipment were in a proper state of preparedness for the exercise.
There were, however, two criticisms made or suggested by
the Commissioner which have attracted some notice.
The first was that it might be advantageous to practice,
by day, exercises which are likely to occur at night during
the initial " touch and go" practice. We have examined the
Naval Board on this point. Their answer as experts is that the 
work-up programme was a full one involving many exercises more
complicated than the manoeuvres required on the night of
February 10. The programme stretched over four or five weeks.
Any difficult exercises, for example, replenishment at sea, where
ships sail close together, and " touch and go" landings by
aircraft, were in fact done, first by day. If all the more
routine ship manoeuvres involved in the programme first had to be
practised by day, the work-up period would be so long as to
reduce very considerably the period when ships were available for
operations. This seems to us to be reasonable.
The other suggestion was that the exercise programme on
the 10th February commenced at 7 a. m. and was still continuing
at 8.56 p. m. when the collision took place and that this was a
lengthy period of time. But the whole point of these exercises
is to equip the Navy for operations of war. The Naval Board
believes, and we see no reason to disagree, that if it were accepted
that 12 or 14 hours exercising so reduced the concentration of
of command teams as to render their judgment unsound, the Navy
could not operate effectively in peace or in war.
I referred just now to the findings of the Commissioner
to the effect that the ships and their equipment were in a proper
state of preparedness for the exercise. The Naval Board,
however, considering all the available evidence and findings, has
concluded that the state of preparedness of " Voyager" could not
have been adequate, having regard to some of the detailed matters
dealt with in the Royal Commissioner's Report.
In the view of the Board, the fact that " Voyager" had
just completed a long refit during which she had a large change
aroundof personnel, and that it is not possible now to discover
where the weakness in her organisation lay, does not adequately
explain the state of affairs existing at the time of the collision.
The Naval Board, therefore, is instructing administrative authorities
to carry out an inspection of ships on completion of refit and
before commencing their work-up to ensure that ships' companies
and equipment are at an appropriate level of preparedness. In
addition, reorganisation of the staff of the Flag-Officer
Commanding the Australian Fleet is being made which will enable
increased visits by staff officers to be made to each ship
while working-up, thus enabling an additional check to be made
and remedial action to be taken if necessary.
I will therefore refer to various specific matters
mentioned by the Royal Commissioner. 
I think I should recall to Honourable Members that in
the early stages of the Royal Commission, we became accustomed
to somewhat sensational headlines. It is therefore important
to recall that the ultimate findings were on a much more
moderate scale. However, Honourable Members are familiar with
the Report. They will quite probably be anxious to know
what action, if any, has been or is being taken by the Naval
Authorities. As soon as it was discovered that wheel spanners
had been missing from " Voyager's" escape hatches on the night
of the collision, the Naval Board asked its technical branch
to devise, as a matter of urgency, some better means of
ensuring that hatches could always be readily opened. As a
result, a new mechanism has been produced in the Naval
Dockyard and the escape hatches in naval vessels have now been
modified by fitting this improved securing mechanism, which does
not require the use of a wheel spanner. At the same time,
of course, it must be remembered that, like any other opening
device in any vehicle, even this one may fail if badly buckled
in a collision. Although the Royal Commissioner found that at the time
of the collision not all of " Melbourne's" boats were available,
he said that there was no ground for criticising those in charge
of " Melbourne" in that regard. He praised the work of the boats
that engaged in the rescue operation. The findings of the Judge
have, however, not silenced criticism. It is therefore fair
that I should state a considered view.
* Boats in naval ships, unlike life boats of merchant
ships, are not part of survival equipment. Inflatable rubber
rafts are carried in naval ships for this purpose. Naval boats
are carried in ships for three purposes:
to be used as sea boats so that in some emergency,
such as " man overboard" or a ditched aircraft, a
suitable boat can be put into the water quickly.
These boats are fitted with a device which enables
them to be launched and recovered in heavy weather
and with the ship moving. There is always one
crew standing by one of the sea boats so that it
is ready for immediate use in case of emergency,
" Melbourne" carried three motor cutters of this
type. for the transport of men and stores in harbour.
As these boats are required for use in harbour,
their engine and hull maintenance must be done
at sea, except for the one motor cutter which is
required as a sea boat. 
8.
for training and recreational purposes.
On the night of the collision, the emergency boat in
" Melbourne" was damaged in the collision butdespite this, was
in the water in a very short time. The boat's rescue work was
done, as the Commissioner found, with great efficiency.
As soon as it became clear from evidence given before
the Royal Commission that men were not familiar with the procedure
for being winched out of the water into helicopters, arrangements
were made by the Naval Board for all personnel already serving
and for those who join in the future to be instructed in this
procedure. There were many publicised complaints about the travel
arrangements made for survivors. The Royal Commissioner dealt
with this quite precisely. He said:
" In the main, survivors who had long distances to
travel to their homes were permitted to travel by air, and others
travelled by train. There were but few complaints from survevors
in this regard, and I do not think any criticism can justly be
directed against those responsible for the arrangements,"
The Naval Board itself, however, looking at the matter
in retrospect, feels that all interstate survivors should have
been sent to their homes by air from the outset, in spite of the
normal rules. Although the Royal Commissioner found that it seemed
unlikely that very many men were lost once they had escaped from
the ship, he did have comments and suggestions to make about
the nature of swimming tests.
The Naval Board promptly initiated a review of the
swimming tests and has sought advice from the Life Saving
Association as a result of which the tests are being varied
to require a man to be able to keep himself afloat for 10 minutes
instead of 3 minutes. Almost every person in the RtA. N. can
swim. The Board thinks it would be undesirable if the small
minority who cannot swim, despite instruction, were prevented
from serving in the R. A. N. We think that this is right.
The existing storage arrangements for life jackets were
criticised by the Royal Commissioner.
A review of the existing practices ( which have been
identical with those in the Royal Navy) was initiated following
the collision. The Royal Australian Navy Life Saving Equipment 
Committee has recommended to the Board that life jackets should be
stowed conveniently to the escape routes from ships and not,
as formerly, in a single store room. The Flag-Officer
Commanding the Australian Fleet is currently and urgently
preparing proposals on the re-siting of such stowages. The
task will take a little time, as space is, for obvious reasons,
at a premium in all naval ships and it will be necessary to rearrange
other stowage so that life jackets can be stowed in the
most important places.
During the hearing, it was said by several witnesses
that they did not know how to operate the inflatable life
rafts. This could well have been the case with a number of
those who joined the Navy before these rafts were introduced.
Since their introduction, instructions have been given to all
recruits as they join the Navy as to how to operate the rafts,
and posters, showing the method of doing so, are displayed in
all R. A. N. ships. The Naval Board, however, has taken steps
to improve the position. Live demonstrations are now given on
the workings of the inflatable life rafts and this, together
with other routines, will be practised as early as possible
in the working-up of a ship and at regular intervals thereafter.
I now return to the important general questions which
have exercised the minds of all of us.
The loss of " Voyager" and the report made upon that
loss may have induced some to reach sweeping adverse conclusions
about our Navy. This would in our opinion be grossly unjust and
unwarranted, since, as I have pointed out, unhappy accidents
occur in all navies and should not be hastily used as a reason for
attacking our Navy as a whole. On the other hand, of course, it
would be most unsatisfying to the public mind and to our own
judgment for us to adopt the attitude that everything in the
Royal Australian Navy is perfect and that what happened on the
night of February 10 was just one of those accidents that must
be accepted as the normal price of Admiralty.
I have already said something about the changes made
by the Naval Board in the light of the evidence before, and the
Report of, the Royal Commission.
Before I conclude, I will say, on behalf of the
Government, something about new steps that we think can be taken
with advantage. But we do think that justice requires that I
should set out certain facts which show that whatever improvement
may on examination be found desirable in the overall organisation
of the Navy and its officers, we have every right to be proud 
of the Navy for the way in which it has handled the problems
which have come to it in recent years.
It should be remembered that since 1959 a new destroyer
and four new frigates have completed their building in Australian
shipyards and have been manned and commissioned, together with
a number of smaller support ships, We have acquired a flotilla
of six mine-sweepers which have been commissioned and steamed to
Australia, their base support has been provided and magnetic
mine sweeping has been introduced into the R. A. No. Antisubmarine
Wessex helicopters have been introduced and H. M. A. S.
" Melbourne" converted to operate them. HoM. A. S. " Sydney" has
been brought out of reserve and has been converted to a fast
transport. In this role, she has been effectively employed
quite recently. A modernised replenishment tanker has been
brought into service to complete the fleet's mobility. A new
specialised survey ship has been built in Australia and brought
into service, while three frigates have been converted to oceanographic
and survey work, New weapons and techniques have been
introduced, such as the SEACAT anti-aircraft missile and variable
depth SONAR. The first Australian designed naval weapon, the
anti-submarine system IKARA is being developed in conjunction
with the Department of Supply.
In the introduction of all these new units and
techniques, a very considerable training and logistic and
administrative effort has been involved. Work is under way on
ten new ships for the Fleet, three guided missile destroyers in
four Oberon submarines in Great Britain, an Escort Maintenance
Vessel and two new frigates in Australia.
Preparations are well in hand to cope with the greatly
expanded training and maintenance requirements involved in
absorbing these new and sometimes almost incredibly complex
units in the Royal Australian Navy,
All these things have put a great strain upon the
resources of the Navy, because they have not only required steps
to raise the general educational level but have also required
provision for specialised training in the wide range of activities
required. There is a junior recruit entry scheme which has
involved the setting up of training establishments in Western
Australia and Victoria. The Navy has set up an apprentices
training centre ( which is recognised as one of the largest and
most efficient in the country) to meet the demands for tradesmen
volunteers. 
11.
Large numbers of selected officers and men and
technicians are receiving training in Great Britain and the
United States. It is, I think, commonly agreed that R. A. N.
personnel who are sent abroad each year to Britain and the
United States are regarded as being well up to the standard of
their counterparts in the British and U. S. Navies. For some
years, at the request of the Government of Malaysia, the R. A. N.
has provided the Commanding Officer of the Royal Malaysian Navy
and seven other officers for that service.
The manpower strength of the Navy has increased from
10,600 in 1960 to 12,870 at present. It is evidence of morale
that the re-engagement rate has risen from about 8 per cent at
the end of the 1950s to over 50 per cent to-day.
Two destroyers or frigates have served continuously
since 1955, on a rotation basis, with the strategic reserve based
on Singapore, and the aircraft carrier, with escort, has served
a tour of duty each year with the reserve. The general standard
of efficiency of these units and their crews has been the subject
of favourable comment by a succession of British naval commanders
to whose command they have been operationally assigned.
A R. A. N. squadron has participated for several years
with distinction in annual multi-national SEATO and Commonwealth
Maritime exercises. On two occasions, the R. A. N. has been
responsible for the planning and command of SEATO exercises, and
with great credit.
I need not elaborate these matters. The mere statement
of them should be sufficient to show that we have a good Navy and
that we ought not to under-estimate its quality and performance.
* In considering whether new practices or procedures
might be adopted in the Royal Australian Navy, it is as well to
remember that our Navy began as the child of the Royal Navy, a
very great Navy with centuries of tradition and achievement
behind it. We have therefore had a natural tendency in
Australia to inherit the practices of the Royal Navy and, to
a considerable extent, vessel design. This, of course, has
advantages; as a relatively young naval power, we cannot
pretend that we have nothing to emulate or to learn. But it
might turn out that it has some disadvantages, since it may
lead us to believe that the problems of the Royal Navy are in
substance identical with those of our own. 
We have learned something about this in the case of
the Army where, having regard to our territorial situation,
we have found it necessary to give particular attention to
training soldiers for jungle fighting in tropical areas and
have considered the weapons that we may require in the light of
similar circumstances. In the Air Force, we have had our own problems. The
kind of Air Force that might be required by Great Britain is
not necessarily the same kind of air force that we feel that
we need. To take a quite recent example, any fast bomber we
wanted would need to have a very long range and would need to
have a speed and manoeuvrability that would enable it to foil
attack at a long distance from its base.
The point I am making is that each country must
consider each of its own armed services in the light of its
own particular circumstances.
Much of what I said earlier was somewhat detailed;
and even then there are many minor aspects of the matter to
which it has not seemed necessary to refer.
But, in examining this tragic event, the Government had
and has several duties,
The first was to put in hand with all speed a searching
enquiry into the causes of the collision, This has been done,
withcut fear, favour or affection, by the Royal Commissioner.
We now know as much as we are ever likely to know about what
happened that night, and about the acts or omissions of those
conducting the manoeuvres)
The second is to restrain ourselves from harsh judgments
upon individuals, and in particular upon those on the bridge of
" Voyager", who are lost and gone and cannot speak for themselves
or personally influence our judgment,
Nor, for the reasons I have stated, should we, having
decided that no charge can legally be laid or supported against
Captain Robertson, Commander Kelly, or Sub. Lt. Bate, seek to
condemn them for deficiencies of observation or action which
the Commissioner has found were not the primary ( which I understand
to mean the effective) cause of the collision.
The third, and at this stage the paramount duty, is to
establish and enhance the future efficiency and morale of the
Royal Australian Navy; a military arm vital for our national 
13.
security. This is a duty to be performed with understanding and
judgment; its performance not to be impaired by extravagant
attacks, or to be abdicated by an uncritical defence of the
status quo. The statement of this third duty, indeed, brings me
to the nub of the matter. I think it probably right to say
that the people of Australia are not looking for individual
scape-goats. They know that the R. A. N. has a splendid record
in two great wars, and that its international reputation is
high. They have read with a mixture of pride and anguish the
findings of the Royal Commissioner about the efficiency with
which operations after the collision were conducted, the
absence of panic among the men, and the outstanding gallantry of
those to whom the Commissioner has directed attention. They
will, no doubt, have properly concluded that a service which
can train men to this high point of discipline and efficiency
has much in it to be recognised and praised. Clearly, the
general morale is high.
But the Government is well aware of the existence of
a feeling of uneasiness because of some recent incidents, of
which the latest is the " Voyager" disaster. It is not our
practice in Australia to conceal such incidents. Indeed, in
two which involved loss of life, the investigations have been
conducted in public. This is not the normal practice in other
navies. We believe that the uneasiness may arise partly from a
natural failure fully to understand the hazardous nature of
naval training and service even in time of peace, when preparations
must be made for active service in circumstances of great menace
and difficulty. But we also believe that there may be doubts,
not capable of precise definition, as to the effectiveness of the
naval organisation, including communication procedures, and as
to . the suitability of the methods of selection, training and
promotion so far practised.
To this criticism we have most anxiously directed
our attention. For whatever the overall efficiency of the
past, and I have made recognition of it, we must meet the
challenge of the future. We will not be afraid to make
changes where they prove desirable. In particular, we must
not assume that practices followed by other and much greater
navies are necessarily appropriate to our own, with limited
numbers, a much smaller fleet, and peculiar geographical and
strategic circumstances. 
14.
Steps will be taken constantly to review procedures in
the light of the special character and circumstances of the
R. A. N. It would be wrong to say that the cause of the " Voyager"
collision was maladministration on the part of the Naval Board, for
proper look-out and navigational moves on individual ships are
matters of individual efficiency and judgment on the part of
those at sea. But it is right to say that much good may result
from re-examination of methods of selection, training, and
promotion, and of constantly improving general efficiency.
How should such review and re-examination be made?
It has been suggested that we should seek the services of a
British or American Naval Officer of suitable rank and experience.
We reject this suggestion. What we are looking for is Australian
answers to Australian questions relating to an Australian service,
operating in its own special circumstances. There are plenty
of Australian Senior Naval Officers of ability, experience,
and integrity, as capable of giving advice as any.
It would, of course, be quite unsatisfactory if
changes in organisation or procedures were conditioned upon the
occurrence of some mishap which directed attention to some defect
in the Service. Our study must be wider and more continuous.
Yet we have noted that in the Air Force there is a Standing
Committee to investigate air accidents; that it goes to the
spot rapidly; that it concerns itself particularly with such
problems as faulty construction or maintenance, defective
communications, and inadequate control. Its reports are a
valuable source of recommendation for improvements, and have
contributed usefully. to the increasing efficiency of the Air
Force. Enquiries are made by experts into naval incidents;
but they are essentially ad hoc, and are made by varying groups
of people. We have decided that there should be a Standing
Naval Committee of Investigation, with as much continuing
membership as the circumstances of the Navy will permit.
But for a general review the Government must and will
accept its proper responsibility. It will, through a Ministerial
Committee presided over by the Minister for the Navy, the Cief of
the I. aval Staff b7ing associated with him, and with the professional
naval advice available to it, ' closely and regularly consider
ways and means of reviewing Naval Organisation procedures and
methods so as to make improvements where these are found to be
desirable. 
We believe that under these circumstances the Navy
can go on with its vital service to the nation in co-operation
with the Government and with the moral backing of the Australian
people. I repeat that we have a fine Navy, with a gallant and
devoted company of officers and men. It is the task of all
of us in responsible authority to remove any discoverable
impediments to its full effectiveness. 


CHAMBER OF M\ UFACTURES OF JEI SOUTH JALES,ANNUAL DINjIER, SYDNEY 16th SEPTEiABER, 1964Speech by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Ho. Sir Robert MenziesSirs, Your Excell. encyI am speaking tonight at a great disadvantage.Jell, as you know, I usually do. I looked at the programmeof the sports, as you might say, and I realised that I wasthe first. Now that is a position I don't caro for,except, of course, in my capacity as a cold-blooded dictator.I am going to be replied to by young Ferrier here who hasall the advantage of being able to disagree with me withexquisite courtesy and then Mr. Pettingell who is a strangemixture of a man he's in the gas busiress as I am, he'sin the manufacturing business for some reason that I don'tunderstand and he's a banker for some reason that, technically,I don't understand. And I thought for a moment he was goingto be replied to by John Renshaw and indeed here is PatHills here tonight. You think of what mischief he'll makeof me! Henry Bolte won't be in the same street' And thenmy old friend Mr. Herford is going to speak and then HarryJensen, When I've made a mess of it and even somebody elsehas made a mess of it, he turns up and leaves us all fordead. Great pity. I regret that he didn't become the Memberfor East Sydney, And do you know why I regret it? BecauseI really thought that that would have given us our cnlychance of fixing him up. You know what I mean. But insteadof that no no, there he is. Anyhov" good luck to him, aslong as he lays off this strenge idea that Tullamarine isto be the chief international airport.Do you know, gentlemen, that about a w ekeight days nine days ago, I found that in a moment ofsickness when I was in my bed, I had agreed to make a speechhere to another Association The Australian IndustriesDevelopment Association. So I came down, and I made whacyou might loosely call a powerful speech and I looked aroundthe pecple to whom I was talking and I realised with ahorrible clutch at the heart that they were just the samegang qs I would be spealzing to tonight. And, consequently,I am at a very great disadvantage. I admit that withexquisite courtesy........ And so with your kind permission,when I go back to Canberra early in the morning, I willtell Dan Minogue that as a special compliment to him theclock rang. ( Laughter) Now, you members of the N. S. U. Chamber ofManufactures I hope that's right have been beguiling orordering me here for many years and I've had a variety ofexperiences. I can remember believe it or not occasionson which when I stood up to speak the people applauded.This is a very happy memory on my part and I remember on oneoccasion ( I think it must have been in 1952 when we had apainfully unpopular Budget) that I arrived here and walkedin and somebody proposed my health in the most offensivepossible terms, everybody applauded him like mad. I won'tmention him you all know him and then I got up to replyand was received with great courtesy by two members whosaid ( slow applause) well, even two are better than none
2from the point of view of the politician and I remember on thatoccasion you will remember this Sir, I said that there wasa musical comedy coming on in Melbourne which ultimately wasbound to reach the provinces in which the theme song, slightlyaltered for my purpose was " One Enchanted Evening" " OneEnchanted Evening, you will see a supporter across a crowdedand that was true, and mind you, you've been muchbetter ever since. I must say that for you. You've had yourcivilised moments in dealing with me. Therefore tonightperhaps I might have a civilised moment or two to speak tc you.I've been thinking about manufacturing and doinga little manufacturing of my own, no doubt, and hearing aboutmanafacturing and being indoctrinated for a lorg time, and Isaid the other night, somewhere else, my earliest politicalrecollection is being told by my father who strangely enoughhad great dynamic violence and lack of toleration in his viewnot a bit like me, And I remember my earliest lesson at myfather's knee they talk about your mothel's knee but it ismy father's knee was that the. one thing to be iun. erstood inAustralia was that we must hive manufacturing and we must have aprotective tariff. Now some of you gentlemen may think that in thecourse of time I've wandered a little off the course, but this iswhen I was fourteen years old, and at fourteen years old, in myexperience, you don't quarrel with your father. ' Jell, that'snot true in the case of my own children but it was in our cae,And so from the very beginning of my political life, I've understoodsomething about protection and I've understood somethingabout the reasons for it, but i have never succumbea to theeasy arguments which occdsionally were produced against thecreation of manufacturing in Australia. And therefore I say toyou, as I've said many times before, this matter has gone beyondargument. I believe that there are sume settled policies inAustralia, national policies, policies which are shared by allparties and one of them is that we must do -eaerything we can todevelop secondary industry in Australia and in recent years we'veadded to this. And to develop the capacity of secondaryindustry to export to the rest of the world.Nowr, Sir, this is easy enough to say but I thinkwe've become sophisticated enough, haven't we, to have a lookat this and to consider its implications. WJhen I was this smallboy of sixteen, short and thin, people imagined that the greatargument in life was whether you were a protectionist or a freetrader and even later on in my life, there was a great argumentas to whether you believed in secondary industry or primaryindustry as these were two branches of industry fighting witheach other. Now I do hope that we've grown out of that.Ue are now Australians and we are Australians in a country inwhich farming, grazing, manufacturing, tertiary industriesretailing industries are all engaged in some or other aspect oftotal national effort. This is the one thing I think that wemust now come to learn because I will assume that you are allmanufacturers. Let me therefore at once say to you that beingmanufacturers you are also the greatest importers in thecountry that's right isn't it? Because if you were to analysethe volume of imports into Australia you would find thac thebulk of the imports came in as raw materials, and as plant andas equipment for manufacturing industry. And therefore I addressyou as manufacturers, and I address you as major importers.This is something worth remembering. When I address you asmanufacturers and importers, I address you as major employers / 3
-3-in Australia. You can't get this thing off on to particularsections or groups. You are great employers and because youare great employers, you represent a body of activity withoutwhich we couldn't have an immigration programme at all.So I emphasise that immigration. It is to thelasting credit of my opponent in the Federal Parliament, Mr.Calwell, that he was the Minister who had enough courage tostart a major imigration movement in this country after thewar, And I have never hesitated to pay tribute to it. Butwe have gone on with it. And this year7 were importingthat's the right word we are bringing into Australia a greaternumber of immigrants than we have for a long long time. Theycome here expecting to work.They could not come here without any genuineexpectation of work unless we had been wise enough and youhad been wise enough to develop enormous manufacturing,secondary activity in Australia. Because, of all the migrantswho come here, very few go on to the land. The land hassucceeded in producing more and more with fewer and fewerpeople, for obvious reasons. And therefore I've never beenable to discuss an immigration programmne without saying tomyself, " Well, this can't succeed unless we have a greatmanufacturing programme. Secondary industry and immigrationare intimately bound together," And therefore I might describeyou not only as great producers and great importers, but asgreat immigrators, and this is worth thinking abcut,You see my point I want you to give up, if Imay say so, thinking about yourselves as specialists in aspecial field, In reality. manufacturing today has become thegeneral practitionere You must not regard yourselves as merelyconcerned with manufacturing, but you are concerned withimporting, you are concarned with immigration, and indeednowadays you re concerned with exporting. I know there arepeople who think in a rath. er shallow way that a little flushof inflation does no harm, it will improve the equities and itwill reduce the burden of the debentures you know what I meana little bit of inflation.In the short run yes, I can understand that somepeople, in the short run, will think that a little bit ofinflation does no harm, like a little bit of something I wouldmention in other circumstances. This is not true. In theshort run it may be, but in the long run your interests and myinterests and all the interests of all the responsible peoplein Australia depend upon having a reasonable stability of thecurrency, so that people will save money and not be afraid, sothat they will save money for investment and not be afraid, sothat the loan market will be healthy, and unless the loanmarket is healthy I say to you, quite frankly we will eitherhave to stop a lot f works of development which are vital fromyour point of view, or we will have to increase taxes to anexorbitant extent. And, therefore, you have in the long run atremendous interest in the stability of the currency. And thenthere are two other matters in which you are interestedoI've mentioned the others.If I may say so, Mr. President and Your Excellency,you are interested as citizens, because we have too muchdisposition, even in our own relatively small country, to divideourselves into a body of special interest, or a body of specialpressure groups. We've only eleven million people. We'venever lived in the whole course of our lives in a state ofgo 60/ 4
4greater risk than that in which we live today. We have onlyto look on the map north of ourselves to realise that some ofthe greatest and most crucial events in modern history areoccurring near to us. And we're not frightened of our fearsit's not in our nature to be frightened but it is essentialthat in looking at all these matters that are going on, weshould remember that we are one people with one vital interest.And, therefore, wha' I've baen saying to you tonight is designedto indicate that we must not just think of ourselves as manufacturersbut think of ourselves as importers, think of ourselvesas employers of migrant labour, think of ourselves in a varietyof capacitieso This is essential, because given Australia isa united nation, we're not going to be easily overthrown by otherpeople, And that means, Sir, coming to the end of thisexercise, that the interesting thing, the obvious thing but atthe sama time the uncommon thing, is that we're all citizensof one country, citizens of no mean country. Don't let us taketoo much time off to argue with some other section or some othergroup. Let us defend our interests, of course this is auiteright, but let us always have in mind that, whether you're amanufacturer or a farmer or a grazier or even a poor wretchedpolitician, you are subordinate to one great thing and thatis the interest of our countryoNow, Sir, I knew this is well understood, I knowas well aj most people could know how manufacturing industryhas understood these things, has worked on these things, and Ias the head of the Cormonwealth Government am immeasurablyindebted to your representatives for the advice that we ask forand receive from time to t. me. I don't want to underestimatethat at all. I bops it will go on mo. re and more and mcre. Butin proposing the health of Austrolian indisstry. I vwould like tomake it clear that I am not proposing the health of a foreigner,but proposing the hedlth of somathing which is in the va:' y webof our national beingo Now have I made that clear?I'm happy, and if I haven t made it clear, youwill still be happy to join with me in drinking the health ofAu., ralian industryo '-3



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH
Rt. Hon. SI R ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
COMMONWEALTH PRIME MINISTERS'
CONFERENCE.
[ Fromt the Parliamentary Debates," 18.8.64.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister)-by leave-After I
returned from my overseas visit, and Parlia6-
ment not being in session, I gave a long
Press and television interview. It is not
my purpose to repeat all that I then said
Da-bthlee verbatim tape record will be avail-
to honorable members-but I do propose
to say something about some of the
highlights of my work.
For the record, I will say at once that
I propose a little later to lay on the table
-) of the House the text of the final communique
of the Prime Ministers' Conference.
I had intended -to pay a visit to Israel.
Indeed arrangements for this visit were well
advanced when, by reason of illness, I
found, with very great regret, that I had to
cancel my journey to that country. I hope
to make it on a future opportunity. In the
result, I had made sufficient recovery to
go to the Prime Ministers' Conference in
London via Washington. It was necessary
for me to leave London the day after the
Prime Ministers' Conference, in order to
be back in time for important Cabinet
discussions on the Budget.
Two matters emerged from my talks in
Washington. The first was that I was keen
to discover from the Administration
10543/ 64. whether the statement I had made in this
House on the A. N. Z. U. S. Treaty was one
with which they agreed. I should, I think,
quote the substance of what I said in the
House because there had been some controversy
about-the position inside Australia
and there had been, indeed, some misrepresentation
of what the then Minister for
External Affairs had said on this matter.
In this House on 21st April, I said-
The treaty is between the United States,
Australia and New Zealand. Article IV reiads-
" Each Party recognizes that an armed
attack in the Pacific Area on any of the
Parties would be dangerous to its own peace
and safety and declares that it would act to
meet the common danger in accordance with
its constitutional processes."
Of course, this should be in accordance with
constitutional processes. Very few countries go
automatically into a state of war. They all have
certain procedures to go through but, subject
to constitutional processes, which can operate
here just as much as they can anywhere else,
there is a clear statement that the parties will
act to meet the common danger in accordance
with their constitutional processes.
The article goes on-
" Any such armed attack and all measures
taken as a result thereof shall be immediately
reported to the Security Council of the United
Nations. Such measures sh-all be terminated
when the Security Council has taken the
measures necessary to restore and maintain
international peace and security." 
Article V reads-
" For the purpose of Article IV, an armed
attack on any of the Parties is deemed to
include an armed attack on the metropolitan
territory of any of the Parties, or on the island
territories under its jurisdiction in the Pacific
or on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft
in the Pacific."
Those words do not produce automatic hostilities,
because reference is made to constitutional processes,
but they contain in the clearest terms a
high-level acceptance of responsibility. It is not
for us to assume thut any great ally of ours will
avoid that any more than we will avoid it.
There is a contract between Australia and
America. It is a contr-ct based on the utmost goodwill,
the utmost good faith and unqualified friendship.
Each of us will stand by it.
I was happy to find in Washington that
my statement was accepted as a completely
accurate interpretation and that the State
Department had, in fact, ciirculated it as a
definite statement On the point. This, I
think, revealed a state of affairs eminently
satisfactory to Australia. It has, as I pointed
out last week when we were debating these
matters, been powerfully reinforced by the
recent statement of President Johnson, and
the terms of the resolution of both Houses
of the Congress. In the second place-and
I think I should report this having regard
to some comments that have been made-
President Johnson very promptly, at the
beginning of our discussions, stated his
pleasure and the pleasure of the American
people at our contribution, to the defence of
South Vietnam. He expressed pleasure both
with the content of our response and the
prompt way in which we had made it.
It is sometimes thought that Australia's
efforts in these fields, being relatively small,
are either of no significance or must provoke
some American criticism. This is not
so. The United States is the greatest power
in the world. It has given enormous aid to
other countries. It must occasionally fel
somewhat isolated. It would be more than
human if it did not occasionally feel that
it was being cast for the role of the world's
gendarme with the major responsibility for
keeping the peace. It is because of these
things that in Washington contributions by
other countries are welcomed as an identification
by other countries of their world
interests with those of the United States.
I have repeatedly said that while we
rely and will continue to rely very much on
the collaboration of the great powers in our own defence, that collaboration involves
mutual obligations which we will
at all times be prepared to honour. This
is well understood. I have not been able
to detect any mental reservations about
the friendship of the United States for Australia
or-and this is of broad importance
-the determination of the United States
to do all in its power to preserve the
peace in South East Asia and to prevent
the spread of aggressive Communism.
This attitude of mind has, in fact, been
illustrated vividly ' by recent events.
When I went on to the conference in
London, I was quite convinced that something
should be said to strengthen the
position of Malaysia and to make it clear
that, as a Commonwealth country, it enjoyed
the support, physically or morally or
both, of all the Commonwealth nations.
Honorable members will be familiar with
what I will call " the new vocabulary
There is a strong opposition to
" 1colonialism and to imperialism
and to what is now called neocolonialism."
As I understand it, " neocolonialism
" is an expression which relates
to a new or derivative form of
" 1colonialism It is, as honorable members
know, an expression frequently used by
the rulers of Indonesia to support their
allegation that the creation first of Malaya
and then of Malaysia did not represent
the termination of colonial rule but
represented an attempt by the former
,, colonial power to use the new independent
body and thus to deprive it otf
some of the attributes of complete political
independence. I
Considerable play has been made of the
fact that the military and paramilitary and
economic aid given to Malaysia ' by the
United Kingdom, Australia and New
Zealand represents some desire on the part
of predominantly European nations to
maintain a position of influence and thus
to treat Malaysia as not fully free. This
notion seemed to me-and I believe that
I will have the support of honorable members
in this view-to have a somewhat
dangerous quality. I therefore had a very
great desire to secure in the conference
some general support for Malaysia, a
support which should include that of the
West Indian, African and Asian members
of the Commonwealth. 
A great deal of discussion occurred on
these matters with, at one stage, some
divergence of opinion but in the long run,
I am happy to say, a satisfactory result.
There was ' no disagreement about the
statement in the communique that " they
will maintain their efforts to reduce the
areas of international disagreement with all
the means within their power, while maintaining
both the strength and the resolution
to resist aggression from without or
subversion from within But there was a
difference of opinion as to whether, having
said this, we should give some assurance
tthe Prime Minister of Malaysia of our
sympathy and support in his efforts to preserve
the independence and integrity of his
country. Some thought that an expression
of sympathy was enough. My own view was
that it was inadequate; that one might well
sympathise with people without agreeing
with them or in any way backing them
up. I pointed out, and so did others, that
the word " support" did not necessarily
connote military support or even material
support, since the nature of the support
to be given would be for each member of
the Commonwealth to determine.
I did my best to point out that every new
African nation represented at the Conference
was jealous of its own independence and
would strongly resent any interference in
it by outside people. This, indeed, had been
demonstrated in the case of Kenya and
Tanganyika, each of which had, after independence,
been happy to receive British
military aid against aggressive movements.
I said as strongly as I could that what was
true in the case of African countries was
equally true in the case of Asian countries
Dand that Malaysia was entitled at the very
least to our strong moral support at the
United Nations and around the various diplomatic
posts in the world. I expressed the
view that a Commonwealth which was not
prepared to take a public stand in favour
of the political independence and territorial
integrity of all its members would be a
strange kind of Commonwealth. From our
point of view in Australia this is, of course,
extremely important. We are not supporting
Malaysia, as we do in the most practical
terms, because we have some colonialist
point of view. We have not. But we do
believe that we have obligations to sister
members of the Commonwealth while, of
course-and this may be stated quite frankly -we have some particular interest in the
preservation of Malaysia having regard to
the threat from Communist aggression
which -presses down upon us or in our direction
from the north. I am happy'to say -that
agreement was finally secured upon an expression,
not only of sympathy, but of support.
This was to me one of the crucial
matters in this Conference. The fact that it
was resolved in the manner contained in
the communique, a unanimous document,
is one of the facts which has enabled me
to say, as I have said publicly, that the
Conference achieved valuable results.
It will, I hope, ' be remembered-and I
repeatedly invited the Conference to remember
it-that when Malaysia was created it
secured the unanimous approval of an
earlier Prime Ministers' Conference, it
secured admission to membership of the
United Nations by a unanimous vote and
that, later on, when it was alleged by
Indonesia that the people of the Borneo
territories had been ignored, a special mission
set up by the Secretary-General of the
United Nations had found that there was
approval in those territories of wvhat had
been done.
It follows from all this, as I said to the
Conference, that the validity of the existence
of Malaysia cannot sensibly be challenged.
The challenge to it-in other words the so
called confrontation policy of Indonesiafinds
its expression in actual military aggression
across the frontiers of Malaysia. This
beipg a clear case of military aggression, the
argument that there were unsettled disputes
has a somewhat hollow sound. The plain
fact is that Malaysia is defending itself
against aggression and therefore comes
plainly within the Commonwealth statement
that there should be a resolution to resist
aggression from without or subversion from
within. It became clear, as the Conference proceeded,
that the problems of the new Commonwealth
must be approached patiently
and without illusions. An example of this
fact is to he found in one reference in the
communique. It is as follows-
They discussed the great significance of China
for South and South East Asia. They also discussed
the question of relations with China and
of her membership of the United Nations.
This, it will be seen, conveys very little.
The reason for this is that there were deep 
divisions of opinion and of emphasis, and
that these rendered a more positive statement
impossible. I must recognise that from
the point of view of most of the African
countries, Asia, particularly South East
Asia, seems a long way off. They do not
feel that Communist China presents any
threat to them. When I presented views
which are based upon the aggressive policies
and activities of China in and around Laos
and Vietnam, I was told that this was
cold war talk, and that the cold war was,
for purposes of a Prime Ministers' Conference,
an irrelevancy. In some quarters there
even seemed to be an assumption that the
cold war had been created by the West, and
a failure to understand that but for the
tenacity and success of the great Western
powers in resisting the cold war and deterring
a hot one, the Prime Ministers might
have been meeting, if at all, in very different
circumstances. I mention this not by way of criticism but
by way of explaining some of the atmosphere
of a new Commonwealth meeting.
New nations, with different histories and
backgrounds and emotions, cannot be
expected to fall into our inherited patterns
of thought, or to see world conflict in the
same light as those of us who have treaty
associations and obligations and indeed
special regional problems of security and
survival. But I am not at all despondent.
The greatest value of these conferences is
that we are all conscious of our special,
though undefined, relationship to each other,
that we exchange our experience and views
with great vigour, but with personal goodwill,
and that we learn something from each
other. The Conference having noted-I am sure
with great satisfaction-that since the war
more than 20 countries, with a total population
of some 700 millions, had been brought
to sell-government by Great Britain,
and that others will shortly be added to
the list, became involved in a discussion
about Southern Rhodesia. Now, we all
agreed at the outset, and reaffirmed
-unanimously in the communique, that the
authority and responsibility for leading the
remaining colonies to independence must
continue to rest with Britain In spite of
this, and of the further fact that under the
agreed Soufhern Rhodesian Constitution of
1961, there will be an African majority of electors within a period variously estimated
at from five to ten years-I think I heard
somebody say it might be twelve-some of
the African leaders said they wanted a
discussion. It was pointed out to them that
as any further negotiations must be conducted
by Britain and as there were strong
political views and differences in Southern
Rhodesia itself, advice or instruction to
Britain might well complicate a task already
sufficiently delicate and difficult.
In the result, it was agreed that the
Southern Rhodesian problem should not be
discussed in full conference, but in a closed
session with restricted membership.
At the end of the Conference, it was
agreed that the matter could be referred
to in the communique, in the terms which
I now quote-
At the same time, Prime Ministers of other
Commonwealth countries expressed their views
to the Prime Minister of Britain on the question
of the progress of Southern Rhodesia towards
independence within the Commonwealth. They
welcomed the decision already announced by the
British Government that, as in the case of other
territories, the existence of sufficiently representative
institutions9 would be a condition of the grant
of independence to Southern Rhodesia.
We all agreed about that. It continues-
They also noted with approval the statement
already made by the British Government that they
would not recognise any unilaterial declaration of
fndependence--We all agreed about thatanid
the other Prime Ministers made it clear that
they would be unable to recognise any such
declaration. The view was also expressed that an Independence
Conference should be convened which the leaders
of alt parties in Southern Rhodesia should be free
to attend. The object would be to seek agreement
on the steps by which Southern Rhodesia might proceed
to independence within the Commonwealth
at the earliest practicable time on the basis of
majority rule. With a view to diminishing tensions
and preparing the way for such a conference, an
appeal was made for the release of all the detained
African leaders. The Prime Ministers called upon all
leaders and their supporters to exercise moderation
and to abstain from violence; and they affirmed
their belief that the best interest of all sections of
the population lay in developing confidence and
co-operation, on the basis of tolerance, mutual
understanding and justice. In this connection, they
recognised the necessity for giving confidence to
the minority community in Southern Rhodesia
that their interests would be protected.
The Prime Minister of Britain said that he would
give careful consideration to all the views expressed
by other Commonwealth Prime Ministers. At the
same time he emphasised that the Government of 
Southern Rhodesia was constitutionally responsible
for the internal affairs of that territory and that the
question of the granting of independence was a
matter for decision by the British Parliament.
Frankness requires that I should tell -the
House that 1, for one, did not associate
myself with this public tendering of adviceadvice
which might be interpreted in some
quarters as instructions-to the Government
of the United Kingdom, which alone, as was
expressly conceded, had the power and the
responsibility. I want to put my position on
record to my brother members of this House.
So that there may be no misunderstanding,
I should make it clear that-
The Australian Government had
already offered friendly advice to
the Government of Southern Rhodesia,
stating our belief that the
end result to be arrived at, if
D aSdomutihtteerdn tRo hotdhees iaC owmimshoendw etoa lthb, e
was a voting roll which would
provide an African majority.
We took the view that if this result
was not achieved in due course, it
would probably be impossible for
the United Kingdom to grant
independence and therefore
Southern Rhodesia could not be
admitted to membership of the
Commonwealth, the Commonwealth
being an association of
independent nations.
D A unilateral declaration of independence
before the necessary conditions
existed had no chance of
Commonwealth recognition, and
would tend unhappily to isolate
Southern Rhodesia from Common-
3wealth affairs.
Those are all views that we ourselves had
put, through me, to Southern Rhodesia.
On the other hand, I indicated to the
Conference that I thought it would be a
dangerous precedent, and an invasion of
domestic jurisdiction, for the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers to get into a
position of sitting, as a body, to examine
the affairs of other members, and pronouncing
public judgments. I said that it was not
difficult to foresee circumstances in which
any one of us might find this intolerable.
This difference of view explains some of
the language of the communique. I was,
of course, as I hardly need to say, not opposed to the idea of a constitutional
conference about Southern Rhodesiaindeed,
that is inevitable-or the
adequate representation of the African
citizens; this is completely proper. But I
felt strongly that -the Government of the
United Kingdom should not -be handicapped
in its negotiations by public state,-
ments which could increase its difficulties
by stiffening resistance. After all, the problem
is not easy, and needs to be solved
in an atmosphere of mutual understanding.
It is proper to remember that there are
many thousands of settlers in Southern
Rhodesia, frequently of long standing and
with no other homes, strongly British in
their allegiance and with legitimate rights
to be protected, who will be unhappy at
becoming a minority in what is now a
fashionable African conccpt-a one party
republican state.
But, Sir, I am sure that most of them,
watching the tides of events in other former
African colonies, realise that there must be
an accommodation, and that -in due course
-and not too long a course-an accelerated
movement towards adult suffrage
must be completed, or the alternative
accepted, of mounting internal disorder, of
hostility among neighbours, and of a result
finally achieved in an atmosphere of hostility,
not friendship, with racial hostilities
unfavorable to the continuance of
European settlement and out of harmony
with those inter-racial relationships for
wich the new Commonwealth has come
to stand.
In the course of the general survey of
world affairs with which we normally begin
in Prime Ministers' Conferences I thought
it proper to make some reference to the
still ' current dispute between India and
Pakistan over Kashmir. This is a dispute
which has considerably embittered relations
between these two great countries and has
led to circumstances which do not aid
the presentation of a common front to
common dangers. Naturally, I had nothing
to say about the merits of the dispute,
about which there are deep differences of
. opinion. All I was concerned to say was that,
if the dispute could be solved by some
mutual accommodation, it should be of great
advantage to all of us. In view of what
has been subsequently said, I should make
it quite clear that the Conference did not 
debate the merits or nature of these
differences of opinion. But it did happen
that the distinguished President of Pakistan,
Field Marshal Ayu-b Khan, and the Minister
for Finance in India, Mr. Krishnamachari
who, in the absence of Mr. Shastri, most
ably represented India, both made speeches
of a helpful kind. We all hoped that if the
atmosphere so created continued we might
see a settlement. But quite clearly the
problem is one for the two countries concerned.
I repeat that, as a meeting of Prime
Ministers, we were not sitting in judgment.
We thus by implication re-affirmed our
belief, to which I have referred elsewhere,
that we are not an arbitral body, that we
do not sit in judgment and that we
recognise that there are very important
domestic or intra-Commonwealth problems
in relation to which we should not seek to
impose our views.
We had some discussion, perhaps not
enough, looking back on it, on the importance
of and the problems associated with
economic development in the Commonwealth.
I say not enough, because I felt that
rather too much of our time was devoted
to the problem of Southern Rhodesia. In
the result, the economic problem might
have been dealt with in too general a way
and without useful definition if it had not
been for the fact that the Government of
the United Kingdom put forward a series
of positive proposals. These were put forward
as practical ways in which the
Commonwealth could be given added
vitality, meaning and purpose, as a sort of
co-operative association so as to be able to
help both its own members and the world at
large, and thereby contribute to world peace
by the raising of living standards and the
achievement of economic progress. As the
Communique records, various proposals
were advanced. They were in a broad way
accepted in principle. The final decision was
that they were to be put into study by
officials in the first instance to determine
how best they could be carried into effect.
Some of the proposals were as follows-
That technical assistance on a co-operative
project basis within the Commonwvealth
should be provided to aid the development
and use of resources.
I pause here to say that, as I said in
the Conference itself, it is a mistake to
think of the Commonwealth as an association of rich countries. Some indeed are
very poor. Some, like our own country, are
far from poor but are still heavily involved
in the importation of capital and technical
skill for our own industrial development.
Great Britain alone can be described as a
capital exporting country; but, as the Prime
Minister of Great Britain pointed out more
than once, sometimes with a wry smile,
there is a limit to what a nation with its
own balance of payments problems can do.
We were, therefore, not so much talking in
terms of massive capital assistance as we
were in terms of technical assistance, in
which field so much may be done by one
for another. I return to the proposals-
The . encouragement of closer contacts
between professional and other bodies
within the Commonwealth to strengthen
the links between us.
This is, I think, an attractive proposition.
It is quite true that nobody can attend amodern
Prime Ministers' Conference without
realising, sometimes with a shock, that
we * have very different ideas about the
institutions of government, and indeed, very
different ideas about democracy itself.
Quite a few of the newer Commonwealth
nations have one-party systems in which
the principle of one man, one vote becomes
quite ironical. Some have different ideas
on the rule of law from those which we
entertain. Some have different ideas about
the treatment of minorities from thos(
which we entertain. It would indeed be
quite impossible today to make a speech
about the Commonwealth in which the
point was made, as it used to be made
years ago, that we all had great constitutional
ideas in common; that we all believeJ
in Parliamentary democracy, in the
sovereignty of Parliament, and in the rule
of law. The sober fact today is that some
of us do and some of us do not. But this
is not a matter about which we are to
lecture each other. Indeed, I have constantly
opposed any idea that we are to
interfere in each other's domestic affairs.
Such interference violates the most classical
precepts of foreign policy; it is quite contrary
to the Charter of the United Nations;
and it is in my opinion a matter which
could seriously damage intra-Commonwealth
relations. For these reasons, I was
very glad to find some attention directed
towards the establishment of closer contacts 
on matters in which we do have some
common interest and some common desire
for advancement. Examples of these are
obviously to be found in the establishment
of closer contacts between professional and
other bodies in relation to which there is this
community of interest.
Incidentally, Sir, I noticed recently that
the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell)
seemed to be * under the impression that I
lectured the Prime Ministers on the
advantages of private enterprise. I can
relieve his mind; no such incident occurred.
SNobody has been more careful than I have
) been to make it clear that each member of
the Commonwealth is entitled to adopt
whatever system of government it likes,
and whatever economic principles or
policies seem best to it. I have attended the
last nine Prime Ministers' Conferences. In
that time, there has never been a discussion
on private enterprise or socialism. The
proposals continue-
The proposal that we should aim at the
pr~ ovision of financial assistance to the
developing of higher education in
Commonwealth countries.
Here again there is no doubt a limit to
financial aid. We know from our own
experience in Australia that higher education
is not cheap. Indeed the cost of university
education in Australia is mounting at a
mst formidable rate, while we have
.&gt; recently received a report in relation to
-Papua and New Guinea which recommends
further developments of this kind in those
territories. Yet there still remains a field of aid
Yvhich we all thought should be explored.
-It may well be that Australia can aid some
other Commonwealth country or countries
by providing expert advice in the universities
field; by the provision of visiting professors,
lecturers or administrators. For similar purposes,
we must continue to receive in our
own universities students from other countries
and particularly from Commonwealth
countries with whom we have such a special
association and such close engagements.
The next proposal was-
The encouragement of specialised training
and research in public administration
with special emphasis on the needs of
developing Commonwealth countries.
This, I venture to say, is of prime importance.
That wise man, the Prime Minister of Nigeria, who presides over the destinies
of the largest of the African nations, has
more than once said to me that the great
shortage in all these countries is a shortage
of competent administrators. Here, I think,
we can help each other a good deal. The
Government of the United Kingdom had in
mind the establishment of some special
teaching or training body in London or in
connection with some university. I by no
means reject this idea, but I do feel that
in the long run the best training in administration
that can be given to people from
other Commonwealth countries is that they
should be, so to speak, fitted into the public
service of a more experienced nation so that
they may learn something of the rules and
practice of administration and something
of the mental and moral attitudes which
distinguish an advanced Civil Service in a
politically advanced country. The last proposal
I wish to mention was-
The convening of a Commonwvealth
Medical Conference in 1965.
This idea fits into what I was saying
earlier about professional bodies. Such a
conference would do good, because the
problems not only of personal medicine but
of public health are of immense importance,
more particularly in new nations where
medical services may be scanty and the
problems of public health extremely
complex. These various proposals, and there were
others, the nature of which is broadly stated
in the communique, must be converted from
vague expressions of principle into practical
schemes. Our officials will willingly contribute
to this result. If, in some or all of
these matters, an effective result is achieved.
we will, I think, have done a great deal to
put substance into a Commonwealth
relationship the nature of which has so
changed in recent years, and to counter the
scepticism which is frequently expressed as
to the capacity of the new Commonwealth
to endure.
The proposal for a Commonwealth Secretariat
is of course not a new one. It had,
over a period of years, been put forward
in general terms by Mr. Curtin and myself
and others. On this occasion, the idea was
first mentioned in the meeting by some of
the African Prime Ministers. The suggestion
was that there should be established in 
London a central clearing house In the
first instance, it was suggested that it should
prepare documents on trade aid and
development and should circulate information
on these matters to all the members
of the Commonwealth. Then, by way of,
further or alternative suggestion, it was
proposed that the Secretariat might assist in
the preparations for the meetings of Primel'
Ministers in the sense of receiving and'
circulating papers, which would make us.
all much better informed of other problems
when we arrived. I myself drew'
attention to the Commonwealth Parliamen--;
tary Association and the small and useful'
secretariat which it has. I felt that a
Secretariat for the Commonwealth on the
Parliamentary Association model might encourage
members to put forward papers and
proposals for circulation, information and
consideration in advance of Prime
Ministers' meetings.
After general debate amongst the Prime
Ministers, it was decided to ask an official
committee to go into the proposal further
and to report back to the Prime Ministers
on what functions a Commonwealth
Secretariat should perform. The view I
stated was and is that the task of the
Secretariat should be to pool and coordinate
and disseminate information of a
factual kind. There should be no question
of a policy o~ r executive role. As the
examination proceeds, there may well be
considerable differences of opinion as to
what a Secretariat should do. Some may wish to have something resembling the
office and -functions of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, with considerable
executive significance. We must, I put to
the House, be astute to avoid constituting
the Commonwealth as a sort of committee
of the United Nations, with resolutions and
votes. If we are to achieve and maintain a
special significance, it will be by preserving
the informality of our association, and
the basic independence which each Commonwealth
country brings to the conference
table. It was at all times important that
this Conference should produce constructive
results and thus contribute to the
future of the Commonwealth. I think that
I should, therefore, pay tribute -to the
invaluable work of the Chairman. Sir Alec
Douglas-Home exhibited at all stages great
tact and fairness and admirable flexibility
of mind, a broad wisdom and a complete
knowledge of the subjects under discussion.
Without these elements, I would have
doubted more than once whether the Conference
would have a satisfactory conclusion.
It is proper, therefore, that I should
say that what were sometimes acute
differences of viewpoint were in a large
measure reconciled and that in the result
there was a general feeling that the new
Commonwealth had great usefulness and
could make a powerful contribution to
human destiny.
I present the following paper-
Meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers,
1964-Final Communique dated 15th July
1964.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR. COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



OPENING OF RED CROSS HOUSE, HOBART PLACE,
CANBERRA. A. C. T.-19th SE-PTEMBER7 1961+
Speech by thie Prie inister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir Roy and Lady Oliver, Your Excellencies and Gentlemen:
Before I forget, I declare the building oper,.
( Laughter) ( Applause) Whatever I say hereaf. ter will be just
a trifling bonus because the job is now done.
I was very interested in what Sir Roy was saying.
Of course, he is an old Chief of Staff, and chiefs of staff
seldom miss an opportunity of getting a little money or a
project out of the Government. ( Laughter) I was therefore
a little disappointed when he comforted you by telling you
that with these admirable and highly solvent tenants in the
building, they will wipe off the debt. I was sorry that he
said tha. I thought he was going to say, " Well, that will
help us, but unless we get a lot more hel~ p from you people,
we will have a debt hanging around our neck."' This is a
point that I make for him. ( Laughter) Because, of course
this is just a small building. When Canberr'a . has risen i
its fullest state, this will have to be added to, This -will
I hop0, ir, due course, Dr. Newman Morris, become the national
headquarters of -U* he Red Cross in th'a Capital of this co'intry.
Therefore I suggcst to Sir Roy that he ought to
always keep on his face that st..--ige l2ook of a man who is
yearning for somebody to produce some money. It is quite
easily done; as I tell. you, in the past I have seen him do
it, ( Laughter) sometimes with~ success.
It Is a very interesting conjunction of events
today because putting it in round terms the Red Cross
Movementl-is 160 years old and the Australian branch or organisation
is 50 years old and therefore we are dealing with an
organisatien which already has achieved considerable seniority.
T was reminded, when I was thinking -about this matter today,
that the founder of Red Cross was and I hesitate to pronounce
his name because of local rules about French names but I
will call him Andre Dunant and if anybody says it's " Dunant"
I accept correction. ( Laughter)
But he was a very remarkable man in two respects.
One was that the battlefield of Solferino filled him with the
most tremendous ideas that something ought to be done about
the care of the wounded and it ought to be done without having
regard to sides, it ought to be done in a broad sweep of
humane action, and that nations themselves ought to subscribe
to a convention so that all those who needed attention as a
result of battle could have it irrespective of what side they
had been on. This is elementary enough to us today who have
inherited the benefit of this matter, but in those days, an
idea of immense novelty but of course, so profoundly humane
in its conception that It took on and before long, most if
not all of the nations of the worldahad understood it, subscribed
to it. The second interesting thing about it was that he
drew some inspiration, a great deal of inspiration from the
work of Florence Nightingale. You know, Sir, I speak with
hesitation in the presence of distinguished Generals and
people of that order, but really, the Crimean War, and the
events which followed on it, are very difficult to understand 0 oeeo./ 2 
r -2
today. It seems an almost inexplicable contest. It did
two things, anyhow, in the case of Australia. It honoured
the names of its not frightfully competent Generals by
attaching their names to hotels and items of clothing ( Laughter),
and so we have a raglan sleeve, a cardigan jacket, and hotels
in the suburbs in Australia were built at that time richly
garnished with their names, and this, I think, is very satisfactory.
If they were now alive and looked back on it they
might feel that they had done better than they knew. ( Laughter)
But the remarkable thing about it was the conflict,
so difficult to understand as we look at it over a hundred
years later, gave rise to two most astonishing developments.
The first of them, of course, will always -be associated with
the name of Florence Nightingale. I think people are
occasionally inclined to think of her as the Lady with the
Lamp, as a rather benign and kindly creature, who soothed the
brows of those who needed attention in the Crimea, She wac
of course, one of the most astonishing women of the nineteenth
century, one of the most a stonishing people, male or female,
of the nineteenth century.
It isn't for nothing that Lytton Strachey, when he
wrote abcut eminent Victorians, included her in his relatively
small galle:' y, because she had enormous strength of will,
tremendous ability, a superb capacity for telling politicians
where they got off, considerable fam.-' ly influenca which 3he
didn't hesitate to use. She was responsible herself for the
whole modern character of nursing. Indeed, I 3lways delight
to remember the story of Queen Victoria, herself a very strongminded
woman, always sure that she was right and, sometimes,
let it be admitted, she was right but not always, But when
she had had Florence Nightingale up to tePalace in audience,
and had listened to her and had fallen under the spell of her
personality, she wa~ s reported, as many of you will recall to
have said " Ah, what a mindl She ought to be in 2-harge o
the War Office," ( Laughter)
Nc, w, Florence Nightingale; we can have all sorts
cl, views, very properly quite sentimental about her. The
fact is that this woman was one of the great creative people
of the last century. She created the whole modern conception
of hospital treatment and of nursing and she did it at a time
when it was considered faintly disreputable to become a nurse,
when the popular image of the nurse was the one created by
Dickens you know when he decribes Sairey Gamp who had a
little container on the mantelpiece and took a drop of it when
she felt disposedo ( Laughter) This was a revolutiun that was
created by Florence Nightingale. She is one of the great
people in our entire history, And then this was followed up,
partly I am sure as a result of the stimulus of hier example,
by the creation by this great Frenchman of the Red Cross idea
and of the Red Cross organisation.
Now, Sir Roy Dowling who has devoted a tremendous
amount of energy I think with great public spirit to this
matter, has told you something about its history, something
about its numbers today, something about its growth, and all
this, of courses is tremendously stimulating. I just want to
supplement what he said by mentioning one point.
In time of war the work of the Red Cross becomes
vividly clear in the public eye. Nobody doubts its enormous 0 a 00 
-3
value, its tremendous and sacrificial efforts in time of war,
and in time of peace, we are a little inclined to think
" Well, that's over" and also to think 111dell that canli
happen here" and there is threfore a danger that the Red
Cross may come to be regarded as something that falls back
into a state of hibernation between one war and another.
Now, I just want to say to you that you can't in
the event of war bring into existence a mass of' services of
this kind without notice in a week or two, any more than you
can bring into existence armed forces to perform th. eir tasks
at a notice of a week or two. There must be tremendous
preparation when we are in a state of peace and the more
the Red Cross organisation is sustained, not onl-y by the money,
by the understanding and moral support of the people of
Australia, between wars or after a war, the better it will
be for our efficacy in these fields whatever may come.
I beg of ' you, don't let us fall into the error of
thinking that wilen all is quiet the Red Cross doesn't matter
and that when all is not quiet we may suddenly expect to find
a fully sustained and well organised Red Cross, ready to do
its work at th3 drop of a handkerchief'. In otber words, we
must, I 1elieve ir Australia keep our interest in the work of
the Red Crcss always up to date, keep our personal support
up to date, keep our financial support up to date, because it
is only iii that w~ ay that when the big strains come on to it,
it will be able to sustain them and perform its remarkable
lunction-on behalf of humanity.
And so. Sir ' Roy, I amn delighted to think that6 in this
city, increasingly becoming recognised as the capita). of this
nation, you have this building, a building which will serve
as a constan't reminder-to peopl~ e of the significance of what
goes on. I dontt wanc to say any more thrn that because I
don't subscribe to this old doctrine that when people come and
sit in -the shade and feel cold, they ought to be compelled
to listen to politicians ad nauseam. I don't believe in that
at all, so I'm not going to detain you, but I want to say to
you, Lady Oliver, that I accapt your invitation with very
great pleasure* I am delighted to find that somebody like
yourself, distinguished in office and in person, has been
so actively engaged in this matter.
I publicly acknowledge -the great services that have
been rendered by Sir Roy, by Dr. Williams, by all those who
have been mentioned; I needntt go through them, one by one.
I would like to extend my own congratulations to the Minister
for the Interior and to the Chairman of the Capital Commission
because a great deal ol co-operation has performed itself in the
bringing about of the result that we see today,
There's a rule in Parliament, in the Standing Orders,
and as I don't need to tell some of you, the Standing Orders
are an interesting document, never observed by presiding
officers or members, but there is a rule in the Standing Orders
against tedious repetition. I shall now in the highest
tradition of Parliament, violate that rule. I will engage in
repetition. I declare the building open. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 67/ 1964~
DEATH OF MRX. R. C. MALEY
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzie s
Mr. Ray Maley was a fine servant of the
Crown, His Public Service career ex. ended over a
period of twelve years, which was made up chiefly of
six years as Press Officer at the Australian Embassy in
Washington where he served the Ambassador with high
capacity and distinction, followed by three and a half
years as Press Secretary to the Prime Minister,
I, as Prime Minister, and other members of
the Government, have been greatlvly assisted by his rich
' talents in journalism and its related fields.
He displayed a meritorious insight and
application in his work, linked with the attractive
personal qualities of great cheerfulness and dignity.
I extend to his wife and family my own and
the Government's deep sympathy,
CANEERRA Sepiember, 1964 



OPENING OF CHRYSLER MANUFACTURING CENTRE,
T1ONSLEY PARK, SOUTH AUSTRALIA 2ND OCTOR19
Speech by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir, Mr. Premier and Ladies and Gentlemen
Might I begin with a rather assertive question?
Can you hear me? Because I cantt hear myself. I've been
flying with a cold. In a little time, I will unveil something
or other here. I'm still not clear as to whether I declare
the building open or the estate open, or declare it duly
inaugurated, but it doesn't matter because at a glance this
afternoon, you could tell it has been open for weeks. ( Laughter)
And therefore my function is purely retrospective.
I must say, listening to Mr. Cheseborough, as I did
with great interest, I thought he seemed a little biased in
favour of this car the Valiant. ( Laughter) It puts me in a
very, very embarrassing position, because on one occasion, I
opened a factory that was going to produce a competitor car
for the Ford Company, On another occasion, I seem to remember
opening something fo, the Holden people. Very difficult to
be a politician nowadays ( Laughter) but at the same time I
must say that apart from his propaganda, I was the recipient
as I came out here, with my wife, of -he most pointed piece of
propagand, the kind of thing that could happen to you only in
South Australia, ( Laughter) only in a State where no poor
humble Federal fellow like me can possibly arrive or depart
without being the victim of propaganda from beginning to end.
And what happened this afternoon? There we x., ere,
sitting in scme car thac ,. ras p-o idod for me I dontt know
what make I looked to the right, there was a Valiant? I looked
to the left, there was a Valiant; I looked ahead of us there
was a Valiant, and I thought, " By Jove, this car has got one
hu-ndred per cent. of the market." Indeed without desiring to
advertise any other ear, it was a distinct refreshment of my
sW'rits to discover in a moment that there was another car on
the road. I think it was a Holden. ( Laughter) But, there they
were to the right of us, to the left of us and in front of
us. Now, I am no expert, Sir, but all I can tell you is that
my wife made the most admiring remarks as they passed alongside
us and that is a good beginning because women buy cars and men
pay for them. ( Laughter)
Sir, on any occasion like this it is very interesting
for me to look back a little, if you donlt mind. For example,
I can look back over a great number of years of very close
friendship with Fergie over there. There never was a better
representative in negotiations with political people than
Fergie. ( Applause) Many is the time over the last fifteen
years, or several times at any rate, over the last fifteen years,
he has had occasion to look at me, sometimes with approval,
sometimes with disapproval, dependent entirely on the rate of
sales tax, ( Laughter) but however it went, he was a man I
want to tell this to you in the presence of his colleagues
on this platform he was a man who was always intelligent and
understanding and put a case without pretending that there was
no other side to the question. This is a very great asset and
I have always had a great respect for him.
But as I was reminding an audience in Sydney the other
00~~ 0 0/ 2 
-2
day, it is not much less than thirty years ago that I found
myself then being Attorney-General of Australia talking
to a very famous motor car manufacturer in England. I won't
mention his narle you'll all think of the wrong one but
he was a rather melancholy chap, I thought, and we met on an
occasionandtiutook~ me into a corner and he was under the erroneous
belief that I was a person of some influence I was a humble
Attorney-General in those days. He said to me, " You people
must not make motor bodies in Australia," Well, shad3s of
Adelaide, you know. ( Laughter)
Dear me, this rather rjc'czed me because in my earlier
days I used to come and be a house guest with Ted Holden and
I was very familiar with the motor body wVOr. ks.
shouldn't make them. You peoplE. ought to grow wool and wheat
and things you understand." 1 TiAi was a serious proposition,
and our-modest motor body industry ought to be swept out.
I tried to explain to him that what was then a modest, smallish
motor body industry would undoubtedly some day be some kind
of fragment ii,. a very enormous motor vehicle industry, and
that it was very foolish on his part to think that he could
stop the tide frcm mro ving. However, he was much older than
I was, and therufore much wiser and he therefore disagreed
with me. ( Laughter)
Now what has happened since? It wasn't long after
that conversation only about five years, I wtould thi nk that
I found myself as a Prim~ e Minister greatly concerned tc see
whether we could establish an industry of building motor
vehicles in Australia, and this was regarded by a lot of
people wit%, h some hor-ror and we had all sorts of expert ad~ vice.
Expert advice is the very devi. l., You want to have at least
a hundi-ed experts and then conduct a Gallup Poll among them
and then think out tiae answer for yourseif. ( Laughter) That's
my firm belief.
The exerssad," h, but you cnnt do it. Nobody
could build a car in Australia with less than I think it was
forty, but it may have been fifty thousand vehicles a year as
t'. e extent of the demand." " And that, of course," they said,
" 1is impossible. Not within remote cooee is the time when
you can sell 50,7000 motor vehicles in Australi* a, made in
Australia." Well, it is only twenty-five years ago that that was
happening. I remember it very well. There were all sorts
of misconceptions, there were all sorts of expressions of
anxiety and inferiority on the part of people, and today we
have in Australia a state of affairs in which 4+ 00,000 new
motor vehicles go on the: roads every year. Four hundred
thousand.... and there will be thousands and thousands of
them that will come out of this great factory. The whole
scene has changed, and so far from great motor vehicle
people in other countries regarding with hostility what goes
on in Australia, they have steadily, one by one, come to
Australia themselves and invested in Australia,
I remember in the same impudent period of my life
when I was much more impudent than I am now, having a talk
in America to the then head of General Motors and telling him
that if he wanted to feel any assurance about his position
in Australia, the right thing to do was to put somte money
here and do sortie work here and produce a few~ jobs here, and
a e 9 a* o 
-3
this rather surprised him, though perhaps it wasntt entirely
without effect. ftmay have had some small effect because,
much later on, it happened.
And the same way in Great Britain. 4herever
you go in Australia today, you will see engaged in the
business of car and vehicle production companies whose names
are household words in Great Britain, in America, in Germany,
in France. This tremendous movement of enterprise into
Australia is the most exciting thing of our time and vre ought
to be proud of it and we ought not to be too frightened of it
and we ought not to believe that whatever is done to p) revent
it from running into excesses is something wrong, Uhat we
want to maintain in this country is something that we have
been enjoying for years, a remarkable stability in the value
of money, not unimportant to the investor, and also the most
astonishing rate of growitL-, growth of population, growth of
employment, growth 311 along the line,
It's a marvellous thing, isnvt it, how all these
things, proper-ly considered work together. I go around a
works like this. I don't need to be told that there are
quite a number o'L' people ILere, as I go around who are whp. t
we usud to call New A~ ustralians, whc are peopie who migrated
ha since the war. There are millions now anyh-ow, something
well over a million in Australia and every large factory I
go to contains a high. percentage ol' people who have come in
in these years. There cculd not Lave been a. n immigration policy
or programme without eirployment on this scale in industries
of this kind. Ths rural industries, vital as they are to
the survival of Australia, can't employ people by the scores
of thousands extra every year, WIe know tiiat they cant.
It is industries of this kind which enable the migration
programme to continue, and the fact that the migratCion
programme continues, that you have this remarkable increase
in the population year by year has given strength and tone
and optimism to the people who run retail stores in Australia,
to all sorts of other manufacturers who produce things that
in demand by stores and which are bought by them because
they are in demand by their ordinary customers. This is a
whole interwoven structure.
I dont profess to have any particular credit
for this. I just think I ought to remind you that the prime
political responsibility for economic policy and financial
stability in Australia comes flatly on to the Federal Parliament
and the Federal Government. ( Applause) And this is
perhaps a matter that gets a little overlooked occasionally.
I look down here. I see one of my colleagues in the Ministry,
Dr. Forbes. This is a great responsibility he carries. I
carry a bigger one, because when anything goes wrong, everybody
knows whose fault it is, ( Laughter)
But this is our sole contribution, that we must
try to be sensible try to have a stability in money, try to
have an economic climate that will favour the growt h Of
industry in Australia, and if we do that, we have made some
useful contribution to what goes on. But in the long run,
at the operating end, it is the people who have the imagination
to establish an enterprise of this kind in this place, it is
the thousands of people who work or will work in it in all
sorts of degrees of employment, these are the people who really
make the result because it is on the skill of their work, the
0. 0 0 6 0 */ IF 
fidelity7 the honesty of their work, that the industry that they
are working in will depend. This is wihat will persuade the
people to buy the product and this is what will mean in the
long run a growing prosperity right down the line.
Sir, whenever I come to a matter of this kind,
these thoughts pass through my mind. I think I am one of three
people who went into the Federal Parliament thirty years ago
and is still there in the inscrutable wisdom of Provi. dence,
( Laughter) Only three of us, Very interesting, because
looking back over that time, I would say that they w:, e by
far the most exciting thirty years in the history of Australia,
Indeed, that is the last thing I want to say to you.
Don't let us fall into the error of thinking that
all the history is in the books, the books thiat we read at
school, Some history is there, but don't let us think it is
all there. There is more history being made around us each
year than was made in twenty-five years in earlier generations.
Tremendously exciting history wonderful things new generations
coming on, and I, though I belong to an old and I suppose,
partly exhausted generation, I am all for it. I think this is
tie moft tremendous thing. We ought to be realising it, we
ought to to proud of it and when we come along here we ought
to, as I am sure we do, lcok around us and say, " Thxs is the
perfect illustration of the world that we are living in and
the Aust:; alia that is and is to be."
I now do whatever it is, retrospectively. 



SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES
ANA. iA'j DINNER AT ADELAIDE _ JRDOCTBER,,_ 196Lñ
S-oeech by the Prime inister the Et.__ Hon. SirRnbert Menzies
Sir Mr. Premier ( I never go in for any of these fa!-lals I
jus say " Sir, Mr. Premier....
I wondered wihen I came here in wi-at guise I was to
speak to you I had no idea that I was a species of -uestlecturer.
I thought that I'd probably be able to reply to a
few friendly insults in answering some toast, and sure enoug
up pops my old friend, Tom Playford if I may refer to him
in such familiar terms to you wh. o know him so little. ( Laughter)
I think on the whole it would have been better, Sir, if I had
said " No, I couldn't come" because Tom Playford has over the
trifling period of years for which I have been Prime Minister
( a fraction of the substantial period of years in which he has
been Premier). occasionally given me some good advice. Sometimes
he doesn't bother to advise me; he just says, " This is what
I want", and when I say then well... I needn't complete
the sentence. ( Laughter3
But I remember years ago he said to me, " You know,
old man no fellow in our game ever got into trouble for what
he didn't say." Now this may seem to you a bit of mere
flippancy, but of course, it's profoundly true. It's like the
old proverb, you know, about the wise old owl who sat on an
oak the more he heard the less he spoke; the less he spoke
the more he lieard; why can't some folks be like that bird?
Do you remember that? That put into four lines what he put
into a single sentence with me, He said, " Never forget: You
never get into trouble for what you don't say." Oh well, I think
there's a good deal of truth in that, though in my experience
what you don't say is frequently reported. ( Laughter)
Now, if you don't mind I would like to make another
preliminary observation. I was taken this afternoon to the
Adelaide Cricket Ground, where I found myself looking at a
fuotball match, of sorts. ( Laughter) I decided that I was a
suppo'ter of South ( Cheers) now wait a moment. I decided
before the match began and for a very elementary reason.
They had the same colours as Carlton in Melbourne, who have
had a singularly unsuccessful season,
One of the things that was pointed out to me by the
Lord Mayor was a clock face wonderful, superb; there it is
handsome, controlled by electric power and this would tell
you at any given moment how long was to go before the quarter
ended, all time off being allowed for. A brilliant piece of
mechanism, the electric power no doubt being supplied under the
authority of the Premier. ( Laughter) And just after half time,
the power was cut off and I thought to myself, " Now what s Tom
up to now?" ( Laughter) I wouldn't put it past him to have it
deliberately cut off end then send me a little note to say, " tIe
can't afford to keep it on all the time. Don't forget there's
a Loan Council meeting coming up. You have to watch this chap,
you know." I have been watching him in an imperfect way for
a long time. And then, of course, he confirmed this, I thought,
tonight, because he was referring to electric power and he gave
you a broad hint, a somewhat indiscreet one I thought, that by
about March or before March you might expect a reduction in the
charges. Then, I suppose, 1he fellows who run the clock would
be able to keep it going for all four quarters during the game. / 2 
2-
This is a mere broad hint. You are so accustomed to looking
at him as if he were an unsophisticated character I'm not.
And the moment he said, " You might expect a little reduction
by March," I thought, " By Jove, I'll have to go back on Monday
and tell Harold Holt what to expect in the next Loan Council
Meeting." ( Laughter)
But, Sir, that's all as it may be. The truth is
that contrary to all these rumours both Sir Thomas Playford
and I can talk with a very good will about the development of
secondary industry in this State because he in a great way,
and I in my own fashion, have had something to do wlch it, going
back over a long period of yearso
He has been a great champion of this State. I never
make any secret of my view that this State would be lucky if
it ever had another Premier like him for galloping on behalf
of this State. ( Applause) Mind you, he's tiresome occasionally
yes, difficult occasionally, but always either tiresome
or difficult or enthusiastic or demanding, not on his own
behalf but oi behalf of this State of South Australia, and
that is something I can admire and always will.
And indeed, of course, one of the things that you
must remamber on all these matters is that no Commonwealth
Government, though it has major responsibilities in this fie'd,
no Commonwealth Government by itself can complete a full
improvement in industrial development. It must have in the
various States governments with imagination and the willingness
to do things that the States can do and that the Commonwealth
cannot do. Our main job in life, a job which everybody knows
we peiform indifferently, is to create an economic climate,
to pursue economic policies that will be sound õ to pioduce,
so far as we can by cur policies though there are some
things that we cannot control a state of affairs in which
there is a reasonable stability in the price level, a reasonable
stability in the value of money, and at the same time a feeling
of confidence outside Australia in our future. Now these are
-reat tasks, and we have to do our best in the Parliament of
the nation and in the Government of the nation to perform them,
-nd on the whole, looking back on it over the last fifteen
years, I would venture to hope not too badly, when I look back
on what has happened during that time,
But what I really want to say a little to you about
is this. The longer I live, the longer I hold my present
responsibilities, the more I am struck by the fact that the
day is fast disappearing in which wie ought to divide ourselves
as if inevitably into groups, de want this we want this
we want this it's quite true, I am not objecting to
organisations. I am all in favour of them. But if there is
one thing that is quite clear today, it is that what we need
is a full sense of our interdependence in this country. In
the words of the apostle Paul, " We are all members, one of
another." Now this is profoundly true.
I have said before and it will stand repeating, that
I have lived long enough to remember the days when political
controversy in Australia was between the protectionists and
the free-traders, I suppose there are some free-traders left
in Australia, but not too many, not too many. The day has
gone when it was said that there was an inevitable conflict
between the manufacturer and the man on the land. Increasingly s / 3 
-3-
it is understood that there is no such conflict, that the man
on the land achieves enormous advantages from developed
manufacturing industry, and that manufacturing industry derives
tremendous advantages for a variety of reasons, one of which
is, to put it quite plainly that the great exports of primary
commodities from Australia to the rest of the world provide
every year hundreds of millions of money for imports by manufacturers
of raw materials and of plant. Don't forget that.
There is a tremendous community of interest.
It is a very interesting thing to reflect that the
greatest importers . n Australia are the manufacturers, as you
all know. The greatest exporters are the primary industries,
Under the pressure of events and with some enccuragement, the
secondary industries are now becoming, as Mr. Allison reminded
us, very substantial exporters, and when the day comes that we
are exporting the products of our factories, and why not, to
a world that is opening up before us, and we are doing that to
the same extent as we are exporting wool and wheat and dairy
and products and meat and what-have you, that will be the day
in which we can say that Australia has a conspicuous example in
itself of the balanced economy, which is the best kind of
economy to survive the shocks of economic variation. And therefore
this is a case of interdependenceo
But it goes beyond that. Interdependence all along
the line, I suppose this old nonsense that used to be talked
about the inevitable conflict between the employer and the
employee tends to disappear. I acknowledge with great pleasure
the remarkable record of South Australia in this field. but the
job is noc yeti completeo Tilere nre still people who appcer to
think that the solvency and success and pr'ofit-making capacity
of the employer has nothing to do with his employee, o0 with the
future of his employee, or the welfare of his employee, the truth
being, of course that each is dependent on the other. They b3ve
a common interesk, It would shock some of biie old-fashioned
warriors in this field, wouldn't it,, to be told that all their
interests are in common and yet they are.
There is another aspect of this matter. You know, I
have a very great respect for economists because they're quite
numerous and give them enough chance and they cancel out, and
therefore I like them. By the time I have measured one against
the other, and the other against one, I find I am at complete
liberty to apply my own judgment and I like this very much.
But they will keep on, won't they, Tom, talking about " expenditure
in the public sector" and " expenditure in the private sector,"
And some of you gentlemen here tonight have pursued them no doubt
into those tortuous paths, when you look at a budget. You look
at it and you say, " Look at the way the public expenditure, the
expenditure in the public sector is increasing; that is a great
mistake. They ought to cut that down by a couple of hundred
millions and have more expenditure in the private sector."
Now just let's have a look at that,
What is this expenditure in the public sector? The
Premier of South Australia is in course of spending a great deal
of money, with which we have something to do, in constructing
the Chowilla Dam. Why? WJhy are these steps being taken with
the expenditure in the public sector, mind you, to create this
doubling, I suppose, of the water supply of South Australia,
water being the greatest non-indigenous commodity that this
State needs. Nowr why is that being done? In order to have the
water laid on at the public offices? Don't be silly. In order
to give this State and the industries of this State an opportunity
* 0 
sometimes without much advantage to anybody finds its way into
the stock exchange, but mostly finds its way into capital
investment in Australia. And some of us are more nervous about
this than others, but I don't think that when we come to reflect
on it we'll have much real difference among us.
Every time a million pounds comes in, or ten, or
twenty, or a hundred or, as in recent years, two hundred, for
investment in an enterprise, say of this kind that we are in
( and it's not the only one by a long chalk) every time that
happens, something is created in Australia an industry, a
section of an industry; something is added to Australia
experience know-how, special skills, special techniques. These
are part at once of our national assets, and a few thousand
Australians get employment of a highly stable kind. Is this
a bad thing for Australia? I don't believe that it is.
I admit, Sir, that I would be much happier if all
the people who came into Australia were willing to admit
Australians to some share in the equity in the business, some
share in the management of the business. This is sometimes done,
it is sometimes not done, but we haven't yet reached the point
of time at which we can frown at a movement of investment in
Australia, because properly considered it is again an example
of interdependence. I don't imagine that Chryslers, I don't imagine
that General-Motors, I don't imagine that Fords, or the
International Harvester family, whoever it may be, lay out
millions and scores of millions in Australia because they have
an undying affection foi you or even for me. They lay their
millions out in Australia because they feel that this is a
country with a future, and that this is a country wheie there
is sanity in government, and where there is a reasonable stability
in currency and in monetary management. Don't let's overlook
that. I don-t imagine that any country or any company would
be anxious to throw its money into a whirlpool of inflation and
instabilityo I don't believe it for a moment.
Our great task, speaking now on behalf of the
C. mmonwealth, has been to achieve as great a degree of stability
as we could and at the same time encourage by national development
the greatest degree of growth that we can, and that this has
succeeded, I think is beyond controversy. And I hope, whoever
is in the government, it will continue.
I am not meaning that we want to live indefinitely
in our balances of payments in our overseas reserves on private
capital investment. I hope it goes on, I don't want to be
entirely dependent on it, but we won't be entirely dependent
on it. We have just come out of a year the past year, in which
our record exports were achieved, in which our overseas balances
rose to an enormous extent. There will be fluctuations of course,
but we are in a very healthy position in our overseas funds, and
at the same time, we are attracting the interest of investors,
shrewd investors, experienced investors, industrial investors,
from other countries, because they see in Australia a degree of
good sense and stability and opportunities for the future that,
quite frankly, they can't see in any other country in the
world. a */ 6 j 
6-
And so? Sir, all I have to say can be summed
up in this fashion. We ought to be jolly proud to be
Australians, and we are. die ought to be jolly proud to
live in a country which has established enormous records
in our own time of growth, of expansion and of solidity.
Wle ought Sir, to conduct ourselves that we will continue
to be attractive in that sense to the rest of the w~ orld.
And if we keep on doing that, and we keep on realising that
we are not just a lot of fragments warring with each other,
but that we have all our greatest interests in common, and
that fundamentally we depend upon each other in tbio,
country, then I believe that the future of Australia is
completely assured, and indeed, will exceed anybodyts
expe cta tions. And if that's not~ true. I will rise some day
from my grave and shake my fist at all of you~ t 



FOROXd L
Sktp t IZ Um &amp; JM 11niglarm. the IA. W&amp; s r ab~ a
1 huo O been in toUch with M, Jolt* about
his letter to ms r. rding -tate Inoim ? a2x tics.
I have told im that we have had a Cabinet disaussion
about this matter but thAt, bsere eaoahing rin1mity,
tIo send to hanibmor etwo hae a" o r anO iovsp" t paaeott eor twdustu irry hoeff losow rd etsoired,
put to the C Uloemruth Tesa ury any futhr mt~ zati s
or arpuent which my be availabie an this Impottant
matters H. told me that he would like to have this
oppotnity This is a fair course as between GO rmnts.
no iMi Omtisa are t. be read into it one Way or the
other. When these talks hav occuved, I vi put
mYSff into a position to comunioste a deion to
Mr. 3olt* That deciin will then, of course, bo res sd
to the Pkess.
6th October, 19&amp; 0. 


Lineral PArty of Australia (NSW Division)&nbsp;DINNER IN HONOUR OF THE PRIME MINISTER, THERT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES, KT, CH, QC, MPat David Jones' Restaurant. Sydney.
7th October &nbsp;1964.
There are in our community, aren't there, &nbsp;people who&nbsp;are cynics&nbsp;and there are people who are sceptics. The two&nbsp;animals are quite different. I have a profound respect for&nbsp;a sceptic, for a man who says, " But wait a moment, wait a&nbsp;moment I want to be persuaded that that is true." That is&nbsp;a sceptic. And you and I, all of us, haven't we, been&nbsp;sceptics on a variety of matters. But the cynic, the man&nbsp;who doesn't want to be persuaded, but who believes that there&nbsp;is something to use the homely phiase " crook" about&nbsp;everybody, he is, I think, a common post.
The cynic sometimes says, in Australia7 " Well, itdoesn't matter very much which side wins, things are muchthe same. Why should waste our time on politics?" Nowthis is genuinely the cynic's point of view. " Well, youknow, nothing much happens. Why should I concern myself?II'm so busy on other matters. Why should I worry myselfabout politics?" Well, Sir, all I can say is that if manyof us had refused to " waste our time" on politics, then Iwonder whether cynics today would have been so comfortable.( hear, hear) ( Applause) This is a perfectly fair question.
I have spoken to hundreds of men in my life, men of&nbsp;consequence, men of intelligence, men of training and&nbsp;experience and I have said, " You know, you might make agreat contribution to politics and all too frequently Iget the answer, " Oh, I'm much too busy," to which I have tosay, " Well, do you imagine that I went into politics becauseI wanted a job? Do you imagine I went into politics becauseI was unemployed?" This is too stupid for words. This isthe piece of nonsense that has unduly affected the historyof politics, particularly on our side in Australia. " Oh,D no, well, I couldn't take up my time on it" and the answeris that unless a lot of us are prepared to take up our timeon these matters, then the standard of politics the standardof administration in Australia will fall and fall and fall.
Now, Sir, having said that, I would just like to say&nbsp;a word to you about the current politician. May I so describe&nbsp;him, being one of them myself? Nowadays, it is essential forany responsible politician to know a good deal about variousmatters. I don't mean by a responsible politician somebodywho can do the stuff in the local bazaars and all that kindof thing; I mean the kind of man that you want to see inParliament, the kind of man that you want to discuss thingswith some day with the great idea that he will understandwhat you are talking about,&nbsp;
And from that point of view any responsible politician&nbsp;tod-y ought to know a good deal, believe it or not, about applied&nbsp;economics. When I say " applied economics". I must say that&nbsp;I have been something of a student in my time. I am ratherbetter than half literate, and always in my library I had&nbsp;" The Pure Theory of Economics" by Keynes and " The Applied&nbsp;Theory of Economics" by Keynes, and I confess to you I hope&nbsp;Bill McMahon won't use it against me that I understood theapplied theory rather better than I understood the pure theory.But at any rate, what we all need to know something about isapplied economics because you gentlemen of business though onthe whole you don't know much more about it than we do, doyou? you like to say, " Well, politicians, what do they know?"and my answer is, well, we ought to know and it is ourbusiness to know a good deal about applied economics. And,indeed, you would be astonished to know how many people thereare in Parliament in Government and in Parliament who devotean immense amount of time to this kind of problem. But anyresponsible politician ought to know something about thesematters.
He ought to know something about public finance.&nbsp;Public finance is not one of those mysteries that financial&nbsp;editors write about when the Budget is produced. Public&nbsp;finance comes down to a series of basic ideas which we reallyought all of us who are aiming to be intelligent to knowsomething about. The politician in the Federal Parliament whoaims to be qualified ought to know something about centralbanking and monetary policy. Now this is true, isn't it?How could you ever suppose that people could sit or speak inParliament without knowing something about these matters whichare at the very heart of financial and monetary policy fromyear to year, and, above all things, from your pointcf view,a competent and responsible member of Parliament ought to knowsomething about the impact of banking and financial policieson all apsects of business and industrial undertaking.
Now, I look across here and I see a distinguished&nbsp;friend of mine who is a businessman, a manufacturer. He would&nbsp;agree at once that he would get nowhere in discussions withthe Government unless he felt that he was talking to peoplewho knew something and preferably a good deal about theimpact of these policies on the activities of he businessworld.
&nbsp;
Now, Sir, let's put it to you in this way. No&nbsp;Member of Parliament can offer to know something, however&nbsp;rudimentary, about these matters, except at the expenditureof tremendous application and tremendous hard work. Now allthis? of course, is elementary to you; it is quite elementary,but it has a bearing on what I want to say next.Why have we got into the attitude of mind inwhich we think Members of Parliament have a nice cushy job?They go and open bazaars. Oh, if anybody thinks opening abazaar is a cushy job, I wish he'd do the next one for me.( Laughter) But there is this rather cynical approach, isn'tthere? " Oh, well, they just go around and kiss the babies andopen bazaars and all that kind of thing." Look, governmentsccne and governments go and governments change. Even a PrimeMinister who has been a Prime Minister for so relatively shorta period of time as I have been, has every now and then tosay, " I would like to bring A or B or C in. Do I bring A orB or C in because he is ignorant or because he has this standardof information about the problems of the country that I thinkought to be contributed to a Cabinet consideration?" In otherwords, the vital thing about politics, and it is the historicmission of our party to produce it, to perform it is to bringinto Parliament people who will be able to contribute on thishigh level to the settling of the problems of the nation; notignoramuses or should it be ignorami but I don't mind but&nbsp;not people who are just having a stab at it, not people who are&nbsp;just amateurs at it, but people who have really, year by year,devoted their attention to t, as I proudly profess I have myself.( Hear, hear) ( Applause) Now this is it.
The superficial onlookers I name no names are&nbsp;rather given to saying, 110h, Members of the Federal Parliament,&nbsp;they sit X days a year, and if they are in the Senate like'Alister McMullin they sit X-Y days a year" and then they workout a pretty lithe sum and say: 11X days, so many hours, wellwhat a homely, hopeless proposition this is. These boys arebeing I've read this more than once. They say," They are paid X ( some improbable sum of money) per hour." Nowif anybody supposes that a Member of the Federal Parliament worthhraving I say nothing about the States which have immenseresponsibility confines his labours to X days multiplied by somany hours and that's it, then all I can say is that he has anotherguess coming, because if I were a private Member of Parliament( which many people would very proper~ y desire me to I dontthink I would be measuring my effort by so many days a week, somany weeks a year or so many hours a day, I think I would bewanting to get stuck into the problems of the nation with allthe Departments at my command or request so that every time Irose and spuke, I might say something of value something thatwas a positive contribution to the affairs of the nation,
I mention this to you, gontlemen, because if you&nbsp;willI allow me to say So, I think there is for some reason or&nbsp;other a rather grudging attitude on the part of our peopletoworls the people they send into Parliament to conduct theultimate affairs which produce the ultimate judgments wihinthe long run determine the course of life of so many of us'.
You must not havo this grudging attitude, I said&nbsp;earlier, I don't suppose anyone thought I went into Parliamentbecause I wanted a job, but you are not to look at it from my&nbsp;point of view. I have seen so many men come into the FederalParliament of immense tclent and I am happy to say, Most Of them&nbsp;on our side of politics ( Applause) and I would like them tofeel that the more time they devoted to the problems of the&nbsp;nation the more would their labours be recognised by the people&nbsp;wh. o vote and the people who talk and the people who write,
It is&nbsp;&nbsp;I think, a grudging thing for people to say&nbsp;to a man who goes into Parliament, who is prepared to cut&nbsp;himself adrift and believe me, on our side we must have moreand more of them cut himself adrift from the normal avcnuesof promotion, from the normal access to increased professionalfees-" But, of course yumust understand that we are allsceptical about you. 1&amp; are all cynical about you, and if youwant to be paid an emolument that will compensate you fordevoting one hundred per cent, of your time to the affairs ofthe nation, then you must of course recognise that you will getsomewhat less than the salary of a branch manager in a chainstores systemi."&nbsp;
This is true. This is true, and the trouble is&nbsp;that in Australia we thave produced this cynical approach, Now&nbsp;I am not concerned personally about this. Nobody compelled meto go into politics nobody compelled me to become a PrimeMinister, nobody sits over me with my own meagre firwncialaffairs. I don't give a damn about those things, but if we,on our side of politics, arc going to produce, every time wehave an election, people who are calculated to be the statesmenof the future, then we are not to say, in a rather cynic-. l way,10h well, forget about it. Let him take the senior clerk'ssalary," You cantt do that. You can't impose on people asort of involuntary sacrifice, because we are all different.Some people have wives and some don't ( Laughter) and some havewives and children and some wives but no children. All ourobligations are different, but speaking as the Loader of theLiberal Party to a bunch of people who are, in all essence,Liberal, I want to say to you that what we have to do is tomake it more and more feasible that people of quality andcharacter should go into Parliament on our side so that we may,over a long period of years, present to the people a standardof statesmanship, of quality, that this country and the worldwill need.,
&nbsp;
Now, Sir, there is one other thing that I want to&nbsp;say speaking as the Loader of the Liberal Party. If somebody&nbsp;sai to me, " What is the essential distinction between a socialistand a Liberal" I think I would say that the socialists liveon a basis of dogra. They have a platform they have theirmasters who say this is what you may do, this is what you maynot do, and the result is that whenever any great national issueoccurs, they are hog-tied by the dogma of their party, and afterall, the doctrinaire socialists are dogmatic.
They start off, don't they, by saying, " Well now&nbsp;here's a problem. The State ought to run it," and we start off&nbsp;by saying " Not at all. This is not a matter for the State to&nbsp;run. Can t private people run this? Can't privato enterpriserun this?" and it is only when we come to the conclusion thatprivate enterprise cant run it that we begin to think of somegovernment action. But the doctrinaire socialist, he says, " Oh,no. Start off with the government. We ought to nationa3isethis. We ought to control this." This is a very vital distinction.They are doctrinaire and we are not. We are practical,we are pragmatic on these matters. There are hosts of examplesof this kind of thing in the history of Australia.
But our great danger is that in avoiding dogma,&nbsp;poitically, in avoiding the dogma of the socialists, we may&nbsp;begin to think that we ought to go to the other extreme, and&nbsp;have no faith whatever. But my contrast is between faith, adepp-seated burning faith in how we handle the problems of thecountry and a mere wooden dogma at the other end. This is really,basically, the choice that people have in the modern world.
Now, Sir, it is because of these things that we&nbsp;reject what I have always said is the reactionary theory of&nbsp;socialism. Could I just develop that a bit? You know Sirin the nineteenth century, Great Britain went through the firstindustrial revolution. Mr. Stephenson and Mr. Watt, theyproduced all these marvels and Great Britain became the leaderin the nineteenth century of the new world. This was theindustrial revolution, and this, of course, meant inevitablythat a great number of people became very rich and, no doubt, thata great number of people becramo very poor.
This was it in the nineteenth century. Then we had&nbsp;all the social revolutions in Great Britain. We are their&nbsp;descendants. We might as well remember these things. We had&nbsp;Lord John Russell and we had all the things that went on,industrially and politically, and it was towards the end of thecentury, and perhaps not so much towards the end of the century,that the socialists began.
All the people who hated inequality very rightly&nbsp;sdid, " Well, the only answer to this in this new bursting world&nbsp;is that we should make people equal" and I have never had any&nbsp;dif'ficulty myself' in understonding why in that century andparticularly in the second half' of' it, people were attractedby the idea that if' you were to have social justice you musthave equality and if' you were to have equality you must havethe government running everything. This, as a heoreticJ.exercise in history I've had no diff'iculty in understanding.But I have never haa any temptation whitever to believe in it.Never. Because the truth is that if' in the long run the bestthing is to be done f'or the most people then this is not justa matter of' dividing up what exists, Mu a matter of' adding to&nbsp;what exists.
This is the matter of' developing the resources of' the&nbsp;nation, and if' you are to develop the resources of' the nation,&nbsp;then you must encourage priv: ate citizens to get out and gptbusy and have them hove some reward f'or what they do, It isthe fundamental dif'ference between the socialists of' today andthe Liberal and Country Party people of' today, VIe believe indeveloping resources, we believe in stabilising the currencyof' the country, but we believe that we con do all of' this bygiving to every person the incentive of' reward, or even if' Imay mention that nlmost indecent word prof'it upon what heis doing. Whereas our opponents, they go beck, they are veryreactionary. You must always remember that. They cre veryreactionary, they go back and say, " O0h, no, no. You mustn'tdo that. The government must run this particular thing."
I see an old friend of' mine sitting over there&nbsp;saying to himself', " Now I wionder how the government would get&nbsp;on running the steelworks....?" Now that's right isn't it&nbsp;Cecil? You know this is it. It is a f'atal belief' that thegovernment shoulA be the master and that the government servantscan do better because they are not excited by the prospects of'reward, than ordinary people who if' not excited by the prospectsof' reward, at least hope to get 1hem in due course. Now this,Sir, is the basic problem; it is one of' the fundamentaldifferences between ourselves and those to whom we are opposed.And I repeat that we don't live on a dogma, we live on a f'aith.We believe in the individual, we believe in encouraging theindividual, we believe that in the long run the growth of' ourcountry will depend on what individuals do.Now, Sir, there is one other thing that I would liketo say to you. On our side of' politics we must never becomethe advocates of' special interests or of' pressure groups, Thisis something that needs to be said. Our function is a wide andhuman function. W1e are not here, we are not in politics tobe the advocates of special groups, of' special interests, of'pressure groups. lie nre indeed prof'oundly concerned withjustice and not with subservience to any group of' people.Now I just want to remind some of' you how these principles apply tosome of' the great current problems.WJhere I sit in Canberra we have deputations I seequite a f'ew people here tonight who come f'rom time to time totell us their view and I am delighted to see them and to hearthem But underneath it all, I never f'orget that there aretwo things f'or which a government on our side of' politics muststand. One of' them is that there should be as f'ar as possibla,stability in the currency. Now this, genhemen, is prof'oundlytrue. I don't menn that we are to be pedantic about thismatter, but everybody here will realise that if' we permitteda series of' policies which meant that the value of' the currencywas jumping up and jumping down so that you had the consumerprice index bouncing up and down, then this would be no greatP e. a / 6
6-help to us, either internally or externally. I believe thatit is quite clear that we ought to aim at stability of thiecurrency and the moment we say that, somebody says, " OK, yes,well that means that you don't want growth." Growth is notinconsistent with the stability of the currency. On the contrary,I would venture to say that of all these hundreds and hundredsof million. s that have come into this country in the last eightor ten years from other countries, only a fraction would havecome if we were in the middle of an inflationary boom, with thevalue of currency going out through the roof. This is true.And therefore, stability in the currency, pursued within properlimits, and investment from overseas, investment internally andthe growth of the economy are both on the same side, There isa great temptation to think that they have some classic s'ort ofopposition to each other,I will just give you one simple example. Iapologise for giving it. You know, there is a great dispositionamong the economists, or some economists, to divide investmentin Australia between investment in the public sector and in theprivate sector? the assumption being that investment in thepublic sector is in some way inconsistent with or hostile toinvestment in the private sector. This, I venture t~ o say, isutter tosh. How much investment in the public sector isthere that doesn't come in aid of private industrial andeconomic development? Now I ask you. I look around here andI see a few famous...... tyceons is that the right word?and they say, " Yes, but we want to concentrate on industrialdevelopment. We want to build a new factory. We wrant to dothis." But bless my soul and body, what do the governments do,particularly the State Governments? If you want to have this,you must have roads, you mrust have bridges, you must haveschools, you must have footpaths, you must have water supply.You know, we live in a world of false dichotomy,One of the many reasons why I am a Liberal is that I am a greatbeliever in the practical truth of what goes on, not in sometheoretical division, The truth of the matter is that withouta lot of public expenditure in the public sector perhaps ninetyp~ cent. of it it would be impossible for industries toexpand, to employ people, to have them housed, to have themtransported, to have them supplied with water and light andpower. This is so simple, isn't it? Perfectly simple. Andwhat you must always remember is that it is because we understandthose things that we are to be distinguished from the ratherdogmatic people who make artificial distinctions between oneand the other. Now this is, I think, tremendously important.Nowi I won't talk to you any more about ourinternal affairs Mu I wonder if I have enough time to saysomething about our external affairs because although it used tobe said, not without truth, ten, fifteen, twenty years ago, thatAustralians weren't interested in foreign affairs, I don't thinkthat's true any longer, I don't think there are too many peoplein Australia who believe that we can just go on looking down inthe back garden and saying how the pumpkins are growing andforget that there is something over the road which may preventthe pumpkins from ever being harvested. Political affairs,externally, have become in our time, and since the last warparticularly, of tremendous importance to Australia, e a
-7-Now I am not here to provoke an argument aboutwhether somebody ought to do this, or this, or this, becausethis gets down to detail, but I do want to say this to you:Where my Government stands is perfectly clear. We don'tbelieve that Australia can be an isolationist country. Neitherdo you. We don't believe that we can sustain our future securitywithout having well-chosen alliances, and my owm Governmenthas made them, not with very much approval from some other people.We have made the SEATO alliance. Before that wemade the ANZUS alliance. Is it oln. iys realised in Australia thatif we hasn't entered into this Treaty with America and NewZealand and thereby evolved the ANZUS pact, that we might tcdaybe in no position whatever to say to the United States, " Well,it would be very nice if you could help us" whereas today We arein a position to say that under the terms of that treaty, if ourtroops are attacked in the Pacific that is the business of theUnited States and if the United Sates troops are attacked inthe Pacific, thatts our business. This cuts both ways.( Applause) I venture to say that the ANZUS pact will one ofthese days be looked back on as the most remarkable treaty thatany foreign conntry ever made with the United States, and fromout point of view, it is of vital importance.Well, then, take the other thing. We have SEATOthe South-East Asian Treaty Organisation. We are members ofthat and so is the United States and So is Great Britain, so * sFrance, though the French are not frightfully keen on it, youknow. ( Laughter) No, I think that's fair enough to say. Andso are many Asian countries. It means something, doesn't it,when you are able to say there is a treaty between six or sevennations under which they all jointly and severally agree to cometo the aid of the other in the event of an attack. This, I think,is tremendously important. And both ANZUS and SEATO have neverhad one word of warm-hearted praise by our opponents.And then the latest thing is Malaysia. Now I musttell you about Malaysia. This is really almost incredible.Now Malaya was there, Malaya a non-aligned country, if I mayuse that current expression, with the Tunku. He's a grand man.They decided they would like to establish a Federation. Oddlyenough, that is what we did in 1899 and 1900, when New SouthWales and Victoria were almost as foreign to each other asSingapore and Malaya, because you in New South Wales now richin manufacturers, were a free trade State. Remember? Of courseyou don't9 you're too young, but they were. But here theTunku himself promotes a new Federal system Malaya, Singaporeand Borneo States, and this is adopted, and it is recognisedby the Prime Ministers' Conference the previous one that wehad. We say, " Yesq right, Malaysia is in." It is recognisedby the United Nations, because when the Tunku arrived on behalfof Malaysia, Malaysia was admitted to the United Nations, asMalaysia, not as Malaya or Singapore or something else, but asMalaysia. Then when the ineffable Dr. Soekarno said thiswas not right, people didn't approve of it? the Secretary-General of the United Nations sent out a mission and theyreported that this was in accordance with the will of the peoplein the Borneo States. So if ever there was a country that wasultimately torn and christened as an independent State it wasMalaysia. Now, what is our position in Australia and thisis almost the vital question in the next two or three years?Do we look on indifferently? Do we say, " Well, we approve ofthe concept of Malaysia?" It is almost like saying that youe / 8
-8-approve of the birth of your neighbourls child, the conceptof Malaysia. This is hopeless.We, being what we are, came out and said, " IJebelieve in Malaysia, we think Malaysia has as much right toits independent existence as any other country in the world,and if Molaysia is attacked and Great Britain which has aspecial defence treaty s ays and Malaysia says to us, " We wouldlike your help", we will give it." ( Applause)Sir, this seems to me to be all elementary. I amnot underestimating the problems that we have. Not at all.There are problems of defence and of equipment all thesethings, but that this country should reneg on Its obligation tohelp Malaysia be independent is to be so unthinkable that Icouldn't be the head of a government that contemplated it.( Hear, hear) ( Applause)Well, all this is quite clear. We have forces inMalaysia, we have all sorts of obligations and they areconstantly being changed and added to, but when you look onto the other side of the House ( there is always a choice, neverforget that) what do we find? Well it is only the othernight that one of the spokesmen of the Left ing of the LabourParty said, " Oh, yes, we approve of the concept of Malaysia,but there ought to be no Australian troops in Malaysia," soyou see this is a noble, or ignoble, contradiction, accordingas you look at it. " There ought to be no Australiantroops and his Deputy Leader denounced him orrepudiated him on this matter, and then the Loader of theOpposition said, " Well, on the whole, he thought the man whospoke first was a very good man, a very good Labour spokesman."Gentlemen, this is not good enough. With a littlebit of luck, with a little bit of wisdom, this man Soekarnomay decide to play it quietly and may decide to give up hisconfrontation policy. I don't know and you don't know, butsuppose he doesn't, Suppose he builds up his attack onMalaysia to a point where there must be retaliation unless alittle war is to be lost, what side are we on? This is one ofthe great problems that we have to look at. I have no doubtmyself as to what the answer is on that matter, but these aretremendously difficult matters, and because they are difficultmatters, because it is essential that within an hour or two,questions should be put and answered, then it is vital that youshould have people in a position to receive the questions and tomake the answers who have no doubt or hesitation as to wherethey stand. Now, I am not sabre-rattling on this matter. I don'tthink there is any future in that, but I don't think there isany future in appeasement. ( Applause)I don't think there is any future in allowing aggressivepeople to go on on the assumption that they won't be resistedand that they can go so far, so far, so far, and nothing willhappen. This is really, in our part of the world, the greatestand most acute problem we've ever had. In previous wars, peoplehave said, " Well, what do you say about Belgium? ! Jhat do yousay about Czechoslovakia?" These are a long way away. Butin this matter, we are dealing with what happens next door tous. And I happen to believe most firmly that so be it that westand firm and clear and have no ambiguities and do what needs tobe done on these occasions. We are not going to produce a worldwar. We are going to produce a signal defeat for aggressive so@
-9-dictators who have been chtncing their arm. ( Hear, hear)( Applause) Sir, it is not for me to be labouring this matterbecause everyone of you has given thought to it, but I comeback to where I began: Why are we on our side of politics?Are we cynics? Do we just say UIt doesn't matter who is inor who is out"? I will just test it by the last example Igave you. Does it matter who is in or out? Do you want tohave people in who are the victims of complere ambiguity andinternal dispute as to where they stand on these matters?Or do you want to have people who, whatever their defects maybe abd I am constantly reminded of mine know exactly wherethey stand and are prepared to give a clear, hones and, Ihope, brave lead to our own country in dealing with them.


FOR PRESS P. M. 68/ 1964
I offer my good wishes to the Victorian&nbsp;Government for Saturday's Legislative Council by-election.
Whatever differences of opinion may exist&nbsp;on particular matters and there always will be&nbsp;differences the dominant issue on Saturday is whether&nbsp;Mr. Boltets government is to retain a majority in both&nbsp;Houses, or go back to a position where any government&nbsp;policy may be frustrated by an adverse vote in the Upper&nbsp;House. Similar questions will arise at the next&nbsp;Senate Election. The record of the Bol-e Government is a very&nbsp;fine and progressive one. The electors of Victoria&nbsp;recently gave it tneir warm and clear approval, I am&nbsp;sure that they will affirm their decision on Saturday,
CANBERRA8th October, 1964.



65/ 030
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING, ACADEMIC SESSION, OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLLEGE OF GENERAL PHICTITIONERS, AT
WILSON HALL, UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
ADMISSION OF SIR ROBERT PJENZIES AS AN HONORARY
FELLOW: J OF THE COLLEGE 9TH OCTOBE__ 126+
Speech by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robet -le
Your Excellency and Sir
This shors how wrong one may be, because I came
here tonight saying to myself, " His Excellency the Governor
will make a speech and I'll be able to pick up a crumb or
two, and then my old friend, Sir Victor Coppleson, he will
speak." Not he. silent as the tomb, and therefore all
that is left for me to do is to say thank you very much, Sir.
I appreciate this honour, and in a strange, odd
fashion, you know, I have rather earned it. Would you
mind if I developed that theory a little?
As you know, in the course of a life of a man
like me, one acquires certain things by merit and other
things by favour, I managed to get a degree or two in
this university by working for them and in later years I
have been given a series of unearned honours which give me
the most immense satisfaction. For eximple, I am a surgeon.
Never let anybody entrust himself to my scalpel, but I am
still a surgeon. dhenever my general practitioner looks at
me, or even my expert specialist consultant who is going to
make a speech tonight, I like to remind them that I am a
surgeon and I am also a physician, and also, you don't think
I am boasting this is a simple narractive of fact I am
a gynaecologist and obstetrician, though -hether as a
patient or a practitioner has never been made quite clear.
I seem to remember that I am an architect, but not-responsible
for everything you see. I am a builder, I am a scientist.
This is a boasting record, but I mention it to you firstly
to say I didn't earn any of them and, secondly, to make
you understand after all these events that I am now so
superbly qualified to become a general practitioner.
Now Sir, I have been lucky enough in my life
not to encounter professionally the medical profession too
much. I used to have a bit of fun in a clean way at the
bar in my time, cross-examining doctors, who are very easy
to cross-examine, much easier than when you are their gatient,
and I haven't been their patient all that much, but I ave
d. ived long enough to have the most tremendous regard for
what goes on in the medical world and I have lived long
enough to have a particular regard for the work done by the
general practitioner, because the general practitioner, as
His Excellency said, he is the family doctor, he is the man
you know, he is the man who knows you, knows the family,
who can speak intimately and yet with authority and he is
the man who, over a long period of time, has been the first
diagnostician when he comes to handle something in the family
or in the family circle. / 2 
-2
I find it hard to believe, Mr. Chancellor, when I
look back on my time here and on your time here when we who
were students of the law certainly understood that we were
much more intelligent than the iue9, ical students, I find it
hard to believe how many of these scamps who were medical
students in my time have now become the most trusted family
advisers. And they have, and that proves, of course that it
is a jolly good thing to get it out of your system atsome
time or another, because I venture to say that there are more
millions of people in Australia who owe a debt to the family
doctor than there are any corresponding number who o'., re a debt
to any other particular group in the community
I have been exercised, as I know you have in this
College, exercised about what is going to happen in the future,
because in my own lifetime, which goes back before the turn
of the century, all sorts of astonishing things have happened
in the medical world. I have no doubt that at the time when
I was born, the true function of a physician was to keep his
patient quiet and allow nature to take its course. I have
no doubt that not long before I was born and before all the
subleties of anaesthesia were being got to be understood,
surgery was a chancy thing; in fact, it is only in the memory
of some men still living that antiseptic surgery gave place
to aseptic surgery.
It is really an astonishing thing for somebody like
me to realise that in his own lifetime the greatest discoveries
affecting mankind have not been i ' n the field of destruction
as some people think, but in the field of preserving life as
more people ought to think. Because of all these things the
work of the biochemb-sts, the work of the microbiologists, the
extraordinary developments of drugs and techniques in the
specialised fields, it must become increasingly difficult for
a general practitione-r whose day begins at any hour of the
early hours of the morning and whose day ends at about the
same time, It must be difficult for him to feel that his
tremendous job of dealing with people in the broad and dealing
with people in the particular has to be performed against a
background of knowledge with which he must feel, occasionally,
he is losing touch,
Now this is a problem I thinkc that I, as an outsider,
understand. Do we want general practitioners merely for an
instrument for passing patients on to great specialised experts?
I hope not. Or do we want the trusted family doctors skilled
in understanding, skilled in diagnosis, to preserve hs position
byr keeping up, in the broad and in the particular, his knowledge
of the new developments in medicine, so there is not an
unbridgeable gulf between What he knows he understands and
wrhat he knows is understood by the most refined specialties
in the medical and surgical xworld? If I were a family
practitioner this is what I would want to feel. Yes, of
course, there are great specia'Lised experts who know more than
I do in their particular field-they ought to, because I have
to cover at the beginning at least, all fields. But I do
iwant to Lelieve that every year I know more and more about the
new discoveries, that 1 am every year becoming competent to
understand these latest developments and to know what it is
that my highly qualified specialist will be talking about, @ 0900 * 0/ 3 
3-
This is tremendously true. Jeare not having a
great gulf betw,, een the specialist and the general practitioner,
because if we do, the general practitioner will begin to feel
more and more tbat he merely begins something and that the
skill, the expertise, must belong to other people. If I
were a specialist in some branch of medicine, I wrould want to
know that general practitioners every year knew more and
more about the kind of thing that I was concerned with, and
I am sure that the general practitioners would want that
too, That means, as I understand it, the reason that
this College has been established I heard about this
before it was established. Wy own family doctor used to
address me very earnestly on this subject when he had me
at what you understand to be a disadvantaget and even
from the beginning I can see quite clearly that a College
of General Practitioners, which is going to include within
its scope educational work, refresher courses, lectures and
practice in matters which are new, is going to do something
even more tremendous for the whole body of medical knowledge
and of practice, and so Sir, surgeon though I may be, I
think this is one of the great moments of my life. I have
been a general practitioner in other fields for a long time.
It is a very great honour to become a general practitioner
in the field of medicine. 



CIVIC REGiEPTION. AL3AN," v. A. 11TH OCTOBER, -196+
S~ ehb h Prime Ministero the nt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Mayor, Your Excellency, Parliamentary Colleagues and
Ladies and Gentlemen You have just been reminded that this afternoon
in another place I have to make a speech about the Memorial,
so I won't make it now. I will only hope to make it then
properly. But I do want to thank you, Sir. This is, T
think, the second occasion on which I have given tongue in
this hall. The first tirrn3 I was on a political errand
you are quite right, in 1948. 1 must have had a very rich
supporter or two in i'lest Australia at that time because he
chartered a plane and this was a humble means of getting me
to make about ten times as many speeches as I otherwise would
have made, and one of them was hiere, and I always remember
that as we flew in, we seemed to just dodge over the hump
of the hill and core down on the lunway. It looked frightfully
close, and my Press Secretary at that time said, holding a
piece of paper out to me, " Any famous last words that I can
throw out?" ( Laughter) No doubt, a lot has happened since
then and I am still here.
Sir, the one tViing T would like to say in your
Town Hail and in the presence of yourself as ' Mayor is that I
always get a certain amount of " kick", in the homely phrase,
outiofs tin a enre of municipal government. I'm rnot
just saying that. I say this for the most, I think, profoundly
important reasons. In Australia we are accustomed to local go-vernment7
to voluntary associations of various kinds. to
State Parliaments and Governments to a Coimonwealth Parliament
and Government, and this distribution of the activities of
government is really one of the reasons whiy we have never run
any serious risk in Australia of comding under the grip of a
dictatorship. Government has grown properly from the grass
roots and this, I think, is tremendously important.
I have thought it more and more important in
recent years when I have observed, as you have, how many new
countries have been brought into existence masses of them
in Africa, a number of them in Asia new countries with
newly-won independence and too many people in the western
world have been under Zhe impression that all you have to do
is to give them a constitution, give them the means of electing
a parliament and then kiss them goodbye and say, " Now, you
are a democracy." This, of course, is all nonsense,
Democracy can't be built from the top down.
Democracy has to be built from the bottom up, and the reason
why so many of these now countries have become, in reality,
dictatorships with no parliamentary oppositions with no
opponents worth talking about to the powers-that-be the reason
is that these countries started at the wrong end. If they had
begun by having local councils just as the Parliament in Great
Britain began with the hundreds, the moots, under the spreading
oak tree and gradually developed into some form of national
representational body, so in Australia we have had, with all
the benefit of history behind it, the same kind of experience. / 2 
-2-
We are trying to do this with countries for which we
are responsible, i am interested to see my valued colleague,
Mr. Hasluck here today, because for many years he was the
Minister for Territories, and he seeing this with his usual
clarity, decided that the place to start in was the village,
to establish what you might call a sort of shire or local council,
in which the indigenous people could take a hand, and in which
they could learn some of the arts of government. Therefore,
I come back to where I began by saying that I like to be, every
now and then, associated with a municipal body because I know
that this is, foundationally, the beginning of the structure of
self-government and therefore a very precious heritage that
we have. I suppose I ought to think like this because the
first time I ever heard about politics was in a little village
in the bush in Victoria where my father happened to be a shire
councillor, and the shire councillor from the North Riding used
to come down twenty miles and then my father would hop into a
buggy with him and go another twenty miles to attend the meeting
of the Council of the Shire of Dimboola. I must confess that
in those early days I rather thought that a Riding was something
that people had to ride to. It seemed like it in those days
before motor cars.
And so i began to hear about self-government and
then about state government because I was in there myself, and
now about CommonwJ-ealth Government. Every bit of this experience
accumulates, do you see. It accunulates so that we can finally
look around our o~-n country and say we have a solid s+ ructure
and no crazy fool can destroy it. This is fiimly based on
representative government all the way through. This issomething
to be thankful for? something to be proud of. My only regret
is that so many of the new countries will have to learn by
painful experience what we have been able to acquire by long
practice and by some inherited talent for this kind of thing.
No. r, Sir, I know there is a little matter of food and
drink, I know then I am whisked off like my wife who, like me,
is delighted to be here because it is her first visit. I have
t-en interested in a variety of things. She has been looking
at wildflowers all the time. Anybody who has a view to put on
any of these wildflowers, please come up and give her the
right drill, and after that we will go up on to the hill where
I have been solemnly warned the wind is so strong that it rill
be a physical impossibility to unveil anything. ( Laughter) But
we will do our best. Thank you very much.
0 



UNVEILING AND RE-DEDICATION OF DESERT CORPS
MEORIAL AT AANY JESTE AUTALIA 11TH OCTOBER, 1964
Speech by the Prime Minister, the IRt. Hon. Sir Robert Mienzies.
Mr. Minister, Your Excellency and Ladies and Gentlemen
This is a day of history and symbolism for two countries
Australia, certainly for us New Zealand, certainly for them,
our enduring brothers in this world. The Minister has told you
something of the history of this memorial. It was in 1932
that it was unveiled by W. M. Hughes at Port Said, and there
was an interesting symbolism about its position in Egypt,
because there it was at the mouth of the northern entrance
to the Suez Canal; there it was looking out towards Palestine,
Syria, towards the very centre of the Old Jorld,
A very remarkable piece of symbolism that was that on
an errand of war, men snould have come fiom two countries to
find their way into one country which was the home of Christendom,
and a group of countries which in a true sense were the home
of European civilisation, ' e don't always remember that the
civilisations of Europe came from originally the vicinity of
the Caucasus and that the Phoenician moves across Europe first
of all produced the great civilisation of Greece and then of
Rome and then of the Romance countries and then of Great
Britain herself.
Therefore, here was a country which, however desert it
might look, was the very cradle of religion and of civillsation,
and men came to it from the far corners of the earth, fiom our
two countries which had comparatively little history of their
own and very little long-derived history, although they were
old in point of years,
Now this was, of course, a matter of enormous significance.
It meant that people who might have been thought to have no
particular interest in that part of the world went there in
order to resist aggression, in order to right wrongs, in order
to give let it be remembered, a practical demonstration of
Christian faith in the very home of Christianity, and therefore
it was a most appropriate and symbolic thing that this monument,
as it then was should have pointed the way to this remarkable
series of countries, this remarkable cradle as I have called it,
of civilisation and religion.
Then in 1956, it was attacked in the most vandal-like
fashion. There was no reason in it, there was no sense in it.
Indeed, when I heard about this, I couldn't help remembering
that in 1941 and 1942, Egypt had been protected against being
over-run, by forces from Great Britain and Australia and New
Zealand at the Battle of Alamein, and this therefore was a
wanton act. However it had one result and that is that by
great skill and artistry, the memorial has been re-established,
and now it has been re-established in a place which I venture
to describe as equally symbolic in its own fashion. If it
couldn't stand to point the way to what was then the future
at Port Said., it is a good thing that it should stand here to
point the farewell to those who left here to go to Egypt, to
go to the Middle East, the last point of departure, the last
lovely glimpse that some of them were ever to have of their
own country. a o o / 2 
-2
And, therefore, I subscribe to the views, if I may
with great respect, of the Soldiers' Leagues of both Australia
and New Zealand in their view that this was the proper place
in which this memorial should stand.
Now, Sir, there is one other thing I would like to say.
War memorials are perhaps not unccmnionly misunderstood.
There are those whz3 think that they are merely commemorative
of war, that in some way they glorify war. I would like to
think they do far more than that. I would like to believ: e,
and I know you believe, that they are symbolic of something
enduring in human nature, something enduring in the human
spirit, because it is after all, human nature tie human
spirit that is the ena. uring element in all hisL.-' y3 i. t may
be turned aside from its normal occupations, it may be called
upon to perform great sacrifices it mcay have its m(, ments of
anger and even its moments of hazred, but when these things
have settled down irnto their place, it is the human spirit
which is the continuing element in our civilisation,
It is a wonderful thing, isn't it, that we should
occasionally be able to stand in a place like thais and think
about the human spirit, think about indomitable human nature
and be proud of it and be refreshed ty it. This to me is
the great significance of this place, It may very well be
that this memorial will not be seen by thousands of people at
a time as it might be in some other place, but w'hoever comes
here and looks at it and remembers its history will, I believe,
feel that he's had his own spirit" touched and refreshed iy
contemplating, i. rhat man can do, what man can endure, -whrat
wonderful lovely qualities in man can survive every kind of
t rial. I remember early in 1941 at Chsavers in England,
sitting after dinner with 4finston Churchill and he was kind
enough to say something to me, to deliver his philosop,-, y to me
in a sentence, as I know he has to other people, but I was
lucky to hear it myself on that occasion. This was early in
1941, when there was no second front, when all the apostles
of gloom were talking about defeat, when America was not in,
vnen Great Britain had conducted the Battle for Britain and
was under bombing attack every night, and I remember the great
man turning to me and saying, " However long you live, remember
this. This is the truth. In war, fury. In defeat, defiance.
In victory, magnanimity, and in peace, goodwill." This I
believe is a marvellous philosophy and it might well be borne
in mind by all of us as we look at this memorial to wonderful
fighting men and as I take the opportunity and give myself
the honour of unveiling a plaque on this occasion, 



Statement by the Deputy Prime Minister
the Right Honourable Jo McEwin. MP,
in _ the House of Representatives on
1 October, 19
SENATE ELECTIONS
I make a statement to the House concerning
Senate elections. I make the statement at the request
of the Prime Minister who, as Honourable Members know,
is absent from the House for the cime being because of
illness. Honourable Members will be aware that to satisfy
the provisions of the Constitution, elections for the
Senate must h&amp; ve been conducted and completed by
June next. so that newl-elected Senators may comience
their tierm ot service on 1st July, 1965.
On the recommendation of the Prime Minister on
behalf cf the Government, His Excellency the Governor-
Geneial has proposed to the State Governors an election
timetable. Each State has agreed to the timetable proposed
and, accordingly, I announce to the Hovse that elections
for the Senate wi2. l be held in all States on Saturday,
December, It is necessary that this announcement be made
to the House at this time since the law of some States
requires formal action in those States within the next few
days in order to give effect to the timetable in mind,
The full timetable is as follows
Issue of Writs o Monday, 26th October, 1964
Nominations close o Monday, 9th November, 1964
Polling Saturday, 5th December, 1964
Return of Writs On or before Saturday.
23rd January, 1965. 



65/ 162
HOSKINS FAILY IEMORIAL SERVICE AT HOSKINS
MEMORIAL CHURCH, LITHGOW, NSW. 17TH OCTOBER, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister. Sir Robert Menzies
It's a very great honour to be here and to be
asked to speak on such a notable family occasion. I'm a very
old friend, I'm happy to my, of several of the distinguished
members of the family. I was warned by one of them that on
this occasion I should not embarrass the family by talking
about it. Having met scores of members of the famil having
been across the road compassed about by a great clou of
witnesses all of whom appeared to be Hoskins, I dare not omit
to speak about them. Indeed, that is what I am here for.
And being a Presbyterian, Sir, I like a text,
and my text, though it hasn't Tound entrance to the Authorised
Version and still remains in the Apocrypha, it is a great one,
a suitable one " Let us now praise famous men and our fathers
which begat us." There can be no more splendid invocation
than that* because we are praising today, with our memories and
with our prayers, notable people, people who were creators
in this country, people who have not merely lived and passed
on but who have left this country in their debt. We are
celebrating an uncommon family and therefore uncommon
individuals. Now Sir, the. history of the Hoskins family in
Australia, running back now over 112 years if I mistake not
is a very remarkable ine. I was fascinated to discover when
I was informed of some of the details that at one stage the
founder of this shall I call it a dynasty in Australia
worked in Ballarat. This at least gives me some faint contact,
in terms of place, if not in terms of quality, because I was
at school in Ballarat and my parents were born in Ballarat, and
so the family lines have merged to that extent.
But the story of this family, Sir, is a matter
for pride for the family and it is a matter of gratitude for
the country. Having said that, I would like to add that it
gives all of us something to ponder.
, ie all know, don't we, that this has been described
as the age of the common man. I want to say something to you
about that. I remember during this last war making a speech
in London in which I used the phrase the common man. I
used it I thought in a very appropriate way on that occasion
because I was referring to the behaviour of the people in
Great Britain under the bombs, under attack, and I said it was
an age in which the common man had become a king. But I had
letters from people, 9uite a few, protesting against the use of
the word " common as if it involved some condescension. Perhaps
I" c hoamdm obne" t tiesr oneex polfa int hotsoe ywoour dast oinnc eo, u r ilta ndgoueasgne' t. w hicThh eh asw oardn
almost infinite variety of meanings. You may say, " That's a
very common fellow." You don't mean something pleasant. You
may say that the Elder Pitt was the great commoner. Not
offensive on the contrary. You may say that a Royal personage
has married a commoner. There are enormous varieties oJ meanings
to be found. But it has been said and said in some senses with / 2 
2
profound truth that this is the age of the common man. It's a
Areat truth so long as we understand what it means. I want
o give you two reasons for saying it's true, before I make a
certain gloss upon it.
The first is that true democracy, that which we
all in our own ways try to practice in Australia, true democracy
seeks to achieve not justice to a few or something for the
talented but justice for all men, for all women, and regards
the good life of the individual as the ultimate aim of government.
This is worth remembering.
PolitiCs is not a matter of loaves and fishes
entirely. Loaves and fishes may come into our economic life,
but the essence of it is that in our ways whatever our party
beliefs may be, we must all the time be stru] ling for the good
life for the individual because that will be -he ultimate test
of the value of whatever contribution we make to our country.
And in the second place in all times of crisis ( we can say
this with pride), in all times of crisis for the nation it is
the spirit of the ordinary man and the ordinary woman tAat has
provided the foundation of survival and successi
I had the great honourt as you know, of enjoying
the close personal friendship of V.; inston Churchill, and like
you, I shall never forget how his w.' rds rang out and gave
encoaragement and hope and confidence to his people and to
people all round the world, and yet he was the first to know
and to concede that he wasn't creating something in the
individual; he was evoking from the individual something that
was there. This courage and determination came from ordinary
men and women and he made their deepest feelings vocal. It was
he who led out something which is part of the genius of the
common man the common individual, the ordinary person in a
community like ours.
Now Sir, having said that let me look at the
other side of tAe picture. I rather think it would be a calamity
if our applause of the age of the common man for the reasons
that I have just been stating induced us to yield to the
temptation to resent or reject the uncommon man. This is a
great danger. One sees occasionally a symptom of it the
little flashes of jealousy, of hatred, of malice. This is too
easy a strong temptation; it s easy enough to yield to it,
and therefore, to look at the uncommon man as if he ran counter
to the pattern of life that I have just been saying something
about. Mj reason for saying that we must not yield to that
temptation is that in all history it has been well established
that it is, after all, the uncommon man who initiates ideas,
who provides leadership, who has honourable and powerful
ambitions who supplies the driving force who has a capacity
for industr beyond the minimum of obligation, who has sufficient
courage to efy disaster and not to be misled by temporary
success. This is some bfinition, I think, of the uncommon
man and it is appropriate to refer to him because the founder
of this notable family was an uncommon man. He answered to all
of these things that I have been Ulking about.
And that adds up, Sir, to this, that the ordinary
man must have a proper pride, should never be over-anxious to
submerge himself or to be misled, but at the same time, he
must aIways have a belief a true belief, a true appreciation
in and of the quality of the uncommon man. low of course the
uncommon man, ir, the uncommon man may turn out to be a tyrant,
a dictator, and therefore a destroyer if he forgets that the
" i a / 3 
-53-
spirit and happiness of the common man is his chief concern and
that his ambition must be for the people and not for himself.
Let me apply those ideas by one or two examples that
will readily come to your own mind. Hitler, of course, was the
latest in this century he was an uncommon man, who turned
out to be a destroyer so that he had to be destroyed.
Nlapoleon, who overshadowed Europe, who overshadowe dthe then
known world in the height of his military successes, his military
genius, he was an uncommon man. Nobody would doubt if for a
moment. But what did he achieve? Measur-e what he did against
its defect for the common man, its value for the common man, the
ordinary man. I remember standing once in Paris looking
through the irc de Carousel right up the Place A. e la Concorde
to the Arc de Triomphie at tUe o her end and this beautiful
arch is covered with the boastful record of Napoleon's victories,
his conquests of this piece of land or that piece of land.
Yothing remains except the marble the victories forgotten, the
victories fruitless, the conquered lands once more free. Here
is a boasting piece of marble* the uncommon man, who in all
those respects failed in his duty to the common man.
On the other hand, we may think of people I don't
need to name very many of them Shaftesbury, in England the
founder of factories lTegislation, the true beginner of all the
humane industrial legislation that has come to us since this
so-called remote aristocrat the uncommon man, a tremendous
benefactor of ordinary people. Lincoln, in America-the great
industrial creators in our own country, because don't forget
that there are two kinds of people who come to great wealth and
position in the country. There are those who make money because
they are good at making money. There are those who make money
or power or influence be cause they have created something and
maintained something for the benefit of other people. Anid the
fact that they have some benefit from it is no more to say than
to say that t~ ie labourer is worthy of his hire. The great
names I won t make invidious distinctions, but I could at the
slightest thought mention five or six great names in industrial,
manufacturing, mining history in Australia who are the names
who would be Ihe names of people who were uncommon men and wLi
have laid common men under heavy tribute.
I was looking the other day, once more Sir in the
Gospel according to Matthew at the parable of the talents.
There is one word in it which deserves emphasis because you
remember that when those who had five talents, two talents, went
away and put them to work, did some thing ith them, and came
back having doubled them the word that was spoken was, eli
done thou good and faith{ ul servant". True, true, they were
the servants of the master who had given them the talents, but
they were also servants because nobody could have done what they
did without serving some good public or private end. The
uncommon man. Wlhenever we are fortunate to encounter him he
is the servant of the country and the servant of his people, and
there is every reminder of that as wie stand or sit in this place
on this most notable occasion.
I wonder, Asir, if I might conclude my remarks by
saying that many years ago, I read for the first time and that
was a great event Robert Louis Stevenson's " Child's Garden
of Verses". There may be people here who have become so grown-up
that they think they have outgrown them. I hope not. I hope
not because Robert Louis Stevenson will himself never grow old
in the minds of people, and his " Child's Garden of Verses"
remains a joy forever. Remember the poem about the river and IA 
4-
the children putting their little boats into the river and
floating them away, 0and exciting childish pleasure? And
then it goes on " Away down the river
A hundred miles or more
Other little children
Shall bring our boats ashore"
This verse has stuck in my mind. It has, in my own case,
continued to have a profound effect on my owvn mind....
" Other little children will bringr our boats to shore".....
Other little children will benefit or suffer, according to
our virtue or our vice; every time wie do something that is
at all significant, vie are launching a little boat on the
river of life, and other little children will bring it to
shore. Let us never forget about that.
No man could be a great nioneer and constructor as
the founder of this family was if he had thought only of
today. He must, from time to time, have looked forward and
have said, " Yes, if I can do this, then we can do so-and-so,
then we'll do something else," looking to the future,
conscious of the fact, as wie all must be, that wve are not
here today and cgone tomorrow but that we have our little
mark to make for good or evil, and the mark doesn't rub out
too quickly That's why I think that that is a geat poem,
a -i-onderful poem deserves to live with us, as I indeed I
hope I may say it has lived with me.
And so here today in the presence of so many members
of this family, this famous family, recalling the achievements
of this family, I would like to think that we, like themselves,
will look forward with thankfulness for what has been done
and with a profound hope that when our boats come to shore,
they wrill be found by happy children in a happy world all
the better because we launched our boat. 



I14AUGURAT ION OF LAKE~ BURLEY GRIF FFRI N,
CANBERRA, A. C. T-. 17TH OCTOBER$ 1264+
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir RoberL Menzies
Sir At any rate, we have added a word to the vocabulary
of the country, because when I knew I had to do something about
this new Lake I wondered what it was open it, close it,
name it what was it to be? Inaugurate. ( Laughter) I think
thatts lovely. I declare this lake duly inaugurated. ( Applause)
While I am making that sweeping gesture I am happy
to say that I am delighted to be able to do it not only in the
presence of' those who have been named so far, but ini the
presence of my old friend, Sir John Butters, the first and
true founder of' this city. I am delighted that he is here.
( Applause) The creationl of this lake is the result of a pretty
long struggle. I remezmber being very much in favour of it in
the late thirties, but I was a humble, miserable out-voted
Attorney-General at that tima and tkiere were powerful forces
arrayed against me because there was a golf course ( Laughterl
and all the Heads of all the Departments belonged to it, and
they took a fine pride in making the then Prime Minister the
President of the Club ( Laughter) and I fougbt an uphill battle
for a long time. But after the war when I had an opportunity
in my own right, I began to come back to this project because
I have always believed, anid never more than today-that you
can't have a great city unless you have water in It.
You look around the world and wonder to yourselves
what London would be like without the Thames, or what Paris
would be like without the Seine. Indeed I have always thought
that part of' the dullness of Berlin if I may so speak was
due to the fact that it had nothing but a miserable trickle
of water running through it. Water, water in all the great
cities of the world, and I have looked forward to this momentor
to a recent moment when the lake was filled,
Now, I'm like the Minister who has made a speech in
which he has covered all the things that I really wanted to
say, but Itm like him, I don't mind a few blemishes on this
thing. I uttered imprecations about the mosquitoes, but they've
gone not because of my curses but because of the skill of
the Commission. W1e all uttered curses about certain faint
odours to which he has referred.
Now I find that it has become rather a hobby of
people to say " There was a big storm last week and a bit of the
wall fell in.' 4 May I offer a heresy? I don't mind if a bit
of the wall falls in. I would rather like to see a few more
patches around this lake in which the wall had fallen in and
in which the rushes had grown and in which the wild fowl
might have their nests because I see this lake ultimately not
as something purely artificial in its surr'ounding but as a
haunt of birds, as a haunt of wild life. Indeed, I am optimistic
enough to think the day will come when tourists coming through
will be able to feed the swans and this will be quite a feature
of the city. So I don't mind. Let the walls fall in as long
as they don't do it completely. ./ 2 
-2
Well, now, the achievement of this lake has been
a long struggle, I wouldn't like to go into the details
of it, but at least twice during its history, having been
abroad, I found when I got back that evil men had been at
work and that something was being taken away from us and
I had to be the humble instrument of providence to restore
it. This is of the essence, this is the heart of the city,
and I hope it will be a heart that will be quietly beating,
not noisy, not uproarious a quietly beating, restful heart
for the rest of our lives.
Now, of course, it has been beautifully done. Do
let me say that to you if it needs to be said, because a
lake is more than a sheet of water. You can have a sheec
of water if you spend enough money on it anywhere I suppose
around about, even in the middle of Australia, but it is
what is around the sheet of water that helps to set the
beauty of the lake, and all the work that has been done on
the foreshores, in the surrounds of -this lake, all tlie
additions of beauty that have been made will, I think, put
us under permanent dcbt to those who have been responsible
for their design and their execution.
Now, Sir, there is just ono~ other thing that I wan-t*
to say. I think that ' this lake, as Mr. Anthony has said
is of tremendous significance to Canberra. It unites this
city. Some people thought it would divide the city on the
contrary it has united the city because it has given a centre
and a heart to the city, and that is a very good thing for
Canberra. But may I add that it is a very good thing for
Australia because what is good for Canberra, what makes
this capital city a more lovely and attractive city what
enables this city to have directed to it the attention of
millions of Australians is very good not only for Can) 3erra
but for Australia, because let us face up to it we have a
natural instinct, haventt we, in this country of~ ours for
parochislism, for thinking in terms of States and of Atate
loyalt ies. Now these are admirable things, but the nation is
the great element in Australia. It is a hard and constant
battle to make people understand that the Commonwealth is
not a foreign power, that the Commonwealth is something
that is interwoven through the whole structure of Australia
and through the hearts and lives of all its people. This,
though we understand it, is not easily taught, not easily
understood by people who havontt bothered to consider about
it. And here we are now, in a city which was a village
when I first came here, some time ago, and now it is a city
of 75,000 people. In due course it will be a city of half
a million or of a million people. Wlhen I first came here, one
almost had to apologise for having anything to do with
Canberra " That silly place" 1Earnest men, in club armchairs,
would debate with each other what ought to be done about
Canberra most of the suggestions being rather offensive and
some of them faintly obscene. ( Laughter) This doesn't happen
today, Every weekend, thousands of people come in. Wherever
I go in Australia now, instead of hearing somebody bleat about
aso eoe* / 3 
3-
Canberra and the wicked expenditure of money in this place,
I have ten times as many people now saying to me, " What a
wonderful place Canberra is. My wife and I went up there
recently" or " We took the children up there last long
vacation. What a beautiful place it is,"
There is a pride in Canberra being developed
and thatts tremendously important, not for us because we
live in Canberra some of us temporarily this is not
just a matter of pride for us. This is a matter of national
importance, because more and more as people understand that
this is the capital of the nation, a capital of which they
may be proud, then more and more will they begin to realise
instinctively that the nation is more important than any
part of it and that the nation is symbolised by the capital
of the nation in this place. In other words thi-I think
is doing a great deal to create a genuine national spirit,
and therefore this lake is good for yoil and me good for
this city, good for Australia good foi, the spirit of the
nation, a spirit that will~ asi beyond any of the prejudices
of today, And so Sir, I am particularly delighted to loo1%
across here and Lo be able to see the two bridges thr-t we~ re
built as one might ray on dry land, because the last thing
I wani to do is to start a controversy bedause controversy
is hostile to my nature ( Laughter), but I venture to say
that those are two of the finest buildings we have in the
Federal. Capital, and I compliment those who were responsible
for them, And from now on here it is, a centre of~
recreation, a lake that will give completeness for example,
to all the scholastic facilities that exist ana will exi~ t
in this city, a lake that will complete the amenities of life
even for the acadumic staffs of the university, who will
be able to go out on the lake in future and forget all
about politics ( Laughter) and have a good time, Rea'lly
there is something here for all of us. All of us. Politicians,
as Doug Anthony has just said, will be able to look at the
lake with a new significance in future, all of us will be
the better for having this lovely centre in this lovely
city. And so, as I think I said at the beginning I
have a great feeling of official privilege, a great leeling
of unfeigned personal delight in declaring this lake to
have been inaugurated by me a quarter of an hour ago, 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION AND
DISARIMAMENT,
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 22nd October 1964.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIFS ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 8.311.-Mr. Speaker, we
have just heard a pathetic speech.
Opposition Members.-Oh.
'-' Sfr ROBERT MENZIES.-Yes. I repeat
_ C at it was a pathetic speech. The question
before the Chair, though we may not realise
it from what was said, concerns a papera
ministerial statement in relation to this
o-called peace Congress. I would have
jpected that the spokesman for the Opposition,
first, would have explained to us why
be believed in the Congress and, secondly,
would have told us that he would attend it,
and why. But, instead of that, we have heard
a speech that was a rambling affair. I recall
an old judge once telling an advocate in my
presence that he had circumnavigated the
entire globe of irrelevancy. If ever anybody
did that, the honorable member for
Werriwa ( Mr. Whitlam), speaking as Deputy
Leader of the Opposition, did it this evening.
He circumnavigated the entire globe of
irrelevancy. Here, we are dealing with -a
conference and a very serious problem concerning
the question of whether this is a
Comramunist front-which it is, beyond
question. But did the honorable member
address himself * to that matter? No. He
13895/ 64. went on a little voyage of discovery. He
talked about the Voyager disaster. He
talked about Ansett. He talked about homes.
He talked about overseas investment. He
even brought into the discussion Sir Walter
Murdoch, a most distinguished scholar who
has been honoured by Her Majesty, not for
* his political views, but for his great distinr_-
tion in the world of literature. Really, the
Deputy Leader of the Opposition is pretty
hard put to it, is he not, when be has to
come to this? He even told us who somebody's
uncle was. I have had a few uncles
myself whom I have liked. But there may
be nephews of mine who would not want
me dragged up on the occasion of some
debate in the future. The honorable gentleman
is hard put to it in this debate.
Oddly enough, in the midst of all this, he
has been devoting his attention to the somewhat
anaemnic labour of reading the
" Anglican which, may I tell you, is not
the official organ of the Church of England.
I happen to know that because, after it had
published a few foul and defamatory remarks
about me, I wrote to the then Synod
of the Church and asked: " Is this your
official organ? I was hastily assured that
it was not. The last time I heard of the
publisher of the. Anglican he-was in a 
little trouble over an obscene publication,
as honorable members will recall. The
Deputy Leader of the Opposition, being
frightfully anxious to avoid coming to the
point, has been reading the " Anglican
If he can find a Presbyterian who is a little
pink, he quotes him. That is easy enough.
I know quite a few of them myself. If he
can find a Methodist, he quotes him. He
ran over the landscape' and picked up a
bishop or two, but never, ' from first to last,
did he face up to the problem that once
exercised his Party-the problem of whether
this Congress is a Communist front. In spite
of the most engaging invitations by some
of my friends on this side of the House,
he failed to say whether he would attend
the Congress. I am prepared to lay a slight
shade of odds within the limits of my
purse-Mr. Hayden.-Oh.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Within the
limits of the honorable" iimeber's purse, if
he likes. Let me put it that way. That puts
it a little higher. I am prepared to lay a
slight shade of odds that the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition will not be at the Congress,
because he will realise that selfpreservation''
is the fist laii" of life. That
is how the matter stands, Sir. He tried to
make something out of the Pairiarch of
Moscow. But he made such an awful blue
there. He put questions in the House asking
whethe"' the' Ptriarch" of Moscow-the
guest of the Archbishop of Canterburyhad
been refused a visa, or something of
the sort. It turned out that he vas not
speaking of the ' right fellow. But" that is
nothing to the honorable gentfeman. The
facts come easily and depart easily on his
tongue. He took up about 30 minutes of
the time of the House without thinking fit
to come to the point of'this matter. I
want to come to the point of'it, Sir.
The Attorney-General ( Mr. Snedden)
made a statement on this subject, and it is
on the motion that that ' stateient be noted
that this debate occurs, though nobody
would have imagined it after listening to
the speech just made by th~ Deputy Leader
of the Opposition. After the Attorney-
General had made his statement in this
House, the organisers of; this beautifully
polite, kindly iitentioned non-Communist
Congress weie so shaken by ' whai" he ' had said that they advertised denying that the
Congress was a continuation of a similar
congress held in Melbourne in 1959. I do
not remember most honorable members
opposite, or even the honorable member for
Werriwa, being at the conference of 1959.
Although that conference had been practically
conceded to be a Communist front,
it was essential for the organisers of the
present Congress to get away from that
sort of thing. So they advertised, in a certain
newspaper which I shall not advertise, denying
that the Congress was a continuationof
a similar congress held in Melbourne in
1959. But, at the very moment when the
Attorney-General was making his statement
in this chamber, a brochure was in circula-t
tion on behalf of the Congress. It stated-
In 1959, there was held in Melbourne thr-'\
Australian and New Zealand Congress for Inter
national Co-operation and Disarmament. Following
this Congress, State continuing committees
were formed to carry on its work. In February
1964, representatives of these committees decdded
to'convene a panel of citizens to form a provisional
sponsoring committee to begin preliminary
planning for a national congress in October 1964.
That Congress begins in a few days.
Can anybody seriously believe that it is
not the legitimate child of the
1959 conference? Yet the organisers
of the present Congress advertised
that it " was not connected with the
World Peace Council or any other organis*'
tion either inside or outside Australia'
They expressly denied that the Congress
was a continuation of a similar Congress
held in Melbourne in 1959. Yet I have just
quoted the words of their committee, which
demonstrate that that was simply a fat 1I
On 18th August, before the statement
was made, Congress News Bulletin No. 3
was published. It contained a series of
items which should be discussed at the
Congress. After the statement by the
Attorney-General, two of the items were
omitted. They were the North West base
and an independent foreign policy for
Australia. This latter item was designed
to get Australia, in the interests of peace,
to abandon all its alliances with the United
States, Great Britain and other countries.
Sir, I can only assume that these items
were so clearly related to Communist policy
and unrelated to peace, as we understand
peace, that the organisers felt that to have
them discussed would rather reveal the
true' nature of the Congress. I do ' not need 
to labour this matter. Nobody with his
ordinary wits fails to understand that this
is a Communist-front organisation. Indeed,
the honorable gentleman does not deny it.
He merely quotes a number of people as
giving respectability to a Communist-front
organisation, forgetting that the whole purpose
of Communist-front organisations is
to get eminent and respectable people to
lend an air of respectability to a conference
that otherwise would be exposed as a
Communist activity.
SWhy do these Communist-front organisa-
Jtions exist? The first reason that I can
think of is that these people want to make
Communists and Communism respectable.
SNothing makes a person so respectable as
to be seen in company with a bishop. That
\ is a very interesting feature of life. There-
_ fore, they get a bishop if they can. Nothing
makes a person much more respectable
than to be in the company of a Presbyterian
clergyman. This appeals to me
very much. I know two or three of thenm.
I do not wonder that they are in this business.
The first purpose of these organisations
-is to make Communists and Communism
respectable. The second purpose is
to weaken the will of free people to resist.
This is tremendously important. Why do
they have a conference in Australia instead
-af in Moscow?
Mr. Pollard.-You are not crediting the
people with' inuch common sense.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-If you do
not mind, Reggie old boy; you are like me,
" decent Presbyterian in your spare time.
3 behave yourself.
The second purpose of these organisations
is to weaken the will of free people to resist.
Why must these conferences be held in Australia?
This is a vital question. If these
people want to pass resolutions and explain
to others the vital importance of peace, the
abandonment of threats and the abandonment
of aggression, why do they not operate
in one of the Communist countries? Instead
of doing so, they come here and bring some
of their respectable sponsors here. Why do
they do this? To tell the Australian Parliament
not to be aggressive? To tell the Australian
Parliament or Government not to
lay covetous eyes on other' people's possessions,
other people's lafds or other people's
freedoms? ' Cani' nybody with a grain of common sense suppose that any government,
any party or any parliament ini Australia
needs to be persuaded that we want
peace and we are against aggression? We do
not need to be told about peace by these
people. Some others in the world do, but
these people never tell them.
One of the objects of these conferences
is to divide the free world. I have not the.
time to do it, but if honorable members
will look at some of the items that are to
be discussed and have been discussed in the
past at these conferences they will find that
more is said in the resolutions and the
debates against America than against the
Soviet Union or Communist China. There
is more cackle about American imperialism
than there is about the sinister imperialism
of the Communist world. But of course these
people like to talk about American imperialism.
They would have us believe-we
have heard evidence of this in the last few
days-that a great contribution to peace in
the world would be made if the United
States of America were to abandon South
Vietnam, the South East Asia Treaty
Organisation, its bases in the Pacific and,
iricidentally, Australia. I will defy anybody
to find a single word spoken by any of these
people -that support A. N. Z. U. S.
or the great liberal, free activities of the
United States on behalf of free people all
round the world. Not a word is spoken by
them against the Soviet Union or Communist
China. Mr. Stokes.-The North West Oape was
on the agenda.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Yes, but they
have left that out for reasons that my
honorable friend perceives in a flash. One
of the purposes of these oonferences is to.
promote nuclear disarmament. Nobody can
deny that; it is all perfectly clear. It is on
the record. We are all in favour of disarmament,
but we are not such fools as toabandon
the freedom of the free world by
saying: " Abolish nuclear armaments but
leave all conventional armaments untouched
To do so, of course, would be to
put the world in the hands of the Communist
powers.
Another purpose of these conferences is
to discourage military alliance against Communist
aggression. " Military alliance" is a
rude expression. Really, are we to accept 
this? I knew that I am discussing something
that the honorable member for Werriwa
did not care to discuss. I happen to be discussing
the motion before the Chair. I want
to make it quite clear on behalf of my
Government that we are not in favour of
persuading or driving the United States out
of Vietnam and the western Pacific. But the
active sponsors, the real organisers, the Communist
promoters of this Congress are. We
are not in favour of destroying Malaysia and
removing the British bases from Malaya and
Singapore. Where do the members of this Congress
stand? Heaven knows, they have had three,
four or five of these Congresses. The previous
one was held in 1960 in Yokohama. I
regret to observe that my friend, the honorable
member for Reid ( Mr. Uren), was
amongst the delegates present on that
occasion. I hope he has been misrepresented,
but according to the report a unanimous
resolution was carried attacking S. E. A. T. O.,
attacking Cento, which concerns us very
much in. the Middle East, and attacking
other military alliances organised by
imperialist powers". I ask the honorable
members to note the last words. Imperialist
powers? I suppose that is a fine phrase to
describe a very great power like the United
States, a great power like the United Kingdom
or a small power like Australia! We
are all members of these treaty organizations.
In Japan in 1960, since when, of
course, they have suffered a sea change
into something rich and strange, they were
attacking all these things.
May I just say, because time is not unlimited-
I am grateful to the House for having
given me as much as it has given methat
in March 1951, which after all was
after this Government came into office, the
Federal Executive of the Australian Labour
Psrty made a pronouncement. I shall quote
its precise words. The Labour Party was a
little more given to precision in those days
than it is now. The Federal Executive said-
We further denounce so-called peace councils
as instruments of Soviet imperialism, and we
warn members of the Australian Labour movement
against being involved with appeals of
organisations which exploit the dsire for peace
in the interests of Russian plans.
Those words, my honorable friend would
agree, are fighting words. There is nothing
ambiguous about them. They say, in effect: " Don't you be misled; don't do anything
about this." Indeed, the Federal Executive
went on to underline that expression in
1951 by stating that it further declared-
That this Federal Executive, being of the opinion
that the Australian Peace Council is a subsidiary
organisation to the Communist Party, we therefore
declare that it is not competent for any member
of the A. L. P. to be associated therewith and
remain a member of the
Those were the good old days of 1951 when
the executive said: " Don't you go; if you
go, you are out of the party." Does anybody
-1 look at honorable members oppositeseriously
want to tell me that these congresses
have changed, that the congress of
1964 is utterly unlike the one of 1959 or
is utterly unlike the one that was considered
and adjudged in 1951? Nobody believes that.
If honorable members look at the names,
and in particular the ecclesiastical names, of
some of the people connected with the congress
then and connected with this one
now, they will find exactly the same set-up.
I sympathise with a member of the
Labour Party in this Parliament who is just
as good a non-Communist as I am but who
finds himself put in this ambiguous position.
It is an ambiguous position. His own party
has said: Have nothing to do with it or
you are out of the party"; but now, i
1964, it says through the present leader,
that the A. L. P. in New South Wales-there
seems to be a rather limited exemption given
on this occasion-the A. L. P. in New South
Wales--whioh, I -believe, was regarded, or.
professed itself to be, as right wing un
it endorsed Mr. Leslie Haylen as a candidate
in the Senate election, when it abandoned
its pretence-has decided that it will not be
officially represented. but that individuals
are permitted to participate. If there was
anything funny about this it would be the
funniest statement in the world-to say tothe
in the greatest State in Australia:
" You are not to be officially represented.
Whatever you do is to be unofficial. If any
of your boys go, they must go unofficially.
They must even conceal the fact"-no
doubt-" that they are members of the
party What is this humbug?
What is the position of a party which
says, in the largest State in Australia:
" Now look, we cannot officially be connected
with this thing, but unofficially we-
don't mind if you nip in the side door"
It is almost incredible.
Mr. Clyde Cameron.-It sounds like
Bolte to me.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I know that
the honorable member has succeeded for
a long time in being both official and unofficial
at the same time, being a rebel and
being one of the Establishment at the
same time. I envy him this. This argues his
great talent. But it does not detract from
the point that I am making, looking at my
friend, the honorable member for Banks
( Mr. Costa) and the rest of you. How can
' you be officially out and unofficially in?
That is the position -that the Labour Party
has got itself into.
I conclude by saying that all of us in
this Parliament-I say this with no reservations
whatever-all of us want peace.
None of us believes in an aggressive policy.
We are, indeed, foundation members of the
nuclear test ban treaty. Nothing could suit
a developing country like Australia more
than total disarmament, honestly
effectuated. Does any honorable member
ppposite seriously suggest that there ought
, to be unilateral disarmament in this world?
Of course not. Therefore, what we are
after-all of us-is ultimate disarmament,
honestly effectuated, so -that nobody is left
with the power to crush another. But, those
' ieing our objectives, I come back to where
Afound myself a little while ago. Why
have this conference? To persuade us of
things of which we are among the world's
greatest advocates? To persuade us? Of
course not. These conferences do not direct
themselves to the Communist powers; they
direct themselves to us. Therefore, it is
proper to say to them and to their unofficial
friends and sponsors: What changes of
policy do you seek in Australia? I do not want to have a lot of fustian
here about wanting to get rid of the present
Government, because honorable members
have had that feeling-very properly, -if I
may say so-for the last 15 years. I do
not want a fustian of that kind. What
changes of national policy do you want,
you unofficial supporters of this congress,
without seeking such changes, apparently,
in either the Soviet Union or in China.
You do not want a reduced defence vote.
The speeches I have -heard recently indicate
the contrary. Do you want a withdrawal
from the South East Asian Treaty
Organisation? Of course you do not. You
would not dare to say you did. Do you
want the abandonment of South Vietnam?
If you do, which would make each of you
more than an unofficial member of the
Congress, pray get up and say so. Do you
want the abandonment of Malaysia? Do
you want a withdrawal from A. N. Z. U. S.?
Sir, I could go on over the whole line
of what I have believed to be indisputable
national policies in Australia, and I doubt
whether I could get more than one, two or
three people on the other side of the
House who would say about abandoning
them: Yes, this is what we want to do
Yet, these being -the objectives of this conference,
we have reached a stage at which
the Australian Labour Party, divided but
still powerful, says to its members: Now,
you cannot officially attend, but if you care
to. go along and lend the benefit of your
presence to this conference that will be all
right with us Sir, it would be a tragedy
if well-intentioned people-many people on
the list of sponsors are well-intentionedwere
beguiled into believing that those
who are, as we in this place are, the practical
friends of peace are in reality its
enemies. The choice remains as it has stood
for years: We can have either the peace of
defended freedom or the peace of
submission.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J7. AJITHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.
1 3895/ 64-2 



FOR PRESS P0M. No 20/ 1964
AIRLINES
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. o_ Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, tonight
released his reply to a letter he had received fromra the Premier
of New South Wales, Mr. Renshaw, on Wednesday. The Prime
Minister's reply reads
" Your letter of October 20th seems to overlook
the fact that it is only the commencement o2 your Air
Transport Act, with its particularly harsh penalties,
that can prevent a continuation of existing air services
to Dubbo and Orange.
There is, in the Commonwealth's view, no
reason whatsoever why the existing air services should
not continue while the question of conflicting Commonwealth
and State laws is resolved. Your proposal is
that a change be made pending legal challenge. That
would, of course, be contrary to usual practice which is
to maintain the status quo pending the determination of
any legal issues. Despite what you say about previous judgments
of the High Court and Privy Council, the truth. is that
neither has considered the position as it now stands.
The judgments to which you refer seem to me to have little
bearing on current matters, except that some comments
made in the High Court judgments sipport the view, upon
which the Cormonwealth has acted, that the Commonwealth
has wide powers in this field.
As I see it, your letter attempts to present
the matter in such a form that the blame in the public
mind for any dislocation of air services will fall on the
Common. ealth whereas, in fact, any dislocation of air
services can only result from a decision of your Government
not to defer the commencement of your new Transport
Act. If your Government is determined to let your Act
come into force, and not to allow the status quo to
continue pending the litigation, you will understand that
my Government will have to make it clear to the public
who is responsible for any dislocation of services which
results. R. G. MENZIES
PRIME MINISTER."
CANBERRA, 22nd October, 196-4. 



LIBERAL PARTY OF N. S. 4. STATE COUNCIL, 23RD OCTOJ-R 1964
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Iienzies
Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen
Tonight I just want to talk to you because you are,
if you will allow me to say so, my ow,½ n people and you, like
myself and my colleagues, have a profound interest in what
happens in the next month or two, what happens in the next ten
years, but in particular, what happens in a Senate election,
what happens in a State election, what happens in the wthole
course of political controversy. And I thought I would like
to offer a few words to you about one or two aspects of this
matter. We are going to have a Senate election on December
and our opponents, remembering the last general election
which was only a little over ten mcnths ago, have been casting
around to see how far they c: 3n divide us or embarrass us.
TherVefore I want to say something to you about some of the
things that they think they have disCovered that divide us oi'
embarrass us, because apart from that, a Senate election coming
pretty soon after the general elections is not an election in
which you write out a new policy speech policy speeches cre
not so easily prepared as all that and, after all, we were
re-elected last elections on a policy w~ hich was a policy for
three years and a great deal of it has already gone into
operation in less than eleven months.
What we really have to do in a Senate election is
to report what we've done pursuant to our engagements at the
election and to indicate what we see is the future shape of
events during the rest of the life of the Parliament, and the
people will decide, in the Senate vote, whether they want to
repudiate their mandate given to us last December or whether
they want to help us to put it into full effect. That, in
reality, is the simple issue at a Senate election.
But our opponents are, themselves, of course,
heavily divided and they seek to divide us, and I must say if
I were in their place, I would regard that as a rather suitable
tactical exercise. Last night we were debating in Parliament this
great Peace Congress whatever it is called which began
today didn't it? ( Voice " Sunday") Sunday, oh well, rather
good for a Communist-inspired Congress to meet on the Sabbath.
I think that's not a bad idea. That I suppose) is tactically
a good exercise. But we had a debate about it, and if there
is anything that became completely clear in the course of the
discussion, it wras first of all that this Congress is bogus,
that it is here to preach peace to the most peace-loving people
in the world, that it isn't preaching the same sermon in Peking
and Moscow and the other thing is that the Lobour Party itself
has got into a state of complete ambiguity about it,
In 1951, which is after all not so long ago when
we were in office, the Labour Party at its conference denounced
these so-called peace conferences, said that they were ./ 2 
-2-
" Communist-front" organisations and threatened with expulsion
any member who attended them. That was just in 1951. Time
has gone on and the Labour Party has moved steadily to the
left. I don't need to remind you that in Victoria, the left
wing had a great victory, its joint standard-bearers being
Mr. Colwell and Dr. Cairns; Mr. Calwell being by disposition
not very much to the left and Dr. Cairns being by disposition
very far to the left. But they were two who led the forces
and who had a great victory in the election for the Victorian
executive. And all this time, in your State, the Labour Party
has asstmed the attitude of an extremely moderate Labour Party,
right wing or at the worst, centre of the road, but perhaps
a little right of centre, and they have had some success in
conveying this image, as I believe it is called, to the people.
But now what has happened?
Well, first of all of course, in the Senate election
they have selected a very prominent left-winger to be one of
their team, and when it came to this conference, this conference
which leaves all orthodox Labour men cold or apprehensive,
what have they decided? As I pointed out last night, the New
South Wales Labour Party carried a resolution which said,
" Well, officially we won't have anything to do with it, but
unofficially, members may attend." Now, that's worth thinking
about, isn't it? Officially, we don't associate ourselves with
it; speaking as the A. L. P. in New South Wales, we don't want
to be associated with what we well know to be a Communist
front, but in order to have a little bit each way, we then say
to our members, " Well, if you want to attend, unofficially
( I don't know what that means) do so by all means." I say I
don't know what it means. I suppose that when one of them
attends, he says, " I want to make it quite clear that I am
unofficial. Don't refer to me as So-and-so I dont
know how this is done. But this is a proof of the ambiguity
of their attitude. It is indeed from my point of view a proof
of the steady move that is going on in the Labour Party ' owards
the left. This will mean more and more accommodation with the
Communists and with the Communist fronts. Now I want to say
no more on that, about the Peace Congress because if you want
to study what has been said on these matters, Hansard is very
readily available. But I would like to say something about a matter
which is now completely current and that is the great argument
that is going on about internal airlines in New South Wales,
and this I think requires a little bit of explanatory matter.
I hope you won't mind if I occupy you for a few minutes in
giving you that explanatory matter.
I am not going to discuss the legalisms of this.
I can't, These are before the Court. It will be for the High
Court to determine whether the regulations promulgated by the
Commonwealth and which occupy the field, are valid or not,
and I say nothing about it. As far as we are concerned we will
facilitate the decision of that matter by the High Court of
Australia, and of course, obviously, what it says will determine
the matter. But I just want to take you back a little. Back
before the war, whon I was Attorney-General and a great deal
more optimistic about constitutional changes than I am now,
we had two proposals to amend the Constitution. One had
relation to orderly marketing and it was rejected heartily,
particularly in those areas in Australia which it was designed 
-3
to assist. ( Laughte: r) , And we put up with it, as a second
proposal, a proposal that the Commonwealth should have power
over Civj; I tviriatiLon. Nobody in the Federal Parliament
could be found to argue about it, it was so obvious,
Civil aviation if there is one proof, to use the
old hackneyed phrase, that we have got away from the horse
and buggy age, it is the fact that today aircraft take 6ff
from Sydney and in a few minutes almost literally, they are
in another State. And we thoughi even then when the aircraft
was slow, lumbering and did 130 miles an hour, that it was
pretty obvious that if you were going to have control of
civil aviation, with all the airports you needed w-ith all
the facilities that would be required, with all Zhe air
safety measures, and all the navigational aids, with all of
these things so obviously necessary for an efficient and safe
and modern air service, it was quite clear that you couldnt
have seven different authorities dealing with it. And so
we put it up and it was rejected, not by any pmcess of reason,
if I may say so, with great respect by the electors of~ that
year, but on the safe general principle that when there' is
a proposal to give any power to the Commonwealth, you vote
" No. l Well, Sir, I'm a federalist. I have made this
clear time after time. I don't want to see unified government
in Australia, but we must have judgment as to what powers
ought to be exercised in a unitary way, I would be astonished
to find anybody here tonight who thought really that civil
aviation ought to be controlled by six Slates anA some aspects
of it, perhaps by the Commonwealth of Australia. And the
best proof thal that is an accurate remark is to be found in
the simple facts. I wonder if I might rehearse them to you.
We have six States. We have South Australia. Now
if anybody wants to tell me that my friend, Sir Thomas
Playford, is a great believer in ur~ fication, he is wasting
his time. ( Laughter) Of course ho's not. But it happens
that in South Australia they have no provision for any State
licensing of an aircraft at all. It is all done, for obvious
and sensible rcasons, under the Commonwealth Air Regulations.
I notice that Tom is now saying, " I will never surrender this
power to the Commonwealth". All I want to say to you is, he
has never exercised it, and it seems to me to be rather odd
to refuse to surrender a power that you have never thought fit
to exercise but which you have preferred to have exercised
by the Commonwealth, for very sensible reasons.
In Victoria, they have no State licensing. In West
Australia, the laws and the regulations of the Commonwealth
operate. In Tasmania, they have an interesting system. You
get a Federal licence and a State licence and unless you
have both, you can't operate. ( Laughter) Therefore, in
effect, the whole condition for carrying on an intra-. state
air service in Tasmania if there be such is that you have
a Commonwealth licence, under the Commonwealth regulations.
In Queensland, they have power to exclude Commonwealth
regulations in relation to intra-state traffic but they have
never exercised it, So you have five States in w.-hich. de
facto the Commonwealth air regulations have operated, the
Commonwealth authorities have licensed aircraft, and the
allocation of routes and all these things air safety
air control have all been in the hands of the central
Government. And the one State that is out on all that is New
go 
South Wales. Now ) Z wonder why it is that in New South Wales
there is some special circumstance which renders it undesirable
that the Commonwealth should exercise this vastly important
power in this vastly complex modern operation of transport.
Apparently the answer is that there are two intra-state
airlines operating here, quite quietly, and that thie State
says that the Commonwealth ought to have nothing to do with
the licensing of them or with the allocation of routes. Now,
all that the Commonwealth has said is, " Look, we have been
advised, rightly or wrongly, that we have power in this matter.
We know perfectly well that we assume 95 or 98 per cent. of
the entL* re responsibility for civil aviation in Australia,
financially and otherwise." Just let me give you a few of the
figures on that,
Even in the case of these local intra-state airlines,
the Commonwealth is looked to for a subsidy. Tie pay subsidies
of œ CY+ 0,000 a year to these intra-State airlines. have
spent in point of fact, œ C6 M. on facilities for civil
aviation. We are at present finding œ C12jM. a year for the
maintenance of these facilities, and oddly enough of the œ f1iM6
Ai. or near enough, we find for intra-state facilities.
Now these are very large sums of money, I think,
In the neXt five years, airports development programmes
in Australia coming into our account will amount to Q30M. plus
another œ-600, 000 in this year for development and maintenance
of municipal airports. Now these fabulous millions of monley
are being found, and what have the State Governments found?
A few score Thousand. If you added it all up, you coulintt
reach œ C100,000. In other words, in practical effect, the
whole financial responsibility for this matter falls on the
Commonwealth Government and Pa rliament.
Now what does this mean? This means that you have
large airports. You have Mascot. You have other large airports
in this State and in all the other States. They have to be
provided with safety facilities by the Commonwealth traffic
in and out of them must be regulated in the interests of the
public safety, there must be effective controls over a control
area, there are international aircraft coming in and out of
international airports, and all these things are done and, if
1 may say so, magnificently done by the Department of Civil
Aviation, so that our air services, international and local,
have a reputation all round the world, And the whole
responsibility for attending to these things falls on the
Commonwealth. Dont you think it is rather funny to have
somebody come along and say " No. Forever and a day, we, a
particular State must have the right to determine who shall
fly in and out o1l these facilities that you provide who shall
fly in and out of this controlled area, what their timetables
are to be." This seems to me to be an almost monstrous
assertion of something that in prope~ r consideration is
irrelevant. If it is determined by the Court that we haven't
the power then thi~ s will go on. If it is determined by the
Court that we have the power, then of course, we will exercise
it in the interests of the c'ommon safety.
Now come back to New South Wales. There are two
intra-state airlines. I have no bias about either of them.
I know very little about them, but I do know that each of them
is subsidised by the Commonwealth and I do know that each of
them is serving what is the paramount interest, in my opinion,
in this State the interests of the people in the country
centres who want air services, both feeder to the main lines e 1 
and between themselves and Sydney. This is the paramount
interest. We have never sought to interfere with it. W4e
, agree. We have said, time after time, we want to serve this
interest. In the second place, we don't want to crush one
of these airlines, So far from doing that, we wcnt each of
these airlines to have services allocated to it which wrill
enable it to carry on a profitable operation and n useful
operation for the people in the country areas. 4e have never
said that Mr. Ansett is to have so-and-so or he is not to
have so-and-so, I wouldn't know. All I know is that it is
not beyond the wit of people to make an equitable allocation
of routes and services as between two businesses, ea~ ch of
which we are determined to preserve and each of which we,
in fact, subsidise in order to make it profitable.
Well, what does the State Government do here. It
passes an Act, very hastily. It 2 ays down penalties running
into many thousands of pounds the whole idea beingZfrighten
people off acting unaer the Commonwealth regulations.
And I had a letter from Mr. Renshaw about this only the other
day. Before I quote that, I mu.. st just go back to the fact
that on August 6th. which. is a long timue ago, I wrote a letter
explaining all these things to every Premier the letter has
been tabled in the House, it ouhkob, el nw n
indicating first of a-ll that we were advised that we had this
power; secondly we tihought it would be in the interests of
orderly control off civil aviation that we should exercise it,
and thirdly that in the case of any particular State, wo would
act when it came to the point of allocating :-outes in the
closest consultation with the State transport authorities.
All that was stated very very clearly on August 6th.
Well then, much later on, regulations of ours are
tabled, they are due to go into operation unless they are
disallowed, and TI have a despatch from the Premier of New
South Waoles in which he sets out his views on this matter and
indicates quite plainly that he proposes to go ahead, that
he will not delay the operation of his own Air Transport Act
or give any undertakings to that effect. In other words,
that if one of theo airlines operates a route which it has
already had for a number of yoars, it will do so at the risk
of being fined f-10,000 or œ C20,000 and the Government of New
South Wales will not hold this matter up pending the litigation,
pending the decision of the Court as to where the power lies.
Well I must say that that struck me as a most
astonishing attitude because there is a legitimate argument.
I dontt know who is going to win the argument but there is
obviously a legitimate argument as to where the power lies,
and this will be determined. The first shots were fired in
the High Court today, and I say nothing about the legalism
of this thing because I don~ t profess to be qualified to do
so. ( Laughter) You forget, I don't forget, but you forget
that I have been in this job for fifteen years ( Laughter)
and not the law but politics. Not oven the profits, but
politics, not the law. And so yesterday I sent a telegram
to Mr. Renshaw which I later on today told him I would make
public. I wonder if I might read it to you, it is quite short.
It is not without point. eo* / 6
5 
-6-
" YOUR LETTER OF OCTOBER 20TH SEEMS TO OVERLOOK
THE FACT THAT IT IS ONLY THE COMMENCEMENT OF YOUR
AIR TRANSPORT ACT dITH ITS PARTICULARLY HARSH
PENALTIES THAT CAN PREVENT A CONTINUATION OF EXISTING
AIR SERVICES TO DUBBO AND ORANGE. ( Tha LB ricght.
If our proposal that the status quo should be preserved
until this matter had been determined had been adopted,
then of course the existing services to Dubbo and
Orange would continue because they are part of the
status quo.) THEREFORE IT IS ONLY THE COMMENCEMENT
OF YOUR AIR TRANSPORT ACT THAT CAN PREVENT A CONTINUATiON
OF EXI3TING AIR SERVICES TO DUBBO AND ORANGE.
THERE IS IN THE COMMONWEALTH'S VIEW NO REASON
WHATEVER WHY TH2i EXISTING AIR SERVICES SHOULD NOT
CONTINUE WHILE THE QUESTION OF CONFLICTING COMMONWEALTH
AND STATE LAWS IS RESOLVED."
Now I wonder if anybody thinks that's unfair. That's a
proposition that is as old as the hills. In my time in
those remote, respectable years in which I practised the law,
this was a commonplace. " Well, if you will undertake to
prgserve the position as it now is, pending the determination
of the litigation, that is all right" and this is what we
offered. " YOUR PROPOSAL", I said to him " IS THAT A
CHANGE BE MADE PENDING LEGAL CHALLENGE. THAT WOULD,
OF COURSE BE CONTRARY TO THE USUAL PRACTICE WHICH IS
TO MAINTAIN THE STATUS QUO PENDING THE DETERMINATION
OF ANY LEGAL ISSUES."
DESPITE WHAT YOU SAY ABOUT PREVIOUS JUDGMENTS
OF THE HIGH COURT AND PRIVY COUNCIL ( I wontt go into
this' he had an argument based on the last decisions),
THE TRUTH IS THAT NEITHER HAS CONSIDERED THE POSITION
AS IT NO4 STANDS."
And that's true because the last time this was in Court, we
had not issued regulations, we had not undertaken to occupy
the field of civil aviation control and, therefore, it hap
all changed. " THE JUDGMENTS TO ;' JHICH YOU REFER SEEM TO HAVE LITTLE
BEARING ON CURRENT MATTERS EXCEPT THAT SOME OMMENTS
MADE IN THE HIGH COURT JUD6MENTS SUPPORT THE VIEW,
UPON WHICH THE COMMONWEALTH HAS ACTED, THAT THE
COMMONWEALTH HL4S WIDE POWERS IN THIS FIELD.
AS I SEE IT ( I want you to note this) YOUR
LETTER ATTEMPTS TO PRESENT THE MATTER IN SUCH A FORM
THAT THE BLAME IN THE PUBLIC MIND FOR ANY DISLOCATION
OF AIR SERVICES WILL FALL ON THE COMMONWEALTH WHEREASI
IN FACT ANY DISLOCATION OF AIR SERVICES CAN ONLY
RESULT ROM A DECISION OF YOUR GOVERNMENT NOT TO DEFER
THE COMMENCEMENT OF YOUR NEW TRANSPORT ACT. ( Hear hear)
IF YOUR GOVEPNMENT IS DETERMINED TO LET YOUR ACT 6OME
INTO FORCE AND NOT TO ALLOW THE STATUS QUO TO CONTINUE
PENDING THE LITIGATION YOU WILL UNDERSTAND THAT MY
GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE T6 JAE IT CLEAR TO THE PUBLIC
WHO IS RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY DISLOCATION OF SERVICES
WHICH RESULTS." ( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
Now, Sir, having said that, could I just go back
to the beginning of this phase when I said that I was a
federalist, and I know that you are federalists and I know that,
/ 7 
-7
like me, you don't want to have a complete aggregation of power
in the centre. But your federal principles always have to be
thought of in terms of the practicalities of life. There are
certain matters in which it would be disastrous to have control
from the centre. Until somebody can satisfy himself or herself
that he or she would like to see seven different authorities
controlling civil aviation in Australia, then it seems to me
to be pretty clear that there is an irresistible case for one
doing it. Indeed, Sir, it is always unwise to prophesy and
of course it is even worse to look back over a period ol~ twenty
years ani say what would have happened if somebody had done
something. Well I think I will take that risk.
If in 1937, whenever it was, we hadn't had this
contentious matter about organised marketing, frightfully
unpopular in my electorate, if we handn't had that and had
just had one single referendum proposal, civil aviation, it would
have been carried by on overwhelming majority. Nobody has yet
been heard to put a solitary rational argument against it,
because you see in the nature of things, there are some matters
which are indivisible. I will take an example of one that is
divisible, the great problem of education.
I would never accept the pooposition myself that the
Commonwealth ought to have control of education because 1 think
that education, if it is to achieve its highest results in the
development of citizens, must have an almost infinite variety,
it must have local characteristics, it must nct be just the same
in Tasmania as it is in Queensland. Education is the production
of a citizen under an environment wnich is not necessarily Lhe
same environment as in some other place. And so I am all for
variety in education, I would regard it as a horrible disaster
if all the curricula in all the schools were written up in an
office in Canberra,, That's what I mean when I say there's a
problem which is in its nature divisible,
But how is civil aviation divisible? Can anybody
sensibly believe w1-ien a Boeing 707 flies into Mascot from
overseas and it comes within the whole area of control in the
interests of safety so that it is brought down by a proper
system of control, that you can distinguish between that and
a--other aircraft which is coming in from the west which has to
go through the some controls, which has to be accommodated
within the total pattern of flying?
Look, ladies and gentlomen~ forn~ sins Irust have b~ n hoicked
around the world and around Australia in the air for about a
million and a half miles by now; I know all the noises that
an aircraft makes exce-. pt one and I don't want to hear that.
( laughter, Applause) And one of the glories of it is that
we have developed such a comprehensive, such an indivisible
system of control in this country, and indeed thuy have in Great
Britain and elsewhere, that when you find yourself going around
and around in a dense cloud, you just say to yourself, " Oh,
well, we are in the stack" and you look at your watch and you
hope that you will be down in about ten minutes. And sometimes,
if you have to make a speech at the other end, you hope you
will be very long delayed. ( Laughter) I understand all these
feelings. But this is something indivisible, and to have what
professes to be a great Constitutional issue, an issue of State
rights built up over this thing, seems to me to be just about as
silly and irresponsible as anything possibly could be. 1 And, Sir,
I hope that nobody in this Party in New South Wales wil be
0 0 0&amp; 00/ 
8-
deceived by it. Indeed, I hope that none of them will believe
for one moment that if our power to do these things is established
in the Courts and we proceed to become the licensing authority
for intra-state lines in New South Wales I hope nobody will
believe that we are going to do this as Zhe humble obedient
servants of somebody. We're not. WJe are going to do this on
a basis of equity and the predominant rights of the people in the
country who need these services. ( Applause)
After all, it is worth remembering that we pay the
subsidieoz. We are not likely to land ourselves with an absurdly
4igh subsidy becouse one of the airlines has had an absurdly bad
deal and can't make money are we? You know, we can be foolish
but we are not fools all Zhe time. That is a boastful statement
but I make it. ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, I don't want to say any more about that.
I just want to go back to mention one or two other matters.
Itve mentioned the Peace Congress, I've mentioned the airlines
controversy. Itd just like to say something about the economic
problem as we now see it and then something about the international
problem and I'll be as brief as I come to them as can be.
This great slogan of the Labour Party that this is
a Stop-Go Government is brilliant. It's brilliant, like
accusing n motor car driver of being a stop-go motor car driver.
A terrible thing to be. Terrible thing. If the traffic lights
are against him, he should drive through them. ( Laughter) In
the interests of consistency, he ought to ignore the rule of
the road, he ought to ignore the weather. Well.. you know, it's
too silly for words that kind of thing. The fa'ct is that we
have a policy which is briefly expressed in these terms% That
we want the greatest possible degree of progress and development
in Australia that can be achieved without destroying the stability
of the currency. I wonder if anybody can fault that. And,
of course, if that's to be your principle, then you must always
De watching the indices of pressure on the economy, of pressure
on the structure either shortages of labour or an over-supply
of labour, shortages of material or an over-supply of material
as it may be from time to time.
And alongside of you, you have the Reserve Bank.
All I ask of people is to understand that it is a very good
thing to have a Reserve Bank. There's not a civilised country
jn the world without one, and if you have a Reserve Bank you
ought to allow it to do its job. A Reserve Bank is not 1here
just to take the bidding, the whims and fancies from day to day
of non-expert political people. The Reserve Bank is there to
study all the aspects of the national economy, the credit, the
-liquidity of the banks, the trade balances, all the matters which
come into account, and, from time to time to take those steps
which only a Reserve Bank can take to modify the effect of so-and-
So* It may call up special reserve deposits some of the
money in the trading banks when their liquidity is so high that
a great inflation becomes threatened. It may, on the other hand,
wrhen there is a decline in that kind of thing, restore, release
some of these. It may move on the question of interest rates.
It may take all these various aspects which are part of its
technique, not only here but in any other country in the world,
for keeping as much stability as possible in the monetary system.
And we are all for that. We much prefer to have it done in that
normal fashion than to be compelled to take stringent measures
in a rather dramatic way. We had to do that a few years ago.
It wasn't very popular. We are human beings, we have no desire
tohve to do it agrain, and I don't think we need to because I
0 0009 
9-
think that these matters have been handled with very great skill.
People may say, " Oh, stability. This is a sort of
fetish." Nobody in this audience thinkis it's a fetish, I hope.
Everybody in this audience tonight has saved up some money, has
invested some money, has some assets. In a sense you knows
we are all little capitalists, to quote that immortal phrase
of Jack Dednaan's, and we want our money to hold its value, and
strangely enough though this is supremely true in the case of
somebody with œ C260 or œ 300 or œ C+ 00 in a savings bank, or with
an investment in a life insurance policy, it is also profoundly
true in . he case of some of the greatest industrialists and
investors in the world.
We have them in Australia from time to time, We have
the advantage in Australia of having hundreds of millions coming
into Australia on private investment account, with some of the
shrewdest people in the world controlling that investment at the
other end, and every time I see one of them, from a Roci*, efeller
down the first thing he says to mc is, " Do you know what the
grea attraction about Australia is? This is the one country
with a future which Las great stability." It is worth
thinking aboUt that, and with a little pride.
There are plenty cf countries in Latin America, 4
there are countries in Africa which may present the prospects
for a quick turnover, some groat prospects of development, but
their political and financial instability is So notorious that
they are not an attractive haven any more. And all I am bound
to say to you is that as long as we keep our heads and behave
like sensible people, I have no doubt that one of the great
factors in the enormous growth that is going to occur in
Australia will be that we command the confidence of people,
particularly in the United States and in Great Britain,
Now the only other matter that I want to say a word
to you about is t~ e matter of foreign affairs. I made a glancing
reference earlier to the Labour Party and the fact that it was
divided and the fact that it seemed to me to be moving fairly
steadily in a left direction. Where does it stand on our
foreign affairs? We had an election about this, and this
p'. ayed a great part in the last election.
We have alliances, we have arrangements, we have
mutual. advantages and obligations with some of the great
countries of the world. We have with the United States,
the South-East Asian Treaty and AHJUS, the ANZUS treaty, the
significance of which to Australia has never yet clearly been
understood, and on top of that we have Great Britain in the
South-East Asian Treaty and Great Britain in Malaysia and our
obligations willingly accepted in relation to Malaysia, our
constant opposition to aggression, wherever it comes primarily
Communist aggression from the north and aggression a present,
unhappily, from Indonesia. And we stand against it and we
have had enough sense to get firm friends who stand with us.
The Labour Party sneers. It is always quoting a
phrase I used once about our great and powerful friends,
You know, they do it rather well. They say, " The Prime Minister,
he talks about great and powerful friends. This is a good way
of dismissing them," They would be howling like mad for their
help if the point arrived.
But our policy consistently has been that we must
build our defence and the defence of the free world, the defence 
10
of freedom, into the overall structure of defence with the
other great powers in the world who stand for freedom and
who indeed are prepared to lay out vast stores of treasure
and of lives to defend it. I don't know where the ILabour
Party stands on this.
We had a funny little incident recently in the
House, ( Bill McMa~ hon will remember it very well) where one
of the Labour Members said there ought to be no Australian
soldiers in Malaya, None. That's good Labour policy.
Well, 7 1 sympathised with him because it is a wise man who
knows what Labour policy is on these matters; ( Laughter)
it depends on whether you read the version of 1951 or 1956
or of 1959 or whatever it may be, and he was taken to task
for this rather incautious remark by the Deputy Leader of the
Opposition who, I understand, is a young man with ambitions.
( Laughter) He was taken to task, and then he was restor'ed
by Mr. Calwell.. I don't know where they stand. I really
don't. All I know is tat-atany crucial1 moment over these
years when a wholehearted statement by the opposition I'de
stand with t~~ e Government on this matter; this is a joint
policy for Australia" would have done infinite good, we have
waited for it in vain,
And I hope that everybody, Sir, will have these
things in mind they are only a few out of many that we
have to consider because we are going to have a Senate
election, and although I am not without experience in
conducting a Government with an equally-divided Senate ~ a
hostile Senate, it is an experience that one gets a little
tired of as the years go on. I beg of you, deliver us from
it* I hove no doubt that we will be preserved in our
position in the Senate by the people because I believe
profoundly that at this last election we had a policy and
a campaign which coiunanded the enthusiastic support of the
Australian people and in particular of the younger people of
Australia with their lives and their families in front of
them. ( Applause I would be very unwilling to believe that
the enthusiasm which demonstrated itself at the last poll
was of so evanescent a character that it faded away by
December 5th. It won't. But it will be for you, if I may
say so, to maintain it.
It is important that the Government should continue
to have a charter incapable of frustration in another place,
and if you think of what I have been talking to you about
tonight and a dozen nnd other matters that will manifest
themselves over the next four or five or six weeks, I am
perfectly certain that once more I will be nble to say to
myself when the poll comes along, " Well, we have a great
number of grect people in Now South Wales who are doing their
job and will do it with success."
QUESTION : Is it not a fact that the Federal Executive of
the ALP, meeting quite recently in Cainberra, has
determined to work wholeheartedly for the Federal
control of aviantion and if three or four very
prominent members of the Labour Party are not
already committed, through a Federal Government
Committee to such a policy? a o0a0111 
11
PRIME~
MINISTER Sir you couldn't be more right. The fact is
thai tie Federal Labour Party is unanimously in
favour of Federal control of civil aviation. It
has said so in Parliament, it said so through its
representatives on the Joint Parliamentary
Committee on the Constitution and it made no
secret of it the other day, Its attack on the
Government was not that we were assuming control
over aviation but they thought we were doing it
for the wrong reason, which is a proposition that
mystifies me a little, but on the end result, Sir
you are dead right. They are one hundred per ceni.
Q. Will the Prime Minister please tell us whether
his Government considers the suggestion made by
Mr, Wilson in Britain recently practicable.
You will remember Mr. WJilson suggested a Commonwealth
consultative council be set up to
integrate the affairs of the Commonwealth more
closely?
P. M. Well, Sir, all I know about that proposal is the
necessarily brief reference made in the newspapers
and I don't profess clearly to understand what it
means yet. No doubt I will hear from Mr, Wilsn
in due course because it is my practice to be in
communication with the British Prime Ministers.
I just point out that we have had in recent years,
in the last ten, twelve years, a Prime Ministers'
Conference each year which has lasted for ten
days, sometimes for a fortnight and this enabled,
of coursel a very great exchange of views to
occur. Every year, some Minister or Ministers
will be in London or some British Ministers will
be here and, of course, discussions on the official
level are almost continuous, and ve--y properly so,
on matters of trade and finance, to take two
examples. We also have the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association which meets regularly and that
provides a means of contact between Commonwealth
countries. There is also something that emerged
in a general shape from the last Prime Ministers'
Conference and that was a proposal for a
Commonwealth Secretariat. Now that w'ill, pretty
soon, I think, be discussed on the official level
to see what the functions of a Commonwealth
Secretariat ought to be. It may be that Mr. Wilson
is proposing some modification of that idea by
establishing some kind of permanent body or
assembly or council, but I wouldn't say " 1yes" l
or 1" no" l to it without knowing exactly what he has
in his mind, but I am certainly, of course, very
willing to hear what he does have in mind and to
give it the most careful thought.
Q. Sir Robert, I will send you a copy of this, but
the question I want to ask you, reads as follows:
I, along with many Liberals, view with concern
the contention of your Government to introduce
restrictive practices legislation and I hope it
is understood that if the proposed legislation
becomes lawg the Government will lose the
support of many true Liberals and a large section
.0/ 12 
12
Q. of the business community. I therefore ask:
( Contd.) Will you give consideration to the suggestion
put forward by a former Queensland State
Liberal Party President, Sir Leon Trout, that a
small commission be set up to see if the
legislation was practicable and if there were a
sufficient number of cases of sufficient
importance to warrant the legislation.
P. M. Sir, if you will allow me to say so, you have
made a few assumptions there. One of the
assumptions is that whatever is in the legislation
it will excite the great hostility of a
great number of people. With great respect,
how do you know? You haven't seen the legislation
yet. We are not taking this matter lightheartedly.
We have had proposals, we have had
them examined welve heard representations from
various aspects of industry and so on, both
metropolitan and rural, we've had two or three
long close Cabinet discussions on it of late and
before we finish, we will be hearing more
representations on this matter. I think . when
the legislation finally emerges, the people of
Australia will take it on its merits. I don't
triink that everybody in Australia necessarily
has the same view as my old friend, Sir Leon
Trout, who objects to any legislation of this
kind, as I understand it, on principle. I think
the people of Australia will look at it and
say, " Well, now what does this do? What does
this make unlawL'ul? Is this a good thing to have
made unlawful? What is the machinery that is
set up? Is it fair? Is it businesslike? Is it
not over-technical?" These are the things that
people will look at, because it must be
remembered that on this question of restrictions
and trade practices, there are very many
interests, there are very many fairly big people
who may not like a particular proposal. There
may be very many small people who do. The whole
business that we have to aim at is to provide
for genuine fair competition, because we believe
tuh itsh. t asits ioi. sa . o cno radcacnocrQd awncieth witnepIuiTbp. de cra olicy
interest. Now it is easy enouht o saytha
When you have to come to or I O lnO
form of a particular measure, that becomes a
vastly complex affair. But I pin my own colours
to this mast, that I believe that anything that
we can do, however it turns out, anything that
we can do to increase fair competition in the
interests of the ordinary consumer in Australia
would be a very good thing. ( Applause)
Q. Does Sir Robert consider, even bearing in mind
the differing economic conditions, the recent
Territory ordinance prescribing vastly different
rates of pay for native people of Papua and New
Guinea as conducive to better relations with
these people, when one considers for example,
native doctors being paid a quarter of the rates
of white doctors and native school-teachers being
paid considerably less than half than that paid
to white people in New Guinea? 
13
P. M. Sir, I beg to be excused from talking as if I knew the
details of the regulation or ordinance because I don't.
I have a Minister who attends to those matters. But
I do want to point this out to you as a broad consideration.
Itts worth having in mind. Our whole purpose
in Papua and New Guinea is that some day we will bring
these people to self-government. Now that is the object
of the exercise to bring them to self-government. I
add to that: To bring them to self-government on terms
that they can sustain, on terms on which they can continue
to live without being utterly dependent financially on
other countries. I've seen a lot of modern countries
inl the world newly-emerging countries, which are futll of
political inl. ependence and are economically completely
dependent on the first man who comes along with a bag of
gold, and I don't want to see that happen, and therefore
I don't accept the proposition that it necessarily follows
that a great kindness would be done by us to the Papuans
and New Guineans by introducing Australian standards of
pay, for example, in their country. Wde would make it
impossible for them ever to become politically independent
with economic self-reliance. This is not a problem of
sentiment. Thi~ s is a problem of doing what is for them,
in the long run, the best thing and how this is to be
dealt with in particular cases gy the Administration is
a problem of great delicacy, not to be understood, if I
may say so, except by people who are in the middle of it
and who have given a lot of thought to it, and I certainly
wouldn't endeavour to muddy the water by offering some
extremely ill-informed views on it myself,, ( Applause)
Q. Sir, I noted with much gratification you~ r remarks about
the divisibility of educat-ion. I hove just spent several
weeks in New ( tuinea in the remote parts and before I go
on to the question, I must say on the ground roots level,
the Government are doing a most magnificent job of
education on the lower levels. ( Hear hear). H1owever,
there is much concern about the developments and tnie
adoption of the recommendations of the Commission on
Higher Education, particularly at the tertiary level,
The recommendations, which I have studied in great detail,
are eminently sound and practical. Could you advise us
of the intentions of the Government regarding the adoption
of those re commendations please?
P. M. Well, Sir, I am sorry to say that I cantt because the
matter has yet to reach the Cabinet in a form suitable
for decision. I have read the report myself and I think
it is a very valuable one. I have also heard rumours
and perhaps more than rumours in the last few days about
a report that is coming in on the future of tertiary
education generally, and judging by the size of it I
think I will have to get around to studying it a dttle
later, but I don't anticipate that on either of these
matters there can be any effective decision taken in the
next month or six weeks.
Q. Sir, from time to time we see statements that the Army
cannot introduce compulsory training or expand the CMF
due to a shortage of instructors, Wouldlyou, Sir, ask
your military advisors to consider establishing the
Australian Instructional Corps which before World War II
although small, was one of the finest bodies of permanon?
soldiers in the world and a ctuallly trained the Duitroon
men who load the Army today? * 000000/* 
P. M. g1ell, Sir7 all I can tell you is that I know that that
proposal, among others, has been one of those under
consideration, but beyond that, I would ask to be
excused because I anticipate that in the week after next,
( the House meets next week rather longer than usual) the
following week we are going to have a complete examination
of the Defence position on a paper produced by the Minister
for Defence, and when that's been dealt with, no doubt the
answers to all these problems will fall into their place.
Q. Has the Government been able to assess the effect of the
change of Government in the Kremlin, and if so, what is
that assessment?
P. M. Sir, Ifm sorry. No. I'm asked whether we have been able
to assess the effect of the change of Government in the
Kremlin. WAell, the answer is that we haventt. We are like
everybody else around the world, just speculating at present
as to how it happened, but I did receive a courteous visit
the other day from the Amb; assador from the Soviet Union in
Canberra, who called to assure me that although there was
a change of Prime Ministership there would be no change in
policy. That led of course, 10 an interesting conversation
between us as to ho difference between being a Prime
Minister in the Soviet Union and a Prime Minister i~ n
Australia. ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Q. May I ask the Prime Minister a question somewhat related
to an earlier one. Would the Prime Minister hope to be
able to make to the country a comprehensive statement on
the Defence situation, and including one dealing with the
strength of the Army, before the Senate elections?
P. M. I am a little cautious about raking prophecies. IP. in
these conferences, Mr. Rowe, that we are having the week
after next in Cabinet, if we arrive at conclusicns which
are definitive and I see no reason why we shouldn't, then
I would assumne that we would announce them in Parliament
in the following week,
Q9 Mr. Prime Minister, may I ask you whether it is a fact
that the civil aviation industry as a whole is regarded as
a back-stop to our Air Force in time of an emergency, and
the second part of the question is: Does the Feder4
Government also finance the introduction of modern aircraft
to our civil aviation systems or guarantee the finance for
them and therefore assist our airlines systems?
P. M. You know, Mr. Waddy, you might almost have had a look at
my notes because you have just reminded me I forgot that
point, beca-use we have in fact, of course, as you know,
found millions, many millions of pounds for the re-equipment
of airlines, including intra-state airlines. We have been
the financial backers of modern air services in Australia
and modern facilities of all kinds, so that Mr. Waddy is
quite rights As for his first question, of course thatts
quite dloar that if we came to a war, the existence of
aircraft capable of trransporting people and goods would
be of first-class importance and therefore this is, in a
reserve sense, part of the defence structure of the
country. 



FOR PRESS P L. No. 609/ 1964
R ETIRED TNT OF SIR 1-MIC HARR~ ISON
ST-ATE.: E. r'NT BY THE, PPIDiIE MINISTER
The Prime liinister ( Sir RobeD-rt i2ienzies) today
announced the retirement of the Right -Honourable Sir Eric
Harric-on, Australian High Commiosioncor
in London. "' Sir Eric has represented Australia with distinction
since he, took uD his appointment in 1956. Over this period,
far reaching changes have been occurring within the Commonwealth
* and many mr-atters of great importance have required the attention
Wof our Irigh Comimissioner. Vie have been fortunate indeed to have
in London a man of 6ir Eric's oualities, experience, and
personality, and he has m~ rade a particular contribution in
footering Australia's owin intimate ties with Britain. le and
* Lady Harrison, who has made her own distnctive contribuation,
will be remem,-bered too by manyI thoasandc-s of Aust-ralian visitors
passing through Australia House over thee's-yea-rs.
" On behalf of myv colleagu,-es and myself, I express
our thianks to Sir Eric for the outstanding job he ha--done and
Iwish him and Lady IHarrison a long and enjoyable retircnient ." 1
BACKGROUN D
0 in 1931 as mSeimrb eEr rifoc r Hathrer is1o~ nS Ve. nsteeraetd tohf e WHeonutsweo rtohf Rwchpircehs ehoien thateildves
until his appointmant as High Commissioner in 1956. He held such
ministerial posts m1, inioster f-; or the Interior, Postmaster-General,
M1inister for Repatriation, i22inister for Trade and Cus9toms--,
oli1nister for Defence and irdinister for Dst'ence Production.
Hle was also Vice--President of the Executive Council
and Leader of the House of Re~ pres,, n-tativ. s. He served as Resien
LMini~ ter in Liondon in 1950-51 and wac Minister-in-Charge of the
first viait by The Queen in 1954. He was ap~ pointed. a Privy
Councillor in 1952 and a TC. C. 111in the New Y. car's Honours List
in 1961. The Honourable A. R. Downor, whtose appointment as
successor to Sir A7: Eric Harrison has already bceen announced,
will assume office today.
CANBERL: PRA October, 1964. 


[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 28th October, 1964.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES (Kooyong Prime Minister) [4.8]
I&nbsp;move-
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide&nbsp;increased salaries for the holders of the&nbsp;statutory offices included in the schedule to&nbsp;the Bill, the salaries for which are provided&nbsp;by special appropriation. The Bill arises out&nbsp;of the Government's decision to increase&nbsp;with effect from 1st November 1964 the&nbsp;salaries of Permanent Heads and of the&nbsp;holders of certain statutory offices now on&nbsp;the salary levels of £&nbsp;5,900 and £&nbsp;6,900.&nbsp;These salary levels were determined in the&nbsp;early part of 1960. The new salaries will&nbsp;be £&nbsp;63;7,500 and £&nbsp;8,750 respectively. As &nbsp;honorable members will know, the 1960&nbsp;review for Permanent Heads and statutory&nbsp;office holders followed a general revision&nbsp;of the salaries of all other offices in the&nbsp;Public Service.
In the last three years there have been&nbsp;substantial changes in the pay structure of&nbsp;the Commonwealth Service. These changes&nbsp;have arisen as a result of the group by&nbsp;group reviews by the Commonwealth Conciliation&nbsp;and Arbitration Commission, the&nbsp;Public Service Arbitrator and the Public&nbsp;Service Board. Major changes have&nbsp;emerged as a result of the series&nbsp;of re-assessments for professional groups, &nbsp;commencing with the Commission's determination&nbsp;of June 1961 for engineers. The&nbsp;salary increases have had regard to all&nbsp;factors relevant to wage and salary fixation,&nbsp;for example, Work value, comparative wage&nbsp;justice and economic circumstances.
In order to illustrate the effect. of these&nbsp;developments, I mention that the total&nbsp;incrcase granted by the arbitral authorities&nbsp;for the class 4 engineer in the Third &nbsp;Division at present on a salary of £ 3,733&nbsp;amounts to £&nbsp;1,143. The similar increase for&nbsp;the Principal Legal Officer in the Third&nbsp;Division at present on a salary of £ 3,938&nbsp;amounts to £ 1,218. As explained in the&nbsp;paper prepared by the Public Service Board&nbsp;and already presented to the House, these&nbsp;increases are quoted on the basis of the&nbsp;positions most commonly found within the&nbsp;new salary levels. In the Second Division,&nbsp;the December 1963 determination of the&nbsp;Public Service Board, subsequently endorsed&nbsp;by the Commission, resulted in some offices&nbsp;receiving a higher rate of remuneration than&nbsp;that received by Permanent Heads of&nbsp;departments. The top salary in the Second&nbsp;Division is now £ 6,465 per annum.
The Government has decided that, in the&nbsp;light of the time which has elapsed since&nbsp;their salaries were last reviewed and of the&nbsp;various developments in the Commonwealth&nbsp;Service and elsewhere, a -further review for&nbsp;Permanent Heads and the statutory offices&nbsp;listed in the schedule to this Bill is now&nbsp;required. In determining the new salary&nbsp;levels to be applied, the Government took&nbsp;account of the high level of responsibility and the complex duties devolving upon the&nbsp;statutory office holders and Permanent&nbsp;Heads.
The salaries for the remainder of the&nbsp;offices not within the jurisdiction of the&nbsp;Public Service Board will be individually&nbsp;reviewed by the Government and the&nbsp;appropriate increases applied as from 1st&nbsp;November 1964. Because the salaries are&nbsp;provided from special appropriations, legislation&nbsp;covering the offices of the Public&nbsp;Service Arbitrator, the Senior Commissioner,&nbsp;Commissioners and Conciliators&nbsp;of the Commonwealth Conciliation af&nbsp;Arbitration Commission and the Chairman&nbsp;and Members of the Taxation Boards of&nbsp;Review, and proposing effect from 1st&nbsp;November in each instance, will be introduced&nbsp;before the end of the present&nbsp;sessional period of Parliament. I commend&nbsp;the&nbsp;Bill to the House.&nbsp;
Official &nbsp;Hansard for 28 October 1964 available on aph.gov.au


OMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.SPEECHThe Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,M. P.,ON THlEPARLIAMENTARY ALLOWANCES BILL1964 AND ASSOCIATED BILLS.[ Front the Parliamentary Debates," 28th October, 1964.]Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-Prime Minister) [ 3.221.-I move-That the Bills be now read a second time.Honorable members may recall that when,in April 1959, 1 introduced legislation dealingwith Ministers of State, parliamentaryallowances and parliamentary retiringallowances, I indicated the Governent'sview that these matters should be dealtwith every three years at the beginning ofeach Parliament. What I said was-The proposal to which effect is now being givenis a proposal that the salary and allowances ofmembers of this Parliament should be dealt withevery three years, at the beginning of each Parliament,and that the decision should endure, exceptfor some quite phenomenal or catastrophic circumstances,for the whole of the period of three years.These, of course, are matters for Parliamentsince, under section 48 of -the Constitutionof the Commonwealth, alterations in theemoluments of members of the Parliamentmust be made by Parliament itself.The Government did not, in the event,bring down any proposals at -the beginningof the 24th Parliament-that is, the earlypart of 1962-or at any time in the life ofthat Parliament. It is now, therefore, morethan five years since the last review. Having14043/ 64. regard to the great changes which haveoccurred during this period in the r~ ates ofearning outside Parliament, and the increasingpressure of parliamentary business, theGovernment has decided ithat a review ofemoluments should not be further delayed,but should be made now in respect of the25th Parliament and to take effect from1st November 1964. As regards parliamentaryretiring allowances, I shall saysomething in detail a little later on. Atpresent I limit myself to the observationthat steps to amend the benefits upwardsare due, and in reality overdue. The increasedpension benefits proposed will, asI will indicate later, require increased contributionson the part of members.In relation to increases in salaries andallowances, the Government is again convincedthat the adjustments proposed aredue, and even overdue. Circumstances are,of course, never really propitious for dealingwith parliamentary salaries and allowances.Certainly some people are always found tosay, " Now is not the time". No doubton this occasion, as in the past, that willbe said. But to understand the Government'sdecision it is only necessary to understandthe facts pertaining to salary incomes.Recently the Leader of the Opposition ( MT.
Calwell) asked me if I would make availableto the House certain information andcomparisons in the parliamentary pensionand salary field and in certain related areasof salary, for instance in the Public Service.I agreed, as I said at the time, with theimplication of the honorable member's request;that is, that a first requirement in thismatter is to have and to study the facts.The Leader of the Opposition added-Most imporiantly, will his Government take suitableaction to adjust parliamentary and electorateallowances in such appropriate fashion and at suchtime as it deems desirable in the light of movementsin the directions that I have just instanced?As honorable members know, material,in response to the honorable member'srequest, has been tabled by my colleague,the Deputy Prime Minister ( Mr. McEwen),on my behalf. This material shows whatI may call a cycle of increases in salary'incomes since the 1959 adjustment of Parliamentarysalaries and allowances. Thesalaries and allowances of members of StateParliaments, which were increased followingthe Commonwealth adjustment ofMarch 1959 have, with the exception ofVictoria, been increased again by substantialamounts in 1963 or 1964.A very significant comparison may bemade with the position of members of theAssembly in the State Parliament of NewSouth Wales. Their salary is œ 2,650. Membersof the National Parliament, a parliamentwhich has to deal with the greatestnational and international problems andwith a vast complex of social, economicand financial responsibilities, now receiveœ 2,750. The State electorate allowancesrange from œ 650 to œ 1,050, the Commonwealthfrom œ 850 to œ 1,050. Clearly, thisstate of affairs ought not to continue, andonly this Parliament can change it.Both this year and last year there havebeen large increases in Public Servicesalaries-in the professional grades and theadministrative grades and, I may add,largely as a result of arbitration. As I shallbe indicating a little later, when I come to asubsequent -bill, there are now to be, on thedecision of the Government, necessaryadjustments in the salaries in the FirstDivision of the Public Service, that isto say in the salaries of the PermanentIeads of Departments and also of statutoryofficers and related officers. I shall come tothat matter later when moving the second reading of a subsequent bill, but I justinterpose on my own remarks at this stageto say that, as a result of all these changesthat have been made through aribitral processes,there are officers in the SecondDivision of the Public Service who are nowbeing paid more than the Permanent Headswho are in the second grade of PermanentHeads. This, of course, is a state of affairsthat really nobody could allow -to continueif we are to have an orderly and properlyorganised Public Service.The Government has necessarily hadregard to all these developments and Ibelieve that thoughtful and reasonablepeople will, on the evidence, be ready toaccept that increases are now justified. Wehave considered whether, even though thesalary adjustments are more than due, weought ' to defer them still longer. We haveconcluded that we should not. In the firstplace, we are firm in our view that theadjustments are warranted. In the secondplace, they are adjustments which come atthe end of a cycle of adjustments and notat the beginning.Sir, as politicians-and we must all pleadguilty to being politicians-we are wellaware of the facts that increases in theprovision for Federal members are alwaysattacked-this seems to be something fromwhich State members have a certificate ofexemption-and that a Sena'te election isin front of us.Nevertheless, we are convinced that' honest dealing with the electors requires thatthey should know right away what our proposalsare; we believe that they willappreciate the propriety of this course, andthat on proper consideration they will seethe fairness of the changes that are beingmade. On some previous occasions a reviewhas been approached by first having anindependent committee inquire and reportto the Government. We had the NicholasCommittee in 1951. In 1955 and 1959, wehad a committee of inquiry under thechairmanship of Sir Frank Richardson.This, however, has not been an invariablepractice. On other occasions, the Governmentof the day itself has brought proposalsto Parliament without recourse to such acommittee, and we have decided to do thaton this occasion. We decided against a
committee because what we are now proposingto the House is essentially anupgrading of the amounts applying underthe existing arrangements for salaries,allowances and retiring allowances. It is nota review of the structure of the arrangementsor of other parliamentary privileges.Honorable members will see that thesalary of members and senators is toincrease by œ 750 per annum to œ 3,500 perannum. As there are misapprehensions inIsome quarters, I would like to make it clearthat members' salaries, like ministerialsalaries, are -taxable at the normal rates.Thus, the increase of œ 750 is subject toincome tax-say, œ 280 in an average case,and this is a modest figure-and to anincreased retiring allowance contribution-œ 143-a matter that I shall refer to later.This means that the net current cash gain,if I may so describe it, to the member isœ 327 per annum.The supplementary salaries of Ministersand other office bearers have been increasedbroadly in parallel with this basic increase.In the case of senior Ministers and theLeader of the Opposition the increasesrange from œ 1,000 per annum to 1,250per annum; in the case of junior Ministers,the increase is œ 750 per annum. In general,the increases represent of the order ofper cent, of the 1959 level-a little morein some eases, a little less in others. The electorate allowances have beenincreased, by no means extravagantly, byœ 250 per annum, while special allowanceshave been increased by amounts varyingfor different offices-from 100 per annumin the case of Whips, to L2504œ 300 perannum in the case of Ministers and theLeader of the Opposition in the House, andœ 500 per annum in the case of the PrimeMinister. Electorate allowances are, ofcourse, granted to cover expenses incurredby members and their wives in dischargingtheir public responsibilities. These costs haveincreased significantly since 1959. The samecan be said of the costs of discharging theduties of various parliamentary offices.These expenses, which private citizens donot normally encounter, are ones which, inturn the special allowances are designedto cover.It is proposed, although this will be doneadministratively, to increase travellingallowances for senior Ministers and theLeader of the Opposition by œ 3 per dayand for junior Ministers and members by2 per day. As I do not want to take uptime by reading through a mass of figures,with the concurrence of honorable membersI incorporate in " Hansard " a statementsetting out in detail the proposedchanges in salaries and allowances. Copiesof the statement are available to honorablemembers and the Press.THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTSALARIES AND ALLOWANCESSUMMARY OF PROPOSED CHANGES1. Members-Salary Electorate Allowance-SenatorCity ElectorateCountry ElectorateTravelling Allowance ( per day)2. Ministers-Salary ( additional to I above)-Prime MinisterDeputy Prime Minister ( not being Treasurer)Treasurer Other Senior Ministers..Junior MinistersSpecial Allowance ( additional to I above)-Prime Minister.Senior MinistersJunior MinistersTravelling Allowance ( per day)-Prime MinisterSenior MinistersJunior Ministers Present IProposedper annumn per annumnL 2,750 800 8501,050 4 f 3,500 1,050 1,100 1,300 68,500 5,0004,900 4,250 3,000 4,000 1,800 1,500 18 12
Present Proposedper annumn per annumn3. Other Office Bearers-Salary ( additional to I above)-œœPresident and Speaker .2,250 3,000Chairman of Committees 1,000 1,250Leader of Opposition ( Representatives) 3,250 4,250Leader of Opposition ( Senate) 1,500 2,000Deputy Leader of Opposition ( Representatives) 1,500 2,000Deputy Leader of Opposition ( Senate) 500 650Leader of Third Party ( subject to existing conditions) 750 1,000Special Allowance ( additional to I above)-President and Speaker 500 600Leader of Opposition ( Representatives) 1,500 1,800Leader of Opposition ( Senate) 500 600Deputy Leader of Opposition ( Representatives) 500 600Deputy Leader of Opposition ( Senate) 250 300Leader of Third Party ( subject to existing conditions) 250 300Government Whip ( Representatives) .500 600Other Whips 400 500Travelling Allowance ( per day)-President and Speaker 10 12Leader of Opposition ( Representatives) 12Deputy Leader of Opposition ( Representatives) .10 12The actual adjustments to salaries and allowancesmust, inevitably, be in some degree amatter of judgment. Obviously, the adjustmentsmust have regard to adjustmentswhich have already been made in otherincomes. Incidentally, average earnings inAustralia have risen 35 per cent, since early1959. The adjustments must have regard totrends in expenses incurred by members andoffice bearers. We have considered the factson both these points and the proposals nowbefore the Housc have been devised havingregard to the facts. We believe that thebasis arrived at is justified by the facts andis one which will serve to sustain the qualityand prestige of the National Parliament.I turn now to members' retiring allowances,the amounts of which are no longerappropriate to the increased parliamentarysalaries. In considering the standard ofbenefits, we concluded that members shouldbe entitled to contribute for a basic pensionwhich, in ordinary circumstances, would beper cent, of the salary they were receivingon retirement. The 1959 legislationresulted in 30 per cent. of the cost of pensionsbeing met from members' contributionsto the Fund. I want to emphasise that,because I think it is little understood aroundAustralia that this is a contributor'y pensionsscheme. We have preserved this basis offinancing in adopting the scale of contributionswhich the Commonwealth Actuary hascalculated for the benefits set out in the Parliamentary Retiring Allowances Bill. Thecontribution henceforth will be III percent. of salary, or, as I indicated a littleearlier, œ 7 14s. 10d. per week on the proposedsalary. The scheme has now been inforce since 1948 -and, in the course of ourreview of the Fund, the Actuary reportedthat at 26th March 1963 there was a substantialsurplus in the Fund, which thenamounted to œ 77,000, and which now wouldundoubtedly exceed œ 100,000. This surplus,which has -been built up entirely from thecontributions of members, has enabled usto review the rates of pension now beingpaid. There are many who were once wellknown in this Parliament and who are nowreceiving pensions at the rates prevailingprior to the 1959 legislation. We have decidedto raise these pensions to the ratesthat were adopted in 1959 and, as a resultof the surplus in the Fund, 30 per cent. ofthe cost of these pensions will be met fromthe Fund. Those who have retired since the1959 legislation will receive either a lumpsum payment from the surplus or anincreased pension related to 50 per cent. ofthe parliamentary salaries hitherto in force.These pensions will also be financed on thebasis of 30 per cent, from the Fund.Finally, as I said in my speech in 1959,we have examined the possibility of a contributoryscheme to give very much modifiedeffect to the recommendations of theRichardson Committee for a supplementary
scheme for Ministers and certain otheroffice bearers. The scheme now to be introduced,based upon actuarial advice, providesfor a basic contribution rate of œ 4 5s.per week and pensions varying with servicefrom a minimum of eight years to a maximumof fourteen years. That will be serviceas a Minister or as Leader of the Oppositionor whatever the office may be. Mr. Calwell.-Eight years of service inthe position will be necessary before onecan qualify.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-That is right.The contribution rates have also been calculatedon a basis to ensure that 30 per cent.of the pensions will be met from the Fund.I commend these three Bills to the House.BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUB, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.14043/ 64.-2



PARTIALLY BLINDED SOLDIERS ASSOCIATION
SILVER JUBILEE DINNERPADDINGTON
TOZ4 HALL,_-SYDNEY OCTOBER, 1964+
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt.. Hqn._. Slr Robe t Menzies
Sir and Your Excellency the High Commissioner
I am quite accustomed to beaing made a bit of a
chopping block but I have been chopped in three different
directions todUght. I have a sort of raixed assortment of
tasks. One I will conclude with, tb-Pt is the task of handing
over this remarkable historic volume Mr. Maloney for the
Government. I think I should perhaps begin by discharging
the lightest of my duties, I think it is rather sinister to
give a politician the Order of the Double Cross. ( Laughter)
Don't you? I know that it is well meant. but it lends itself
to misunderstanding, if you don't understand these things
quite well. I think I had better take it of" f for a moment
so that I can see this. There is a picture in the middle of
what I will say is a gentleman and I have had a quick glance
at it, and so help me Bob I couldn't make up my mind
whether it was Khrushchev or Nasser or Menzies ( Laughter).
Might be any one of the three.
I must tell you about..... I mustn't dejcr-ibe
him as the late Mr. Khrushchev as far as we know he is
not late. ( Laughter) But something has happened, ut I had
a long discussion with him once in New York in his office there
at his Embassy. . JlI want to tell you that he has a nice
earthy sense of humour. It may not avail him very much now,
but then, humour is wasted when you are out of office.
( Laughter) I went in to see him and his first remark he
doesn't speak English at least he pretends not to but he had
a brilliant interpreter so that the conversation was practically
non-stop. He stood up, shook hands with me and then looked
ct me and said, " For an imperialist you are not a bad specimen."
( Laughter) To which I retorted wiih that courtesy for which
I am famous, " Sir, for a Communist, you are, on the whole,
rather better than I expected." ( Laughter) And after that we
got on fine. He talked about disarmament without achieving
any and he went through all the old usual gambits which occur
in the vicinity of the United Nations in New York. But there
it is. Come to think of it, you know, the top part, the
cap, rather suggests Soekarno, doesn't it? ( Laughter Well,
there you are. Isn't it a brilliant piece of work? It looks
to me so ambiguous as to make it possible for it to be any one
of four men, with a snake down in the corners...... Now,
I would be upset about this to be called a Double Crosser, to
be called a snake in the grass or whatever it is, this would
be very annoying, except that f would have you know that this
is not the first decoration that I have ever received. I am
a physician, did you know that, ( Laughter) I am a Fellow
of the Royal College of Physicians. Doesn't make the faintest
difference to the bill. ( Laughter) So there I am, I have a
certificate to show. And the medical profession have a symbol,
you know, which was vulgarly described by a friend of mine
in law once as a snake crawling up a stick. ( Laughtor) a a. a 0 0/ 2 
2 a
And so I am not unfamiliar with the symbol of the snake
in the grass. The raw prawn is a particularly Sydney expression.
( Laughter) In the genteel quarters of Melbourne in which
I used to live once, nobody ever heard of a raw prawn.
( Laughter) When I came to Canberra and fell. into low
company and had to meet a lot of Sydney fellows, you know,
in Parliament I became accustomed to hearing one of them
say " Oh, dontt come the raw prawn.'" ( Laughter) They had
another expression, " There wore sharks in the bay," ( Laughter)
These, of course, were meaningless to Victorians. There are
no prawns and no sharks, or at an ae oshrsi h
bay. Anyhow, Sir, I thai., k vou very much. This will
be hung in a suitable place of -onr.( Laughter) ( Applause)
I will execute, of course, a deed of trust so that it goes
to my descendants ( Laughter) and If -It is valued by some
curiosity-hunter some day at a sufficiently high figure,
it will attract, so I am told by my colleague the Treaslrer,
a suitable rate of taxation. ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, the next thing I want to say is that
I was delighted to find that your guest last year was the
General General Muttukumaru, the High Commissioner of
Ceylon. He has only been in Australia for what only a
couple of years now just under two years. He Is a familiar
friend of all of us, and I am delighted to think that two
years running, ho has come here. Indeed, if I may betray
a Scottish secret, I may tell you that among the many
occupations I have, I am President of the Melbourne Scots,
and he is coming down as a guest this year. ( Laughter)
That, of course, is bad enough from our point of vie, but
he's going to make a speech. ( Laughter) And so you can see
that Le has established himself.
Well, now, I dontt want to make a long speech
to you and I know that I am not to make a political speech
to you. Indeed, I have never been brave enough to ma~ ke
apolitical speech in Paddington Town Hall. ( 7au K~
You understand that, Jim, don't you? ( Laughter) -Anyhow,
I never have, but I must say that in the same electorate
one year, I made what was regarded as a speech at the
stadium. Now, you take it from me, if you want to' have a
novel experience, make a speech at the stadium,, standing
in the middle of the ring, with an all-direction mic. rophone
and noboay there with you ( Laughter) and 8,000 people, 2,000
of whom hate the sight of you and occupy the first threo or
four rows. A very remarkable experience. Every now and
then, I would look down and I would see my wife. She was
there. She never misses, do you see. My secret weapon.
And she was there and she was in the front row there and she
couldn't hear a word I was saying. I've never seen her look
at me with such mystified respect. ( Laughter) Not a word
could be heard. We finally got away, sound in wind and
limb, and went back to the hotel and they were rebroadcasting
this speech of mine. Honestly with very great respect to
the surroundings I hadn't a clue as to whether I had begun
a sentence or ended one. Because if you can't hear yourself,
it is very difficult to know whether you arc talking.
But that's been my experience. I like to hear myself because
sometimes I have a shrewd idea that nobody else is listening.
( Laughter) When we got back to the hotel, and heard the
radio, I said to my wife, " By Jove, this fellow's doing
well. Who's this?" And sho said, you." ( Laughter)
ee s/ 3 
-3 -A
Well, I don't need to tell you that I went on from then through
the next three weeks, won an election and have been in office
ever since. ( Laughter) So peace to Paddington and good luck
to the stadiuml ( Laughter) Is it still called the stadium?
There is one in Melbourne they now call the Festival Hall.
( Laughter) They have a festival there this afternoon. You'll
read about it in the papers in the morning,,
But, Sir, I didn't mean to be so absurd as all
this. I just want to say this to you, This eye bank scheme,
this, I think is one of the most remarkablo things in
Australia, H~ would bring credit on any organisation that
thought of it and put it into effect. This is a tremendous
thing and it is a tremendous thing done by peoples many
of whom have already done tremendous things for thisocountry.
These are matters that we must never forget. And I was
thinking about tonight and saying t,-o myself, " g4ell, what is
there beyond the usual platitudes that one can say on an
occasion of this kind? WIhat is thore as we look forward to
the future that ought to be in our minds?" And I came to
one conclusion and I venture to state it.
It sounds a truism but it is more thin that.
It is that every year is a new year. Now this of course is
qiiite right, but every year is a new year. You begin a
year, you look back on a year in which the problems have
beenIA and B and C and in the next year you find thnt the
problems are D and E and F, They are changing all the time
because every year is a new year and the world is a new world
every year. The world is a new world for e~ eyperson born
into it. We all, don't we, remember our own childhood and
so on* That's the kind of world we know somethiing about
and we've lived in, but for everybody it's a new world, f~ or
every year it's a new world.
This year is, as usual I think a year full of
most critical events. I read them from left to right, I
wonltcbtain you very long, but it is worth thinking about
them. Next Tuesday there will be an election in the United
States of America, the election of a President. I am
not taking sides, this is not; my business or ycurs in That
sense but the Presidential eieutions may have a prufound
effec' on the relations of the United States witb. the rest
of the world. It may. I don't know. There arc controversies
going on in that country. I don't know one of thj candidates
Senator Goldwater. I do have the honour of knowing t-he
present President. But the important thing is that, whatever
comes or goes in an election of this kind, whatever mud is
thrown or whatever extravaganzas of argument may occur, it
is vital from our point of view, isn't it, that America
should continue to be the greatest stronghold of freedom in
the Western world, of tremendous importance to uls because of
her strength, because of her goodwill, of tremendous
significance to Australia's future security and freedom.
WIhen I say that, let me remind you that nothing
would ever persuade me or you to be anything else but
British. We're proud of it, But the facts in the world today
are the greatest single power) with its resources and good
will is the United States of America. It is from my point
of view, vital that the United States of America and Great
Britain and the whole of the Commonwealth should be as close
together as two groups of nations can be because we have a
common purpose and, I think, a common destiny, I think that's
one rather crucial event that has been played out and we will
all be listening at some time on Wednesday to discover the
result, 
Then the next thing is this, in respect of which
this is a new year. We have a new Commonwealth. You
mustn't suppose when you look at the General which is
something to give you pleasure; look at me which is perhaps
in a different c, togory you mustntt suppose that we are
typical of the new Commonwealth. He comes from a country
which has a parliamentary system, which has elections and
parties. We have elections and parties. We live as
Winston once said to me in a fine eighteenth century
fervour of politics. We do. We, on the whole, rather
enjoy them. But here we are, we ae both democracies,
Great Britain of course, the father, the mother, of the
whole democratic system.
The interesting thing rjbcut the new Commonwealth,
and we will know more and more about it over the next two or
three years, is whether the new Comonwealth will be something
that advances democracy or retards it, because don't be under
the misapprehension that some peopile are in other countries
that all the new Commonwealth countries are democracies.
Not at all. I don't think Nkrumah would pretend for a moment
that Ghana was a democracy, because as I have had occasion
to say to him, playfully, more than once, " At any rate, we
don't put the Leader of the Opposition in gaol in Australia"
( Laughter) and therefore, any description of Ghana as a
democracy must be one, I think, rather modified by the facts.
And, of course, a number of the other new countries
have declared themselves for the one-party State, The oneparty
State. Indeed, when Mr. Mboya of Kenya was here during
the year, he spoke to a great number of Members of P'arliament
about the one-party State and the reason for it. 1tbs a
rather simple conception. There is just one party. there is
no-one else to vote for. This is, depending on youx. point
of view, a rather agreeable conception. But, of course, it
would be impossible with us.
One of my Labour friends in the Housp, whenn iMboya
vas getting warmed up on this, tapped me on i: l2d: r and
said, " Don't worry, old boy, yot'e had it fclr :. een years."
( Laughter) But, you see a one-party State in w! iich you have
no choice tends to consolidate a species of dictateship,
Now I believe, myself, implicitly that in all thesoae
countries, these new colleagues of ours the whole process
will tend to break this dowm, to establish from a beginning
of highly-centralised power in government, what re call a
democratic system, so that people are free and free to vote
and to make their choice. I think that's going to be the
process, but don't expect that totnppen overnight,
But whether the new Commonwealth survi.; res in the
form in which we now see it in my opinion largely depends
upon how far over the next live years or ten years its
activities and its attitudes advance democracy or retard it.
Now thatts the second thing that we are looking at a little
distantly at the present time in this year of grace, in your
twenty-fifth year, your jubilee year.
And the third thing is what's going to happen in
this corner of the world? Will South-East Asia continue to be
non-Communist, continue to be free from the Communist drive?
Now, I am not just talking a lot of hot air and politics on
this business, but everybody must realise that our future, the
a 
future of neighbouring countries, the future of New Zealand,
these are all wrapped up in whether South-East Asia this area
of the world manages to remain outside the Communist orbit,
whether the Communist orbit is Russian Communism or Chinese
Communism and this is something on which really we must begin
in Australia to rise superior to detal. ed party differences.
There can't be any difference-on this matter, surely-that our
freedom, the future of this country, the future of free people
like the Malaysians who have a democratic system of government,
people in New Zealand, our close kinsraen, we must all be in a
position to feel that we are the mast-3rs of oir own future and
that the peace that we enjoy is the peiacc of freedom and not the
peace of submission, This is the great issue this part of the world.
I won't elaborate it, but you see I mean when I say each
year is a new year in the United 3, tes, in the New Commonwealth
in South East Asia, we hav,; seen problems emerga,
crystailise, become known, sometimes become critical sometimes
become easier, all in the space of one year, and next year will
bring its new problems, problems to which we will all have to
devote whatever talents and courage we may possess.
Now everything that I have said is really an expansion
of what I said to you at the beginning because I am here in the
presence of men who have done groat service to freedom in this
country great service. And they have themselves, w. th this
splendil effort of imagination, established this bank in order
that lots of people may have the opportunity future of. having
their sight improved or saved. This is an iraginative bold
thing and I am delighted to discover how magnificently it has
succeeded. And therefore I take the most sincere pleasure in
handing over the Volume Three of the eye bank to Mr. Malcney
who will receive it on behalf of the Government of New : 3outh
Wales. 



FOR PRESS Pi. m No. 21/ 1964
SOUTHERN RHODESIA
Satementb_ yth e PriJme Minjstej tbe t. Hon. Sir LQbert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, said
today that he had sent to the British Prime Minister, Mr,
Harold Wilson, a message assuring him of Aus-ralia's full
support for the British Government's recent statement warning
Southern Rhodesia of the serious consequences that would
follow a unilateral declaration of independence, and for the
British Government's efforts to bring the most difficult
problem of Southern Rhodesia to a successful outcome.
He very much hoped that it would be possible
to avoid a unilateral declaration of independence by the
Prime Minister of Southern Rhodesia, which would precipitate
various undesirable consequences that Commonwealth leaders
had all striven to avoid.
CANBERRA, October, 1964.
L 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 71/ 1964
VISIT BY THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES THE DUKE AND
DUCHE; S OF GLOUCES TR
Statement by tho Prime Minister0 the _ tHon. Sir Robert Menzies
Their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of
Gloucester will visit four States and also Canberra during
their stay in Australia next year.
The visit will begin and end in Canberra and the
States to be visited are, in sequence, Tasmania, Victoria
New South Wales ( including the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric
Authority) and Queensland. Their Royal Highnesses will arrive
in Canberra on Saturday, 13th March, and will finally leave
Australia on Monday, 26th April,
Some of the time will be spent in privately revisiting
personal friends and places they knew when the Duke was Governor-
General. Their official engagements will include attendance
in Canberra at a ceremony to commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the landing at Gallipoli, and visits to the
Royal Easter Show in Sydney which His Royal Highness will open
on Wednesday, 1+ th April,
CANBERRA, 3rd November, 1960 



Pa. No. M1964
kRUS8 õ E õ CHTAl! PXrIM MIIUIMTh
SIMIMBI by ME &amp; AM UUMIS&amp; O tb&amp; Rtm JJM SLE Fabgr
t is smenoed that Mr. L. Ovens, at present
Press Secetary to the Minister for Defence, wMi join
the Pronl Staff or the Prime Minister an Acting Press
Secretary. 1r, Ovens wil be with the Prime Miister for
the Semate Ceapia and viii begin his duties vith the
Prim Minister after the Ptrliimnmt rises at the end or
next Week.
CA dIMM
4ith Nowumber, 19&amp;* i 



PM No 74/ 1 2kt
COMMENT BY SIR ROBERT MENZIES ON
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION
ift are all delighted. The continuation
of President Johnson's policies should mean a
great deal for the world and indeed for Australia
in particular. As I have reason to know,
President Johnson has a varn feeling for our
country.
CANBRA, November, 196.. 



DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
CAN BERRA.
FOR THE PRESS
( Released only in Canberra) PR101 6th November, 1964.
EXCHANGE OF MESSAGES BETWEEN MR KOSYGIN AND SIR ROBERT MENZIES
The following are the texts of messages recently
exchanged between the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, and the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the USSR, Mr Kosygin:
Message sent by Sir Robert Menzies to Mr Kosygin
" On behalf of the Government of Australia, I extend
to you my good wishes on your assukmp tion of:, the, -position of
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics. In doing so, I expresM my deep
conviction of the need in the present state of world affairs
for continued efforts to ease international tension and
strengthen peace"
Reply from Mr Kosygin to Sir Robert Menzies
" I am grateful to you, Mr Prime Minister, for the
good wishes in connection with my appointment as Chairman of
the Council of Ministers. I share your opinion that further
efforts in the direction of weakening international tension
and strengthening peace are necessary". 


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIASPEECH BYRt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,ONDEFENCE REVIEWMINISTERIAL STATEMENT CAMBERRA[ From the " Parliomentary Debates," 10th November, 1964] LIBRARY4-~Sir ROBERT MENZIES { Kooyong-Prime Minister).-by leave-For somemonths the Department of Defence and theService and Supply Departments, in closecollaboration with the Chiefs of Staff Committee,have been making a complete reassessmentof our defence needs and programme.Their labours have been conductedagainst the background of affairs overseas,and particularly in and around South EastAsia. The Government has exhaustivelystudied the reports placed before it, andhas consulted closely with its professionalmilitary advisers. In the result, we haveformed certain views about our strategic0 position and about our defence requirementswhich I will now proceed to state as clearlyas I can.I refer, first, to our strategic position.This requires an examination of our positionin relation to our neighbours. and ourinternational associates. Since the SecondWorld War and increasingly in the lastdecade, the struggle against aggressiveCommunism coupled with other developmentsin Asia has forced us to recognisethat we are in a new situation. General or14661/ 64. global war-that is, unrestricted conflictbetween the major world powers-hasreceded in probability because of thedeterrent effect of nuclear weapons, and wecontinue to believe that it is unlikely exceptas a result of miscalculation. But armedconflicts short of general war could developat any time in areas of tension throughoutthe world. Communist powers will continueto press their aims through all the variedcold war techniques of subversion andinsurgency and other threats to theintegrity of States which they wish to bringunder their domination.At present, important questions arisewhich require frank answers. They will, Iregret to say, indicate that there has beena deterioration in our strategic position sincethe review which I presented to Parliamentlast year. The range of likely militarysituations we must be prepared to face hasincreased as a result of recent Indonesianpolicies and actions and the growth ofCommunist influence and armed activity inLaos and South Vietnam. If these countriescollapsed, there would be a grave threatto Thailand and the whole of South East
Asia would be put at risk. The effectivenessof the South East Asia Treaty Organisationas a guarantee of mutual security wouldbe seriously jeopardised.In particular, in South Vietnam the continuedinstability of government has madethe task of resistance more difficult and tosome extent frustrates the massive efforts ofthe United States and our own necessarilysmall contributions. The aggressive attitudeof North Vietnam towards South Vietnamis demonstrated by continued political andideological support given to the militaryinsurgents, and the infiltration of thousandsof trained men. There was the TonkinGulf attack on United States warships;Communist China has ignored the NuclearTest Ban Treaty. These are sinister andsignificant developments.In Malaysia, to which we have given thespecific assurances which I announced inthis House, Australian troops have for thefirst time been in combat with Indonesianforces. True, in international opinion,Malaysia has been strengthened by the votein the Security Council, the meeting of theCommonwealth Prime Ministers in London,and the relative failure of President Sukarnoto gather support at the Cairo conferenceof unaligned nations. But, though it is nowclear that, for all practical purposes, noimpartial person doubts that Indonesia iscarrying on active and entirely unjustifiedarmed aggression against her neighbour,the fact is that Indonesia still goes on herunlawful way, seeking to undermineMalaysian morale, to cause the disintegrationof Malaysia, and no doubt to dominatethe Borneo territories if and when they canbe detached from Malaysia.If Indonesian attacks continue, Malaysiamay find it intolerable to confine defensivemeasures to the guarding of Malaysia'sshores and jungles against Indonesian intrusion.These Indonesian attacks may createa real risk of war, a war so hopelessly unprofitableto Indonesia that it is hard tounderstand how any leader concerned withthe well-being of the ordinary men andwomen of his countr-y could seriously beprepared to provoke it. Indeed we mustprepare for all eventualities including thec ontrol and, if necessary, defence of thefrontier between West New Guinea and theTerritory of Papua and New Guinea. Meanwhile,by his cultivation of the Communist Powers, President Sukarno is exercising aninfluence in South East Asia which couldweaken resistance to Communism.It must be conceded, therefore, that therisks of our situation in this corner of theworld have increased. This does not meanthat we suffer from fatalism or defeatism;there is not the slightest occasion for either.But it does mean that we must do more, andpay more, as our contribution to ournational security. This is, of course, to bedone having in mind, and indeed neverforgetting, that in the South West PacificAustralia and New Zeal-and have allies, includingGreat Britain and the United States,who are rich in power and goodwill. Withoutthem, Australia's task in defending sovast a territory with so few people wouldbe a fearful one.But Australian defence cannot be consideredin isolation, any more than the forceswe possess should be regarded as garrisonforces. Placed as we are, our defence, ifit is to be successful, must be beyond ourshores, and in depth. Hence andA. N. Z. U. S. We are in S. E. A. T. O. not onlybecause we have a goodwill towards thenations concerned and would wish to helpto protect them against Communist aggression,but also because the further Cornmunistpowers are kept away from us, themore secure we will feel. Thus, inS. E. A. T. O. a high common interest is renderedstronger, not weaker, by theindividual national interest each of us has.Again, we are with Malaysia for severalgood reasons. Malaysia is a well governedand friendly Commonwealth country, andas such is entitled to our support. Malaysiais a non-Communist nation, and is willingat all times to resist the Reds; it is monstrousthat she should be the subject ofunprovoked aggression from the south. Butagain, we in Australia also want Malaysiapreserved because we want the Communistpowers as far away as possible. It shouldnot be forgotten that one of the aims ofwhat Indonesia calls its " confrontation" ofMalaysia is the removal of the Commonwealthpresence, including the bases. Weare advised that so long as the bases areavailable and Commonwealth forces supportMalaysia, there is little prospect of a defeatof Malaysia by Indonesian military action.In short, Malaysia and Australia have acommon interest and an individual interest,and they coincide.
In the same way, it is tremendouslyimportant for us that Indonesia should notbecome Communist, but retain its independenceunder a Government serving onlythe good of the Indonesian people. It is verymuch to be feared that if Indonesia provokeda war, the only people in Indonesiawho would get advantage from it would bethe Communists, ever ready to thrive ondisorder and defeat. Thus, Indonesia andAustralia have vital interests in common.The recent actions of the IndonesianGovernment are therefore all the moredeplorable. It is a misfortune to have tojoin in a defence of Malaysia against anation with which we have no other quarrel,and so much in common. Yet it is a misfortunewhich we must be prepared to face,to the utmost of our power.Now, this has been a brief account ofsome of the developments which have led usto the conclusion that there has been, sincemy revierw of 1963, a deterioration in ourstrategic position. What new defence provisionshould be made, in the light of thisconclusion? True, we are not and cannot bethe sole guarantors of our defence. Butwe must be able to say with truth that weare making a contribution to it which iscommensurate with our capacity and ournational self-respect.The 1963 review itself added very considerablyto the defence programmes andvotes. Since then, substantial additions havebeen made. It will be of interest if Iremind the House that until very recentyears our defence vote was, and had beenfor some time, of the order of œ 200 milliona year. The order of financial magnitudeinvolved in our present revierw can be brieflystated at this stage. The review of May 1963Y raised -the programme for 1965-6, 1966-7and 1967-8 by about œ 40 million a year toa total of œ 816 million. In other wordsbefore that review only 18 months ago thetotal figure for these years had been ofthe order of the œ 700 million and it wasraised to œ 816 million. This present reviewTaises that total to œ 1,220 million, that is,a further increase of œ 404 million. I willreturn to the figures before I conclude.I now turn to the concrete decisionswhich have led to these financial conclusions.Because of the central importanceof manpower to the whole of our defencepreparations I shall deal first with thisquestion. 3 At present the regular forces number justover 52,000 including 22,750 in the RegularArmy, 16,600 in the Air Force and 12,900in the Navy. In addition, there are approximately1,000 Pacific Islanders in the PacificIslands Regiment. In the Citizen MilitaryForces we have 27,630; in the CitizenNaval Forces 5,115; and in the Citizen AirForces 868.Over the programme period to mid-1968the Navy and Air Force will require a considerableincrease in manpower to correspondwith the planned expansion of theseforces including the progressive introductionof new equipment. By June 1968, the Navywill have a requirement for approximately16,700 and the Air Force for 21,000 men.The Government and its naval and AirForce advisers are confident that a satisfactoryprogressive build up of manpowertowards these levels can be achieved byexisting means of recruitment.The question of Army manpower is moredifficult. The numbers are larger; the wholestrength and organisation of the Army areinvolved. We have given close attentionto this problem which has beforenow given rise to great controversy.After an examination of all the factors,and in full consultation with ourmilitary advisers, we have reached the conclusionthat the Regular Army should bebuilt up as rapidly as possible from thepresent 22,750 to an effective strength of33,000 men, which means a total force of37,500. A peace-time Army of this sizewould be adequate to meet our immediatelyforeseeable operational requirements andform a basis for rapid expansion in war.The training effort required to achieveany reasonably quick build up of a muchlarger Army than the one we now contemplatewould be such that the RegularArmy would cease to be an effective fightingforce and become for some considerabletime simply a training organisation. This hasbeen one of the limiting factors in this. Letme remind honorable members that we havethrough successive programmes built up thecapacity of the Regular Army as an effectiveand readily available fighting force, and itis essential in present circumstances that thiscapacity and quality be retained to the greatestpossible extent.The Government has given the mostcareful consideration to the means by which
the Army's manpower requirements may beachieved. It seems clear, on our militaryadvice and our own carefully formed judgment,that we cannot expect by voluntarymeans to achieve a build up in the Army'sstrength of the order we require and to thetiming which is necessary. We are living'ina period of unsurpassed prosperity and morethan full employment; the attractions ofcivilian employment are very great indeed.The Government has therefore decidedthat there is no alternative to the introductionof selective compulsory service. Weknow that this presents difficult personal,social, economic, and perhaps politicalproblems. Our decision has been taken onlybecause of the paramount needs of defenceand, in the difficult circumstances I havedescribed, the preservation of our security.May I return at this point to the observationsI made earlier in reference to thedemands of our deteriorating strategicsituation? We expect a continuing requirementto make forces available for cold warand anti-insurgency tasks. We must haveforces ready as an immediate contributionshould wider hostilities occur. We must atall times retain adequate forces against anymore direct threat which might develop toour. own security. Because of our geographicposition we have the most compellingreasons to take those steps which willput us in a position to meet these variousdemands. The necessary units cannot beprovided with a lesser effective strength than33,000, yet this number cannot in presentcircumstances and in proper time beobtained by voluntary means.It follows also that, to enable the RegularArmy to achieve the required degree ofoperational readiness, selective servicemenmust serve in regular units on a full timebasis. If the scheme is to be effective, thosecalled up must therefore be under an obligationto serve overseas as necessary and mustbe available to go with the regular unit inwhich they are serving.In assessing the length, of servicerequired, an average of six months mustbe allowed for recruit and corps training.Provision must also be made for leave,movement and acclimatisation should thenational servicemen be sent to an overseastheatre. In order to permit a period of atleast twelve months effective service in aunit a total period of two years full-time duty * is required And this will be the basisof the Government's scheme. This will befollowed by a period of three years on theReserve. Briefly, we have decided that young menwill -be required to register in the calendaryear in which they reach the age ofyears. The first actual call-up will take placeabout the -middle of next year. During thesecond half of 1965 a total of about 4,200will ' be required. Thereafter there Will beannual call-ups of about 6,900. This will,by December 1966, give an Army of atotal strength of about 37,500-this is theRegular Army-which will mean aneffective force of 33,000. Detailed considerationis being given to the conditionsof service and the question of exemptionsand deferments to meert particular circumstances.Civil ' employment rights of -thosecalled up will ' be appropriately protected.I hasten to say that the introduction ofselective compulsory service does not in anyway detract -from the importance ofvolunteers for the Regular Army, theEmergency Reserve or the Citizen MilitaryForces. On the contrary, we would wishthe volunteer spirit, which has meant somuch to Australia in the past, to continue.Both the Government and the net-ion wouldurge that as high a percentage as possibleof those in our armed services should bethose who, of their own choice, and in thespirit of a great natio ' nal tradition, havejoined one or other of those Services.Mr. Clyde Camneron.-I know one whododged it in 1914.Sir ROBERT MENZ~ IES.-You do not.You must not repeat other people's lies.Mr. Clyde Cajneron.-Well, 1915.Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-That is a verybad habit, Clyde, and I advise you againstit. Indeed, so far as the Regular Army isconcerned, volunteers will continue to be offundamental importance to the effectivenessof the force. Volunteers on longer terms ofengagement will reach the highest standardsof training and will give greater flexibilityin the organisation and deployment of ourforces. A selective service scheme does notgive sufficient time to train ' highly qualifiedspecialists and technicians and we mustcontinue to look to volunteers to providethese. The Government has . already
reviewed and improved conditions of serviceto make a career in the Permanent Forcesas attractive as possible. With this in mindand in the light of the strategic situationwhich I have outlined, we would ask theyoung men and women of Australia to considercarefully a permanent career in thearmed forces.The new Emergency Reserve, for whichenrolment will be commencing almostimmediately, will provide a ready means ofsupplementing -field force units, increasingour cold war military capability and providingreinforcements in the initial stages ofhostilities. It -has a most important place inthe full concept of our defence forces. Therole of the Citizen Military Forces-to providein war or defence emergency thefollow-up forces and the expansion of ourmilitary effort-remains unchanged, andindeed assumes even greater importancefollowing the passage of the legislation tomake these forces available in a defenceemergency. I seek the co-operation not onlyof our young men, but also of their employersand others to ensure that the CitizenMilitary Forces target of 35,000 isachieved over the period of the new defenceprogramme. The detailed organisation of the Armywill ' be further reviewed to provide for anexpansion in the field force with particularemphasis on a substantial increase in thecombat element and high priority logisticunits. Two additional battalions will beraised making a total of six including thetwo battalions in our first two battlegroups and the battalion already deployedin Malaysia. In addition, the organisationwill provide adequate backing, not only to. j maintain and support the expanded fieldforce, C. M. F. and cadets, but also to providea sound basis for further expansionand mobilisation.There is, for a variety of good reasons,some concentration of military provisionand organisation in the south-eastern areasof the continent. We feel, however, that,in the overall interests of rapid mobility,this should not be carried too far. We have,therefore, af ter careful consideration,decided that a new battle group will beestablished in north Queensland, probablyin the Townsville area. The Special AirService Regiment already established atPerth will be more than doubled in size to provide a head-quarters squadron and foursquadrons. The Government has decided ona substantial change in the organisation ofthe Citizen Military Forces designed tocreate additional battalions, give greaterflexibility and increased opportunities forservice, particularly in country areas. Thetarget strength for the cadets is being increasedfrom 40,000 to 45,000.In the 1963 defence review, I announcedthat it was intended to double as soon aspossible the strength of the Pacific IslandsRegiment, which at that time was of theorder of 700, and I also indicated thatfurther developments in relation to theforce were under consideration. Recruitmentto the P. I. R. has increased steadily, and thetarget strength we envisaged in our previousplans will be attained earlier than we hadexpected. In the present strategic situationthe Government continues toattach high priority to the strengtheningof the P. I. R. The detailed investigationshave now been completed,and the Government will proceed withthe plan ' to increase the force to threebattalions and supporting units with a totalstrength approaching 3,500 by June 1968.Tenders closing on 30th November this yearhave been called for necessary Army worksfor Papua and New Guinea which couldcost about œ 12 million. An honorable memberopposite asked me today whether therewas any difficulty about this, having regardto the fact that it was a Trust Territory.Part of the answer is that there is not.These include additional barrack buildings,workshops and engineering services, andhousing for native married members of theforce. The -provision of equipment for the Armymust match the improvements in the strengthand availability of units. In the defencereview of May 1963, expenditure on Armyequipment was raised from the rate ofmillion Per annumn to the much higher levelof œ 17.5 million.. In the light of the deterioration of ourstrategic Position there is a need to aoceleratethe rate of progress towa~ rds achievemenitof the approved objective of providingmodern equipment for one division. Provisionis also required for the expanded forcesin Papua and New Guinea. Provision mustbe made for the replacement of out-moded.equipment as new items become available
from research and development for introductioninto service. Sufficient additionalequipment must be provided to ensure thatC. M. F. training is realistic and effective.For all these purposes, and in line withthe expansion in other elements of ourdefence preparations, the Government hasapproved a major acceleration in Armyequipment purchases. Expenditure will beincreased to œ 20 million in 1965-66-thefirst year of the new defence programmeo œ 25 million in the following year, andto œ 30 million in 1967-68. The equipmentto be purchased will include the whole rangeof moder conventional weapons, ammunition,vehicles, light aircraft, engineering andsignals stores and so on. Items of new equipmentwhich the Army is investigating includelow level anti-aircraft weapons, air-portablearmoured fighting vehicles, new artilleryweapons, combat surveillance equipment -andvarious other items. Emphasis will continueto be placed on air-portable equipment andthose items which will improve Armymobility. The general effect of this approvalis that as the strength of our forces is builtup, the weapons and equipment which theyrequire, and of the most modern types, willbe available to them. The increase in theArmy strength from under 23,000 to some37,500 by the end of 1966 means thataccommodation for an additional 15,000men has to be provided. This is . additionalto the large works, programme for thePacific Islands Regiment which I havealready mentioned. This will mean a greatlyincreased Army works programme whichwill be carried out with the highest priority.I turn now to our proposals for an expandedNavy and Air Force as part of anoverall programme for strengthening theAustralian military effort. Before the defencereview undertaken by Cabinet last week,the Naval programme provided for a Fleetcomprising the following main units: Oneaircraft carrier, operating anti-submarinehelicopters and also fixed wing aircraft fortheir remaining service life; two Daringclass destroyers: three Charles F. Adamsdestroyers-D. D. G.' s; six type-12 frigates;four Oberon class submarines; six " Tonclass minesweepers; one escort maintenanceship-being construdted in Australia; onefast transport; one fleet tanker; and oneBattle class destroyer for use as a trainingship. This programme involved the constructionof ten new ships, including threeCharles F. Adams destroyers whichrank among the world's finest guidedmissile ships; four Oberon class submarines;and two type-12 antisubmarinefrigates and an escort maintenanceship being constructed in our ownshipyards in Australia. These additions inthemselves would provide a significant increasein the capability of the R. A. N. tofulfil its increasing operational commitments.Careful consideration has been given tothe future of the Fleet Air Arm which isa complex field of defence and couldinvolve very large expenditures. H. M. A. S." Mellbourne" was converted to the antisubmarinerole with the acquisition of 27modern Wessex helicopters in 1963, and anumber of Gannet and Sea Venom aircraftwere also retained. A number of possibilitiesas to the continued operation of theMelbourne" have been considered,having regard to the remaining life of theship, the general cost of naval aviation, andother defence considerations.The Government has now made twoimportant decisions-First, as the Gannet and Sea Venom aircraftare approaching the end of their servicelife and ' becoming difficult anduneconomical to maintain, it has beendecided to replace these aircraft with 14S2E Tracker anti-submarine aircraft. Thisaircraft, which is in service with the UnitedStates Navy-as members of the Housewho visited recently the U. S. S. " Enterprise"will recall-is a twin piston-enginedaircraft with good endurance and wellequipped for all-weather operations. Theanti-submarine equipment it carries includesthe latest electronic devices, and it also hasthe capacity for carrying a good weaponload. Its inclusion in the Melbourne's"equipment will improve considerably theship's anti-submarine capability. If Iremember accurately, the cost of this itemis about œ 16 million or œ 17 million.Secondly, the Government has alsoapproved an extensive modernisation ofthe " Melbourne" going much beyond thatapproved in the 1963 review. Thismodernisation will cost nearly œ 10 million.The main functions in which modernisationis required are the operation of antisubmarineaircraft in all weather by dayand night; long range detection and height
finding radar; improved close range airdefence by mounting Seacat missile systems;and improved habitability.Those proposals will add substantially tothe anti-submarine capability of the RoyalAustralian Navy. In the 1963 review theGovernment authorised modernisation ofour Daring class destroyers directed mainlytowards improving their anti-subm'arinecapability. This plan has been reviewed inthe light of the Navy's tactical requirementsand the needs of our strategic situation.It has now been decided to modernisethe Darings by providing them with Ikara,which, as honorable members are alreadyaware, is a guided anti-submarine weaponssystem developed in our own research andproduction establishments. The estimatedcost of modernising the two Darings is inexcess of œ 13 million.With a view to enhancing the Navy'smobility, a fast fleet replenishment ship withsome provision for the carrying of oil fuelis to be acquired. It is expected that theship will come into commission in 1970.The question of local construction-whichwe would prefer-or purchase from overseaswill be determined at a very earlydate. It has -been decided to add two minesweepersto the present force of six vesselswhich were obtained in 1962. Theadditional minesweepers will be introducedinto service in 1968.Concurrently with the planning of theexpansion of the Pacific Islands Regiment,investigations have been proceeding into theformation of a coastal security force inPapua and New Guinea. It has now beendecided that five patrol craft of a type suitiable for local manning and maintenancewill be obtained. These will contribute substantiallyto the general surveillance of theshores and rivers of the Territory. Nine allpurpose patrol craft to replace vessels inuse by the which are now approachingthe end of their useful life, will also beobtained. These vessels will be suited forpatrol duties such as those being carried outat the present moment by our minesweepersin Borneo waters.In addition to the above proposals,Cabinet has approved a wide range of navalprojects designed to support objectiveswhich have already been approved, includingsupport facilities for the Charles F. Adams destroyers, a missile firing range,development of a submarine base and supportfacilities and provision for a submarinerescue vessel, replacement of harbour supportcraft and fleet boats, modernisation ofWessex helicopters, and rehabilitation ofManus Island oil fuel installations.In recent defence programmes, theGovernment has approved the substantialre-armament of the fighter and strikereconnaissanceelements of the R. A. A. F.with modern aircraft of advanced performance.The order which has beenplaced for 100 Mirage supersonic fighteraircraft will provide for the re-equipment ofthe four Sabre fighter squadrons. Deliveriesof these aircraft from local production tothe R. A. A. F. are continuing. The 24 Fl 11Aaircraft which have been ordered from theUnited States will add powerfully to thedeterrent and strike capability of theR. A. A. F. The Government is confident thatthe FIl11A aircraft, which is expected to flybefore the end of this year, will amply fulfilits promise as an outstanding military aircraft.In this programme the Government hasgiven particular attention to the transport,maritime and training requirements of theR. A. A. F. and to the continued developmentof our airfields. The existing squadron of12 Hercules C130A aircraft with which theR. A. A. F. was equipped in 1958 has considerablyimproved the air strategic mobilityof the Australian forces. The developmentof plans associated with our S. E. A. T. O. andother commitments has, however, shownclearly that our present air strategic movementfacilities fall short of those requiredto meet likely military situations. A studyby our professional military advisers on thestrategic mobility requirements of the Australianservices indicates that in addition tothe aircraft which would be provided fromcivil resources, the services require anadditional squadron of medium range transportaircraft. The aircraft selected to meetthis requirement is the C130E, a greatlyimproved version of the C130A at presentin service in the R. A. A. F. For operationaland maintenance purposes these aircraft arecompatible with the C130A. They providean increased strategic lift capacity and theypossess the short field characteristics whichenable them to carry out intra-theatre operationsas well as inter-theatre tasks. Approval
has been given to acquire 12 C130E aircraft.This will mean an increase in theorder of battle of the transport element ofthe R. A. A. F. from two to three squadrons.The existing squadron of Hercules C130Aaircraft will, of course, continue in service,together with the squadron of Caribou aircraftwhich has recently been acquired. Thedetachment of Caribou aircraft in SouthVietnam has already given notable servicein operations against the Communist Vietcong.The maritime element of the Royal AustralianAir Force, working closely with thecarrier " Melbourne" and with the escortsof the Royal Australian Navy, providesmaritime reconnaissance and anti-submarineprotection for our forces. At present thereare two maritime squadrons in theR. A. A. F. No. 10 Squadron is equipped withNeptune SP2H aircraft embodying modernsurface and underwater submarine detectionequipment. No. 11 Squadron stationedat Richmond is, however, equipped with anolder version of the Neptune aircraft, theP2E, containing submarine detection andtracking equipment, which is now comingto the end of its useful operational life. Itis accordingly necessary to re-equip thissquadron so that it will be fully effectiveagainst modern submarines. It has beendecided to re-arm the squadron in 1968with Lockheed Orion aircraft which haveoutstanding performance in the locationand destruction of enemy submarines. TheOrion is the best maritime aircraft availablein the world today. Ten of these aircraftwill be obtained.The current flying training aircraft inthe R. A. A. F. are the Winjeel in the basicand the Vampire in the advanced stages.The introduction of high performance aircraftof the Mirage and Fl111A types willrequire new types of training aircraft andnew techniques in training. In major airforces operating supersonic aircraft the useof a jet aircraft from the commencementof training has proved to be necessary toachieve . the required standard quickly. TheGovernment has accordingly approved thepurchase of an all-through jet trainer ofsuitable performance to replace the Winjeeland the Vampire, thereby enabling thetraining organisation to advance in parallelwith the re-equipment of operational squadrons. Seventy-five of the new aircraftwill be obtained.At present navigators and signallers ofthe R. A. A. F. are trained in Dakota aircraftmodified in 1952 for this purpose. In afew more years these aircraft will beinadequate to train navigators and signallers,having regard to the latest trainingtechniques, the type of training equipmentrequired and the modern operational aircraftbeing obtained for the R. A. A. F. TheGovernment has approved the acquisitionof eight replacement -trainer aircraft of asuitable type.Experience gained by the members of theR. A. A. F. Mirage instructional team inFrance, coupled with the experience ofother air forces operating supersonic aircraft,indicates that a dual mirage aircraftis necessary ' to provide safe, efficient andfast conversion of both experienced andless experienced pilots. The Governmenthas approved the acquisition of ten dualMirage aircraft. These will be additional tothe 100 operational Mirage aircraft alreadyon order.I have referred already to the additionalequipment which we are providing toimprove the essential strategic and tacticalmobility of our forces. The continueddevelopment of airfields to permit the rapiddeployment and effective operational use ofour forces -both strategically and tactically isa complementary measure to which theGovernment continues to attach the highestimportance. In earlier years we have carriedout an extensive programme of airfieldworks and development in such places asDarwin, Townsville, Amberley and Williamtown.The construction of a second airfieldin the Northern Territory at Tindal, whichwas approved in the last programme, isproceeding satisfactorily and will be completedin 1966. Detailed investigations andtechnical planning for the new airfield atBoram near Wewak in New Guinea havenow been completed and construction willproceed without delay. This airfield will bebuilt to standards which will permit its useby all aircraft now in service or to beacquired by -the R. A. A. F.We have now approved ' the furtherdevelopment of airfields in New Guinea. The
existing airfield at Nadzab will ' be rehabilitatedand extended for ferrying purposes tostandards permitting its use by Mirage andother aircraft. The airfield at Daru in thesouth west of Papua-New Guinea will beextended and developed and smaller airstripsbetween Daru and Boram will be broughtto a higher standard. This will add to theflexibility of our forces and improve theeffectiveness of the patrols now carried outby the Pacific Islands Regiment. On themainland the existing airfield at Learmonth,near North West Cape, will be furtherdeveloped by the provision of taxiways,hard standings and other essential services.Improvements are also to be made to theairfield at Cocos to increase its capability.The Government has previouslyannounced -the acquisition of two newcontrol and reporting units, one of whichwill -be installed at Williamtown and one atAmberley. Both these equipments will bemobile. Provision is made in ; the new programmefor the modernisation of the controland reporting unit already installed atDarwin. Adequate provision will be madefor new capital construction and modernisationof existing facilities in. our productionand research establishments so that theymay continue to meet the demands of ourexpanded -forces.A major expansion of the nature which Ihave outlined must inevitably bring a substantialincrease in expenditure. Briefly, weestimate that defence votes in the threeyears of the programme will be: 1965-66,œ 370,000,000; 1966-67, œ E421,700,000; and1967-68, œ 429,100,000. In our defence review of 22nd May1963, we contemplated expenditure allotmentsas under-1963-64 1964-65 1965-66 1966-67 1967-68Em Lm LM œ m LMrNavy 53.3 54.3 63.3 65.2 59.7Army 77.6 87.5 90.7 94.0 97.2Air 80.1 84.9 87.9 89.1 82.6Supply and 26.5 26.7 27.7 28.7 30.0other Departments -23 7.5 1253.4 269.6 277.0_ 269.5Since May 1963 these allotments havebeen increased by Cabinet approvals ofnew projects, of which the main items are:Purchase of 24 Fl111A strike-reconnaissanceaircraft; construction of two additionalfrigates to replace H. M. A. S. Voyager";increased costs for the fleet fitting of Ikara;expansion of the Pacific Islands Regimentin Papua and New Guinea; replacement ofV. I. P. aircraft; purchase of seven additionalCaribou aircraft; a housing programme;and defence aid for Malaysia. Thetotal estimated cost of these approvtals isœ 1 18 million.In addition to these specific projects,additional costs have also been incurredwith the introduction of new Service payscales, improved conditions of service,basic wage increases and margins adjustments.The ' addition of the expenditureflowing from all these decisions hasinvolved an increase in the planning allotmentsof ' the May 1963 review to thefollowing-1963-64( Actual) 1964-65( Estimates) 1965-661966-671967-68im Emn Em Em EmNavy 55.6 69.2 80.1 81.3 76.9Army 79.0 94.2 106.5 109.4 111.2Air 89.2 90.0 99.6 108.1 105.3Supply Department 29.3 33.0 34.0 33.2 34.6Defence Department and other charges to theDefence vote 7.4 10.4 10.2 9.0 9.8260.5 296.8 330.4 341.0 337.814661 / 64.-2
The decisions whichannounced will increasefigures still further to -the I have justthese adjustedfollowing-1965-66 1966-67 1967-68œ m œ m œ mNavy 95.2 105.3 98.5Army 118.1 138.0 150.1Air 107.8 130.3 131.5Supply Department 38.4 39.0 39.1Defence Department andother charges to the Defencevote 10.5 9.1 9.9370.0 421.7 429.1These are very great increases. We considerthat they are warranted having regardto the situation which we now face.Although decisions which we have nowmade will mean an increased allocationover the three years commencing 1965-66of some œ 212 million, we are certain thatthe people of Australia will also recognisethe need for us to continue to maintainadequate defence forces capable of meetingthe obligations which we have to makea great Australian defence effort, and alsothose obligations which we have assumedwith our allies. No-one can doubt that theincrease in defence expenditure arising fromthe decisions which I have announced, withtheir added demands for manpower andmaterial resources, will have very significanteconomic and financial effects.In the present financial year, the directbudgetary effects will be limited. There will be a spurt between now and the end of thefinancial year in accommodation and otherworks expenditure necessary to the commencementof the selective servicescheme in July. And here and there,there will be a need to make smallinitial payments this financial yeartowards new equipment which is thesubject of the new three year programme.However, in 1965-66 and later years, theimpact will Ibe large. In the first place, itwill present a formidable budgetary problem.On top of -that, the additions to expenditureat home will add to the call on the resourcesof the economy, which are already undersome strain, and the additions -to expenditureabroad will increase whatever drawingswould otherwise be made on our externalreserves. There are thus involved obvious problemsfor -the national economy. These must andwill be faced and solved. All I need sayat present is that, as a Government, we haveacted under a sense of national duty. Webelieve that we will have wide public supportin whatever tasks may lie ahead. I presentthe following paper-Defence Review-Ministerial Statement,November, 1964-and move-That the House take note of the statement.Debate ( on motion by Mr. Calwel)adjourned.



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
UNIERSITIES ( Financial Assistance) BIUl 1964.
Second Reading.
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 11Ith November, 1964.]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 12.25].-I move-
That the Bill be now read a second time.
* This Bill, and the States Grants ( Universities)
Bill, which I will introduce shortly,
relate to the same subject-academic salaries-
and I propose Sir, with your per-
. msissipon, teo deeal wicth bhoth . Bi lls in this
Last October I announced the
intention of the Government to establish
an inquiry to recommend the level of
university salaries which we should support
for grant purposes from the beginning of
the current triennium, namely 1st January
1964. 1 said then that, as an interim
measure, the Commonwealth would offer
to the States for recurrent expenditure by
the universities grants calculated on the
' basis of a professorial rate of œ 4,600 per
annum. This rate would be payable from
1st July 1963. As it was higher than the
rate upon which the 1963 legislation was
based, I undertook also to introduce amending
legislation to provide the -supplementary
funds required on the Commonwealth's part
to support the new salary levels.
14786/ 64. The Government asked Mr. Justice
Eggleston to inquire into university salaries.
His report has been received and was tabled
yesterday. All honorable members will
agree, I feel sure, that we are much indebted
to Mr. Justice Eggleston, and to those who
assisted him, for the thorough and lucid
report which has been -furnished to the
Government. Mr. Justice Eggleston has recommended
a standard salary of œ 5,200 for professors
and a standard salary of œ 4,300 for
associate professors and readers. The Government
has decided to accept these recommendations.
In addition, however, in the
process of arriving at his recommendations
Mr. Justice Eggleston assumed that a reasonable
minimum of the salary range to be
paid to a lecturer would -be œ 2,400 -per
annum, and a reasonable maximum of the
salary range to be paid to a senior lecturer
would be œ 3,800 per annum. Having noted
that Mr. Justice Eggleston recommended a
single salary for an associate professor or
a reader, and not a salary range, we accept
his suggestions for the salary ranges of
lecturers and senior lecturers. 
It is now necessary to do two things. The
first is to amend the States Grants ( Universities)
Act 1960-1963 to provide Commonwealth
support appropriate to a basic
professorial salary of œ 4,600 per annum for
the period 1st July 1963 to 31st December
1963. This is to cover the original provision.
The second Bill does this by providing
an additional œ 175,000 of Commonwealth
money on condition that œ 318,000
is provided in additional fees and State
grants. This is the usual formula.
The second need is to amend the Universities
( Financial Assistance) Act to provide
for our acceptance of Mr. Justice
Eggleston's proposals. That is the purpose
of the first Bill, but I emphasise that this is
an interim measure only. We received the
report on 30th October. Therefore there
has ; been insufficient time to obtain from
the States the detailed information necessary
to enable accurate figures to be inserted in
the First Schedule for recurrent expenditure
in each of the years 1964, 1965 and
1966. This Bill provides provisional figures
for 1964 only. These indicate an increase
of œ 1.3 million in the Commonwealth
offer to a new total of œ 12.3 million. The
corresponding figures for fees and State contributions
are a œ 2.4 million increase to a
new total of œ 22.8 million. As soon as
practicable the Universities Commission
will recommend final figures for 1964 as
well as new figures for 1965 and 1966.
It will do this on the basis of information
received from the universities and the States,
including information -about the levels of
salaries adopted. I think it is appropriate
that I emphasise once more that the salaries
actually paid in a State university are
ultimately a matter for each university and
the State Government under whose authority
it has been established.
A State university may, in fact, pay
salaries either higher or lower than those
approved for grant purposes by the Commonwealth.
If higher salaries are paid, no
assistance will be forthcoming from the
Commonwealth toward the cost of the
excess. It would by my understanding that
if salaries lower than the levels approved
by the Commonwealth are paid, the amounts
payable by the Commonwealth in respect
of academic salaries would be limited to
our share, according to the established formula, of the salaries actually paid. I think
that all will agree that it would not -be
reasonable for Commonwealth money,
specifically offered as our share of the cost
of higher salaries, to be used for other purposes,
should salaries ' be adopted below the
level on which our offer was made.
I should add at this point that the Government
views sympathetically the suggestion
made in chapter 6 of the report that
limited provision should be made for additional
funds from which loadings to professorial
salaries should be paid in certain
individual cases where there is a desire to
recognise particular merit. This is distin*
from the established practice of paying'
differential salaries to holders of certain
Chairs. The Act to which we are now
giving our attention applies only to
State universities, but I take this
opportunity of saying that, so f
as academic salaries at the Australian'
National University are concerned, the Government
will adopt a similar policy to that
which I have just described. In broad terms
this means that in the School of General
Studies in that University we shall recognise
for grant purposes the four salary points
already mentioned. In the ' Institute of
Advanced Studies we would envisage a continuation
of a loading broadly similar to
that now paid, giving a basic professorial
salary of œ 5,700 a year. The details of
salaries at the Australian National University&amp;
will , be settled in consultation with the W
Council of the University and with the
advice of the Universities Commission.
There is another matter not related to the
Bills now before us, but arising from the
report, on which I take the present oppor-O
tunity to indicate Government policy. Our
experience with the recent inquiry has convinced
us that this kind of machinery is
perhaps the most satisfactory means we can
devise for arriving at a measure of academic
salaries for the purpose of fixing the level
of Commonwealth grants for university
purposes. Therefore, as suggested by Mr.
Justice Eggleston, we stand ready to employ
this kind of machinery again; we are not,
however, prepared to adopt any specific
period between reviews. That must depend
on circumstances. I commend this Bill to
the House.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH UOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISEED BROADCAST OR TEL2CAoT BEFORE
8 P M. ON MONDAY, NO1EMBE. 18.
BROADCAST NO, 2
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. SIR
ROBERT MENZIES OVER ABC NATIONAL STATIONS AT 8 PM.
ON MONDA, NOVEMBER 18, 1963
In an earlier broadcast, I disposed of the campaign
being conducted by my opponent, in a mixture of shouting and
whispering, about my alleged imminent retirement from office
after the election.
But Mr. Calwell's tactics do not end there.
Clearly in a straight-out conflict of policies, having
in mind the record growth of Australia in the last ten years,
and having in mind also the vital importance of a clear and
unequivocal Australian foreign policy and Australian relations
with our allies, Mr. Calwell has no groat faith in victory.
That is why he is busy raising these sidc-issues on which he
thinks he can secure votes either by fomenting animosities or
by creating fears in the public mind.
The one I want to mention briefly on this occasion is
his statement that if my Government is re-elected, it will impose
another far-reaching " credit squeeze", presumably out of a
spirit of sheer hardheartedness. I don't like this because, as
all my colleagues know9 I am not a hardhearted person. Now1,
if Mr. Calwell knows anything about public finance, he must
know that severe economic restrictive measures can be needed or
produced only in order to check or defeat an inflationary boom.
He knows, or should know that a prosperous economy in which the
extravagances of speculation have been checked, as they
undoubtedly have been in the last two years, an economy in which
effort is concentraded upon production and supply and in pushing
forward works and national deveJopmentl both public and private,
is not an economy which invites extreme measures at all.
We have had the benefit of a great deal of experience
in these matters in recent times. For myself and for the
Government, I see no reason why continued economic growth should
not continue to be associated with stability of costs and prices.
qe will do all in our power to avoid a cost-price spiral because
we know that inflation, the fall in the value of money, hits
ordinary citizens far more than it hits a well-to-do minority.
But did you hear or read Mr. Calwell's Policy Speech? I hope
you did. It contained the longest and most extravagant and
expensive series of bids for your votes that have iarked any
election in my time. Really, it treated you as if you had your
vote for sale! In his eagerness to achieve office ( because I
suppose that for him this may well be the lost chance), he
proposed to add to the supply of money in this country on such
an astronomical scale that he has left himsclf, in the event of
victory, with the choice of two evils. One is to have an
inflationary boom so violent that even a Labour Government would
be compelled to take the most stringent measures to counteract A
it, or alternatively, such an enormous increase in taxation,
including no doubt new forms of taxation, as would be well
calculated to destroy business confidence and lead to an acute
depression. Mr. Calwell tries to make your flesh creep with imaginary
fears of which we would do. I would strongly advise you to got
out of this realm of fiction and do some hard thinking about the
price that you would have to pay one way or the other for the
policy on which he asks you to elect him, 



FOR PRESS P. M. No, 75/ 1964
DEATH OF SENATOR WADE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
Senator Wade's death is a sad blow; he seemed
to be recovering. He was a man of quiet strength of
character, a really first-class Minister and, as a
colleague, uniformly friendly and helpful.
In sending our sympathy to his widow and son,
we would wish them to know that we share their own sense
of loss.
CANiBERIA, 19th November, 1964. 


19TH November, 1964
Good Evening Ladies and Gentlemen:
There is a Senate election coming on. That means that less than twelve months since the general election for the Lower House, you have to be voting again, and unfortunately perhaps for you, I have to be speaking again. You will, of course, at once understand that this is not an occasion for a new policy. A policy that is put forward in a parliamentary election is put forward for a three-year period, and of course, at the end of twelve months, you don't expect to have completed the whole of your policy, though we, as I will point out later on, have completed a remarkable percentage of it. So this is not a time for a new policy. This is a a time for you to say whether you affirm your vote of last December. What, in effect, the Opposition is saying to you in the Senate election is, " Let us the Opposition, have a majority in the Senate." That will, of course, contradict your decision of last December and it will frustrate the Government and impair the success of the policies you voted for. Still, of course, the Opposition asks you to do it.
Now, I want you to remember - because this is very important - &nbsp;that the Senate is not the House of Lords. We occasionally call it the House of Lords when we are moving around among its members but it isn't the House of Lords. The House of Lords hasn’t a fraction of the power that the Senate has. The Senate can reject legislation sent up from the Lower House; it can dismiss or disallow regulations made under Acts. In other words: When you have a hostile Senate, you live, as a government, entirely at the risk of your actions being overthrown in the other place. Now this is important, because under a good deal of the legislation that we have been passing or introducing pursuant to our last policy speech, our promises to you, are several Acts under which regulations will have to be made from time to time to make them effective, and if those regulations can be laid on the table of the House of the Senate, as they must be, and rejected by the Senate by a hostile majority, then the regulation falls to the ground.
So have that in mind, would you. I have had a little experience in this, because in 1949&nbsp;when you sent us in with a cracking majority, we were at the mercy of the Senate, and it took eighteen long months to got a double dissolution and get a majority in the Upper House, and in that eighteen months, we were able to do very little, although you had given us an enormous majority in the House of Representatives. Therefore, you see, the real issue in this matter is: Do you reverse your decision, having elected us so handsomely last December? Do you want to put it out of our power to carry out the rest of the programme that we laid before you? Now, that is I think the broad issue that comes before you.
But I want to say something about it in relation to a particular matter. Now you will remember that only the other day I introduced a defence prominent Parliament. This was the most far-reaching defence programme in the history of Australia in time of peace. To put it quite shortly, it added £400M. over a period of three years to the defence budget. It added enormously to the fighting capacity of the three Services and to the service of supply. Among other things, it introduced compulsory selective military service. Now you are entitled to know, thoroughly entitled to know, that this is not just a politician's judgment. We did this on the close and detailed advice of our military advisers the Military Board and the Chief of the General Staff. W'e had them there in person when we were discussing the defence programme and we have acted on their view which commended itself to us as unanswerably correct. If you were to have the army you want in the time you want, then with the present economic circumstances particularly, voluntary recruiting would not produce the result.
Now, why should we be so concerned about it? The answer is that foreign policy and defence on both of which you have heard a great deal in the last election, foreign policy and defence are inseparable. We have a definite foreign policy as you know, and we examine from time to time the risks involved in the foreign situation, and we came unhesitatingly to the conclusion that things had deteriorated. I am not talking scare stuff. I don't want anybody to suppose we think there is going to be a war tomorrow or something like that. But the position has deteriorated.
In North Vietnam, the Communists, for example, haven't hesitated to attack the United States of America, both on land and by sea. In South Vietnam, there is a very unstable government which makes it very difficult for all of us, very difficult to assist effectively a country where the government is uncertain. You know what has been happening in Malaysia a with Indonesia stepping up if anything, its attacks, its little landings on the main-land Malaya, its infiltration in the Borneo territories; the truculence with which Soekarno and those with him speak to us and to the world, all these. are bad signs. They show that there is some deterioration and, of course, don't forget that a nation which will not hesitate in breach of all the rules of international conduct to invade, even in a small way, a peaceful neighbour, won't have too many doubts about making some infiltration into our side of New Guinea, if they think this is profitable. And therefore in our programme, we have had to step up quite materially, what we are doing to defend New Guinea and Papua,
Now all this, I think, is a matter that you will be able to determine for yourselves. I would just like to say that my distinguished opponent, the Leader of the Opposition, is very hard to please, you know, on these matters. I don't mind that because I daresay when I was Leader of the Opposition, I was hard to please too. But he does put in in an awkward position over this compulsory business because in the first place, he says the people are against it and il we had a referendum, the people would reject it and the Prime Minister won't give them a referendum, and in the next breath, or the next paragraph, he says, "! The Prime Minister has brought this on. It is a political stunt to get votes in the Senate."' Now, you know, with respect, he can't be right both ways, can he?
Now, I don’t know yet what your views are on this matter. All I know is that if I had had a far-reaching programme of this kind, containing considerable novelty and had put it in the pigeonhole until after the Senate election and had brought it out when we resume after Christmas, you would have had a perfect right to say that I had deceived you, and as I am not in the habit of deceiving you, we decided, without any hesitation that what we were going to do, dramatic as it was revolutionary as it was in some respects, very costly as it Is in any respect, should be known to you, plainly and clearly before you voted either for us or against us at a Senate election.
Now having said that, I would just like to turn aside to what I will call the domestic front because at the last election, you remember, I gave great prominence to foreign affairs and to defence and then also put before you a series of propositions, particularly about education and housing and some social services which I thought, and my party thought, would be of value to the people. We promised a variety of things.
Let’s take them first of all on the educational side. We said that we would provide 10,000 scholarships for secondary school students for the last two years of their schooling and that these would be worth up to £ 100 in fees and up to £ 100 in maintenance. This was a very handsome scholarship provision, Well,we found that, of course, we couldn't begin the system last December because you were still voting and therefore the system was carefully worked out and designed to begin at the end of this year. Well, now, we found that a number of students who might, if things had happened a little earlier, have been in for a scholarship of this kind, had missed it because they had not two year-s to go but one year to go, and so in order not to disappoint them and in order to achieve the best possible result, we said, " Right, we'll have 10,000 scholarships two-year scholarships as we said we will add another 10,000 one-year scholarships for students who have one year to go. Now this was a case of performance going far beyond promise, but we did it as you would have wished us&nbsp;to do it so that we achieved the greatest possible good for the purposes that I outlined at the general election.
I said that we would have 2,500 technical scholarships. Now that's been a rather difficult job, as my colleague, Senator Gorton, who has done an awful lot of work on this, could tell you, because each State has its own technical school system and some States have none at all, so-called. We are very individualistic people in Australia and I don’t complain about it-I'm a great believer in diversity but there is an awful lot of diversity in the technical schooling field in Australia. But all these problems have been worked out now and a basis has been arrived at and so these scholarships go into operation at the end of this year.
I said, didn't I, at the last election, we would provide £5M. for technical schools, all of which in Australia are run by government. Well, we've done that, we have paid out the first half already although the financial year is only a few months old. I said-and I give some emphasis to this that we would find £5M a year for the improvement of scientific teaching facilities in secondary schools and that we wouldn't discriminate between State secondary schools or what are called independent secondary schools, some of which are church schools, some of which are not. We said we would not discriminate between them because our purpose is to help scientific teaching in the schools to reach its highest possible level of efficiency and, as those of you know who have children at school, the cost of scientific equipment and scientific teaching in schools now has gone up out of all sight. Therefore we said we would find £5M. a year, and already, I am happy to tell you, half of that has been paid out in respect of a great number of applications from all types of school and this will continue, I hope, I never know whether there will have to be some regulations made under this scheme next year, and we would therefore perhaps be at the risk of a hostile decision on the part of the Senate because, you know, as I understand Mr. Calwell and what he says in the House, he is opposed to this scheme. And if he is, there is a sporting chance that the Labour Party is. So you never know. And if the Labour Party is, then there is a risk which I would wish to avoid and which you would wish to avoid.
Now, that's the scholarships side. I omitted one matter which is perhaps not enormous but I did say, do you remember, that we&nbsp;would provide 15/-endowment for each fulltime student child from 16 to 21. Now that itself has made a very considerable difference.&nbsp;
Well I turn away from that, with this sort of gathering-up remark that if you look at our education programme as we put it before you, you will see that in every respect we have now put it into performance and that in one respect we have gone beyond our promise that is in respect of the one-year secondary school scholarships.
Now I have been in Parliament a long time some people think too long. I think that too, occasionally, when I am a bit dyspeptic. But I have been there a long time, and I want to tell you this. In the whole of that time, this first Session of this Parliament since the last election has been the most productive in the whole of my experience. It's almost unique to have so many things done to completion so quickly after an election, and in the school field, we can look you in the eye and say, " We said we would do it and we have more than done it."
Well now let me turn to housing. We had two promises in particular that we made to you about housing, We directed one to those up to the age of 35, the younger married people who wanted, we thought, some help in saving to put down a deposit or put themselves in a position to negotiate the purchase of a house. And our promise, put shortly, was, as you know, that we would have a home savings advance of £250 for £750 saved by the prospective home-owners, or a proportionate sum as you went down&nbsp;which meant that if the saved £750 we would make it £1,000 This, of course was a very material aid to people in this age group. Its popularity has already been well established.
There have been many, many applications made and the conditions fulfilled. Last time I heard admittedly it was about a week a-go, but at that time, the better part of £1 ¾M . had already been paid out under this scheme, and again, you must remember it hasn't been operating for very long. That has been, I think, a substantial achievement and as time goes on, of course there will be more and more millions found because, as ti. me goes on, more and more people in that age group approaching marriage, anxious to establish a home, will realise what a tremendous advantage this is. This gives the little extra help at the point of time, at the point of substance at which they need it.
The other proposal we made was not confined to younger people, but that we should establish a home loans insurance corporation, the object of which would be to ensure loans given on mortgage normally for the purchase of a house. The insuring of a mortgage loan, of course, would enable that loan to be given at a much more satisfactory rate of interest. We want to get away from all this twelve per cent. business on second mortgages. We want to have a system of insuring home loans of this kind so that the rate of interest will be a perfectly normal and proper rate of interest for something that is, in effect, guaranteed by the government.
Now this has been a very complicated matter because first of all we had to establish a Department of Housing. We had never had one before in Canberra, and I appointed a Minister, Mr, Bury, who had to establish a Department and get a Permanent Head and get things together, and of course, get a good deal of advice of a technical. kind. I think it's a very remarkable performance really that under these circumstances the Housing Department should have already got into operation this savings grant scheme, and that Mr. Bury himself was able in the last few days of the Parliamentary Sittings, to introduce and move a Bill relating to the establishment of the corporation which is to be the Home Loan Insurance Corporation for the Commonwealth.
I know there are so-me people who think all these matters might be done overnight. I marvel, really, that they have been able to, at this stage, within comparatively few months, to arrive at this result, and I am anticipating that when the House resumes after the Christmas break, this Bill will be passed and will go into operation and by that time we can say that the whole of our special housing proposals pu before you at the last election have gone into operation. You know, politicians, my friends you know what people say about us, and probably you do too we are always supposed to be great makers of promises and great breakers of promises. I just want you to remember that I am able to sit here and tell you of the promises, all of which you remember from the last election, all of which, so far from being broken, have been put into performance.
Now there were other things in the Health Department. In the health field, we said we would increase the Government contributions by one-third. That was done in the first Sittings after we returned. We said that we would extend the scheme by which we helped the States on the building of mental institutions. We did that in the first Sittings,
Very difficult to find in any of these fields, health included anything that has not been put into complete and satisfactory performance.
There are two matters which very properly concern a great number of people particularly those who live in the northern parts of Australia, that perhaps I should refer to with particularity. Roads. Now I made what some of you might have thought to be a rash promise when I was coming before you on this last occasion, I said that we were going to negotiate a new roads agreement with the States, a new five-year agreement and that we would, on that occasion, increase our provision from £250M to £350M - there was to be an increase of £100M, on this tremendously important matter. Well, we dealt with that matter. Instead of increasing it to £350M we in fact increased it to £375M. so that there again is a case in which the performance outmatched the promise.
We also said that we thought it was time to have some body which could survey the roads needs of Australia and try to bring some order out of chaos, try to get some system of establishing priorities which road was more important and what one and that therefore we would establish a Roads Bureau, Well we had a conference with the States and we established the Bureau, an Act was passed through Parliament and the whole matter is now under way. Second, we said that we would examine the freight burdens on the people in the far north of Australia that we would set up a special committee to do that. We did, and it's been working and I expect that its report will be coming to us before very long. This may be one of the most significant reports about the north of Australia.
And third, we said we would establish, within the Department of National Development, a Northern Division, the special and urgent Job of which would be to examine all proposals for the northern development of Australia so that the Government might be in a position to make some selection and to conduct useful discussions with the States where States were involved such as Queensland and Western Australia, or with its own Department of Territories in the case of the Northern Territory. Now that division has been established and is working hard and, as a matter of fact, has at present in hand some very useful enquiries about priorities of work in that part of Australia. So in those fields we have done what we said we would do.
There is one matter on which we have not reached completion though it concerns the very people I have been directing myself to, and that was our proposal. that we would work out a scheme under which the price of petrol in remote areas should not be more than 4d. above the metropolitan level. This was a conscious, deliberate act of decentralisation.
Now it required two things. First of all, of course, discussions with the oil distributing companies, because unless we have their co-operation on this matter, then we, the Commonwealth, can't compel. So we negotiated, and we have reached, practically finality in our discussions with the oil companies. Those have teen, of course, prolonged. We are now putting before the State Governments the results of these discussions because only with the co-operation of the States can this scheme become effective. I donut anticipate for a moment that we will have any difficulties raised because I am sure the States will want this just as much as we do, but it is necessary to put our, negotiation results before them. This will be done instantly. I dare say that by the time Parliament resumes; we will be in a position to announce that there is a complete scheme and that the necessary legislation can be put into operation.
Now that leaves only one matter &nbsp;- restrictive &nbsp;practices. This is the most complex problem in the world, as the experience of every other country shows. We have devoted, literally, hours, days and weeks in Cabinet. The Attorney-General has been working on this we've had representations from all sections of the community ana we are now getting to the point where we can see daylight, because we don't want to make a mess of business. We want to encourage free competition without having injurious effects on those who are engaged in business undertakings. Now we are determined to go on with this matter. I am perfectly certain that when the House resumes we will be in a position to introduce into Parliament a scheme which will be none the worse for having been delayed because it will have the great advantage of having been thoroughly considered.
Now, my friends, there it is. My time is running out, In a statement to the nation, I made up my mind I would like to tell you remind you, of what we had promised and to tell you about our performance. I hope you will allow me a little pride in being able to make such a report to you at this time. To the extent to which the defence programme and the defence argument now going on operates to affect your minds and votes, then all I say to you is that this defence programme is realistic, it's practicable, it is completely necessary in face of the deteriorating position that we see overseas, the threats which exist in our neighbourhood and the basic fact that the security of Australia depends, very very largely, upon how far we can have defence in depth, and how far we can have South-East Asian countries kept out of the hands of the Communists. Because if they all fell to Communism, we would be a very unhappy and, in some senses, a very lonely people.
Now I am sure that all these things can be avoided they can be avoided by strength and readiness, and I know that in all those matters we will have your support.
Good night ladies and gentlemen.
&nbsp;



FOR PRESS P. M. Z6_! 964
MINISTERIAL APPOINTMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
The Honourable R. W. C. Owartz, E. D.,
Minister for Repatriation, was todaysorn in by
His Excellency the Governor-General as Minister for
Health. The swearing-in ceremony took place at Government
House, Canberra, at 9.30 a. m.
The appointment must at present be regarded
as temporary. I will give consideration to Cabinet
arrangements immediately after the Senate elections.
CANBERRA, 21st November, 1961. 



EMBARGO: NOT TO HE PUBLISHED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE
7.15 P. M. ON TUESDAY, 24TH NOVEMBER.
BROADCAST NO, 1 SENATE ELECTION
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, OVER ABC NATIONAL STATIONS
IN ALL STATES AT 7,15 P. M. ON TUESDAY,
24TH NOVEMBER, 1964
The primary issue in this Senate Election is whether
you want to reverse your decision of December last.
Now why should you? You agreed with us that Labour,
divided, and under the growing influence of the Left Wing,
is not to be trusted to maintain sturdy foreign policies,
or to have a realistic defence policy.
Why should you change your minds?
Take our domestic policy, from development to
education to housing. We have just concluded the most
active and productive Session in the history of the Commonwealth
Parliament. Many our soecial policy promises
have already been performed or put into legislative form
so that they may operate next year. Prosperity is high.
Wages are at record levels, The national income has grown.
Unemployment has disdppeared
You elected us to carry out a three-years policy,
Why should you now defeat your own choice?
True, Labour does not like our provision for science
teaching and scholarships in secondary schools, without
discrimination between State and Church or private schools,
With. a majority in the Senate, it could defeat any further
legislation in this field, or disallow any Regulations.
On top of all this, we now have a cleavage between
the parties on the vital matter of Defence,
But I should say something to you about our reasons
for introducing a limited measure of compulsory selective
military service in the Regular Army.
Our strategic position has suffered a deterioration
since the end of last year. North Vietnam has not hesitated
to attack ships and forces. South Vietnam is
increasingly threatened by the Communists. Indonesian
attacks upon Malaysia are increasing in illegal boldness.
Our own forces have been engaged in resisting them. Clearly
our defence provisions must be stepped up.
The present strength of the Regular Army, well
trained, well equipped, and mobile, is 22,750. I e are
convinced on the highest military advice, that we should
increase this to 37 500, which would mean an effective force
of 33,000 by the ena of 1966. Current experience of
recruiting shows that these numbers just cannot be achieved
in the time unless there is a compulsory call-up.
We have adopted this policy in the interests of the
national security, You will take your own way of expressing
your own opinions about it, You would have had a poor
opinion of us if we had delayed the announcement until after
the Senate Election. We thought you ought to know right away.
Without this now policy the defence of Australia would be
inadequate. This, in a period of great risk, would be a grave
breach of Government duty, 



EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST
BEFOiE 8 PM ( EST) ON IEDNESDAY, 25TH NOVEMBER
TEL1VISION SPEECH BY THE PRIME WINISTER,
THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES OVER ALL
ABC NATIONAL TELEVISION STATIONS ( EXCEPT
VICTORIA) ON WEDNESDAY, 25TH NOVEMBER, 1964
In his opening speech, I notice that Mr. Calwell
covered a groat variety of topics. I thought in effect,
that he repeated his policy speech of the last General
Election. Now, of course, this is not a General Election.
This is a Senate Election, and it is not the occasion for
new policies because you voted for us on a three-year
policy only less than twelve months ago. But I think it
is important to discover what is the real bone of contention
on this occasion, and I am indebted to the Opposition for
having made it quite clear what it regards as the bone of
contention. Now, the spokesman, the Member in charge of
the Opposition's case against compulsory service was Mr.
Fraser, Mr. A. D. Fraser, a very senior and experienced
member of the Labour Party. He was put in charge of the
Bill. What he said about the Bill represented the view of
the Opposition, and when the Bill was through and had got
to the Third Reading stage. he took the unusual course of
speaking on the Third Reading and uttering one paragraph,
but he did it with great deliberation so that everybody might
notice it. Could I read it to you?
He said " Ve believe that the time has come for
this issue the issue of compulsion to be
transferred to the jury of the Australian people
from this Parliament. That will enable the
Australian people to do, as I am certain they
will do at the Senate poll. namely, register
their overwhelming opposition to the unlimited
conscription of Australian youth in peace time
for service on foreign battlefields under foreign
commands and in wars to which Australia is not a
party," Now I am bound to believe that that is the Labour
Party speaking through its trusted representative in the House,
and so I would like just to have a look at it because this
really exposes the whole error, the basic error of the Labour
Party's approach to this matter.
In the first place, he said do you remember?
I quote the precise words: " unlimited conscription". ' Jell,
of course, it isn't unlimited conscription. It applies to a
limited and selected number of people out of a great number,
a very large number. That is unavoidable if you want a limited
intake. But I will pass on from that, it doesn't matter.
But this is in peace time, in peace time. Does
the Labour Party really believe that we are living in a nice
comfortable, leisurely time of peace? I pointed out in the
House, when I announced the Defence Programme, that we are now
in a state of rather more peril than we have been accustomed
to in times of so-called peace. Can we really believe that 
2
this is ordinary peace time, wrhen at this moment in South
Vietnam troops are engaged in combat, American forces are
engaged in combat American forces, of whom a quite reasonable
percentage are draftees, or as we say, conscripts, fighting
in South Vietnam. Can we really say it is a tiec of peace
when we have our own people there helping? Can we really
say that it is a time of peace when the North Vietnamese
are attacking American forces both on sea and on land? Can
we really say this is a time of peace when almost every few
days Indonesian infiltrators go into Malaya, to say nothing
of Malaysia, because they have been going into the Borneo
Territories for some time, and now they have become boldor,
and they land from time to time in Malaya itself. Can we
say this is a time of peace?
This is a basic fallacy on the part of Labour,
and indeed, Mr. Fraser admitted that these were not times of
peace because in the next breath he said...." for service on
foreign battlefields". " battlefields".... he acknowledges
the existence of battlefields but he says this is a time of
peace And then, of course, above all, he says that
these are wars, these are wars, the ones in which our own
people are to serve " to which australia is not a party".
Now this, of course, denies the whole existence of our
alliances. It denies the existence of the South-East Asian
Treaty, in which we have as partners, Great Britain, the United
States and a variety of Asian countries, and there in what we
now call SEATO we have obligations, and it is because of
SEATO that we have men at this moment in South Vietnam and that
we have men at this moment in Thailand, troops in Thailand,
that we have troops air forces in Malaya. Does the Labour
Party seriously suggest that we are not a party to these matters.
We are bound by treaty, by honourable obligation, and in the
same way, we are bound by honourable obligation, declared by
us in this Parliament and approved by you at th3 last election,
to come to the aid of Malaysia under unwarranted attack from
the forces and the leaders of Indonesia.
You see what I mean? To talk about wars to
which Australia is not a party you see, I come back to the
very words " to which Australia is not a party" is to
deny all reality. If we are not a party to these matters,
what are we doing there? How do we come to be there?
Because we have treaties and honourable obligations and we
don't come of a nation that is accustomed to dishonouring
its treaties or its obligations.
And if you come a little nearer home and look
at our side of New Guinea Papua and New Guinea in which we
have a tremendous trust obligation for millions of relatively
primitive people, you will find that we have declared that
we will defend the frontiers of New Guinea and Papua just as
we would the frontiers of our own country. Suppose an attack
came that way, would the Labour Party say this is a war to
which Australia is not a party? Don't they realise that any
attack on our Territories in the Pacific invokes the operations
of the great ANZUS pact to which the United States is a party?
I wonder what would happen to us, my friends,
if we adopted the Labour view and if we took up the attitude
that what happens in South-East Asia is no business of ours,
even that what happens in New Guinea is no business of ours,
And suppose the United States said, " All right, if that goes
for you, it goes for us. If you're not a party to these 
-3-
military obligations, why should we be? If you can renounce
your obligations, why can't we renounce ours?" L. nd not one
of us will take very much persuasion, will we, that if we were,
in fact, deserted in this part of the world by the groat powers
who can command the greatest strength in the world for our
protection, then we would be not only lonely but our future
could well be destroyed. Dontt let us have foolish talk as if we were
living in the halcyon summer of unbroken peace. We are not.
We are living in a dangerous period in the worldts histoiy and
we must, at this time above all tines, have clear thinking and
resolute action in relation to our own security. 



E14BARGO: NOT TO B FUBLISHED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST BEFORE
7o15 P. M. ON THURSDAY, 26TH NOVEMBER.
BROADCAST NO, 2 SENATE ELECTION
BROADCAST BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.
SIR ROIERT MENZIES, OVER ABC NAIIONAL STATIONS
IN ALL STATES AT 7.15 P. M. ON THURSDAY,
26TH NOVEMBER, 1964
The Labour Party has challenged the Government
on Defence Policy. It has made it the issue in the Senate
Election. So I ask: " What is the policy of the Labour Party
on foreign policy and defence?"
No Party can have a foreign policy or a defence
policy unless it has certain basic ideas. Once these basic
ideas are established, details of application will fall into
pla ce. To be opposed to any form of compulsory service is
not a Defence Policy, because it is negative. The Labour Party
must go further. Briefly, let me lok at two crucial matters.
The first is our relationship to our alliesi in
ANZUS and SEATO. Under certain circumstances, we have treaty
rights to secure their help. Rights, of course, involve
obligations. We are bound to help if we want to be helped.
We have forces in Thailand, in Malaysia, in South Vietnam,
Why? Because eleven million Australians in the line of advance
of aggressive Communist China cannot defend our country alone.
We must have partners, and be active partners ourselves.
What is Labour's basic policy on this great matter?
Nobody knows. Their Left-Wingers growing in influence say
that we ought not to have forces overseas, which means, if you
think of it, that we ought to renounce our treaties.
I know that moderate Labour men do not want so
suicidal a policy. But will they prevail?
After all, they ar, committed to the strange idea
that nuclear weapons ought not to be brought into or used from
the Southern Hemisphere an idea that would mean that America
could not use nuclear weapons in our defence in a nuclear war
while leaving the new nuclear power, Rod China, free to operate
from North of the Equator.
The other crucial matter is in reality involved in
the first. Does the Labour Party have a garrison conception
of Australian defence2 abandoning our idea of " defence in
depth?" We believe in keeping the enemy as far away as
possible, by strengthening those South-East Asian nations which
are opposed to Communi,ñ mo o / 2
6 
-2
Only a few weeks ago, Dr. Cairns, who is the
Opposition's most consistent spokesman on these matters,
propounded, without dissent from his leaders, an astonishing
proposition, He said " I think the general policy of containment
is a sound policy, but the question is: dhere?
I think here is where serious mistakes have been
made. I do not think[, Droper consideration has beern
given to where is the best strategic point to make
this containment. I think as far as the Pacific is
concerned it is clear that t; is somewhere along the
52,500 mile line from Kamchatka north of Japan to
say Darwin in the south and then to the east and the
west. This is, I believe, the first line of defence
in this policy of containment,,"
If you look at the mapp you will see that this
abandons the whole of South-East Aisia. It is the abandonment
of defence in depth of our treaty obligations. It is pure
isolationism. So I r-epeat: What is the policy of Labour?
WLatever it is or may turn out to be, you are being asked by
our opponents to vote for it on Decemiber 



FOR PRESS FINAL STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENZIES, ON
THE SENATE ELECTION
If Mr. Caiwell were Prime Minister, would he be
prepared to accept the professional advice of his Chiefs of
' taff? He has made it clear during the past few weeks that
he considers it most improper to reject such advice as he
so w-rongly alleged that I did. Jdhat then would he do, having
sought and received the same advice as dia my Government?
Where would he be on a measure of compulsion in providing the
numbers needed by the Army?
This simple question remains unanswered though the
very decision it demands has become the most debated and
discussed issue of the Senate election for which voting, on
Saturday, is compulsory.
SIt is one of three related issues which have proved
to be of outstanding importance, concerning foreign policy and
defence and the position of the Senate in relation to both.
You know that the Labour Party normally does not
believe in the Senate. It wants it abolished. Now, however,
it asks you to give Labour control of the Senate for the express
purpose of crippling the Government ( which you elected so
recently) controlling its legislation and interfering with its
administration, All this is at a time when any reasonable person
must admit that we have real dangers to our north and that we
need strength and certainty in our own plans and in our relations
with those great nations who are our allies, and in some
eventualities, our partners in defence,
We believe that the essential requirement of a
defence policy is that we keep the prospective enemy as far
away from our own soil as possible. So, we have done two things.
We have made treaties, ANZUS and SEATO and we have pleged our.
support to our sister Commonwealth country Malaysia in her
defence against armed attacks. Broadly we have planned for
defence in depth, with highly mobile ana modern forces of all
arms capable of effective use, preferably outside Australia, to
keep any enemy away.
It is a defence conception fully shared by our
allies, but completely rejected by the Left-Wing of the Labour
Party at Canberra which, make no mistake will be considerably
strengthened in numbers and authority within the Labour Party,
should Labour gain control of the Senate.
Our proposal for the rapid increase in the strength
of the Australian Regular Army from 22,750 to 37,500 has among
other things, been recommended by our highest military a dvisors and
has been accepted by us. e . o/ 2 
-2-
Again, on the specific advice of the chiefs of Staff
Committee we have decided on a limited selective call-up of
4+, 200 next year and 6,900 in each of the two following years.
Voluntary recruiting will, of course, go on and will be
encouraged in every way. Alone, it simply cannot produce the
numbers we need in the time we need them.
Of the 100,000 or so men who turn twenty each year,
some will be deferred for a variety of reasons and the
relatively small number required will be chosen by a process
of ballot, Mr. Calwell describes this as a sort of lottery. But
how does he think they should be chosen? By selection, or by
political influonce?
All military W ovision must have relation to our
military obligations and duties. Today, and completely apart
fr-om limited local defence, AustralI. ia has obligations under
SEATO and has troops on the Thailand frontier and in South
Vietnam. We have forces of all services in and around New
Guinea. All of these current obligations make it necessary
that we should have adequate numbers and first-class equipment
and training and means of trransportation.
And, since our opponents control the time-table, as do
all aggressors, we have no time to lose,
That is why we stand where we do.
CAN BERR{ A,
1+ th December, 1964+. 



65/ 0?
P. M. 77/ 1 c64
FOR PRESS RINE MINISILR'S COMMENT ON SlE
ELECTION iRESULTS
The results are by no means final. But
so far, they show that the Government candidates hive
polled well and that our defence policy has certainly
been approved. Our authority, on behalf of the people,
is thus affirmed. lhoat is more important is that we
continue to carry great responsibilities, which it will
be our supreme duty to discharge with energy and clarity
of mind and purpose.
CANBERIA, 7th December, 1964. 



P. M. No, 78/ 1964
ACTING MINISTER FOR LABOUR NATIONAL SERVICE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon,_ Sr. Robert
Mensies
During the absence overseas of the Minister for
Labour and National Service, Mr. McMahon, the Minister
for Shipping and Transport, Mr. Freeth, will administer
the portfolio.
CANBERRA,
8th December, 1964. 



10~ 6 4/ 0425
THE ABMIDALE SCHOOL SPEECH DAY
11THi DECEME, 1963
Speech by the Prime Ministe: ie, the Rt. Hon. R. G.-Menzies
My Lord Bishop, Headmaster and Ladies and Gentlemen
Before I address myself -to the serious business
of the day, I would like ' to say that at the Girls' Grammar
School this morning, I was honoured by having pinned on to the
back of my chair a picture of a thistle. Today, I am happy to
tell you, the practical nature of boys manifested itself because
lying on the seat of my chair was a shilling ( Laughter) which I
now donate to any worthy school charity, ( Laughter) ( Applause)
Of course, you will not overlook the fact that while the thistle
now has some association with me or I have with the thistle,
the shilling also has an association with me because it's a
bob, ( Laughter) As a matter of fact, there was some reference
made I must refer to what happened this morning at the other
school, if for no other reason than this, that the Bishop this
afternoon really stole quite a bit of the speech I made this
morning. ( Laughter) And, like Mark Antony, I must wait until
it comes back to me, Anyhow, there was a reference made this
morning, apropos of The Thistle to the Prime Minister of Great
Britain, Sir Alexander Douglas ? Iome, whose name, as you know is
spltH-Ime and is pronounced 11Hume just my name, boys,
as you all know, is spelt Menzies but in Scotland pronounced
Mingies, So there we were once, two of us at a dinner in
London, one of those large dinners at which people make powerful
speeches and Lord Home as he then was, made a speech proposing
my health and had a litle fun about the pronunciation of my
name one way in Australia, another way in Scotland, and so on.
I had to get my own back by saying that when I got back to
Australia and was invited to a concert in the local town, with
perhaps the vicar presiding, though I would hope not because I
am a Presbyterian myself ( Laughter); I would look forward to
hearing him say, " Now Miss Jones will favour us by singing,
fHume, Hume Sweet Hume". ( Laughter)
Now Sir, I would like to pursue an idea which
I had in may mind when I came here and which I am stimulated to
say something more about nowl The function of education, This
sounds very, very heavy, doesntt it? The function of education,
All sorts of fine things have been said about it but I would
rather like to divide it myself very, very briefly into two
matters. First of all, we go to school, we go to a
university, if we are lucky enough to do so. We go to some place
of learning in order, I believe to equip ourselves to learn
by our own experience. I hope I convey myself on that matter,
To equip ourselves to learn by our own experience. Now, no man
can learn by his own experience if he permits himself no
experience, if he is merely one of a mass, one of a mob if he
has merely got the ambition of being so like everyone else in
appearance and dress and raind that he will never be distinguished
from any other man in the crowd. This is one of the terrifying
prospects of this century that people should succumb to the
mass idea, that people should be even so bemused as to believe
that the majority is always right. I know fellows like myself
occasionally like to get a majority; ( Laughter) but if I hadnt
got a majority this time it would have been conclusive evidence
to meo that the majority Is wrong. ( Laughter) But the point I
of a 0 0 0 0/ 2 
2
want to make is this: Nothing could be more absurd than to
have your own mind devEloped to a point at which you really
believe that you can't disagree with the majority of people
without being a little odd, a litftle unworthy, a little crazy.
You, Sir, Ireferred to something that Jan
Christian Simuts had said about mankind being on the march0 I
remember that very well, It was in the same speech that he
pointed out that the most dangerous thing in the world was
the mass movement and the mass mentality which threatened to
destroy the freedom of mankind. This is true. I remember once
attending a church service somewhere or other, I've forgotten
in which there was a Scots preacher who told the story of the
first disciples on the shores of the Sea of Galilee, Suddenly
he stopped and hie said, " Picture the scn" and he described
it. He said, " That was the beginning of the greatest minority
movement in human history." Now this is true because Christianity
is the greatest minority movement in human history. We can't
count majorities in this world for Christianity, but it stands
for something more than that because people, generation after
generation and century after century, have been found who
believe that the majority was not necessarily right, that
minorities though they might be, they had standards to uphold
and great ideas to preach and to practice.
Therefore, and this is really what I am trying
to say, the first business is to learn to be yourself, not to
be somebody else. To be yourself. That doesn't mean to be all
filled with self-conceit, saying, " Ah I am the greatest fellow
in the world," but it is to be yourself and not a miserable
copy of your neighbour, not a feeble imitation of some other
fellow in your class or in your year or in your part of the
world, We have to be ourselves if we are to make our contribution
to life, whether that contribution is made in a vast place and
on a high ground or in a small place obscurely and quietly.
But we must be ourselves, not somebody else.
When somebody has learned by broadening studies
which may seem irksome, but which produce balance in the mind;
when he has through those processes learned to be himself, then
he will be well qualified to learn, to learn sensibly and wisely
from his own experience. And it is a pretty good man who does,
In my life, now no shorter than it was, I have seen people fall
time after time into exactly the same error because they have
not learned by their own experience because they have got into
the mental habit of having a stab aZ something as if the problem
had suddenly arisen. So we must learn and I say to the boys,
particularly, " Be yourselves."
Not a bad thing to be yourself, with all your
defects or with all your advantages or v'ith all your gifts or
with all what you may regard as your lack of talent; it is a
splendid thing to be yourself because it is as yourself that
people will deal with you in this life, that people will meet
you in this life, that people will judge you in this life. They
won't say, " O0h, you belong to a good crowd." 1 They will want to
know what you, yourself, are like. Therefore we must be ourselves
and prepared to learn by our own experience.
But of course, Sir, I don't need to say that in
a school, in any place that professes to be a seat of learning,
we must also be taught to learn from the experience of others
and the books are full of the experience of others. Every
library is full of the experiences of others; the whole study
of history is designed to enable us to benefit by the experiences
of others. I am astonished, timo after time, to encounter people 
M3
who think they have been successfuLl in life because they have
made a lot of money whj.' Th really, quite frankly, is the lowest
of the arts very useful one lo have no doubt but it doesn't
mean much, on the whole, except to the individual; but who at
the same time will almost boast about their entire innocence of
what has gone on in the world before, as if they had made a new
world of their own, all of a sudden, without benefit of history,
without benefit of looking back or of looking forward, I think
it was Henry Ford who, having turned out to be a benefactor, I
think, of mankind, inventing the mass production of motor cars,
and having become a very rich man and very powerful and having
displayed a species of genius, I agree, in the industrial world,
and a great constructive genius at that, the moment he became
a multi-millionaire and a successful producer of motor cars
became, following our charming habit, an authority on everything,
So newspaper reporters wou]-d go to him and say, "' Excuse me, Mr.
Ford, what are your views on classical music?" " Excuse me, Mr.
Ford, what are your views cn the international situation?"
" Excuse me, Mr. Ford, who is your favourite poet, end why?"
Once a year, they ring somebody up in my family and say. " What
are your twelve favourite flowers?" ( Laughter) and that'leaves
me for dead because I only know the names of about six. ( Laughter)
It was Henry Ford himself who, being asked for
his views on history pronounced final judgment. He said,
" History is bunik". ( Laughter) Now, some of you earnest students
may have said this too, for all I know. ( Laughter) I get a
gleam in the eyes of one or two of you that suggests that you
mlay have said that under your breath. Believe me, just as a
knowledge of your own language is imperative for life, just as
the knowledge of somebody else's language, ancient or modern is
of terrific significance in life, so is the knowledge of history,
which is the gathered-together and recorded experience of other
people, essential for judgment. Any man who has to handle great
problems in my line of life, if you like, though this is by no
means the only one to try to make a decision about great
problems, I believe is grievously handicapped unless his mind
is sufficiently furnished to know that this is not the first time
a problem of this kind ever cropped up that it has cropped up
elsewhere, that other people have had to look at it, that some
people have solved it or tried to solve it in one way and the
solution failed because of certain circumstances. This is a
tremendous thing to have a mental background yesterday's mind,
if you like, in a sense, yesterday's memory in dealing with
today's problems. So you see your own experience the
experience of other people belore you, you must learn from both if
you are to come out from school with some sense of values,
Headmraster is so right,, It is a good thing to acquire a
vocation. I did myself and not to my disadvantage. It's a good
thing to achieve a profession or a trade or a skill or something
or other that will eanble you to earn a living. But earning a
living is the mere mechanics of providing yourself with food and
drink and clothing. Achieving a life, that's a different matter,
because that depends on human values upon human understanding,
upon having achievedg however modestly, a kind of civilisation.
Now, this is a school with a great name, a great
history, a great reputation and it has a Headmaster who has
expressed it in his concluding remarks perfectly: " This is a
church school. Dontt let us ever forget it." Here the torch
of learning burns alongside the altar of' the Christian church,
and this is a great thing because it means that the values we
achieve will be the greatest and best and most enduring values
in the world. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 79/ 1964
MINISTERIAL APPOINTMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister? the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menzies
His Excellency the Governor-General has
authorised me to announce that Senator G. C. McKellar will
be appointed Minister for Repatriation. It is expected
that Senator McKellar will be sworn in on Tuesday, 22nd
December, 1964. The Honourable R. J. C. Swartz, E. D.,
who is at present Minister for Repatriation as well as
Minister for Health will continue as Minister for Health.
I also announce that the Honourable H. S.
Roberton, Minister for Social Services, is appointed
to the Cabinet.
CANBERhA, 17th December, 1964. 



For Press: P. M. No. 1/ l. 965
' JITHDRA4IAi OF INDONLiSIA FROM UNITED NATIONS
Statement by the Actinjg Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon~ j. Jc1ewe,.
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. MoEwen, said in
Canberra today that the whole world would be disappointed that
the President of Indonesia, having withdrawn from the United
Nations, should now denounce this organisation.
Mr. McEwen said the United Nations was the hope
on which most of humanity pinned its faith for the progressive
development of processes to prevent war.
" The world looks to the United Nations to aid those
nations and communities whose freedom is incomplete and whose
resources are undeveloped. It is a main hope of those people
who exist on lower than adequate standards," Mr. McEwen said.
The Acting Prime Minister said it would be no
contribution to engage in recriminations.
" The Principles and purposes of the U. N. Charter
enshrine not only recognised principles of international
conduct but the aspirations of mankind for a better and a
peaceful life. I am sure that most people would hope that
Indonesia will act in accordance with those principles and
purposes," Mr. McEwen said.
CANBERRA, 8th January, 1965. 



6 5 / O0
EMBARGO : NOTr TO BE PUBLISHED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST
BEFORE~ 7 PM ( EST)
FOR PRESS: OVERSEAS TRIP BY MINISTER FOR D) EFENCE
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. McEwen
Mr. John McEwen, Acting Prime Minister, announced
today that the Minister for Defence Senator Shane Paltridge,
would be leaving Australia on 19th January for a visit to a
number of South-East Asian countries, Japan and the United
States. In South-East Asia the Minister will visit Malaysia,
Thailand and Vietnam.
Mr. McEwen said that this would be the first
time that Senator Paltridge had had an opportunity since
becoming Minister for Defence to visit South-East Asia and
to acquaint himself at first hand with the problems relating
to Australia's defence interests there, In Malaysia he
would have discussions with members of the Government on
defence matters of common concern. He will also visit units
of the three Australian Services which are stationed in
Malaysia. In Thailand he will have discussions with members
of the Government and will call upon the Secretary-General
of SEATO at the Organization's headquarters in Bangkok,
He will also visit the R. A. A. F. unit at Ubon.
In South Vietnam he will be discussing with
members of the Government and the United States representatives
there the present situation created by aggression from
Communist-controlled North Vietnam. He hopes also to visit
some of the Australian Service personnel in South Vietnam*
Mr, MoEwen said that during his visit to Japan,
Senator Paltridge hoped to meet Ministers and Service
officers, In the United States the Minister will have
discussions with the Secretary of Defence, Mr. McNamara the
Secretary of State, Mr. Rusk, and other defence authoriiies.
The Minister will also inspect various Defence installations
during his visit including Defoe's shipbuilding yards where
the Charles F. Aclams destroyers ordered by Australia are
under construction and also General Dynamics at Fort Worth
where the F111A strike aircraft, which is being purchased
by Australia, is under construction.
Mr. McEwepn said that on Senator Paltridge's
departure, he would be Acing Minister for Defence until
the return of the Prime Minister.
CANBERBA, 12th January, 1965 



FOR PRESS PM 4/ 65
SOUTH-EAST ASIA
STATEMENT BY THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John McEwen, announced in
Canberra tonight that the Cabinet had made a wide-ranging review of
current developments in Malaysia and South Vietnam with particular
reference to Australian obligations in the South-East Asian area.
Mr. McEwen said that Ministers had over recent weeks been
giving constant attention to information flowing to them on South
Vietnam and on both the military and diplomatic aspects of Indonesia's~
confrontation with Malaysia, including the latest information on the
views of the Malaysian and British Governments about the continuing
threats from Indonesia and the steps being taken to meet them.
The Minister for Defence, Senator Paltridge, during his
visit to South-East Asia and the United States, would personally
assess the position at first hand and would report back to the
Australian Government. The Minister's report would cover possible
future courses of action having regard to Australia's over-all
commitments to the security of the area.
" The recent Indonesian decision to withdraw from the United
Nations and new Indonesian military activities in support of their
policy of ' confrontation' have heightened tension between Indonesia
and Malaysia," Mr. McEwen said. " The latest Indonesian military
activities included noticeable building-up of Indonesian forces on
the Borneo border. These developments had led to the recent deployment
of additional British and Malaysian forces."
Mr. McEwen expressed disappointment that Indonesia is
persisting in this policy of military ' confrontation'. The
Australian Government continued to hope for changes in Indonesian
policy which would allow peace, security and prosperity to be
established in the area. " However, the Government is quite clear
as to its obligations to Malaysia, a free and independent nation
and a fellow member of the Commonwealth, and is firm in respect ef
its responsibilities," the Ac11ting Prime Minister said.
On Vietnam, Cabinet had before it reports from its
diplomatic representatives and the views of the American Government.
" The Australian Government is concerned that the South Vietnamese
leaders resolve their domestic differences in the overriding
interests of the security of South Vietnam and indeed South-East
Aisia," Mr. McEwen said. 
PM 4/ 65
2.
Ministers expressed appreciation on behalf of the
Australian people of the efforts of the United States Government
to assist the people of South Vietnam to build a free and stable
society and to defend themselves against Communist aggression.
This was in keeping with the resolution of the United States Congress
of 6th A ugust which included the statement that " The United States
regards as vital to its national interests and to world peace the
maintenance of international peace and security in South-East Alsia%'
Mr. McEwen said the Piustralian Government had obligations
under SEATO to South Vietnam. Australia has provided military and
civil assistance to South Vietnam, including a training team of
Army instructors, and a detachment of the It is in close
consultation with the Vietnamese and U. S. Governments about further
assistance. Canberra, 18th January, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 5/ 196
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon.
John McEwen_ M. PA
The Acting Prime Minister Mr. McEwen, announced
that, following his designation as Australian Ambassador
to Ireland, the Honourable HS. Roberton had today
tendered to His Excellency the Governor-General his
resignation as Minister for Social Services.
Mr. McEwen also announced that the Minister
for Health, Mr. Swartz, had today been sworn in by the
Governor-General as Minister for Social Services.
Mr. McEwen said that on his return to Australia
the Prime Minister would be giving consideration to
Ministerial arrangements but, in the meantime Mr. Swartz
will hold both portfolios of Health and Social Services,
CANBERRA, 21st January, 1965, 


FOR PRESS
(Thursday, 21st January, 1965).
The Speaker of the House of Representatives ( the Hon. Sir John McLeay) announced today that he had received from the Honorable Hugh Roberton, a letter dated 21st January, 1965 resigning his seat as Member of the House of Representatives for the electoral division of Riverina.



FOR PRESS: P. M. 6/ 1965
VISIT OF LORD BOWDEN
Statement by the Acting Prime Miniserthe t. J on. J. McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. John MoEwen,
announced today that the Right Honourable Lord Bowden
of Chesterfield Minister of State for Education and
Science in the kritish Government, will visit Australia
for two weeks beginning next Monday, January
During his stay in Australia, Lord Bowden,
who was formerly Principal of the Manchester College of
Science and Technology and Dean of the Faculty of
Technology at Manchester University, will have talks
with Australian Ministers, officials and university
leaders. On Saturday evening, January 30, he will
deliver a paper to the Summer School being held by the
Australian institute of Political Science at the Albert
Hall in Canberra. During his stay in Australia, Lord Bowden
will be the guest of the Australian Government.
CANBERRA,
22nd January, 1965. 



FOR PRESS FLAGS AT HALF MAST
Sttmn yteAtn rm iitr h t a.
J. McEwen.
It was announced in Canberra tonight
that the acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, had directed
that flags are to be flown at half mast on all
Commonwealth buildings throughout Australia on Monday,
January 25th ( tomorrow) and also on the day of~ the
funeral. The State Governments also are being asked
to do the same.
CANBERRA,
January 24+, 1965. 



SIRA ROii FJR &amp; ORDR.
6tajqnme j P tk ACUAX PrIo Minigtor L Rts Hon*
I kwve bwkz in oonrsultation with the
Prim Minister who is at present in Los Angeles,
and as distinguiud representatives of Ccronweulth
countries will be going to London in connection with
the fuwwral of Sir Winston Churchil, the Prime
Minister will proceed frm America to london to be
present. January .24th, 1965. 



FOR PRESS EMBARGO: Midnight, 25.1.65
AUSTRALIA DAY MESSAGE
By the Acting Prime Minister, 11r. John McEwen
Today, our 177th birthday, we look back with thankfulness
and pride on the ability, energy and great vision of those who founded
our country. They helped make Australia the wonderful nation we live
in today. On this day we should dedicate ourselves to carry on their
good work in the growth to becoming a great nation.
Our forebears were adventurous people who, by their
determination, carved out the structure which is the base of our
efforts for the future. In the years ahead we will certainly have
problems, but we have surmounted them in the past and will overcome
them in the future.
We have co-operated with our neighbours and friends, and
will continue to do so. We wish to continue to work in peace and
harmony with them.
On this our national birthday, I ask New Australians to
S share with Native-born Australians the heritage of which we are so
proud. Each and every one of us should celebrate this day as a day
of dedication.
Canberra, January 25, 1965. 



65/ 0 19
FOR PRESS: P. M. z/ 196
TRIBUTE TO SIR WINSTON CHURCHILL
Statement bythe Prime Ministe. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
After a prolonged period of illness, Sir
ainston Churchill's death was not unexpected. But it comes
as a shock. At the height of his power and achievement,
he " bestrode the world like a colossus" but, being no tyrant
or dictator, he left all men in his debt,
He was one of the great men in the whole course
of British history and in the history of the struggle for
freedom. As Prime Minister, he faced the greatest challenge
of our lifetimes. He met it xvrith courage and imaginative
genius. He was able to express and stimulate the spirit
of his people by his immortal mixture of tenacity and humour
harsh realism and indomitable optimism. So long as men retain
their pride in liberty, he will never be forgotten.
Through the many vicissitudes of his sometimes
turbulent and always brilliant career, his wife, that marvellous
woman, was with him&amp; She will, I hope and know, got some
comfort from the love which goes out to her from so many
millions of people at this time.
CANBRERRA, January, 1965 



P. M. 8/ 1965
EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, CABLZD, BORADOAST OR TELECAST
BEFORE 11.00 P. M. ON MONDAY, 25TH JANUARY 190 6 5/ 010,
FOR PRESS VISIT BY HIS ROVAL HIGHNESS, THE DUKE-OF EDINBURGH
Statement by The Acting Prime Minister, The Right Hon. J. McEWEN, MP.
The Acting Prime Minister announced to-day that His
Royal Highness The Duke of Edinburgh would open the Royal
Australian Mint in Canberra on Monday, 22nd February. Mr. Mc~ wen
said that the Government was extremely pleased that His Royal
Highness had agreed to include this as one of his engagements
while in the National Capital.
The Duke of Edinburgh is Chairman of the Royal Mint
Advisory Committee in London and takes a keen interest in that
Committee. The opening of the Mint will be the only public
engagement which His Royal Highness will undertake in Canberra.
He will, however, attend Divine Service at St. John's Church, Reid,
on Sunday, 21st February and in the evening will dine at ' The
Lodge' with the Prime Minister and Dame Pattie Menzies.
0 After opening the Mint on Monday morning, His Royal
Highness will attend a luncheon at Parliament House to which the
Ministry, the Presiding Officers of Parliament and the Opposition
Leaders will be invited.
. Mr. McEwen said that His Royal Highness will arrive in
Australia on Saturday morning, 20th February and travel from Sydney
Air-port to Canberra by R. A. A. F. Viscount. He will return to
Sydney on Monday afternoon, 22nd February and leave for Singapore
So../ 2, 
-2-
on Friday, 26th Februiary.
Mr. Mco6wen said that the primary purpose of The Duke's
visit is to deliver the first Dunrossil Memorial Lecture to the
Institution of Radio and Electronics Engineers in Sydney. While
it would be disappointing to some that The Duke of Edinburgh would
not be able to visit all States, Mr. McEwen said that all AustralJaam
would be delighted that His Royal Highness would be here to deliver
a Lecture named after a former Governor-General who in his
tragically short term of office had won a lasting place in the
Nation's affections.
Background Note
The announcement of the programme of engagements which
His Royal Highness will undertake in Sydney will be announced
separately by the Premier of New South Wales. 



EMD1BARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, CABLED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST
BEFORE 11.00 P. M. ON WEDN. CSDAY, 27TH JANUARY, 1965
FOR PRESS Visit by T. R. H. The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester
Canberra Programme
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister the Right Hon. John
McEwen, M. P.
The Acting Prime Minister to-night announced the
engagements which Their Royal Hiighnesses The Duke and Duchess
of Gloucester have been pleased to accept for the two occasions
when they are in Canberra from Saturday, 13th to Wednesday,
17th March and again from Friday 23rd to Monday, 26th April.
Mr. McEwen said that The Duke and Duchess of
Gloucester will arrive in Canberra on Saturday morning, 13th
March. Their Royal Highnesses will travel from Sydney Airport
to Canberra by R. A. A. F. Viscount following their arrival from
overseas. In Canberra " he Duke and Duchess will stay at
Government House until they leave for Tasmania on Wednesday
afternoon, 17th March. Thereafter Their Royal Highnesses will
spend some time both officially and privately in Tasmania,
Victoria, New South W , ales and Queensland. They will return
to Canberra from Brisbane on Friday afternoon, 23rd April and
on Monday, 26th April, will leave for Sydney in transit for
their return to London.
In announcing the programme of engagements for
Canberra, Mr. McEwen said that Their Royal Highnesses, on
arrival at the R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn, will be met by the
Governor-General, accompanied by The Honourable Anne Sidney,
and by the Prime Minister and Dame Pattie Menzies. The R. A. A. F. 
2.
will provide a Royal Guard of Honour which His Royal Highness
will inspect. On Sunday, 14th March, Their Royal Highnesses will
attend Divine Service at the Church of St. John the Baptist,
Reid, and on return to Government House, will meet Press, Radio
and Television Representatives. In the evening they will dine
at The Lodge with the Prime Minister and Dame Pattie Menzies.
On Monday morning, 15th March, His Royal Highness
will make an informal visit to the Royal Military College, and
Her Royal Highness will undertake separately a brief tour of
Canberra. They will both have luncheon with the Commonwealth
High Commissioners and their wives at Canberra House, the
residence of the British High Commissioner. In the aiening, they
will attend a dinner party at Government House.
On Tuesday, 16th March, Their Royal Highnesses
will visit the National Capital Development Commission's Planning
Exhibition at Regatta Point, and afterwards drive to Civic
Centre to observe the development of Canberra's main commercial
area in recenit years. They will then return to Government House.
Mr. McEwen said that the Government's official
function will be a luncheon at Parliament House on Tuesday, 16th
March. In the evening, The I~ uke and Duchess will dine at
Government House. The following day, Wednesday, 17th March,
The Duke and Duchess will leave Canberra to visit Tasmania.
On their return to Canberra from Brisbane, in the
late afternoon of Friday, 23rd April, Their Royal Highnesses 
3.
will again stay at Government House and on Saturday will visit
the National Headquarters of' the R. S. S. and A. I. L. A. where The
Duke and Duchess will each plant a trce. In the evening, Their
Royal Highnesses will meet Anzac Veterans at Government House.
On Anzac Day, The Duke and Duchess will attend the
ceremony at the Australian War Memorial to commemorate the
Fiftieth Anniversary of the Anzac Landing a~ t Gallipoli. His
Royal Highness will take the Salute during the march past by
ANZAC Veterans, other Ex-Servicemen and women, and members of
the Armed Forces. On Monday, 26th April, Their Royal Highnesses will
leave Canberra from the R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn. This will
again be a ceremonial occasion, with a Royal Guard of Honour
being mounted. Mr. McEwen said it was eighteen years since The
Duke and Duchess had resided at Government House, Canberra, and
he was sure that Their Royal Highnesses would enjoy seeing the
many changes which have taken place, not only in the National
Capital, but wherever else they happened to be during their stay.
Mr. Mc~ wen referred to the programme of engagements
which The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester have agreed to undertake
while they are in Australia and said that comprehensive formal
visits imposed a severe physical strain and therefore he was
pleased to see that Their Royal Highnesses would spend some of
their time privately, revisiting personal friends and places
already known to them.
2 7 JAN 



P. M. 11/ 1965
FOR PRESS: 65/ 01
Visit of Their Royal Highinesses The Duke and Duchess
of Gloucester
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, The Right Hon. John McEwen, MP.
The Acting Prime Minister announced today that His Royal
Highness The Duke of Gloucester had been pleased to appoint
Lieutenant-Colonel R. M. C. Cubis, and Major M. W. S. Fleming
as Equerries to Their Royal Highnesses during their forthcoming visit
to Australia. Lieutenant-Colonel Cubis of the Royal Australian Artillery
was Australian Equerry to The Queen for her visit to Australia in
February/ March, 1963. Major Fleming is a member of the British
Defence Liaison Staff in Canberra and is at present at Australian
O Army Headquarters. He is a member of the Duke's Regiment the
Royal Hussars.
Mr. McEwen also announced that The Duke of Gloucester had
been pleased to approve the appointment of Mr. K. B. Ready, as
Press Liaison Officer for Their Royal Highnesses' visit. Mr. Ready
is News Editor of the ' Mercury', Hobart.
Mr. McEwen added that Mr. Ready and Lieutenant-Colonel
Cubis would take up duty with the Commonwealth Royal Visit Orgariisatian
in. the Prime Minister's Department on Tuesday, 2nd February, and that
Major Fleming would take up duty when Their Royal Highnesses arrive
on Saturday, 13th March.
The Commonwealth Director for the visit is Mr. J. H. Scholtens,
Director of the Ceremonial and Hospitality Branch in the Prime
Minister' s Department.
The foregoing persons will be in attendance when Their
Royal High~ nesses are undertaking public engagements during their visit
from 13th March to 26th April-. VI, 
Accompanying the Duke and Duchess from London will be
Major Michael Hawkins, their Private Secretary, and Miss Jean
Maxwell Scott and Mrs. Hawkins as Ladies-in-Waiting.
Canberra 27th January, 1965.
Canberra, Thursday, 28th January, 1965. 
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE
Lieutenant-Colonel R. M. C. Cubis, R. A. A.
Graduated from the Royal Military College, Duntroon
11.12.46 as a Lieutenant in the Staff Corps; Branch
Royal Australian Artillery.
Served A. I. F. from 11.12.46 to 30.6.47; Saw active
service in Korea with Commonwealth Division from 3.11.51 to
10.12.52. Instructor at Officer's Cadet School, Portsea, Victoria
from 12.2.53 to 29.9.55.
In the United Kingdom for Artillery Training from
26.9.55 to 15.12.57.
Attended Australian Staff College during 1960.
Currently serving in the Directorate of Personnel
Administration, Army Headquarters, Canberra.
Appointed M. V. O. ( 4th Class) for services as Equerry
to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second during the
Royal Tour of Australia in 1963.
Lieutenant-Colonel Cubis is unmarried. 
BIOGRAPTICAL N OTE
Mr. K. B. Ready, O. B. E.
News Editor and Deputy Editor of " The Mercury"' Hobart
since 1946. Journalist for forty years.
Press Relations Officer for Royal Visits to Tasmania
by Her Majesty The Queen and His Royal Highness The Duke
of Edinburgh, 1954, and in 1963; Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth The Queen Mother, 1958; and Their Majesties T~ he
King and Queen of Thailand, 1962.
Press Relations Officer to His Royal Highness The
Duke of Edinburgh, 1956. Was a member of Royal Household
and travelled in HM. Y. Britannia from Malaya.
Press Liaison Officer to Tasmania's first overseas
Industrial Mission to United Kingdom and Europe.
Served five years in R. A. F. and R. A. A. F. in Malaya
and New Guinea.
Awarded O. B. E. in 1957.
Mr. Ready is married and has four daughters. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME~ MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES KT CH QC MP, FROM
THE CRYPT OF ST. P1AUL' CA' 1EDLAL,' 1ONDON
OVER BBC TELEVISION ON THE OCCASION OF THE
FUNERAL OF TIE LATE SIR a~ INSTON CHURCHILL 3OTA AIY16
As this historic procession goes through the stp'eets
of London to the Tower pier, I have the honour of speaking to
you from the crypt of St. Paul's Cathedral, I do this in two
capacities. One is that I, Prime Minister of Australia, happen
to be, in point of time, the senior Commonwealth Prime Minister,
and therefore speak on behalf of a remarkable world organisation
which owes more than it can ever express to our departed leader.,
Sir Winston Churchill. He is one of the famous men whom we
thank and praise. My second capacity is more personal and more intimate.
I am sure that you, mo st of you, have thought about Sir Winston
Churchill a great deal and with warmth in your hearts and in
your recollections. dome day, some year, there will be old
men and women whose pride it will be to say " I lived in
Churchill's time"; some will be able to say, " I saw him, and
I heard him the unforgettable voice and the immortal words."
And some will be able to say " I knew him, and talke~ d with him,
and was his friend." This I can, with a mixture of pride and
humility, say for myself.
The memory of this moves me deeply now that he is
dead, but is gloriously remembered by me as he goes to his
burial amid the sorrow, and pride, and thanks, of all of you
who stand and feel for yourselves and for so many millions.
Many of you will not need to be reminded, but some,
the younger among you, the inheritors of his master-strokes
for freedom, may be glad to be told that your country, and mine,
and all the free countries of the world, stood at the very
gates of destiny in 191+ 0 and 194+ 1, when thu Nazi tyranny
threatened to engulf us, and when there was no " second front"
except our own. This was the great crucial moment of modern history.
' dhat was at stake was, not some theory of government but the
whole and personal freedom of men and women and children. And
the battle for them was a battle against great odds, That
* battle had to be won not only in the air and on the sea and in
the field, but in the hearts and minds of ordinary people with
a deep capacity for horoism,
It was then that Winston Churchill was called, by
Almighty God, as our faith makes us believe, to stand as our
leader and our inspirer.
There were, in 194+ o, defeatists who felt that
prudence required submission or such terms as might be had.
There were others who, while not accepting the inevitability
of defeat, thought that victory was impossible. Winston Churchill
* a0./ 2 
2-
scorned to fall into either category, and he was right. *. U-ith
courage, and matchless eloquence, and hUman understanding, he
inspired us and led us to victbry,
In the whole of' recorded modern history this was, I
believe the one odcasion when one mani with one soaring
imaginahion, with one fire burning in him, and with one unrivalled
capacity for conveying it to others, won a crucial victory not
only for the forces ( for there were many heroes in those days)
but for the very spirit of human freedom. And so, on this great
day, we thank him, and we thank God for him.
. There are two other things I want to say to you, on
a day which neither you nor I will ever willingly forget.
One is that Winston Churchill was not an institution,
but a man a man of wit and chuckling humour, and penetrating
understanding, not a man who spoke to us as from the mountain
tops, but one who expressed the simple and enduring feelings of
or~ dinary men and women. 1t was because he was a great Englishman
that he was able to speak for the English people. It was because
he was a great human being that, in our dark-, st days, he lit the
lamps of hope at many firesides and released so many from the
chains of despair, There has been nobody like him in our lifetimes.
We must, and do, thank God for him, and strive to be worthy of
his example. And the second thing I will never forget is this.
Winston Churchill's iw-ife is with us here in London, a great and
gracious lady in her own right. Could I today send her your
love, and mine? She has suffered an irreparable personal loss.
But she has proud and enduring memories, happy memories, I venture
to say&amp; We share her sorrow, but I know that she would wis i us
to share with her those rich remembrances which the thought of
the great man evokes.
There have been, in the course of recorded history,
some men of power who have cast shadows across the world.
Winston Chiurchill, on the contrary, was a fountain of light and of
hope. As I end my talk to you from the crypt of St. Paul's,
with its reminders of Nelson and "! ellington, those marvellous
defenders of long ago, the body of Winston Churchill goes in
procession through the streets of London, hi London, our Lo'ndon,
this most historic city, this ancient home of freedom, this
place thr~ ough which, in the very devastation and fire of war,
his tojcde rang with courage, and defiance, and hope, and rugged
confidence, His body will be carried on the Thames, a river
full of history. WIith one heart we all feel, with one mind we all
acknowledge, that it will never have borne a more precious burden,
or been enriched by more splendid memories. 



01 01 SPEECH BY THE PRI14E MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES KT, CH, QC, MP, AT THE
ENGLISH SPEAKING UI ION, LONDON ON THE
OCCASION OF THE MAUNCHING OF TT E OJINSTON
CHURCHILL MEMORIAL TRUST APPEAL 1ST FEBRUARY, 1265
What we are proposing to do in Australia is to set
about having an appeal which will probably open and close on
one day February 28th, 1965.
You may think this is a little dramatic but we are
celebrating a very dramatic man. Of course donations will be
received and are, I believe already being received before
February 28th. But our modes ambition is that by the close
of that day, we in Australia will have raised œ CA1, OOO, OOO.
We believe that we will. We believe that if we can do that,
much larger sums of money can be expected from much larger and
richer countries, Now having said that, may I say this to you in the
broad. I went down the other day to Westminster Hall and I
was pleased to see how many young men and women and boys and
girls were passing through Westinster Hall, because you
know, men are easily forgotten and the names of even il
greatest of men may suffer some kind of eclipse for a while,
But it is vital that this name should never be
forgotten and it is vital that this man should never be
forgotten. It is vital that his spirit, touched with immortality
as it was, should continue to be immortal, a living thing,
a continiiing presence among many generations to come in
countries which speak the Eriglish language a language in
which he, by the miracle of scionce, was able to address so
mreaanyc hsincgo rethse man, d tosuccohreins g otfh emmi, l liionnssp iroifn gp etohpelme ddurriivnign gthe war,
pessimism underground, None of us who lived through all this
could ever forget it. I think we have a groat task here to
see that it is never forgotten.
Sometimes in the course of one's life one incurs a
debt and the debt may perhaps be discharged by one blow, by
one payment, by one act, but this is not a debt of that kind.
This is a debt which is part of our inheritance; it will never
be fully discharged. If our grandchildren and great-grandchildren are living
in freedom, they will be his debtors, because at the crucial*
moment in modern history it was he more than anybody else who
inspired the public will and who made victory a certainty.
This is a continuing debt, and a continuing debt is not paid
merely by having monument, great thougia it may be, merely by
having some inscription on some tablet in some place. It maust
be paid in a continuing fashion.
And that is the beauty of this conception which was
worked out here in this country and was taken to us and to
other people and was understood and acted upon. This is a
marvellous conception because in 200 years' time, there will
be Churchill fellows, men and women of all sorts of colours,
all sorts of religious beliefs, all sorts of experiences, ./ 2 
-2-
some of them on a high level of academaic learning andsvme of
them in the practising field of ordinary industry and ordinary
life thousands of thoem, as time goes by, who will corry this
gre at name this proud name, and who will regard it as a matter
of honour to think of him and to perpetuate his memory,
This is a wonderful way of securing a continuing
payment of a continuing debt, and I think that if it is looked
, at in this way, this appeal will be a great success. Its
results will go on.
I trust that as time goes on its funds will be enriched
from time to time by people who see it with the eye of
imaginotion and will be proud of discharging a debt, How
valuable this isl How important this is!
We have looked at in this way in my country, and the
people engaged in the central Connittee in the various bodies
which have been set up cover the full range.
We have not cast the not narrowly we have cast it
wide and I am happy we have had the enthusiastic support of
all. That makes this a notable, historic occasion because
it is the launching of proposals to honour in that abiding
fashion the most historic person whom you or I ever knew or are
ever likely to know# 



FOR PRESS EMBARGO: Not for broadcast, telecast or
publication before 7.30 p. m. EST
Monday night, February 1st.
COMM4ENDATION OF WINSTON CHURCHILL 1IMORIAL TRUST BY
THE ACTING PRIME MINISTER, M R. JOHN McETJEN.
( Mr McEwen is Deputy President of the Australian Committee of the)
Winston Churchill Trust.
" As you know the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, has annnunced that
the people of Australia are to join with the people of Britain and other
countries in the establishment of the Winston Chruchill Memorial Trust.
The Trust will provide travelling scholarships.
Australians selected from all walks of life will be given opportunities
to travel overseas to improve their knowledge and experience. Those chosen
for travel as Chuirchill Fellows will not only be people in the academic
# orld. People engaged at all levels in industry, trade, commerce,
agriculture, and the arts, will be eligible.
" Sir Robert Menzies has spoken of the committees which have been
established in Australia to launch a nation-wide appeal to raise V1 millinn.
It is an accepted principle that the funds raised in Australia will be
controlled and administered by the Australian organisation established
for the purpose. We have been fortunate in securing the services of a number
of distinguished Australians as members of the national committee and of the
a tate committees which will conduct the drive for funds in co-operation with
the Returned Soldiers League. These people along with the many thousands of
voluntary workers who will take part, are giving their wholehearted support
o this grand concept.
11 I am sure that we wifll have the enthusiastic support of the
general public.
11 The Government has decided that donations made to the Fund will
be deductible for taxation purposes.
11 This Winston Churchill Memorial Trust will perpetuate the memory
of the greatest man of our lifetime. Sir Winston made his mark in history,
both in peace and war. He dedicated his life to the preservation of freedom
and democratic institutions,.
1By providing a continuing benefit to all sections of oar
community, the Trust will be a memorial which Sir Winston Churchill would
himself have approved."
CANBERRA, February 1, 1965. 



EMBARLGO : NOT TO BE 3ROADCAST, PGjLISHED OR
TELECST BEFOieE 7 PM ( EST) 3/ 2/ 1965.
FOR PRESS S P. M. No, 12162
FURTHER AUSTRALIAi' MILITARY ASSISTANCE FOR
Statement by t e AtinPrime Minister. the Rt. Hon. J. McEwen
Mr. J. McEwen, the Acting Prime Minister said this
evening that members of Cabinet have been closely following
recent developments in the Malaysian area and have given
consideration to a request for further aid received from the
Malaysian Government.
" The Australian Government has now decided to extend
further military assistance for the defence of the area," he
said. Mr. M. Ewen said that the Australian Governmaent viewed
with concern the substantial continuing build-up of Indonesian
forces in Borneo and the steady increase in infiltration acro. gs
the Malacca and Singapore Straits into Malaya and Singapore.
This heavy build-up has been reported to the President of the
U. N. Security Council by the Malaysian Government which has
advised the Security Council of the seriousness ol the threat
of more intensive Indonesian attacks against Malaysia in 1965.
These developments had already required the British
Government to deploy considerable reinforcements to the area.
In view of all the circumstances and in accordance with
the pledge pre-viously given, the Australian Government had
concluded that the deployment of additional Australian field
units into Borneo in the defence of Malaysia was now necessary.
He said that an Australian engineer squadron had been
for some time assisting in road and airfield construction in
the Borneo territories.
An Australian force is now to serve in this area, in
company with Malaysian and British forces.
This would be the Australian battalion in the Commonwealth
Strategic Reserve in Malaya. On this arrangement, this
battalion. would now scrve in Borneo in rotation with Malaysian
and British units. In addition, an Army Special Air Service
unit from Australia would be made available to carry out
appropriate military tasks in the defence of Malaysia. This
unit will also serve, as required, in rotation with British
units in the Borneo territories.
Mr. M: Ewen said that, in addition to the current defence
aid programme which would continue throughout this year, further
aid proposals for the development of the Malaysian Armed Services
were also under examination by technical experts. The result
would be placed before the Australian Government in the near
future. Mr. McEwen said that he had been in communication with
Sir Robert Menzies while the situation was under study. / 2 
2
Mr. McEwen stressed the Australian Government's deep
concern at the atmosphere of tension and conflict ^% cih the
Indonesian " confrontation" policy had produced. Thfe Au: t::' alian
Government would continue to use all its influence-for
peaceful outcome in full awareness that the p a'Yndis economic
development of the region of South East Asia deper, ded on
conditions of security and stability.
Mr. McEwen said that the Australian Go'-rnnment believed
that the restoration of peace in the area would d.;, pend on
observance of the principle of respect for the political and
territorial integrity of the member countries c tne area.
Mr. McEwen recalled his statement of 18th January that the
Australian Government continued to hope for char-ges in
Indonesian policy which would allow peace, security and
prosperity to be established in the area.
Mr. McEwen said that these new decisions were relevant
to the Australian pledge to support Malaysia in defence of her
territorial integrity and political independence. " Malaysia,"
he pointed out, " is our Commonwealth partner and near neighbour."
Mr. McEwen recalled that Australian forces have been
stationed for some ten years in the Malayan area as port of
the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve, and have already been
engaged on sea, land and in the air, pursuant to the policy
of maintaining the integrity and independence of a Commonwealth
country. " Some six ships of the he said, " have been
engaged in patrolling and other duties in Malaysian waters."
The Australian Army battalion group had made a
significant contribution in dealing with the Communist guerillas
on the Malayan Peninsula and had more recently acted against
Indonesian infiltrators in Malaya The RAAF had fighter aircraft,
helicopters and transport aircraft stationed in Malaya.
Mr. McEwen said that, as is known, in addition to the
deployment of forces, Australia had also provided military aid
in the form of equipment, ammunition, training in Australia
and secondment of Australian officers to the Malaysian Armed
Services, with a view to assisting the development and expansion
of these Services.
CANBERRPJL, 3rd February, 1965. 



65/ 015
EMBAhGO NOT FOR PUBLICATION BROADCAST OR
FOR PRESS TEi&amp; ECAST dEFORE 6.36 PM ( EST) / 2/ 65
P. M. No. 13/ 1965
AIRLINES
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister tbe Mcvn
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. J. McEwen, said
today that the judgments handed down by the High Court had
established that both a Commonwealth licence and a State licence
were necessary for the operation of intrastate air services.
The judgments had also established that Commonwealth permits
were required for the use of Commonwealth aerodromes and
controlled air space. This meant that the allocation of air
services within New South Wales was a matter for agreement
between the Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments.
Mr. McEwen said, " I have informed the Premier of
New South Wales that the Commonwealth is prepared to co-operate
with the New South Wales Government in a reallocation of air
services which would be fair and equitable to both airlines
operating within New South Wales would provide the best standard
of service to the travelling public and would also result in
the most economical pattern of services involving the least
amount of Commonwealth subsidy." Mr. McEwen said he had
suggested to Mr. Renshaw that representatives of both Governments
confer as soon as practicable in order to give effect to these
objectives. CANBERRA,
4th February, 1965. 



FOR PRESSI: FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO REPRESENTATIVES ATTNDIG TH
COMMMORAT ION IN CANBERRA1 OF THE GOLDEN JTIBIELE OF
ANZAC
Statement by the Acting prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Mc~ We
The Acting Prime Minister, the Right lion. J,
McEwen, announced today that the Government had agreed to
give financial assistance to a group of veterans attending
the Commemorative Ceremony in Canberra of the Golden Jubilee
of Anzac in April this year.
Mr. Mcr~ wen said that it was contemplated that the
representative group would include about five Gallipoli
veterans from each State and their wives, a war widow from
each State; and two representatives of World ' dar I nurses.
It was also hoped that it would be possible to bring representatives
from the Northern Territory and from Papua and New
Guinea. The Government had arranged with the Returned
Servicemen's League to reimburse the League up to an amount of
œ C59OOO to cover fares and essential accommodation and meals
for the group, The R. S. L. would be responsible for selecting
the State representatives and making all other necessary
a rrangements,
CANBE RRAI
February, 1965. 



FOR PRESS AWAjRD FOR GALLANTRY
Statement by the Acting Prime Ministerp
The Rt. Hon. John McEwen
The Acting Prime Ministerp The Rt. Hon. John McEwen,
announced today that Her Majesty, The Queen, had awarded the
British Empire Medal for gallantry to Mr. William James
Beadman, of Canberra.
Mr. Beadman, a bus driver for the Department of the
Izterlor in Canberra, hod been responsible for the rescue
of Mr. Bruce David Shields from drowning in Lake Burley
Griffin on November 26 last year.
He had unselfishly placed his own life in danger in
entering the Lake, which had been made rough and ohoppy by
high winds, Mr. McEwen said. Mr. Beadman had shown gallantry
of a high order in entering the rough water.
The official report stated Mr. Beadman had been driving
his bus over Kings Avenue Bridge when he saw three people
struggling in the Lake near an overturned rowing shell.
The three Mr. Shields, Mr. Colin Leslie Panton and
his nine-year-old son, Colin Stuart Luke Panton were
returning from a rowing exercise early in the morning of
November 26 when their boat was swamped in the rough water
which had developed.
All three were thrown into the water when the boat
rolled over.
The report said that Shields managed to cling to the
boat, but Panton let go to help his son.
Shields tried to manoeuvre the boat towards them,
but the force of the wind was too great and he saw father
and son separate.
Shields then saw a man ( Beadman) removing his clothes
on the Lake shore and saw Beadman swimming towards the other
two, but they vanished below the surface before he reached
them. Beadman then came over to Shields at the boat and under
Beadman's instruction, the two managed to reach the shorq
with the boat.
The wind was blowing the waves against the Lake wall,
creating a strong back current.
In the prevailing conditions, it was quite probable
that Shields also would have drowned if Deadman had not gone
to his rescue. / 2 
-2-
BACKGROUND Mr. Deadman has been employed at the Department of
the Interior's Transport Section since 1936.
He was at one time a Ministerial car driver, but for
the past fifteen to eighteen years, has been a bus driver
bringing children to school from the Kowen area.
He was also selected, because of his aptitude, to take
handicapped children to and from the Koomarri School in
Canberra. Mr. Beadman was President of the Canberra branch of
the Transport Workers' Union for twelve years until
relinquishing this office about three years ago.
CAiNBERRA February 5, 1965 P. M. 



65/ 011.
FOR PRESS P g. No., 14/ 1965
PETROIZUM 1" RODUCTS PRICING PROPOSALS
Statement by the Actinig Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. J. McEwen
Satisfactory discussions were held today between
Commonwealth and State Ministers on the Commonwealtht a pricing
proposals for petroleum products.
This was announced today by the Acting Prime Minister,
Mr. 51. McEwen, following a meeting in Canberra with State Ministers.
The proposals were put forward by the Com1yonwealth in
pursuance of the Prim~ e Ministeris election promise to do something
Sabout the burden placed upon rural costs by the higher prices of
Vpetroleum products in remote areos.
As indicated in the Prime Minister's election speech,
action by the Commonwealth in this field calls for thle co-operation
of the States and of the oil companies.
The development of a practical scheme for giving
effect to this undertaking has required a great deal of study by
the Commonwealth Departments concerned and long negoti. ations with
the oil industry and discussions with State officials.
Commonwealth proposals elaborated as a result of this
work were today considered by the State and-Commonwealth Ministers,
and State Ministers agreed to recomnmend to their respective
Governments the adoption of a scheme, the essential features of
which are as follows
The scheme w.-ill apply to motor spirit, power kerosene,
automotive distillate, aviation gasoline and aviation
turbine kerosene.
The scheme will be given effect to by Commonwealth and
State legislation.
In broad terms, the scheme will work as follows.
Subsidy will be paid in respect of sales of the
petroleum products in country locations which, on
June, 1961+, were recognised distribution points
and at which the wholesale price exceeded by more
than 4+ d. the capital city wholesale price. The rates
of subsidy in respect of these locations will be based
on the wholesale prices ruling there on 31st December,
1961+. There will be provision for t'ie determination
of subsidy rates in respect of distribution centres
wihich have or shall come into existence after
June, 1964,. It is intended that the provisions shall
cover consumers in remote areas.
Rates of subsidy in the Northern Territory and the
Australian Capital Territory will be related to
Sydney prices.
The oil industry will undertake to pass on to the
purchasers in reduction of its wholesale prices the
full benefit of all subsidy received. 9 e a./ 
-2
The Minister for Customs and Excise, Senator Anderson,
will be responsible for the administration of the
scheme. Distributors of petroleum products will be
registered. The actual payments of subsidy will be
made to registered distributors by the States. Claims
for subsidy will be examined by officers of the
Commonwealth Department of Customs and Excise, acting
under the authority of the State legislation,
The rates of subsidy, as initially determined, will not
be varied to take account of day-to-day changes in circumstances.
Consequently, should costs of distribution change, the wholesale
Sri ce at some locations may come to differ by more or less than
d. from the city price.
After discussion, the Commonwealth undertook to make a
general review of the rates of subsidy after the scheme has been
in operation for three years.
The necessary Commonwealth legislation will be introduced
in the coming Session of Parliament and the States will be asked
to introduce legislation as soon as practicable. The scheme will
come into operation shortly after the necessary State legislation
has been passed. It is hoped that it will be in operation by
1st October. Mr. McEwen added that the Commonwealth Government was
pleased at the helpful and co-operative approach adopted today
by the States and by the oil companies in recent discussions.
The following Ministers attended the conference
The Rt. Hon. J. Mc~ qen, Acting Prime Minister
The Rt. Hon. H. E. Holt, Treasurer
The Hon. D. E. Fairbairn, Minister for Bationa1
The Hon, B. M. Snedden, Attorney-General
Senator the Hon. Ken Anderson, Minister for Customs and
Excise.
New South Wales: The Hon. J. 5. Maloney, Minister for Labour
and Industry
Victoria : The Hon. V. F. Wilcox, Minister for Imiaigration and
Assistant Attorney-General
Queensland : The Hon. T. A. Hiley, Treasurer
The H~ on. G. VW. W. Chalk, Minister for Transport
South Australia The Hon. Sir Thomas Pla yford, Premier
Western Australia : The Hon. J. F. Craig, Minister for
Transport
Tasmania : The Hon. E. E. Reece, Premier
The Hon. R. F. Fagan) Attorney-General.
CANBERRA, February, 1965, 



65/ 012
FOR PRESS, P. M. No. 16/ 196~
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Acting Prime Ministers.. the Rt. o4J c~ krp
The Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. John McEwen,
announced tonight that invitations had been extended to
representatives of national organisations to participate in a
further series of economic consultations to be held on 24th
and 25th of February. The Government has had very useful
discussions with representatives of industry and commerce over
the past few years and the present meetings are being arranged
' to enable the Government to get the mos t up-to-date views of
business and other organisations on developments in the Australian
e conomy, A cormittee of Ministers will meet representatives
of a group of national organisations in Canberra on the afternoon
of Wednesday, 24th February. The organisations invited to attend
are Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia.
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council
Australian Wool and Meat Producerst Federation
Australian Bankers' Association
Master Builderst Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Retailers
On the evening of Wednesday, 24th February, Ministers
will have discussions with representatives of the Australian
Council of Trade Unions. At 2.30 P. m. on 25th February, Ministers
will meet representatives of the Manufacturing Industries
Advisory Council, and at 4+ p. m. representatives of the Export
Development Council,
CALNBERRA,
February 7, 1965. 



P13ESS, R~ ADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCE
GIVEN BY THEl PRIME MINISTER THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, AT CANB RRA ON
THURSDAY, 11TH FEBRUARY, 1995
PRIME MINISTER Gentlemen, the spectacle of all these microphones
and of all you people suggests to me that I am here under
false pretences, because I want to make it clear at the
outset that this is not one of' those cases where I went
abroad conducting negotiations or discussions about which
something may usefully be said later on, I was on a holiday
and, I assure you, not reading any cables or doing aiay work,,
For the first time since I became Prime Minister, I was hoping
to escape these matters for a time. However, I interrupt * ed.
that and went to London where I had two or three discussions
about which I spoke in London to the Australian Press just
before I left there. So really, I have no great matters t9
report. There are some problems inside Australia about which
I have been trying to learn something in the last twenty-, four
hours, but I don't profess to be a master of them by a long
Mt. and I believe there are certain:
questions you hawe in mind about Malaysia. Well, I have ' done
my best in the last twenty-four hour s to catch up, but one
doesn't entirely catch up the events of a month in twenty-four
hours. At least I can't. Now are there any questions you
would like to put to me?
Q6 There was one report from London, Sir that the British
Government had put pressure upon you to send troops into
Borneo. Is that correct?
A, I didn't even see the report.
Q# Well, it was published.
A. What happened on that matter was that this was being
debated in Australia I mean not debated thrashed out in
Australia in consultation with the authorities in Malaysia,
and when I was in London I received wiord as to what the
availability of' the forces was and what my colleagues here
thought about it. What happened then, was that I conveyed
that to the Prime Minister of Great Britain. There was no
pressure by him. He received the information with great
pleasure,
Q. Sir Robert, what will happen now with the Mt. Isa
dispute? dIhere do you go from here?
A, Where do I go?
Q9 What happens from now?
A* Let us understand that the Mt. Isa dispute is a local
dispute. I know it has immense national consequences of a
disastrous kind but it is, in the strict sense, a local
dispute within the jurisdiction of the Government of Queensland
and the Parliament of Queensland and, so far, matters
have been dealt with by the industrial machinery set up by
Queensland in Queensland. We, literally, have no jurisdiction
in an industrial sense over this matter which ion't interstate.
This is rather more important than appears to have been
realised. A problem may be, as this one is, of very great
national significance tremendous national significance, but
it doesn't follow that the Government of the nation can deal
with it, itself, because we do live in a Federal community / 2 
-2
P. M. and this is one of the awkward things about it. I have been
( CONT.) in touch with the acting Premier of Queensland and I have
told him that if at any time I can be of any help on this
matter I will be not only willing but eager to help, But
what has happened there as I understand it is that the
processes of arbitration have been invoked, awards have been
made, the dispute has been rlc.. x narrowed down almost to a
personal one about this man, Mack. i'e. It seems an extraordinary
state of affairs to bring to a h. tthe greatest copper mine
in Australia, and perhaps becomJir,.: g onie of the greatest in
the icrld, I woul~ d like to thlik that the people concerned
in this mattver were really thlnking about its significance.
I say this not because I am going to crash my way in without
authority in a difficult matter of this kind, but I wonder
if they have all given thought to this that, first of all,
this is really an attack on arbitration. That's quite clear,
and this is an old battle in Australia and it has had to be
fought more than once. We, in AustroUiag believe in industrial
arbitration and the people who are employed in Australia have
a great deal to thank arbitration for. It would be a
tragedy if it were destroyed or even seriously damaged in a
struggle of this kind.
But even more importantly, here is a mine which
contributes and would normally continue to contribute very
great wealth to the country in its international trade, in
its internal economy. One has only to look back over negotiations
that occurred about the railway line from Mt. Isa, with
the many millions that the Commonwealth itself was able to
find for that enterprise, the whole thing being predicated on
a steady increase in the through-put of the Mt, Isa minei
One of the greatest strokes in northern development for a
long, long time, and here is a crippling blow delivered to
it, and delivered innocently in a misguided way by the very
people who have everything to gain by northern development
and by living in a prosperous community.
So that here you have this crippling blow, because it is
one, first of all, to a lot of families living in their homes
in Mt. Isa I have been there myself on one or two occasions
and was tremendously impressed by the fact that here was a
community-this is a crippling blow to themselves; this is,
in hum~ an terms a terrible thing. Then it is a crippling
blow to a great Australian industry, and then in the broad
national sense it is a crippling blow to the whole development
of the north because, let it be remembered, you can't develop
the north of Australia, particularly in the mineral fields
in which there are such enormous possibilities, without
attracting the investment of capital, enterprise, having
people take risks and if they think that their enterprise
can be snuffed oui at short notice by one? one curious
character not even an Australian, I believe this is a
terrible thing.
And I would like so far as I can, to appeal to all
those concerned to realise that they are not just dealing
with a little local dispute about one man but what is
involved in this is all the significance that I have just
been trying to describe. However at this stage this is all
I can do. Mr. Hiley has been good enough to tell me that
if any development occurred on which he thinks my own
influence can be of help, then he will tell me and I have
indicated that I will be willing at all times o help.
I attach enormous importance to this, but I dontt think / 3 
-3
P. M. anything is served by brandishing non-existent weapons. Our
( CJontd.) powers so far as I know; I have had no chance to have
consultations with the Law Department but so far as I know,
our powers on this matter are, for all practical purposes,
non-existent.
Q. Sir Robert, this is very far removed from Mt. Isa.
I wondter if I could get a comment on this from you. Do you
regard the situation between Communist China and Russia, as
it stands now in the political situation of the world, as-a
safety valve for the rest of the free world?
At I don*' t think anybody can answer that question because,
so far as I can gather, and I am gathering up at pretty short
notice, don't forget, and therefore I must be a little
discreet but so far as I can make out the recent contacts
between the Prime Minister of the Soviei Union and the
Chinese authorities gave rise to some suggestion that there
might be a little watering-down of the troubles that arose
between the Soviet and China in the days of Khrushchev,
because we all know there was more than a little difference
between them. Whether this indicates that those differences
are being lessened or not I don't know, but 1 can't help
feeling that they are pro~ ty profound differences differences
of outlook, and that so long as this tension continues, it...
well, it all depends on the point of view I think it is not
a bad thing for the world, I have heard people say, philosophically
that
I have heard this all over the world. It is the thing
that is asked everywhere. What are your vievis?
Aq Well, that's my view. In a realistic fashion, I dont
think it's too bad having two people like that disputing
with each other, disagreeing with each other,
0Q. 0 Could we go back to Malaysia for a minute, Sir?
A, We haven't been there before. ( Laughter)
Q. Mr. Calwell has accused your Government of allowing what
he calls a haphazard drift into war with Indonesia, Sir Robert.
Do you think that is a fair comment?
A. No, I don'tt but still I realise that Mr. Calwell has
his weekly chore to perform and I don't mind. " Allow it to
drift What he is getting at, I sup-., ose is that
we are inert or something like that on the diplomatic front
and that we are thinking solely in terms of military activity.
This, of course, is not right. We are constantly diplomatically
active in Djakarta and we have constantly endeavoured to
produce some peace in this part of the world, but you can't
get away from this that the cause of all this trouble is that
the Indonesians are shooting. Vhen they give up shooting
people, to give effect to whatever their claims may be, then,
of course, there will be plenty of room for negotiation. I
have said repeatedly we have to live with Indonesia for
hundreds of years and I am the last one to want to create some
sort of inevitable hostility, or some long-standing hostility
between Australia and Indonesia. We want nothing better than
sound and good relations, but the fact is that Indonesia is
the aggressor, without warrant, against a neighbour. 0. 0 .1/ 1 
Q Mro Prime Minister, is it still the view of the
Government we having decided to send troops into Borneo, an
attack by indonesia on them would be an attack within the
terms of' the ANZUS pact? Sir Garfield Barwick raised this
issue about a year ago.
A* Now, look I rather deplore this business about the
ANZUS pact. 1 made a statement about the ANZUS pact in
Parliament I thought somebody might ask this. When was it?
They don't even put the date on Hansard now....., 2lst April
1961+, page 1280. There I said categorically what the position
was, as we understood i, under the ANZUS pact and I was able
later on to say that that interpretation was entirely acceptable
by the United Otates. Now, I have nothing to add to that.
We have no dispute or difference with the United States about
the ANZJS pact. I attach supreme importance to it.
Q6 I was going to ask you, Sir, what were the limitations
in the role of' these Australian troops in Borneo. Presumably
they can only go into action in a defensive role on Malaysian
territory.
A, Well, they will be under the command of' the military
people and will no doubt co-operate according to the military
plans. Itm not privy to them at the moment. I can't answer
that question. They will do well, wherever they are.
Q. Sir, will the growing intensity of' the Vietnam struggle
mean a deeper involvement for Australia?
A9 This is a good question. Perhaps it is to be answered
in a somewhat different way from the one you had in mind.
The Vietnam struggle an immfensely difficult one and made
all the more difficult because of the serious political
instability in South Vietnam, seems to me to be associated
with all these other matters, it all tends to become part of
a pattern. The intensification of fighting in South Vietnam
is bound to increase the United States' efforts in that area
because they have made it clear that they intend to remain.
We are profoundly involved in this for a variety of reasons,
one of course, being that we are parties to SEATO, South
Vietnam being one of the protocol States; that the viabilityto
use the blessed word of some of the other South-East
Asian countries will be seriously affected if South Vietnam
falls to the Communists; these things are all inter-acting
or will inter-act one with the other.
Perhaps I ought to say this. I had occasion to point
out in London that we have not only one or two, but perhaps
three or four or five particular interests and responsibilities
in this part of the world, all of which affect defence, One,
of course, is our own self-defence which we dontt see as a
coastal defence but as a defence if possible, in depth, but
it is our own defence and the def'ence of New Guinea and Papua,
our side of New Guinea. In the second place, we have our
old associations with Great Britain and New Zealand in what
has been called ANZAM, which is a planning body. In the third
place, we are partners in SEATO, and SEATO, of course, being
devised as a screen against communist * ggression, gives rise
to contingent liabilities if I may put them in that way. And
under SEATO South Vietnam being a protocol State, we have
come in at their request with modest forces into South Vietnam.
We have the ANZUS pact with the United States and with New
Zealand and in the case of Malaysia we have a unilateral
obligation arising from the statement I made in Parliament. 0* 000../ 
P. M. So that we have five aspects of this problem, New Zealand has
( Contd.) four, Nobody else has five. We have a variety of interests
and responsibilities and that is why it is one of the things
I took the opportunRay of discussing with Mr, Wilson and some
of his Ministers in London. I took the opportunity of discussing
with them ways and means of reconciling the views from
time to time not that I contemplate their differing but
reconciling them, getting some order of priority as between
Great Britain, the United States, New Zealand and ourselves,
because there will arise times when you must balance an
actuality like the fighting in and around Malaysia with a
contingency such as obligations that might arise under SEATO.
Q9 There have been some criticisms, Sir, of the Senate
voting system following the long drawn-out poll result.
Is it likely that the Government will review it?
A, I hope you won't use it against me if I say that I
have never professed perfectly to understand how they count
the votes in the Senate. It has always been one of those
murky mysteries to me which I leave to the fellows with the
computersb But, yes, I think the system of voting for the
Senate needs looking at. With great respect to my colleague,
Senator Hannan whose defeat I regret, who advocates a
circular ballot paper, I would never become enraptured about
a circular ballot paper. It is hard enough now when you hold
the thing upright and you try to put the numbers in the right
squares, but if you have to whiz it round, it will. be what the
French call " folio circulaire".
Q. We can take it, Sir, that this matter will be examined?
A, Yes, it will.
Q. Sir Robert, on the score of the Senate, how do you
feel about the future that a deadlock will arise in the Senate?
A, I have had it before, not long ago. It is not keeping
me awake, at nights. Let's put it that way.
Q9 Sir Robert, it has been mentioned in the Press that we
will pay the money owing on the arms deal being conducted in
the United States, that in the first three years or so we will
pay in cash. Have you any knowledge at this time of how much
that cash will be?
A, Don't ask me. I know no more about it than you do.
I read the communique first in a cable from Senator Paltridge
and then in the newspapers, but I have had no time to
ascertain these Treasury matters. There were Treasury
people there.
Q. There have been some suggestions, Sir that the Commonwealth
Government will make a reasonably substantial grant
to the Churchill Memorial Fund. Has any decision been made
on that yet?
As No, not actually, but I think it may be anticipated
that we will.
Q. Sir, is th:-rc anything you can tell us about the
Commonwealth S,. cretariat? 5 e a 9 e / 6 
6-
A, Well, tile officials had a meeting, as you know, in
London and they made a report which I have only just glanced
at because I got it when I was on my way to the funeral.
I had a word with Mr. Wilson about it. I think that we both
a greed it was undesirable to build up a sort of formidableexecutive
body as if we were copying the Secretary-General! s
business in the United Nations, and that this must be avoided.
But on the whole, he is disposed to think that the report has
the root of the matter in it. I offer no opinion on that
except that I would like to see a Secretariat of the right
kind. I don't want to see it become an executive body, nor
do I want to see it become a body in which there are majority
votes and minority movements and resolutions. That would
give me the horrors. However, I have told him that on my
return to Australia we would have a look at this report and
offer him our own views in good time, that is to say, before
the next Prime Minister's Conference.
Q. Sir, when is it likely that you will be able to make
a statement on the new Governor-General?
A. I don't know. You see, I had no chance to have any
discussion with The Queen. I made my bow to her on Saturday
with a lot of other people and Her Majesty was off to
Ethiopia on Monday. I haven't yet arrived in my own mind
at any firm recommendation, so I can't say.
Q. LnoMight the matter stand over, Sir, until you are in
A. I don't know. I won't restrict myself on that matter.
I might take this matter up by correspondence with Her
Majesty or wait until I see her.
Q6 Is it your inclination to recommend another
Englishman or perhaps someone
A, You will know exactly who the appointee is when
The Queen announces it.
Q. Sir Robert, can you tell us your reaction aboDut the
High Court decision on the airlines case?
A. My only reaction is that I even managed last night
to read the judgments, a considerable achievement I think,
and I found them very interesting, and that is all I have
to say because my Law people are going to tell me on Tuesday.
I'm just an ex-lawyer now, but I still think I know a bit
about it.
Q. There are one or two vacancies in Cabinet......
A. We will announce those as soon as we can.
Q. Any date yet for a conference on the airlines with
Mr. Renshaw, Sir?
A. Well, I don't know. I know that there was a
communication between the Acting Prime Minister and Mr.
Renshaw in which they appeared to agree that there would be
a consultation. On what level, I don't know yet. Probably
between Air Ministers and Transport Ministers Civil
Aviation, I mean. a ./ 7 
-7
Recent events in Asia have raised the prospect of
a proliferation of nuclear weapons Chinese, the Indonesians,
India having plutonium capabilities Can you tell us
your thoughts on this prospect in this part of the world?
At Well, I am one of the Prime Ministers who passed a
resolution about this some years ago, urging that there be
no such proliferation, that atomic weapons ought to be kept
in as few hands as possible if possible, in the hands of
the large powers who would have a sense of responsibility
and that to scatter them would be very serious, and I still
adhere to that view.
Q. In regard to Vietnam, Sir, to return to it is it
your understanding that the recent United States aitack
in North Vietnam was a purely retaliatory one and does not
represent any basic change in American policy towards
My impression is that it was purely retaliatory,
but then don't ask to speak to me as if I were an authority
on the matter because I'm not. i'm really forming an
opinion on something about which you probably know as much
as I do.
Q. Mr. Hasluck, commenting on that, Sir, said that the
aggressor must stop or be stopped. Would you take that as
a general statement of principle applying to all aggressors?
A, Well, now, really. A nd then you will think of some
particular case
Q6 Yes indeed, Sir,
A, You must save that one up. Mr. Hasluck was right
all the same in what he said about this case, but that
little curly one that you are thinking about you must tell
me about privately.
Q. Have you got any ideas, Sir, when we are going to
see the Vernon Report?
A, Oh, no. That is one of the many things I haven't
asked about in the last twenty-four hours. 



OFFICIAL OPENING OF THE N. R. M. A. METHj ADOFICE
BUI Go DNEY, N. S. J. 12TH FEBRJAIRYJE6
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, Sir Robert enie
Sir Norman, Parliamentary colleagues and ladies and gentlemen:
I am very happy to be here, because Norman Nock
is happy to have me here, and I tell you that this took
doing. He first of all started on me back in about September,
I think, or somewhere around there, or earlier. I found
every excuse in the world for saying no. He then had another
go at me and I found an equally valid excuse for saying no.
But he's like the character in " Alice in Wonderland" what
he says three times is right. And when he said it the third
time it was right I surrendered. And so I am here to perform
a very, very pleasant duty.
I am very glad to say that my pleasure is added
to by the fact that when I was sitting down there just now, I
turned around to the right and I saw, in one blow of the eye,
Dan Minogue, 14, P., and the Post Office clock. And this is
w.-orth mentioning, because this is a perfect further proof of'
the virtue of persistence; because the first gI times that
Dan Minogue got up and made a powerful speech even if a
trifle Hibernian about the Post Office clock I was heard
to say by my colleagues: " Lot of nonsense! L~ t of nonsense!
Thing looks better without the tower." But he won, in the
long run. Now the virtue of persistence is of course, a
great one . one of the great virtues. Enthusiasm and
persistence have done great things in this country and
Itd like to take this opportunity of telling you thai I regard
the N. R. M. A. as an outstanding example of what can be done by
this combination. It is very hard to believe in fact I I-ould
not have believed it unless I had seen it in print in the
annual report that you began really at the end ol 1923,
early 1924+ at about the time I was buying my first motor
vehicle. Now it is not a lon time ago, and to thin!, that within
that period of time you're Deginning to tal~ k soberly and
seriously of having a million members within another eight or
nine years is, I think, an almost phenomenal story, summarised
as it is in those figures.
Norman Nock said that he hoped that I or some
miserable successor at Canberra would be able to attend the
opening of a building there, having regard to the growth of
Canberra. ' dell, the growth of CanberraI just like the growth
of the N. R. M is a tremendous proof of what goes on in
Australia somethi~ ng that we ought to be more proud of,
perhaps, than we are.
When i first went to Canberra and became as
I was, I assure you an eminently respectable Attorney-General,
the population of Canberra was 6 000; you could stroll around
it in an afternoon. Now it is g07000; before you can say
" knife" l, it will be a hundred thousand. They tell me it will
be a quarter of a million not long after my time about
the turn of the century. So there's plenty of scope, Mr.
Chairman, plenty of scope for your work. ./ 2 
-2
Now I like, for the reasons that I have mentioned,
I like the symbolism of this great Association. Because it
does symbolise an Australian spirit and Australian growth.
We are a little bit inclined, aren't we, in Australia I seem
to have observed it myself a few times to " knock" our own
country or to " knock" our own Government ( well that I think,
is legitimate and sometimes justified). But we mustn't think
that our country is always wrong, or that some other countries
have some magnificent splendour about them that has been denied
to ours, because I affirm that this is the most exciting
country in the world. No country that wasn't exciting could
have in your own fashion, produced the results that you see
about you when you contemplate the record and achievements
of your own Association.
There is another thing about it. We have some
tendency, haven't we, to think that the Government is the
universal provider. I have even had deputations from
distinguished bodies including motorists' bodies who had
somethi~ ng to say to me on that point, and I won't revive these
arguments because I'm sure that before I'm much older, somebody
else will revive them for me. That's right. But there is
a disposition, isn't there, to say, 114all, we pay our taxes,
the Government should whatever the Government may be
Federal or State or TKunicipal it ought to attend toth
business." That is only true up to a point.
Governments and Government Departments are not, in
their nature, creators, They are regulators. They can come
in aid of what private citizens do, they can hinder what private
citizens do, but they are not in their own nature equipped for
the creative arts or the creative activities in a community,
These proceed from individuals. It is man and woman who are
the creative force in a community, It is the imagination of
the individual which, warming the imagination of a community,
or of a state, or of a nation, 9 can do such things for the
nation. And therefore) while Governments and Government
Departments have their -proper place, we must always be on guard
against thinking that they are the be-all and the end-all, the
port of first call and the port of last call, in all our
difficulties. Now the founders of N. R. M. A. understood this perfectly,
because if I were asked to define an organisation which
exemplifies the benefits of private responsibility, of a
sense of community of a sense of independence and of selfhelp,
I would say this is an outstanding example of it. Now
this is something to be proud of.
I have just been through this lovely building. It is
a good deal better than Parliament House at Canberra, and,
as my wife has pointed out the Board Room here is very much
better and more civilised than the Cabinet Room at Canberra,
But I have been through this lovely building and I share your
pride in it. But to go through it is to discover through the eye,
actually, what one has otherwise read on pieces of paper the
enormous variety of services that you provide. I even
revisited the glimpses of the moon by visiting your solicitor
in his office and there were briefs on the table, tied up
wtith red tape! Retrospectively my mouth watered. Oh, for
the dear dead days. But when they were on my table, they had
all come in, but on his table they were all ready to go out,
ready to gladden the hearts of some Junior Counsel. I felt for
them. It was lovely. 
-3
But to have all these people engaged in providing a
service to members in what may seem a rather dull occupation
but what, in my experience as a Junior, presented the most
infinite variety of activities And all being provided
for members by this great Association, and with great shx'eudness
if I may still stick to my lost like a good cobbler or with
great skill because I noticed in the report that, of the many
thousands of' occasions when appearances were made in court it
was only on a certain number that defences were entered. And
in those cases in which defences were entoz'od, 77% of the
defences succeeded* Now this is either a proof of the immense
skill and judgment exercised in this building, or of the
immense skill and judgmient of the Counsel who have been appearing
in these cases, or a new and genteel outlook on the part of
magistrates. Because I confess that in my time, which is now,
as you all know, many years ago, when I was appearing a little
in the Courts of Petty Sessions in Victoria, to appear for a
motorist charged with an offence was a mere formality. You got
your fee and he got his fine!
d~ ell, things have changed. Here's one excample, to
say nothing of the tremendous services that you give in the
field. This Association is an almost constant presence all
over the State, This is something to be thankful for. And
it is not done because an Act of Parliament said it had to be
done, It is not done because some Department was established
to do it. It is done because thousands of wise men and women
got together on this miatter and said, " We must have something
of this kind and we are prepared to establish it, and we are
prepared to maintain it." And the result is this tremendous
achievement that you are all thinking about today.
Now it would be a very poor show indeed if I spoilt the
opening of this building by rambling on, and I don't prop~ ose
to ramble on. All : I want to say is that Norman Nock spoke quite
truly when he said that he and I have been good friends for very
many years. I even listened to Norman make speeches when hie was
Lord Mayor, and that is the highest test of friendship, But it
is because of that, as well as all these other reasons of
substance that I have been referring to, that it has given me
very great pleasure to come here,
I would just like to say as she may not have an
opportunity of saying it for herself how deeply my wife
appreciates this rare compliment that you have paid her this
afternoon. I don't imagine there are many life members of this
Association of either sex. She is the first and she of course
is delighted, And delighted for an extra reason, an3that is t? 3t
al~ l our married life, or all our motoring life, I have been
heard occasionally to say, " Humph. 1 4oman driveril" ( This is,
mind you, a private admission-, it is not to go any further,
you know.) And she has in recent years, particularly, said,
" lNonsense. The women Lrivers are the best. Don't talk such
rubbish." You see? And Liow it turns out that stie's right.
Now thatts a wonderful thing. Here she is, demonstrated clearly
in the report on the graph, overwhelmingly, to be right. The
only comfort ihat I can take out of the same graph is that I
notice that the accident rate among the lads from 17 to 20 is
the d-ghest on the chart and I daresay some of my grandsons
will be entering that bracket disastrously in due course and
the fellows of 70 have the best record of the lot. 000000/ 4 
Sir, I thank you very much for the opportunity
of coming here in a brief way to declare this building
open. I assure you that it is a very great privilege and
deeply appreciated by me.
I wish the Association all success. I hope and
believe that in another thirty years which will be, I
shrewdly suspect, after my time but not after the time of
some of you now present you'll have two million, and you'll
have three times the size of this building occupied in Sydney.
And as long as you do this will be living proof to the
people of what a greai country we live in and what magnificent
people we have in it.
Sir, I have great pleasure in declaring the
building open. 



65/ 01
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 17/ 1965
NATIONA'L RiDIATION A! DVISORY COMM1ITTEE
Statement bvyjt...? rime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir-Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies announced
today that Professor Sydney Sunderland, Professor ol Experimental
Neurology and Dean of the Faculty of Medicine in the University
of Melbourne who had served for more than five years as Chairman
of the National Radiation Advisory Committee had, in view of
many pressing commitments expressed his wish to resign the
position, The Government had accepted Professor Sunderland's
resignation with regret&amp;
Sir Robert said that Professor Sunderland had
given outstanding service to the Government. The Committee
which he had led with such distinction had the important task
of examining, with scientific detachment, the effects of ionising
radiation on the Australian community, including possible effects
in Australia of world-wide fall-out from nuclear weapons tests.
Sir Robert said the Committee's advice on these matters had been
most valuable to the Government and it must indeed be reassuring
to the A1ustralian community to know that these important questions
were under continual review.
The Prime Minister also announced that Professor
P. C. Courtice, Professor of Experimental Pathology John Curtin
School of Medical Research Australian National University,
had accepted the Government's invitation to succeed Professor
Sunderland as Chairman of the Committee.
Professor Courtice is a medical scientist of high
personal and scientific reputation and was, prior to assuming
his present Chair at the Australian National University, the
Director of the Kanematsu Institute of Pathology at Sydney
Hospital for ten years* Before this he had been Reader in
Human Physiology at Oxford, after holding other research posts
and a Queensland Rhodes Scholarship there. Sir Robert said the
Government was gratified that such an eminent medical scientist
as Professor Courtice would lead the Committee in its future
work. CA NBERRA,
12th February, 1965. 



6
OPENING OF BLIGH HOUSE. SYDNEY
I 5TH FEBRUARY, 9~
õ Pec th t. Hn. Robert Menzies
Mr. LeCouteur and Ladies and Gentlemen:
I think it is rather good fun for a poJJitic,-Lar
in these days to be invited to open Biligh House. ( Laugbter)
He had, as we are given to believe, some acquaintance with
mutiny and I wil. 1 pass on to the appropriate quarters in
Canberra the fact that I have now been associated with his
name. ( Laughter) One other thing struck me as I came in and that
was, apart from seeing all the " idle" business community in
Sydney as I always do on these occasions the quality and
depth of the carpets. Do you mind me referring to this?
( Laughter) Nothing gives you such a good feeling as to
walk along on a carpet into which you sink in the most genteel
fashion. I made an enquiry from Mr. Prideaux who was a
little uncertain in his reply as to whether the wool in the
carpets came from Australia, This apparently remains to be
seen, but if you don't mind putting up with me for half a
minute on this recollection of
I remember thirty years ago, almost, being in
charge of a little group of Parliamentarians from Australia
who went up to the Midlands in England, and we went to a
rather famous carpet area, Kidderminster. At lunchtime I
had a short but heated argument with the Mayor about bodyline
bowling ( Laughter) and we also went in to this vast
display room and we saw carpets. ' Ve began with beautiful
carpets. W4e gradually descended in the social scale until
we got to the far end of the room where there were the most
revolting carpets that I have ever seen in my life, all orange
and brown splodges and curlicues. I said to the general
manager who was showing us around, " Tell me, how is it that
you can bring yourselves to make carpets like these, having
regard to some that I have seen?" And he said, " That's
all right, Sir" ( he didn't know where we were from) " They
are for th Australian market Sir." ( Laughter) And do you
know that the very next time f went to some provincial town
in Victoria for some necessary purpose, I saw the very carpet
on the floor, ( Laughter) Now, I am not comparing it with
this one. This is one of the many proofs available to us
that we are getting on in the world,
Now this company of course, is a very old
company. I am talking about Lhe A. I. H. L. because I know there
are other people who will make their humble contribution to
this building by becoming tenants obscure people like
QANTAS and so on I know that, but today I just want to say
a few words about this great and famous company, over one
hundred years old, and therefore, for over a century, associated
with development in Australia in the most remarkable fashion.
Now, whenever I am invited to open something,
I usually like to be given a little of what we, in politics,
call the " dope" and so I got the " dope", volumes of it, and
it was very desirable that I should because I had not as
clearly in the po~ st recognised something about the work of the
.00.0e/ 2 
-2-
great pastoral companies in Australia because going back to
the beginning of this hundred years, lustra. Aan wool was sold
in London primarily, and sm dyhad to attend the financing
in the inierim six months, n-fne months and so these
companies of which this one is a conspicuous example came into
exitnce in order to finance the woolgrower, who even then was
extremely hard-up finance the woolgrower until the -money came
in. And that 1 imagine, is how it began. ! Jeil., loohkAng back
over the hundred yea.-s, only a portion of which I can surv:, y
writh my ovm eye I am bound to say and you are bound. J
that the wool industry in particular has been and is greatest
industry in this colantry, Its prosperity has meant the
prosperity of As i0Any period of depression in it has
W been a period of 6tE-pession for Australia. This is our great
industry, And htaving said that, one should ask oneself,
" What has contributed to that?" W4ell, there is the woolgrower
himself who has contributed to it because in my experience of
people who have succeeded their fathers and grandfathers in
wool, they have alwrays aimed at a higher and higher level of
quality and of production. This has been a matter of great
pride to the people concerned and of great advantage to Australia,
and at the same time, companies, and I in particular, refer to
this one, have been able to make a conlribution to the development
of wool, and later on, to the development of cattle and
so on, without which I doubt whether we could have had all the
advance that we have recorded in these years. And why is that?
It is not merely that a pastoral company of this kind has been
able to make business transactions with people. It is the
way in which the transactions have been made that has produced
the results that we are witnessing. It is interesting, I think,
to ask oneself what are the elements in this matter, Might
Iventure to suggest one or two of them to you?
First of all, there has been involved complete
integrity of dealing wiith the people with whom the company
deals complete integrity. One slightest breath of doubt could
have destroyed everything. But a complete integrity of dealing,
maintained over generations, has been a powerful contributing
factor, and so I mention it.
In the second place, there is the knowledge, the
personal knowledge the genuine personal interest of the
individual and in~ Zhe individual. This is true of all sorts of
things. I don't believe that anybody, whatever he is doing,
can achieve success unless he is interested in people, in the
individual person, not interested in them as if they were
statistics in a blue book, but interested in them as human
beings, and after all, the success, Sir, of this great company
is fundamentally based upon the fact that you have at all
stages been interested in the individual, you've knoiwn him,
you've known about him, you have been able to form judgments
about him, individual judgments not mass judgmnents,' and he,
in his turn, coming into the ciiy, coming into a branch, coming
into wherever it may be, has felt that he was an individual and
got to know your own people as individuals, so that there was
mutual confidence, mutual knowledge, and these two things are,
in reality, the basis of the success of an enterprise of this
kind. .* ee/ 2 
-3
And in the third place, you have been able to provide
for people on the land expert knowledge and advice, This is
something of tremendous importance. In my own lifetime, I have
seen the move occur because I was born in the country, in
Victoria I have seen the move occur from a stage at which
just rule of thumb observed: " This was all right. The old
man did this and it is good enough for me." de have moved away
from that to a stage where the resources of science, the resources
of new knowledge have been brought to the hand, to the arm of
the man in the field. This, I think, is tremendously important.
My own Government and it is not the only one in
this field my own Government has for a long time been concerned
about the great problem of extending the results of research
to the man who is actually on the farm, and this may seem a
simple enough matter but it is an almost intractable problem
because we rejoice, as you know, Sir, in Australia in having
seven Governments, of which mine is merely the least considerable,
( Laughter) and some Governments have a power, and some have
another power. It isn't easy to say, " 1dell, that's it. This
is what has been discovered, this is what the research men have
told us this goes out tomorrow under proper organisation to the
man on ihe farm, on the station, wherever he may be."
A great deal of work is being done in this matter a
great deal remains to be done. There is still too far greai
a gap between the work done by the scientist and the applied
scientist and the work actually done on the property itself.
We think this is improving. We hope that it will improve very
much more, but I want to express my public acknowl~ edgment to
companies like yours which have been practising this in a very
real sense for many years who have gone to great pains to have
experts in their own staff's, who have gone to great pains to
see that their expert knowledge and their expert advice has
reached the client of the company in the quickest possible time
and in the most effective possible way, You have been
engaging, although you are in a business, in extension services
in the most practical sense and I therefore take the opportunity
of saying that what you have been doing is w,, ork done in
parallel and sometimes more quickly in parallel with the wrork
that governments are seeking to achieve in Australia.
Then the fourth matter which presented itself to me
was this. I don't believe in the theory that some people have
that a business will succeed as long as you have a lot of hardfaced
fellows on the board who insist on getting the l. ast drop
of juice out of the orange, or if the days are rather bad out
of the lemon. ( Laughter) I don't believe in this. I don't
think that any concern of this kind can possibly grow so
dramatically and it has grown dramatically unless it has a
vision which goes beyond the profit and loss account. Indeed,
if it has the vision, if it has an imaginative grasp of the
problems of the man on the land, its profit and loss account
will turn out to be all right because it will represent the
results of imagination and vigour,
The two things that have to be kept in mind if the
imagination is to be exercised in this countiy are the necessity
for productivity Diore and more productivity in unit terms
and growth, growth with productivity. This is what we depena
on, In Australia our population is growing very rapidly
for one reason or another, but it is growing very rapidly, and
0 0 00 0 / 1+ 
the demands of our people are growing very rapidly. As
living standards rise, as purchasing power becomes greater
so we have a greater and greater demand, This demand canit
just be satisfied by more imports though it may have to be
to a degree it can't just be satisfied by the inflow of
capital from other countries although we've been rich in
that over a long time now; lundamentally it has to be met
by an increased production and activity in our owm country,
leading to bigger exports, leading to greater strength in
the international exchanges, but above all, leading to an
increased development of wrealth in Australia. Therefore,
productivity must never be overlooked and the need for growth
must never be overlooked. I venture to say that every man
who has an executive responsibility, either here or in a
branch or in the field is cons:-' ous of this and knows that
the best thing he can do for tthe client of the company is to
help him to improve his productivity, to help him to have a
contemplation of growth for the future so that he is never
satisfied with what is going on today but has an imagination
big enough and lively enough to contemplate what is going to
happen next year and in ten years'I time and in fifty years'
time. Now, in all these things this great company has
been carrying out work, I think, ol national importance, and
it satisfies me very much as no socialist, as you way
understand; it satisfies me very much that you have not
done this as the servant of government but as the ally and
friend of government. I know I didn't come down in the
last political showrer and I know that even in your boardroom
from time to time rude noises will be made about my
Government itts my Government at present but somebodyts
Government some time in the future. I know that, This is
good, this is very healthy. I have always been more receptive
to hooting than to applause. I find it very stimulating.
( Laughter) And in the middle-of all that, never forget that
we are playing in the same team, we are in the same interest,
we are both serving this country we, occasionally, by
compulsion; you, not by compulsion but by a great voluntary
and highly intelligent effort.
Now, Sir, I don't want to weary this audience, but
I thought I would like to mention those particular matters
because this is a great day in the history of the company,
a wonderful day. It is a pity that a nice old building had to
be knocked over, isn't it. I sometimes think it is a pity
that in fifty yedrs' time by which time, I assure you, I will
no longer be Prime Minister of Australia ( Laughter) it
comforts me to know it doesn't comfort me rather it
shocks me to know that in fifty years' time, almost every city
will look like almrost every other city. I suppose this is
inevitable in the course of nature because there are some
lovely things in this city, but still, they can't stand in the
wray of development, for practical purposes of the kind of
thing that I have been talking about. I iherefore want to
say to you, publicly, that I thank you on behalf of the
Government for the work that you are doing and that as an
individual, I esteem it a singular honour o be invited to
come here and to declare this building open. 0 
Before I conclude, I must tell you this is one
of my better deed;~ but not entirely voluntary, because about
six months ago, I said to my Secretary, " ILook, I've had this.
I must cut down on my public engagements. There are far
too many speeches to be made and I am very tired of it,
Letts refuse all the invitations that come in for the next
three months." That was a bold stroke, you seel this is
what I believe they call a crash programme " Le Is refuse
them" and so I think I refused this one, and then it turned
out that my Deputy High Commissioner in London, in some way
having become involved with this company I mean in a
perfectly honourable way ( Laughter) he kept sending messages
saying, " As a personal favour60and so when a Prime
Minister is confronted by a Deputy High Commissioner, it
is always difficult but when the Deputy High Commissioner
turns out to have been the Head of the Prime Minister's
Department for half a dozen years, it becomes impossible, and
so I said, " I succumb. I will do it." I have done it very
badly but I assure you I have done it with very great pleasure.
I declare the building open. 5 



P. M. 18/ 1965
FOR PRESS VISIT BY THEIR ROYAL'HIGHNESSES THE DUKE AND
DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER
STATE4ENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES, C. H.,
MP.
The Prime Minister announced today that on medical
advice, The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester have postponed their
arrival in Australia by one week and will not arrive until
Saturday, March Their Royal Highnesses have informed the Prime
Minister how sorry they are for any inconvenience
which may be caused by this decision.
The Duke and Duchess are both looking forward
to their visit although disappointed that it must
now necessarily be abbreviated.
The Prime Minister said that the resultant changes
would not affect the latter part of the programme and Their Royal
Highnesses will leave Australia as planned on Monday, April 26th.
He added that the changes for the early part of the visitcaould
O be announced as soon as possible.
The Prime Minister expressed his deep sympathy for
Their Royal Highnesses in their recent motor accident and his
great regret that the Duchess should have sustained a broken
arm. He said that Their Royal Highnesses had been assured
of the Government's full co-operation in any rearrangement
which will bring about an enjoyable visit and retain opportunities
for the Duke and Duchess to spend some time privately revisiting
friends. Canberra, Tuesday, 16th February, 1965. 



FOR PRESS iT-AT GIFT FOR INDIA
Statement by the Prime MiMneins teer s., the_ Hon. Sir Robert
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies cdnnounced
today that the Government had offered an immediate gift
of 5,550,000 bushels of wheat to India.
Sir Robert said " The Government has been
keeping in very close touch for some time with the food
situation in India. ' Very recently we learned from the
Indian Government that because of unexpected delays in
the arrival of imported supplies of wheat from some areas,
it would be faced with a critical shortage over the next
month or so until its o, n crop was harvested. ' Te i! ere
asked if we could help meet the shortfall by the provision
of the amount of 5,550,000 bushels, that is to say,
1o, 000 tons, and I @ m very heppyto announce that the
Government has decided to offer a inmmediate and unconditional
gift of this amount of wheat to the Indian Government."
The Prime Minister added that he was sure that
the gift of wheat to India, valued at nearly -C4 million,
would meet with the warm approval of the Australian
people who had shown a keen interest in and desire to
help the Indian people in their present difficulties.
CANBERRA,
February 18, 1-. 65. 



65/ 007
lii, EzoeUam the 000" r " enera
has authorised me to enmme that Mr, Ian HoIb
8ineaiwu b( P. will be appointed Minister fb Social
Servies. It is expected that Sinclair vill be
swrn In on mnday, 22nd Fbumury, 1965.
The lion. fvarta, Ei. 04,9
i at present MiWister fot Soal Servioes as
well as iUister tor leth will continue as Mlinster
for Health.
CANst z, 6
21st Februzr~ v 1965, 


Your Royal Highness and Ladies and Gentlemen:This is not really my day. This is the Treasurer's day. The Treasurer has had all the travail of bringing into existence simultaneously a Mint and a near system of currency,&nbsp;and if anybody thinks that is easy, he should have been with us at any time over the last two or three years. And so this is the Treasurer's day and I don't want to steal any portion of it from him.
My one simple and very pleasant task is to welcome His Royal Highness here. You have already made it, of course, quite clear to him how welcome he is in this country at any&nbsp;time, but it is particularly appropriate that he should be here today to perform this opening because this is something rather special if you come to think about it.
Here is a relatively new country. Here is a relatively new city. Here is a brand new Mint. Here is a brand new system of currency coming up. There is a tremendous amount of novelty concentrated in today modern novelty, up-to-date novelty, and therefore it is very appropriate, if I may say so, Sir, that you, the most modern and up-to-date&nbsp;Prince in the wrorld should be here to perform this opening. (Applause) ,
We, in Australia, frequently have occasion to think about you and to take pride in the fact that although some of us are a bit long in the tooth - is that the expression? - &nbsp;and&nbsp;grey in the hair, you represent, in your own person the talent and enthusiasm and understanding and spirit of adventure of the second part of the twentieth century. It is a matter of immense pleasure to all of us and great pride that you should be heretoday to perform this opening.
And now, Sir, having said this all too inadequately, I will hand it back to the Treasurer whose day it is and who will I shrewdly suspect, make a speech to us about the Mint.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;



FOR PRESS P. JM. No 21/ 1965
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
I have written to the Premiers proposing a
meeting for the purpose of reviewing the financial assistance
grants to the States. The present arrangements were worked
out in 1959 between the Commonwealth and the States, and
were given effect on the understanding that they would carry
on for a period of six years. This period terminates on
June. Ordinarily I would wish to have the replies
of the Premiers before I mention dates publicly. But
since some details of my proposals for a conference have
become known, I feel that I should confirm that the
particular dates I have suggested to the Premiers are 22nd
and 23rd April.
CANEPdRA, 23rd February, 1965. 



6 5/ 005
FOR PRESS P. M. No. jœ
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Prime Mini. ster the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister and senior Ministers
had discussions this afternoon on the economic situation
with representatives of a group of national organisations
representing industry and commerce. After the meeting the
Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies, said that this had been
a further meeting in the series of discussions commenced by
the Government three years ago to obtain a first-hand account
of current and prospective developments in the different
sectors of the economy. Sir Robert said that these talks allowed
Ministers to get the up-to-date views of those directly
engaged in commerce and industry. The talks had again
proved most useful for this purpose.
Representatives who attended the meeting
were Mr. H. G. Ferrier, President Associated Chambers of
Manufactures of Australia
Mr. L. Atkinson, President, Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia
Mr. A. F. Havard, President, National Farmers' Union of
Australia.
Mr. J. P. Heffernan, President, Australian Primary Producers?
Union.
Mr. T. L. Bull, President, Australian ! oolgrowers' and
Graziers' Council
Mr. L. H. Heaslip, Vice-President, Australian Wool and
Meat Producerst Federation.
Mr. N. A. Jackson, Chairman, Australian Bankers' Association
Mr. V. T. dwards, President, Master Builders' Federation
of Australia.
Mr. N. W. Lawrance, President, Federal Chamber of Automotive
Industries
Mr. G. McCowan, President, Australian Council of Retailers.
This evening, Ministers will meet with
representatives of the A. C. T. U. and on Thursday there will be
separate meetings with the Manufacturing Industries Advisory
Council and the Export Development Council.
CANBEA, 1i
24-th February, 1965 



FOR PRESS P. M. iNo 26/ 1162
VISIT OF THE RT. HON. ML. ARTHUR B ITTOYLEY
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR COMMON iEALTH RELATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister, the RtJjnnSiLr. RQbejAM_ en zies
The Prime Minister announced today that the Rt.
Hon. Mr. Arthur Bottomley, Secretary of State for Commonwealth
Relations would be visiting Australia from 26th April to
2nd May. The Prime Minister said he had met Mr. Bottomley
while he was in London last month and he was looking forward
to receiving him in Canberra.
CANBERRA, February, 1965.
L 



65/ 040
OPENING A~ ND DEDICATION OF WHITLEY COLLEGE,
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE 27TH F-bmuaiY, 1265
õ iec y h rg Ministej r e. hRt oj! 2L._ Sir ~ bt en e
Mr. Chairman, Mr. President and Ladies and Gentlemen t
If you look at your programme you will see that
you are about to listen to an oration. ( Laughter) This is
a sort of university practice. In some cases I an called on
to make a speech. In some cases, rather deceptively, to say
a few words; ( Laughter) but at any university gathering it
turns out to be an oration, but I assure you it won't be.
What I find myself cast for now, having listened
to my predecessors, is a few supplementary observations,
supplementary in particular to what Sir Leslie Martin has
said to you. I have had the great good fortune to have been
mixed up a little in the recent university developments in
Australia. I remember that not long after I came back into
office I think it was in 1950 or 1951 we appointed a
committee to have a look at the immediate needs of the
universities. It was, looking back on it, a singularly
modest committee because it didn't cost us very much a
million or two and it seemed very cheap at the time, But
when it was conducting its discussions, it came to my knowledge
that at least one person connected with it had said there
ought to be no recommendation about residential colleges,
because they were luxuries, and if people wanted to have a
luxury of that kind, they should pay for it.
I thought this was a barbarous sentiment, and
being younger then I am now, more audacious than I am now
and more domineering than I am now I said " Unless you make
a report which includes something lor residential colleges,
I won't have the report at all," And so we got the first
little morsel, but we established a very important principle.
Then later on, as you know, ife appointed the
Murray Commission. We were very lucky to secure the services
of a man like Murray. He was a consummate expert on these
matters. W,, e had a powerful committee, and we had a Treasurer
who, when I broke the news to him and told him about the
committee and told him thiat it would turn out to bo very
expensive relaxed and took it very well. He needed to,
when the till came in. Well, that began another great era,
and you have been reminded the Murray Committee recommended a
provision for residential colleges. Another of the recommendations
that the Committee made was that we should establish
a universities commission of our owm in Australia and we did,
and we had the singular good fortune to persuade Sir Leslie
Martin to become its chairman.
I know that he-has had a difficult job. I go
into university circles occasionally and I find thnt he is
not as generous as he should be. Wiell, if I walked around
the corners of the Treasury they would say, " This man is
becoming positively lush". ( Laughter) But wherever I go,
I will hear some criticism but I will hear a paeon of praise
from most people. I don't think everybody understands what
a difficult problem it is to have a universities commission, 
2-
to be on a universities commission, and above all things,
to be its presiding member. Because universities are growing
enormously in their student population we have more universities
coming into existence, we have a demand for higher education
in Australia which is at once exciting and stimulating and
almost overwhelming, If you had a look at the statistics
11rhich the commission itself produces from time to time, its
forecasts of what will be the demand upon universities over
the next two or three or twenty or thirty years, you would
come to the conclusion that for our population there is no
other country in the world that is generating such an eager
desire for education in all its forms as we are in Australia.
This is an enormous and complex task, and I want to take the
opportunity of saying to Sir Leslie, in his presence, that I
think he has laid the whole country under his debt for the
way he has done his work. ( Applause)
Now he gave you some figures. I am no great
believer in cluttering up remarks with statistics but I
think the first beginning Sir Leslie, ( that was before your
time) was œ 20,000 or œ 30 600 some token item. Well in
the 1958/ 60 triennium, tjat Is the first one under the recommendations
of the Murray Committee, œ. 600,000 was provided
that is by the Commonwealth œ C600,000 for the purposes of
residential colleges which now, of course includes halls of
residence in some of the universities, fn the next
triennium 1961/ 2/ 3, the œ E600,000 had risen to CIM. This
merely whet their appetite, because in the 1964/ 65/ 66 triennium,
the Commonwealth is finding, or is prepared to provide, just
under œ 3jM. for this purpose.
Now you think of that in terms of growth a few
thousand, œ C600,000, ZiM, œ C3iM. It's going almost by
geometrical progression, and therefore I smile when I look
back on the doubting Thomas who thought that residential
colleges were a luxury instead of being as they indeed are
of the very essence of a true university.
Now I am going to give you, as briefly as possible,
three reasons I think one or two have already been referred
to, at any rate but I will put them in my own way. I think
one of the great dangers today in our universities with this
rapid growth is that as the demand for teachers, for staff
grows, and as the difficulties of securing staff of adequate
standards grow, so will there tend to be an increasing
remoteness between teacher and students. dJe put that comically
by saying that there ought to be a certain ratio, that there
ought to be a certain limit to classes, but sheer necessity
will tend to produce a state of affairs, temporarily, at any
rate, in which the teacher happens to be, or -, ppears to be,
far removed from his individual students,
Now this is, in its ways a minor tragedy, if it
is a bed teacher perhaps it is good to have a suitable
distance, but if it is a good teacher, it is a thousand
pities that the people who are in his class in their year
for any purpose should fail to come under the spell of his
own personality, to fail to cultivate an attitude of mind,
which in a sense subconsciously they've borrowed from him.
donderful thing lor any man I don't care if he's a scientist
or lawyer or whatever it may be to be able to look back on
his university and postgraduate days and say "* Jell, I worked
under So-and-so" I with a gleam of pride in his eye and a / 3 
3-
feeling of indebtedness in his heart. And therefore there
is a great danger in remoteness,
Now here we have a new university college,
' e have others just, in effect, over the road. They have
their own tutorial people. They will have closer contact
in college than many of their colleagues in the university
proper may hope to have with a great number of their own
pupils. This, in this sense, is a contribution to bridging
that gap, to removing that sense of remoteness that is liable
to exist in future between the staff and the students,
Well, that's one thing.
Then, of course, there is the second thing.
Sir Leslie Martin referred to it, A good deal of the education
in a university is imparted by undergraduates. I don't
mind undergraduates like us my own kind, who were perfectly
ready under provocation to Instruct the professor or the
lecturer ( Laughter). I was once invited by the late
Professor Tucker, that great classical scholar, to come down
and take the class myself as he felt he wasn't competent
to do it. I refused his invitation ( Laughter) to nobody's
surprise. But undergraduates do instruct each other because
of their contacts, because of the different disciplilos in
which they are working. It's of tremendous importance that
a man for example, doing science, shouldn't run away with
the ilea that science is the be-all and the end-all of life.
It is a very good thing for him to have to sit down with
another student who is studying law or a student studying
arts, or whatever it may be, and thrash out their differences
of outlook. This produces, in the long run, a most valuable
education, It justifies the word " university", the universitas
that can be produced by these contacts, by argument, by
quarrels if you like, by any other means. One branch of
study rubs off on to the other and produces a broader outlook.
I know the Principal who I find is a WJelshmnan
and a Baptist ( simultaneously) 4aughter) I knowt the
Principal would say, " Of course, that doesn't apply to the
theological students", or perhaps he wion't say that. In
my time, theological students or some of them, badly needed
close association with respectable law students, ( Laughter)
There are a few ex-theological students here today, I can
detect I think and they will understand exactly what I mean.
But whatever it is, never let anybody per-suade you that you
have made an error by creating a university college, by
creating these facilities for contact and dispute and some
gathering of some aspect of the other man's study and the
other man's point of view, because I believe that if
everybody going to a university of course this is
impossible but if everybody had the opportunity of living
with other students and debating and arguing with other students
we would produce a breadth of outlook in the Australia of the
fut. ure which would be the greatest triumph of the twentieth
century. Then I want to add my third observation. This
college is a colle~ e established by the members of the
Baptist community. There are other colleges connected
with the university established primarily by various
denominations, by various churches. I want to repeat what
I have said many, many times in Australia, that I believe
that education reaches its highest point when it is 000000^. 
conducted against a background of religion, and yet it is a
background which constantly reminds the student that however
clever he may be he is not his own maker, however self-confident
he may think he is, he is living in a world not created by him,
that he has responsibilities, that he has great inheritances,
that he is responsible in his own proper fashion for the people
who come after him, and this spirit is one which has never
developed so completel~ y in the institution which doesn't have
a background of religion, a background of faith, a background
of humility because that after all, must be the inevitable
product of religious belief,
And here is a church college it's young, its
name is an honourable name, the name of a great pioneer in this
field. It will grow, of course. It may expand into other
forms, but I confidently believe that out of all the hundreds
nd hundreds and ultimnately thousands of students who come out
of this college, you will find, or expect to find very few
who have not ackno: rledged the debt that they owe to those who
had enough wisdom and o,-r. rugh faith in God to establish this
College, to accept its labours, its difficulties all the
problems to do so because of their complete faith in the
value of their -, ork.
Sir, this Is no oration and indeed it is painfully
repetitive, but it is true and truth needs to be spoken in
season and out of season if we are not to forget it,
Sir, it is a great honour to be allowed to be here
today, a very great privilege to address you and a very great
and particular pleasure to me to be on the platform writh men
who are contributing so much to the life of our nation. 



FOR PRESS: N0. o27/ 196
COMMnORNWiALTH CON. CRIiBUTION TO THE CHURCH~ ILL
NEMIWT=
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt, 1Kon._ Sir RobetMeze
The Prime Minister announced in Canberra this
afternoon that the Commonwealth Government ! ould contribute
œ 100,000 to the Churchill Memorial Trust Fund,
Sir Robert said that he was sure all Australians
would take great pride in having the opportunity to be
associated with the establishment of the Memorial Trust
Fund. The object of the Fund that of providing a wide
range of scholarships in Commonwealth countries and in the
United States, available to people in all walks of life
is worthy in itself. It is of the greater significance
because it will mark in a permanent way the affection with
which all Australians regarded Sir Winston Churchill and
will stand as an ackn~ owledgment of the debt that Australians
felt they owed to this great wartime leader,
As President of the Appeal, Sir Robert commended
the tremendous work that had been done by those associated
with the organisation of the appeal.
BACKGROUND NOT1E Separate contributions of : C5,000 each have
been made to the Northern Territory section of the appeal,
to the appeal in Papua/ New Guinea and in the A. C. T. by,
respectively, the Northern Territory Administration, the
Papua/ New Guinea Administration, and the Minister for the
Interior. These contributions are in addition to the
Commonwealth Governmentts contribution of œ-100,000 announced
by the Prime Minister.
CANBERRA 28th February, 1965 



OPENING OF THE HEAD OFFICE OF TE NATIONAL MUTUAL
LIFE ASSOCIATION, COLLINS STRELT, MELJOURNE. JST MARCH.. 1965
Speech by the Pri Me zl
Sir Robert It gives me very great pleasure indeed to be here
and to be here under the chairmanship of such an old and valued
friend as yourself. I was provided with these brochures myself and,
unlike most of you, I read them closely. ( Laughter)
Otherwise I would, this afternoon be entirely bereft of
facts. But it was in August of 1 g 69 that this Society began,
the first mutual life assurance society in Victoria, and it
was established at the corner, so I'm given to believe, of
Collins and Market Street better known later on as the corner
of the old destern Market and I'm bound to admit and I
have to be very careful about what I admit I'm bound to
admit that these things have changed.
I look across the road and expect vainly to see
Scotts Hotel where I will have all you Sassenachs know, they
made the best haggis in the world. ( Laughter) Instead of
that there is a rather melancholy sort of......( Laughter)
not at all reminiscent of the old roistering days. And as
I came in this afternoon I sniffed to see vihether some of
the lovely rich odours of the old wine cellars might have
survived but nothing survives the modern builder. Gone are
the wine cellars; gone is all the mess that used to be down
below in the Western Markets and up comes a magnificent
building. And, really, one can't complain because whatever
else might have been said about the old Western Market, I
don't think it added very much to the beauty of Melbourne
although it was situated in one of the most historic localities
in this city. And so here we are watching change, development,
particularly this end of Melbourne a beautiful development
in what in spite of the critics, I will always maintain is
a beautiful city and will continue to be one so long as the
architects permit it to be. ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, the growth since 1869, the growth
beginning before that in Sydney, the growth in life assurance
has been one of the most remarkable features of modern life.
In the last ten years, the total assets of life companies in
Australia has increased two and a half times over in ten years.
Personal savings you will forgive me, won't you, for a few
of these figures but I got them from the Treasury and I must
use them personal savings through iremiums on life policies
and so on represent twenty-five per cent. of the total personal
savings of the people of Australia, and ten years ago, they
represented fifteen percent. This is a phenomenal growth and
I will say a fewr words in a moment to indicate w1V I think
it is not only phenomenal but valuable beyond words. The
excess of premiums over claims and expenses, so I'm told now,
runs at the rate of about œ 100M per annum. 
2
Now, I must say I'm a great believer in life assurance.
It is the only form of saving that was ever effective with me
( Laughter) because it was compulsory. You know, you had to say
to yourself, " WJell 11whatever happens I must keep up my life
assurance premiums and so we do, then with the good management
of those responsible for looking after our little savings, they
begin to increase, They have bonus additions. You find yourself
sitting down and saying, " W'hat am I insured for now?" and although
it is not enough, itis a lot more than occasionally I've been
expecting to know. Compulsory saving is a wonderful exercise
in self-discipline anid that's tremendously important, 1@ dies
and gentlemen, in a country which needs more and more capital
if its growth over the next ten years is to match the growth
that I've hinted at over the last ten.
There's a chronic problem all Prime Ministers have
to encounter it, all Treasurers have to encounter it, a chronic
problem of reconciling growth with monetary stability; growth
without an undue flusii of inflation; growth under circumistances
which will encourage people to save knowing that their sc-! vings
will not be eroded, and at the same time enables the country
to press on with all the development that it needs with a rising
population and rising responsibilities in the world. This is
a chronic problem, and, Sir, all I want to say is that it is
one towiards the solution of which I believe that the great life
offices are making a contribution, a remarkable contribution, and
I think they are making their contribution I don't want to be
tedious about this matter I think they are making it in three
ways. Somebody told me only the other day that as I made
three points, I must be a Presbyterian. I pleaded guilty.
( Laughter) In the first place, I think that the great life
offices are doing thiis by encouraging savings for long-term
purposes. They also encourage a consciousness of the dangers
of inflation. There are some people who believe in inflation.
There are some people who have a vested interest in inflation.
There are some who hear about it as a wrord without completely
understanding what it may mean, but in the long run, we can't
afford to have the value of savings cut away by serious
depreciation in the purchasing power of money. And with all
the hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of thousands of policyholders
we have in Australia, we have a great body of people
who understand this matter and w. 1hose vested interest, if they
heve one is a vested interest in favour of monetary stability.
That, I t~ hink, has been a very great contribution to tie solution
of this problem. Then in the second place, as Sir Robert indicoted
very briefly, by their investment policies they encourage and
help private and national investment and growth. It is not so
many years now since I appeared in a case in court it can't
bo more than fifteen or twenty to appear for the National
Ilutual for a modest fee ( Laughter), to get approval under a
new statute which had come into existence for an alteration in
their Memorandum of Association in order that they might widen
the field of their investment. This is going back some time.
And wo all know! today, don't we how varied the field
of investment is primary industry, seconlary industry,
developmental schemes, housing a great range of investment,
some in the public sector because public demands for investable 
-3
funds are great and growing; some in the private sector an
immense variety, a variety of investments which I imagine the
founder of this society would have regarded as lax and dargerous
in 1869, and in effect have been tremendous. The effects have
been that the funds brought in from policy-holders have served
as a fertilising force all round Australia, and have I think, 1
made a tremendous contribution both to private investment,
private success and to public investment and to national growth.
Then there is a third aspect of the Societyls which
I hope I might be allowed to mention. They are strong. You
take this one we are particularly concerned with today. The
mere quotation of figures that Sir Robert has given us indicates
its tremendous strength and solidity. And because the life
offices have exhibited strength and solidity, they have encouraged
in all of our minds the feeling of confidence in the future.
There is nothing that engenders confidence half so much as
strength solidity, security. Nothing that destroys confidence
so quickly as a feeling that the building is shaking and may
collapse. And the strength of the life offices today, their
solidity, their absolutely invulnerable solvency, this has been
a powerful contributor to confidence, and that is a very very
great factor which perhaps deserves another minute or tw-o before
I conclude, It is a very great factor because if capital and
enterprise and people are to be attracted to Australia, then
they must have confidence in us. This is something that we
need to have in our mainds much more than we do. The inflow of
people, the inflow of money, the inflow of skills and enterprise,
these are not accidental. They wouldntt happen if we were
a community without confidence in ourselves, if we were a
community that gave every symptom of being a shaky community,
insecure, not trusting ourselves and therefore not to be trusted.
These great movements will not happen if we lack confidence in
ourselves and that is why the contribution of the life offices
to the building up of confidence in the way that I have described
is Itts an invisible item, if you like, Itts an
invisible item but a very real one, a very great factor in the
development of our country.
And therefore, Sir, to conclude, I just want to say
this, in declaring this centre open, I just want to say that
wre are celebrating for the reasons that I mentioned, a mutuality
of interests in the service of the nation and therefore the
name National ivutual, embracing as it does both of those ideas,
is a very happy one and well befits a very happy occasion.
I have great pleasure in declaring the centre open. 



6 5/ 0 39
EIGHTH MINI14G A'IND METALLURGICAL CONGRESS BANQUET
HELJD AT TIM,~ R~ OYAL2I~ BALLROOM, EXHIBITION iBUIi DING,
MELBOURNE 2ND MARCH, 126~
Sjeh h rm iitr h lit. Hon. proberMezs
Sir, Your Excellencies, ladies and Gentlemen
I think I ought to begin by making a rew, small,
light-hearted protests. Our great host has complimented the
Governor on having been Antarctica. I would go there tonight
with the greatest pleasure in the world. ( Applause) 1Why he
should be given marks for going there out of a sense of public
duty while I lwould go there out of sheer necessity, I don't
quite understand, ( Laughter) but between you and me, Sir, I
would like to be there.
There is one other little preliminary observation
I would like to make. Your President made yesterday a somewhat
ill-reported but remarkable Presidential address and, unlike
many of you I have read it. ( Laughter) ( Applause). And I read
it with loving care. And in the course of it he spoke about
the constant need for research and developmeni.
Now I agree with this I am a great believer in
this, but while I still have it in mind, what I suggest to
you scientific people who insist on innocent victims wearing
this uniform ( Laughter applause) iLsthat you conduct a small
research into delivering mankind from the constriction of stiff
collars and stiff shirts. ( Applause) And if you want to give a
small prize for the winner of this piece of research, I will
willingly contribute œ-A100. ( Laughter)
Now I've got that off my chest my wife had to get
it on to my chest it is an awful business to be the wife of
a bad-tempered husband who has to wear these stupid things, but
it's almost as bad to have to wear them. However, you've
registered the point haven't you, sir? Old Menzies promised
: CLOO as a prize for ilhe iman who could discover how to get rid
of them, and I hope all you gentlemen sitting there comfortably
and sneakingly in your black ties ( Laughter) will support me.
Now, Sir, when I found that I had been once more
cast in the role of proposing the toast and I now do so but I
will come back to it a little later to the Mining 2nd Metallurgical
Industry of Australia and New Zealand, I said " Oh dear
me, what have I let mayself in for?" And I was reminded that
twelve years ago, in this very place, I had let myself in for it.
Mind you, it was a better time of thle year, the temperature was
milder it was then characteristic Melbourne weather, and I
made a speech. W~ ell, as my speeches are not written, I demanded
of my long-suffering staff that they should produce a copy of
what I said twelve years ago on the remote chance that one of
you old boys might remember what I then said, And they had no
notes but they said, hhIt's published in a book" and so I looked
up one of those expensive volumes that you sent me later on and
there it was full of misprints ( Laughter) but still, I got a
rough idea of what I had said on that occasion. And having
amended the misprints I find and this is perhaps something that
I want to repeat tonight that I had said this e / 2 
2-
" The best thing that could happen to this
world is that all the great specialists in
specialised knowledge should work inside their
specialty, should work and sweat so that humanity
may know all that there is to be known in that
field, but that they should live ( they the
specialists who work in their specialty) they
should live outside of it, that they should
recognise that there is a life outside the work
that i-re do day by day in the course of our own
special a ctivities." ( Applause)
Now, I venture to say that that was one of my
better remarks, suitably edited after I read the book. You know,
" he lives for hs work" is a good phrase, pointing to the
contrast with the clock-watcher, but that we should live only
in our specialties is, I rather thin%, one of the disasters of
the century. I've been around a good deal for a long time and
have had a good deal to do with our relations with other
countries and the various crises of the world and more and more
I find myself believing that one of our disasters is that the
cleverer we become, the more scientific we become, on the whole
the less civilised we've become.
And the reason is perfectly clear. You may be,
as our President is, a tremendous expert in a great dynamic
field of knowledge. You may be, as so many of you are, great
exflperts in these fields. And yet if, to you the only thing
that matters is that your scientific and applied scientific
skill should be of the highest order and what happens in the
world doesn't matter, then the end will be trouble and disater.
Give me somebody who works in his specialty and
who manages to live outside of it you see the points I am
making to you because while the world has an enormous demand
for skill, for science, for expertise and this demand becomes
more and more satisfied, the world has much greater demand for
wisdom, for understanding, for a belief in other people as well
as in ourselves, and therefore this is one of those cases, Mr.
President, on which we have an opportunity of thinking about
these things and indeed, Sir, I am not being very original
because you, Mr, President, made a speech last night which on
its merits should have been published verbatim in every newspaper
in Australia ( applause) because it was informed, it was wise
it was realistic and it was optimistic, Now mark those last
two words realistic and optimistic,
You know that meidncholy fellow you encounter
in the club armchair whether it is in Kalgoorlie or in Melbourne
you know who says, "' Jell, you know old man, Ilra a realist,"
meaning that he's steeped in gloom ( Laughter). " I'm a realist"....
well., now let's have reoalists by all means but let them be like
your President, optimists, because that's the best kind of
relaist, and let us remember in Australia in particular i dont
profess to speak so much on behalf of New Zealand, although New
Zealand is here and New Zealand is a great country and is in the
fullest sense our blood brother ( Applause) but let us recall
I won't be long let us recall what has happened as a result of
the work of realists who face the facts but who are at the same
time optimists who conquered the future. a so so s / 3 
-3
Well$ I can remember when a serious time many
of you may with a stroke of fortune when I came back into
office at the end of 194+ 9. It was like the old scene in the
" Tale of Two Cities" do you remember othen the slogan was
" Recalled to Life" and Dr. Nanette came out of his cell and
came back to London? I was " recalled to -life" if that is
the right expression at the end of 194+ 9.
All I viant to do is to remind you of the fact that
at that time there was a fixed belief, based on that most
pregnable of all foundations, the views of the experts, that
our supplies of iron ore were very limited, tha t we must never
allow one ounce to go out of the country. This was at the end
of 191+ 9. As for oil and natural gas an expression which I
must explain to some of our wives relates to something that
comes out of the ground ( Laughter) as for oil and -natural
gas, the whole of life was a big query, wasn't it? People who
talked about looking for oil and who went on looking for oil
were regarded as amiable lunatics, and today coal,*., coal,..
When I came back into office, wie were importing coal importing
coal and as the charter party rate at that time wias a little
high, -, re paid if this is the right expression Sir we paid
through the nose for the coal that we got, and today we're a
large exporter of coal,
Tin production was failing, and today it has all the
signs of vivacity, Bauxite was imported and today, my distinguished
friend on the right the President, has only two embarrassments
about bauxite. Neither of them relates to the quantity of
bauxite in Australia, One of them relates to how you get the
cash in to develop the wretched stuff and the ot'ner is what you
do with it when you have it. ( Laughter) But look, bauxite
look at Lindsay Clark down there, he knows all about this but
really it is hard to remember, isn't it, that in 194+ 9 bauxite
was a somewhat rare imported commodity.
Now there are dozens of other examples but I've
mentioned these, Sir, in order to remind ourselves that this
dramatic change has occurred in Australia not because of me;
I don't claim to h, 1ve anything to do with it but it has
occurred in Australia because there were optimists of energy,
of drive and of confidence who translated all these things
into achievement, Therefore ( applause) perhaps all I need
to say is this. I was born there's no secret about my age at the
end of 1891+, and before long whisked off into an old mining
city I mentioned this twelve years ago but you've forgotten
an old mining city called Ballarat, and to us in those days,
to us small boys in those days, mining was a sort of memorial
of the past. There were old poppet heads, there were old
mullock heaps, and in an adventurous mood we would crawl along
old drives and suddenly discover we were about to fall in and
be lost forever and then realising our responsibility to
history, we came back. ( Laughter) But there was Ballarat
the old mining city the old gold mining city and so one became
accustomed at tha,:; t time to say, " Yes, Australia " I'm speaking
about Victoria nowr in particular, Henry. I won't make any
reference to what happened in Sydney at a certain stage because
this is indelicate, but in Victoria the pastoral age, the gold
mining age, the agricultural age, the manufacturing age, all
these have followed each other and each of them has brought 0mO@* 6O0 0/ 
its own wave of population into Australia. But when the
historian sets himself out to organise this thing in his own
mind, I think that he will say that the age that intervened
between your last conference and this one is the most dynamic
and productive age in the history of our nation. At any rate,
I believe so and therefore I say so.
One other thing only, Sir, I w. ould like to say.
This Conference is a conference which I think more than any
other in Australia or in New Zealand is unique in its collation
of practical kcno-. Iledge and its dissemination of practical
knowledge. I had a look through the book of the wvords
the programme and really, gentlemen, all I can say to you is
that people who do as much work as you do every day on
practical matters would never qualify for a convention in San
Francisco. D. o you know what I mean?
This is a remarkable event and a remarkable conference
and I was delighted, Sir, when I heard or read in your speech
( because I didn't hear it) your admirable point which we all
need to remember that we mustntt go in too much for dividing
things into the black and the white, we mustn't go in too much
for the false dichotomy to which we are all rather prone, we
mustn't say " Either you're for wool or you're for artificial
fibres*" W~ e mustn't say, " Either youtre for coal or you're
for oil or natural gas". What we have to understand more and
more and this I thought, Sir, was the keynote of your speechis
that in this modern world we are all whether we like it or
not, interdependent interdependent internally, " Wooll
artificial fibres, natural gas and oil coal Australia, the
new world, the new nations we are interdependent and we will
do very badly if in the course of our-work we don't recognise
this fact and realise that what happens in the new ' vrorld in
the new nations, politically immature, economically immature,
will not only determine their future but may very ea-sily
determine ours. And therefore, Sir, I want to say that it is a rare
pleasure to me to be speaking for a little while at a conference
which I believe is directing its mind to some of the greatest
problems that we have not only here but all around the Commonwealth,
and I would like to compliment them on having been given
such magnificent leadership as you have already given them.
( Applause) Therefore, Sir, to come back to the right form of
the words, I propose, ladies and gentlemen, the health now
lot's get this right of the mining and metallurgical
remember the trouble I had about pronouncing thiat word the
mining and metallurgical industry of Australia and New Zealand, 



FOR PRESS P No 2 6j
DECEG~ N21 LISAT ION CONF2LtENCE
Statementb the Prime rt. t A_ I oatnh, e Sir R obe Menzies
The Prime Miinister, Sir Robert Menzies, said in
Canberra today that Commonwealth and State officials had
concluded a two-day Conference on the subject of decentralisation.
Preparations had been made for this meeting following agreement
at the Premiers' Conference in July last year that there was a
need to pool the knowledge possessed by the States and the
Commonwealth on the problems of decentralisation, identify what
was best to be done and how the objectives might be cichieved.
were New The representatives of the States at the Conference
South Wales Mr. E. J. !' alder ( Under Secretary and
Comptroller of ' ccounts, the
Treasury)
Mr. W. Butterfield ( Director of
Industrial Development and
Decentralisation)
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania Mr. N. T. Howard ( Director, Division
of State Development)
Sir James Holt ( Co-ordinator-General
of Department of Public Works)
Mr. Carey ( Assistant Under
Treasurer)
Mr. S. J. Lewis ( Decentralisation
Officer, Department of Industrial
Development)
Mr. J. i. T'enshelwood ( Director,
Industrial Development Branch
Premierts and Chief Secretary s
Department).
The Commonwealth Departments participating were
Treasury, Trade and Industry National Development Labour and
National Service, Primary industry and Prime Minister's. The
Conference was under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister's
Department. Sir Robert said the meeting had been of a preliminary
nature. Following this initial meeting, he would be in touch
with the State Premiers about further work to be undertaken.
CAN BE RRA
6th March, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No2. / 19Q
BUSH FIRES
tatement by the Drmter the RtHon. Se rt Menzies
I deeply regret to learn of the disastrous bush
fires which are now sweeping the southern area of Australia
and of the great personal hardship which has fallen on so
many people in consequence of these terrible fires.
I extend my warm sympathy to those who are suffering,
and to those particularly who have suffered the loss of loved
ones, I extend my deepest personal sympathy.
The Commonwealth Government is doing all possible
to assist in the emergency. The Army has 520 troops in the
Bairnsdale area of Victoria and approximately 85 in the
Bundanoon and Camden areas of New South W4ales. These troops
are equipped with vehicles, radio and fire-fighting equipment
and medical orderlies are standing by.
As usual the Commonwealth Government stands ready
to join with the State Governments in financing schemes for
the relief of personal hardship and distress on a pound for
pound basis with the States.
CANBEIA, 7th March, 1965. 



65104""
FOR PRESS P.. pi. 3o/ g9. b_
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert%
On Sunday I expressed the Commonwealth
Government's deep sympathy with the many people who had
suffered great personal hardship as a result of the
bushfires which were sweeping the southern area of
Australia. I said at that time that the Commonwealth
was prepared to help wherever possible and would match
funds provided by the State Governments in financing
schemes for the relief of personal hardship and distress.
I have since received a request for financial
assistance from the Premier of New South Wales and I
have informed him today that the Commonealth Government
will provide, as requested, an initial amount of up to
000 on a for basis with the Government of New
South Wales towards a bushfire relief scheme to be put
into operation immediately.
CANBERRA, March, 1965, 



65/ 047
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 31/ 1961
P, 2MvIERS I CONFAIIRENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister; tb. I_ eer1t Menzies
Arrangements have been made with the State Premiers
for a Premiers' Conference to be held in Canberra on 22nd
and 23rd April.
Ihen the present arrangements for Commonwealth
financial assistance to the States were worked out in 1959,
it was generally accepted that, unless there were some major
change in circumstances, those arrangements would carry on
for six years. That period will come to an end with this
financial year and the forthcoming Conference between the
Commonwealth and the States will consider arrangements for
the ensuing period.
This is a large and complex subject and it will be
necessary to go into its various aspects thoroughly in the
light of past experience and future prospects. The purpose
of this meeting is to discuss the matter generally so that
the main issues may be identified and to enable State or
Commonwealth representatives to bring forward for consideration
any proposals for changes in the current arrangements.
A further meeting to settle new arrangements in detail will,
I expect, be necessary later, and this is likely to take
place early in June.
CANBERRiA, 11th March, 1965. 



11 32/ 1965 65/ 050
EMBARGO NOT TO BE PUBLISHED, CABLED, BROADCAST OR TELECAST
BEFORE 10.00 P. M. E. S. T. ON SUNDAY, 14TH MARCH, 1965,
FOR PRESS STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, M. P.
ANZAC DAY CEREMONY, 1965
AT
AUSTRALIAN WAR MEMORIAL, CANBERRA
Details for the National commemoration of the Fiftieth
Anniversary of ANZAC were announced today by the Prime Minister
Sir Robert Menzies.
This year being the Fiftieth Anniversary of the Gallipoli
landings The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester will be in Canberra to
attend the commemoration on ANZAC Dayl The Prime Minister stated
that The Queen has graciously intimated her intention to send a
special ANZAC Day message to commemorate this most significant event
in the history of Australia and New Zealand, The Queen has expressed
a wish that The Duke of Gloucester shall anrwunce her message at the
commemoration. Therefore, His Royal Highness will take precedence
as Her Majesty's Special Representativq rr the . occasion. The
Governor-General will attend the ceremony4 The PrI. m. Minister added
that His Excellency and the Australian G# ver.. nwt greatly apprecip
Her Majesty's desire to be thus personally asqoioted with Australia':..
commemoration of the ANZAC assault at the Dardenollek
BACKGROUND NOTE
The National ceremony will take place at the Australian
War Memorial on Sunday, 25th April, and is being arrangedwith the
cooperation of the Returned Servicemen's League and the three
Services. There will be a greater participation than usual by
exservicgnen and women and by the Australian Armed Forces.
The Returned Servicemen's League, with financial
assistance from the Government, is arranging to bring to Canberra
for the ceremony, a representative group of ANZAC veterans and war
widows from the States. It is also arranging for The Northern
Territory and the Territory of Papua and New Guinea each to be
represented by an ANZAC veteran. v/ 
r) 2? . C. ri C,
arvy rot r~': Ftv
fl fMflS'I'a. Carl..
.1. U
1'
" II
C, p.
II 
-wvp-2.
The Services are arranging for over one thousand personnel,
representative of all branches of the Armed Forces to take part.
This concentration of Australian Servicemen will form one of the
most representative Service gatherings at an ANZAC ceremony in
Canberra. As well, the New Zealand Armed Forces will be represented
by a contingent of sailors, soldiers and airmen who are at present
in Australia undergoing training.
Each of the Australian Services will parade The Queen's
Colour along with a Guard of Honour. There will be a band from
each of the Services and the Army will parade a Battalion of four
companies. The R. A. A. F. Central Band will visit Canberra to accompany
the Air Force Armed contingent of one hundred Airmen. The R. A. A. F.
Unarmed Party will include members of the Women's Royal Australian
Air Force and the R. A. A. F. Nursing Service,
Similarly the Navy Band will accompany the Navy Armed
contingent and the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service will be
represented in the R. A. N. Unarmed Party.
The Army Battalion of four hundred men will come from the
Army Camp at Holdsworthy. The Women's Services from the Army will
be represented in the Unarmed Party. The Citizen Military Forces
will be represented by the local C. M. F. Unit and in addition
Cadets from the Royal Military College, Duntroon, will line the
forecourt of the Australian War Memorial.
Their Royal Highesses The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester
will arrive at the Australian War Memorial at 11.30 a. m. The
exservicemen of ANZAC will then march to their position in the
centre of the forecourt and the wreathlaying will commence.
Two minutes' silence will be observed at noon after which
His Royal Highness will read The Queen's message.
His Royal Highness The Duke of Gloucester and His Excellency
the Governor-General will take up positions for the march past and
the ceremony is expected to conclude at about 12.20 p. m.
Prime Minister's Department.
14th March, 1965. 
I. I . L. 0
1.. j I 



FOR PRESS P. m. 1ii0. Wii196-
VISIT OF PRIME MINISTER OF SINGAPORE
The Prime Minister of Singapore ( Mr. Lee
Kuan Yew) had a brief meeting this morning with the
Cabinet. This followed an invitation by the Prime
Minister ( Sir Robert Menzies) to Mr. Lee Kuan Yew to
meet the Cabinet at its usual Tuesday meeting.
Brief talks wore held with Mr. Lee Kuan Yew.
They will be continued by Mr. Lee Kuan Yew with individual
Australian Ministers over the next few days.
CANBERRA, March, 1965 



OPE~ NING OF SPACE-TRACKING STATION AT
j. 9TH iKARCH, 3 196~
Speech by the Prime Ministeruth te rk~ o. RobertMenzies.
Sir, Your Excellencies and Ladies and Gentlemen:
You may imagine that my presence here calls for
some explanation and I concede that point, I am here for two
reasons. One is that as I am cA'llen Fairhall's Prime Minister,
he wasntt game not to ask me. ( Laughter) Now that is one very
good reason, The other very good reason is that he knew that I
would bring to this task a completely fresh and untrammelled
mind untrammelled by the faintest scientific kcnowledge. I
live in the Dark Ages in this sense. I drive in here this
morning and I see this great dish-looking object stickin out
and in some vague way I know it has something to do with
collecting information from outside, but how it is done I haven't
the faintest idea, This is unpardonable ignorance, I know.
I can see Sir Frederick . hite gazing at me with great contempt.
But it does give me an objective, and clearer, mind. I come
to this problem without any prejudices whatever, and therefore,
coming to it without prejudice, I just want to say I think this
is a very remarkable example of two things.
The first is the rapid progress that is made in
this scientific and technological age. I know that every now
and then something will crop up in Cabinet and my colleague
( Mr. Fairhall) here will be putting up a proposal of some kind
and in our ignorance we may question it and want to know what
the end result is and whether the end result is really wprth
all ttxt money and he constantly tells us and it is so rue
that it is not really the end result so much as the information
you gather as you go the improvement in techniques, th
stretching out of the borders of our own technological knowledge
that is so important, This is profoundly true,
Je, perhaps, direct too much attention to some
distant end result and too little to the fact that in this
century increasingly in this century the country that is
backward in these fields will be backwrard in a hundred ways
that may not appear to be closely connected with what is going
on. Therefore this is a great step forward, a notable event
in this technological period of our lives.
In the second place, it is one more example of the
kind of co-operation that is extended by the United States to
its friends; not always perhaps to its friends, but in double
measure to its friends.
I looked through the papers that were sent to me
to find out something about the budgetary aspects of these tracking
stations and I am bound to tell you, Mr. ILydman, though you
musn't use this against me in future, that I thought it was a
bit one-sided. You seem to be carrying the enormous bulk of
the expenditure. Well, this is, if I may say so, characteristic
of your great country. 4~ e, ourselves, have been capable of~
building up great resources in what may be called scientific
manpower and this station is manned, as I gather, by Australians. 2 
-2
This is a great advantage to us because it increases our stock
of knowledge in these fields in Australia, It is also of
advantage to the United States because in suitable apeas, it
is able to get highly skilled and authentic information in the
course of tracking the satellites or other objects moving around
in space. There is a certain mutuality about this,
But beaind it all there is a tremendous friendship.
Any time, I am told, that some reports go in from one of the
tracking stations in Australia, there will be a friendly and
generous compliment passed from the United States end on the
skill with which the operation has been conducted.
Sometimes people think that a little country like
Australia, little in terms of numbers, maintains a very close
friendship with the United States purely for purposes of selfinterest,
Now, of course, I am not going to deny for one moment
welm've a tremendous lively interest in Australi'a in friendship,
in goodwill, with the United States. But in a way, there is
a mutuality about this because all great powers and history
has demonstrated this inspiro I on the whole, rather more
enmities than friendships jealousies, resistances. Arid they
need friends, Even though Australia is a relatively small
country, I know from my contacts in the United States that
the attitude of Australia on these matters is one of immense
satisfaction to the American administration and the American
people. Big friends, little friends, they are friends, and
friends on this occasion co-operating in one of the new miracles
of the twentieth century.
Sir, that is all I want to say. I notice that you
have discreetly placed around the audience little cartons or
tins or something of fly repellent. They sprayed me with it
on the way out and I am bound to say that so far I haven't
been struck by a fly and I don't think you have either, and
therefore the event is happier still, and adding all these
things together, I have the greatest pleasure in the world in
declaring this Deop Space Tracking Station open. 



.0 1 LUNCHEON IN HONOUR OF THEIR ROYAL HTGHNESSES
THE DUKEB AND DUCHESS OF GL'OU CSM~ K
PARLIAMENT HOUSE, CANBERRA 23RD ivltJLCH. 1965
Speech by the Prime Hnise, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Mengieg.
,,..,,,.. proposing the toast of our distinguished guests who
ar no newcomers in this place, but had in fact toaope in their
own time with Ministers of the Crown and, occasionally I have
no doubt, put them right.
Sir I remember the first time you came here
. because I was at that time something of a new boy in Canberra,
I came here in October of 1934 and you arrived am I right
in thinking? i-in November, 191,4 on a Royal Visit, and this
is quite memorable because the rain fell, ( We've had no rain
here this year) It rained and it rained and it rained most
indiscriminately, and the Molongolo, that noble strea flooded,
I have always been indebted to you, Sir, for having arranged
that because it was the first time I had a vivid picture of
what a lake would look like in Canberra. ( Laughter) And from
that time on, I began work hoping that it might arise.
Then, Sir, of course, you were out here as
Governor-General, and you, Ma'am as the Governor-General's
waife, and I know perhaps better Lhan most people what an
affection you conceived for this country. This is indeed most
important because in all these more recent years whenever I
have gone to England, you have overwhelmed me ana my wife and
other people with great kindness and I have never been left
in any doubt that Australia has a place in your hearts which
you would not always want to make vocal but which is perfectly
obvious and has been perfectly obvious to those who have seen
you. S Therefore it gave me immense pleasure to be able
to take a hand in arranging this journey of yours this time.
This is not a pompous journey; this is not a journey to be
richly adorned by illuminated addresses. This is a journey
in which you are coming to a country which you love and in which
you are going to see old friends whom you have known, Indeed,
I think Sir this is perhaps the only unhappy occasion, from
your point ol view, on which you may have to make a speech,
I want to tell you that His Royal Highness, as a
former Governor-General, has a sturdy disregard for speeches.
( Laughter) He probably had to listen to a number of them
when he was here. He will have to listen to what I have just
been saying, and when he has made his I am going to ask
Arthur Calwell to speak to associate he Opposition with this
welcome. But Sir, and Ma ' am, the main thing I want to
establish in the few words that I utter is that you are old
friends and that you are back here among old friends, This,
I think, is something that matters to you and matters to us,
We hope you have a marvellous time. ' Je have had the great
pleasure in Australia of seeing your two sons here A'lliam
and Richard, in their time, and we have been greatly taken by
both of them. Rather nice to think that in many, many years
to come the former Governor-General and his wife will be
recalled by their sons who I have not the slightest doubt
will continue to maintain a lively interest in Australia. * aaa/ 2 
. OP -2-
Now, Sir, I know you don't like listening to
speeches but must tell one story would you mind Sir?
His rloyal Highness was President of the Australian hlub in
London one year when I stepped out of the Australian summer
into the English winter and got the next best thing to
pneumonia whatever the next best thing may be and I was
booked to make a speech at the Australian Club dowrnstairs in
the Savoy and I had a high temperatures I think about 103.
I was advised by a medical man and medical men are always
disagreeable, that I must cancel it. I said, " But I can't.,
I can't, I am booked to do this, This is for me." So I
struggled into that garment of the subservient a stiff shirt
and a white tie and I went down belowI and stood in the line
with His Royal Highness for a while and then we went in and
finally I got up to make a speech the first time I ever made
a speech to a collection of clouds, because that's all I
could see, I didnt know whether I began a sentence or ended
a sentence and when I sat down, I turned round almost
despairingly to the ? aoyal chairman and said, " Sir, could you
understand a word I said? You know, I have a very high
temperature." And he looked at me with a mixture of affection
and contempt and said, " iOn the contrary, I have never heard you
better." 1 ( Iaughter) So there we are.
elSL,, we have never seen you better, Ma'am,
welve never seen you better. we grieved for you for the
troubles that you have been through. You really have had a
rough time, but I have no doubt whatever that with the weather,
the friendships, the comfort the quietness as I would hope
that you will experience in Xustralia, you will go back feeling
completely fit. l-adies and gentlemen Their Royal Highnessesi 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
ON
TERTIARY EDUCATION IN AUSTRALIA
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
I Froin the Par liamentary Debates," 24th March, 19651
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister).-l present the following
report-Tertiary Education in Australi-Report of the
Committee on the Future of Tertiary Education
in Australia to the Australian Universities
Commission ( Volumes t and 11).
I ask for leave to make a statement in connection
with the report.
Mr. SPEAKER.-There heing no objecl
ion, leave is granted.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-What I have
now to say is being said this afternoon in
another place by the Minister in Charge of
Commonwealth Activities in Education and
Research ( Senator Gorton) who has thc
direct administration of these matters in my
Department. Honorable members will know that in
August 1961, the Government appointed a
distinguished Committee under the chairmanship
of Sir Leslie Martin to consider
the pattern of tertiary education in relation
to the needs and resources of Australia antI
to make recommendations to the Australiani
Universities Commission on the future
development of tertiary education. MayI
express the Government's gratitude to the
members of the Committee for their work,
3482/ 65. which has resulted in a report that will play
an important part in thc development of
tertiary education and hence in the development
of our coun-try during coming decades.
When we appointed this Committee, we
knew we -had given it a very large task but
I doubt that we realised just how large the
task was. The Committee had the enthusiastic
co-operation of Governments, institutions
and sectors of the public with an
interest in tertiary education. It was not until
September 1964 however, that it was
able to present its report to the Governmient-
or, to be strictly accurate to present
Volumes I and If with a promise of a third
Volume later.
Volume I sets out the Committee's central
argument and its proposals for the future
pattern of Australian tertiary education.
Volume 14 begins a survey of academic
disciplines, particularly those with an important
professional content. Volume 111,
which is not yet available, will conclude this
survey and deal with certain other aspects
of tertiary education but, we are assured,
will not affect the recommendations contained
in the first two volumes. Immediately
apparent to members will be the wide range
of subjects covered by the report and the
importance of its recommendations not only 
to thc Commonwealth Government but also
to State Governments, universities and the
public generally. Many of the Committee's
recommendations require action by the
Commonwealth if they are to be implemented
and in releasing the report as we
now have it, I will announce the Government's
attitude towards the principal
recommendations. In doing so I wish to emphasize two
important points. The first is -that the aspects
of education discussed in the report are ones
for which the States have normal constitutional
responsibility. Therefore, while it is
necessary for ' the Commonwealth to determine
its attitude and to announce what it,
for its part, stands ready to do, it will also
be necessary for each State Government,
in the knowledge of what the Commonwealth
is prepared to do, to decide
what it is prepared to do-and for
consultation and discussion between the
Commonwealth and each State to take
place. The second point is that the
Commonwealth is not to be regarded
as having adopted any position in regard
to any specific issue dealt with
in the report except those on which I
shall now state our views.
Amongst other things, the report makes
recommendations as to additional aid to
existing, and embryo, universities, as to
assistance to students by way of scholarships,
and as -to a possible method of reorganising
the control and content of teacher
training. But the most important section of
the report deals with -what is rvirtually a
concept new to Australia-the development
of a broad comprehensive system of tertiary
education, with an emphasis different
from but complementary to, tertiary education
at present provided by the universities.
Because they are relatively simple, I propose
to discuss first the less novel proposals
of the Committee covering assistance to
students and immediate assistance to universities,
and to announce our decisions in
these fields before moving on to consider
the new proposals of major importance
stemming from the work of the Committee.
In the field of assistance to students the
Committee has recommended that the number
of Commonwealth university open
entrance scholarships should be kept under
periodic review, but also states that such
scholarships ought not to be awarded at
a standard lower than that obtaining at the end of 1963. The Government accepts, as
it has in the past accepted, the necessity
for periodic increases in these scholarships.
The number available was last raised by
1,000--from 4,000 to 5,000-at the end
of 1963, and we have decided that the
number will be raised by a further 1,000
-from 5,000 to 6,000-at the end of the
present year. Such periodic reviews will
continue in the future.
The Committee further recommends that
all students at universities who successfully
complete the first year of -their university
course at the first attempt, and who arce
otherwise eligible, should be' automatically
awarded Commonwealth later year scholarships.
At present the number of these awards
available covers rather more than two-thirds
of the full-time students who meet these
conditions. The Government does not feel
it should accept this suggested unknown
charge on future Budgets but it has decided
to increase the number of later year awards
* by 250 at the end of the present year.
Mr. Bryant.-That is a fizzer.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-To me it is
a novel idea that getting through your first
year at the first attempt should qualify you
for a scholarship. This is quite new to me.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-The Prime Minister
is still in the nineteenth century.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I was borne
in the nineteenth century. I used to know
a good deal about scholarships having won
quite a few in those rather harder schools
of competition._
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-We are not all asW
brilliant as you are, you know.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Well, you
must speak for yourself.
These later year awards, which at the
inception of the Commonwealth university
scholarship scheme were less than a ' hundred,
have grown steadily since. The number
available each year was last raised, from
780 to 1,280, at the end of 1963, and at
the end of this year the number available
each year will be raised from 1,280 to
1,530. Here, too, periodic reviews will
continue. In the field of the new look tertiary
colleges to which I have referred, the Committee
has recommended that there should
be 2,500 new scholarships awarded to
students who have passed matriculation or 
an equivalent examination and that these
should carry the same financial benefits
as do Commonwealth university scholarships,
plus a means test free allowance of
œ 100 to each scholarship holder. We do not
feel able to agree with the recommendation
as stated but we have decided to make
available in this field 1,000 new scholarships,
awarded on the conditions suggested.
but carrying the same financial benefit as
Commonwealth university scholarships. The
Snet result of these decisions is that, as from
the end of this year, there will be 2,250
more tertiary scholarships available each
year than has been the case in the past, the
number available rising from 6,280 to 8,530
-7,530 at universities and 1,000 at the
new technical institutions.
These scholarships are recommended by
the Committee to be available to students
for full-time study only but the Government
does not accept this recommendation. We
believe there may well be many valid
personal reasons why a student chooses to
do a part-time course, and that no student
who does wish to do such a course, and
who has earned a Commonwealth Scholarship,
should have his preference subject to
a veto. Furthermore, the new Institutes of
Colleges-I will say more about those in a
moment-and the industrial leaders with
whom they will no doubt confer, may desire
to include part-time courses as part of their
curricula, and in some States considerable
emphasis may be placed on part-time as
distinct from full-time courses. If this happens
students should not be prevented from
winning a scholarship to take up such
courses. Our scholarships for tertiary education
will therefore in the future, as in the
past, be available for either full-time or
part-time study as the scholarship winner
chooses. In discussing the financial benefits which
such scholarships should carry the Committee
confines itself to recommending that
the living allowances and the means test
applied to these allowances should be periodically
reviewed. It recommends also that
a text book allowance should be given to
scholarship holders. We, of course, have
always accepted the principle of periodic
reviews of allowances and indeed, as a
result of the last review, living allowances
were increased as from January this year,
and the means test applied to such allowances
was liberalised. We shall continue to apply this principle. A text book allowance,
however, poses very considerable administrative
problems because it would be necessary
to ensure that any allowance did, in
fact, go to books and equipment, and because
requirements would vary considerably
between universities, between faculties,
and between years in any given faculty.
Therefore all I can say as to this proposal
at the moment is that we intend to ask
the Vice-Chancellors of the universities to
discuss with us the problems raised by the
recommendation, and by the comment I
have just made.
The Committee suggested that the universities
study and report upon the feasibility
of their having funds available for making
loans to students in special cases of hardship.
While recognising the desirability of
loan schemes, we regard these as matters
for the universities' internal administration.
The Commonwealth therefore will not make
special financial provision for student loan
funds. Moving to specific and immediate
financial proposals regarding universities,
the Committee has recommended that some
additional capital funds should be made
available to some universities, which it
designates, during this 1964-66 triennium.
These grants are designed to ensure that the
new Universities of Macquarie in New
South Wales and La Trobe in Victoria
will be ready to begin operation at the beginning
of 1967 as planned; that Redford
Park in Adelaide will be able to open in
1966 as planned; that site works will take
place at the University of Newcastle and
the Townsville University College; and that
a start will be made in taking the preliminary
steps for the establishment of a second
university in Brisbane by 1970. In the cases
of Macquarie and La Trobe, the grants are
additional to the establishment grants of
œ 1.1m. each for Macquarie and La Trobe.
The Commonwealth share of these grants
was appropriated by the Parliament for
these universities in October 1963. That is
the œ 1.1 million in the case of each. All of
these are grants for definite projects which
have been examined in detail, and recommended
on, by the Universities Commission
and are in a field which is familiar.
The sums recommended for each university
are given in a list which, with the concurrence
of honorable members, I now
incorporate in " Hansard 
Interim Capital Grants to Universities for
1965 and 1966.
Macquarie University 1,000,000
La Trobe University 750,000
University of Adelaide at Bedford
Park 400,000
Townsville University College 100,000
Newcastle University 100,000
Second university institution in
Brisbane 100,000
They total œ 2,450,000, of which the Commonwealth
share on a œ 1 for LIœ 1b asis, is
œ 1,225,000. We stand ready to provide our
share of this finance at once and will introduce
legislation during the current session
asking Parliament ' to appropriate it.
I turn now to consider the new concept
which is the heart of this report. It is that
Australia, during the next decade, should
develop advanced education in virtually new
types of colleges. These colleges would provide
for those students who, though qualified,
do not wish to undertake a full university
course, or whose chosen course is not
considered appropriate for a university, or
whose level at passing matriculation indicated
a small chance of graduation
from a university in minimum time or
minimum time plus one ' year. The recommendation
for the development of these
colleges and the recommendation that
new universities should not be established
-honorable members will see this in the
report-taken together with other observations
of the Committee, indicate a belief
on its part that universities should grant
entrance only to those matriculants whose
standard of pass was good enough to indicate
a reasonable likelihood of graduation
in minimum time or minimum time plus one
year. The Committee suggests that the new
colleges, to give advanced education, should
be developed from, and around, the existing
tertiary segments of existing technical colleges.
But it is clear that what is envisaged
is not merely a bigger and better college
for teaching technical subjects, for ' the suggestion
is that technology should be only
one of the education fields in which these
colleges should provide advanced instruction.
In them -there should be, says the Committee,
appropriate courses in the liberal
arts for young men and women. ' taking up
administrative positions in commerce, industry,
and government". There should be a
common core of studies at tertiary level
aimed at providing for all students attending the college breadth in education", and
the development of critical imagination
and creative abilities". Students engaged
in such common studies would major in
technological courses or in other courses
provided by the colleges to fit them for
particular careers after they ' had gained
their diploma.
These colleges should, recommends the
report, be provided with funds for capital
and recurrent purposes sufficient to permit
expansion and improvement in buildings,
in equipment, in the -teaching staff required, W
and in general educational facilities. The
funds are recommended to be provided, half
by the Commonwealth and -half by the
States as to capital, and in the ratioit
is the existing one-of œ 1 Commonwealth
to œ 1.85 State as to recurrent*
expenses. We, for our part, accept the broad concept
and stand ready to provide, during the
1967-69 triennium, the œ 1 for flœ 1 grant for
capital and , the œ 1 to œ 1.85 grant for
recurrent annual expenses up to the limits
envisaged in the Committee's report. These
appear to be approximately œ 4 million a
year for capital from the Commonwealth
and œ 4 million a year for recurrent expenses
from the Commonwealth during that triennium.
These grants, if matched, would mean
a total of approximately œ 24 million forlW
capital and œ 34 million for recurrent
expenses for the colleges during that
triennium. Commonwealth financial support for
these colleges will be confined to capital and W
recurrent expenses for the development of
tertiary education only, and we define
tertiary education as consisting of courses
before entry upon which a student must pass
matriculation or an equivalent examination.
It will be confined to new developmentthat
is, as regards recurrent expenses, to
expenses incurred over and above what is,
in the 1964-65 financial year, being incurred
in this field by a State. And it will be confined
to assistance for strengthening, and
expanding, and introducing, diploma
courses. We have noted the Committee's
suggestion that at some time in -the future
the new Institutes of Colleges that it
envisages may build on present proposals in
order to provide post-diploma courses leading
-to degrees. But the support now pledged
by the Commonwealth will not go beyond 
supporting the basic concept of the Committee
as to new type colleges with a variety
of advanced courses leading on completion
to a diploma. We wish to emphasise this
point, Mr. Speaker, for we entirely agree
with the Committee's statements that these
new type institutions should " resist the
temptation to copy , the educational processes
and curricula of universities and that
the responsibilities of these colleges to the
community are " of a different kind from
hose of universities. Our support is founded
n acceptance of this principle, and we do
not make our support available for the
development out of these colleges of new
universities. We do not look so far ahead
as that. We see these colleges as designed
rimarily for teaching at the tertiary level
nd as catering for the diploma not the postdliploma
student.
I now turn -to the machinery which the
Committee suggests might be set uip in
order to provide the means whereby Commonwealth
and State support might be
channelled to these new institutions. The
Committee's suggestion is that each State
should set up an autonomous Institute of
Colleges which would admit a college to
membership when, in its opinion, that particular
college had achieved an appropriate
standard. This Institute would be charged
ith the responsibility of supervising the
expansion and development of technical
and other tertiary education in the member
colleges and with co-ordinating their work
to prevent waste and overlapping. It would
this Institute which would suggest allocaon
of available funds between colleges in
its own State. Subject to this supervision
the member colleges themselves would each
by governed by its own independent governing
body. We are attracted to this proposition
and are prepared, for our part, to
endorse and accept it. But we think that
acceptance and implementation of the proposal
are matters for which the State
Governments are responsible. We do not,
therefore, make establishment of the Institutes
a condition of assistance, though we
do endorse the idea, and we will therefore
he prepared to deal either with such
Institutes or with a State Government direct
should a State decide not to set up an
autonomous Institute.
The Committee on the Future of Tertiary
Education further suggests that the Institutes
should make submissions, in the way in which universities now make submissions,
to an expanded Australian Universities Commission
which would deal not only with
universities but with the new Institutes as
well. We do not endorse this suggestion. We
feel that it would be better that we should
leave to the Universities Commission its
present responsibilities of advising the Government
on proposals from universities and
that we should -arrange other methods of
distributing grants to the new colleges. We
therefore propose to have a separate
advisory committee to which proposals from
Institutes of Colleges-or from ' the State
Education Department in any State which
does not set up an Institute-will be referred,
and which will make recommendations
to the Commonwealth as to the distribution
of Commonwealth funds after it has
considered those proposals. As is the case
with funds for universities, the funds available
would be distributed throughout Australia
on the basis of assessed need in any
particular area.
I have no doubt that within the boundaries
set out there will be great variations of
methods of development among the States
and indeed, if the Institutes and colleges are
given autonomy, among the various colleges
in a State. It may be that we will see
develop colleges which, in this discipline or
that, provide courses which are analogous
to similar courses in the earlier years at a
university, and which are either an end in
themselves in that they lead to a diploma
recognised as a really significant qualification,
or which may lead-depending on the
standard achieved by the student-to postdiploma
transfer to a university, with credit
for work done, and progress to a degree.
It may be that we will see in tho technical
disciplines a diploma course which is still,
as it is now, a course leading in itself to a
significant qualification but which can lead
to post-diploma study not in an existing
university but in a foundation in each State
which takes the best diploma graduates
and conducts them to a Bachelor of Technology,
or Master of Technology, degree
in the single location where there can be
concentrated the best teachers and the best
facilities for practical research in conjunc-
' tion with industry. Such developments,
which can be determined only by discussion
and agreement between the Commonwealth
and each State Institute, are matters for
hammering out in the workshop of ideas 
which will be contributed by academic
circles, industrial circles, public bodies, and
the community and their representatives.
But I1 repeat that the Government does
endorse the general broad concept and for
its part will provide œ 1 for œ 1 for capital
and El for B1.85 for recurrent expenses
to develop that concept within the bounds
wvhich I have specified.
Before leaving the subject, I must refer
to an immediate specific recommendation
which the Committee makes concerning
Institutes of Colleges. It recommends
grants, of which the Commonwealth's share
is œ 2.5 million to be available in 1965 and
1966 in specified amounts to specified colleges.
Honorable members will find their
list of these Colleges, and the amounts recommended
for each, in the appendix
attached to this statement.
With the concurrence of the House. I
shall incorporate the list in " Hansard
Interim Capital Grants to Colleges for 1965
and 1966.
Sydney Technical College..
-Royal Melbourne Institute of
Technology
South Australian Institute of
Technology
West Australian Institute of
Technology
Central Technical College, Brisbane
Bathurst College
Wagga College..
Ballarat School of Mines and
Industries
Gordon Institute of Technology,
Geelong
Bendigo Technical College
Darling Downs College.
Rockhampton College 1,0000
1,000,000 250,000
1,000,000 700,000 100,000 100,000 350,000 150,000 100,000 150,000
' 100,000
The actual purposes of these grants have
not been examined in detail and are not
known to us, or to the States, in the way
in which the actual purposes of the interim
grants to universities are known, and they
will require further discussion. We cannot
therefore specifically endorse them as we
do in the case of the interim grants to universities.
But we, for our part, now stand
ready to receive from the relevant States, or
from autonomous Institutes of Colleges
where States set them up, propositions for
the expenditure at the named colleges of
the amounts recommended for each college,
and to carry on discussions with them on
the approval of and the application of
such amounts in those colleges. We do not, however, stand prepared to make interim
grants to the proposed boards of teacher
education or to the " other institutions"
recommended -by the Committee.
We do not, ourselves, intend to establish
a Commonwealth institute of colleges, for
the three colleges operated by the Services
have a specialised role, as has the Australian
School of Pacific Administration. Nor do
we propose to establish an Australian college
of external studies to be responsibl%.
for all external studies throughout Australi
since we believe that the existing universitie~
can best provide courses for external students
who need to study at university level
and that other existing institutions can cater
for those who wish to study at other level
The next important recommendation oW
the Committee is that the Commonwealth
should enter the existing field of teacher
training, both by way of an interim capital
grant of œ 1.25 million and by way of LI
for iL grants for capital and LEI for œ 1.85
grants for recurrent expenses in the 1967-69
triennium and after. Important as this field
is, the Commonwealth is not prepared to
enter it. It is one which has been the exclusive
responsibility of the States and is, in
each State, closely bound up with the State
Education Department's judgment as to th
training it wishes teachers in its schools to
have, and as to the manner in which it decides
to run its primary and secondary
schools. Moreover, on the evidence of the
State Education Ministers themselves, the
amount of capital required in this specialise
field, in order to bring standards up to whaW
they would regard as satisfactory, is not
large-amounting to a total requirement
covering the needs of all six States of œ 1.25
million annually over a period of four years.
And the recurrent expenses of the teachers'
colleges-excluding salaries paid to trainees
-are also, compared to the requirements of
universities and colleges, not great. The
impact of the Committee's recommendations
as to the length of a teacher training
course, and as to-the standard required of a
student before he embarks upon it, would
vary widely between States and the removal
of teachers' colleges from the control of
State Education Departments is clearly one
which is primarily for the States to determine.
Therefore, while we do not in the
least denigrate the importance of the Committee's
recommendation in this field, we 
believe that it is one where action can be,
and should be, left to the State Governments
which have before them the Committee's
recommendations for adoption and
action should they so decide. It follows, also,
that we have not accepted the Committee's
proposals for a separate scheme of scholarships
for teachers' college students.
I now turn to some general recommendations
as to universities, on which, at this
stage, I wish to make our views plain.
First, the Committee makes the firm recomendation
that no new universities, other
an those for which provision is made in
this report, should be established during
the period up to 1975. While we agree that
during this period most of our effort as to
ew establishments should be concentrated
n the proposed new type tertiary institutions,
we feel that a firm decision against
establishing any new university, looking so
far ahead, should not be taken. The growth
and distribution of population throughout
Australia might, in the period under discussion,
be such that a new university would
be justified in this area or that. Consequently,
while we endorse the general
approach inherent in the Committee's
recommendations, we are not prepared to
say firmly that during the period no new
university should be established. Secondly,
he Committee recommends the reduction
ind gradual elimination of part-time and
external studies ii universities. As I have
indicated, the Government does not agree
with this recommendation and does not wish
the Universities Commission to adopt such
n approach in its discussions with, or its
recommendations concerning, universities.
We believe, as I have said, that there are
many reasons for not discouraging the parttime
undergraduate and we feel that parttime
courses and external studies have a
valuable part to play in providing refresher
courses for graduates and in providing instruction
at university level to graduates or
non-graduates whether such people are
seeking to obtain a degree from such parttime
study or merely to master some one
subject which they feel will be of assistance
or benefit to them.
How much effort a university puts into
part-time studies, or external studies, will
be for the governing body of that university
to decide but, for our part, we do not
believe that any university which wishes to to do so should be discouraged, and we are
ready to continue to provide financial assistance
for these purposes. Thirdly, the Coinmmittee
suggests that universities should have
enrolments which are not smaller than
4,000 or greater than 10,000. We agree
that a university should have, or should
have the reasonable prospect of achieving,
an enrolment of at least 4,000; but we do
not endorse the proposition that enrolments
should not be more than 10,000. There is
a substantial body of opinion which holds
that much larger universities than one with
an enrolment of 10,000 are occasionally
necessary and desirable. We feel that the
size of the university must be related,
amongst other things, to the area it occupies
and to the opinions of its governing body
and we are not therefore prepared to
endorse any arbitrary upper limit as to the
size beyond which a university should not
grow. The Committee -has recommended that
the triennial grants to universities and also
to technical colleges should be subject to
review so that supplementary grants may
be made when changes in salaries and wages
justify them. We interpret this recommendation
as being limited to reimbursing a university
or college for increases in salaries
paid directly by it to its employees. Such
supplements have been the practice in
regard to variations in academic salaries
and the Government is prepared to consider
recommendations for supplementary recurrent
grants to offset increased costs arising
from variations in awards affecting wages
and non-academic salaries. However, we
will need to be satisfied in each case that
, the increases cannot be provided from the
normal recurrent grants. In other words,
we do not want to break down the triennial
system which has been so significant. We
will make this our policy both for universities
and for technical colleges in the
1967-69 triennium. These are all matters
on which we wish our attitude to be clear
both to universities and to the Commission
for we would not wish future recommendations
as to universities to be influenced
by a mistaken idea of our attitude.
I
The final matter I refer to in this very
long review-I apologise for its lengthis
that of allocations of funds to universities
for purposes of research, and to scientific
research generally. Honorable members will 
recall that the Second Report of the Universities
Commission recomnmended that
during the calendar years 1964, 1965 and
1966, a total of œ 5 million should be provided
for universities to support research
activities at post-graduate level. Of the
million, half was to be provided by the
Commonwealth and half by the States. The
Commission had not, at the time of the
report, reached a stage where it felt it could
make recommendations for the distribution
of these funds among universities and therefore
confined its recommendation, in the
first instance, to the distribution of œ 1 million
in the year 1964. When introducing the
Universities ( Financial Assistance) Bill in
October 1963, 1 accepted the recommendation
for this initial distribution and said
that 1 hoped the Government would shortly
take an opportunity to look at the whole
question of Commonwealth involvement in
research in Australia. This we have now
done. The universities were told, last year,
that a further œ 1 million, or our share of it,
would be available in universities during
1965 for the same purposes as in 1964, and
I now announce that our share of another
œ 1 million will be available in 1966, on the
same basis as to distribution. After that date,
we feel, the Commission should include
provision for this form of research grant,
bound up as it is with post-graduate
teaching, in the general recommendations
which it makes for capital and recurrent
grants to universities.
Of the œ 5 million recommended for
research activities in the 1964-66 triennium,
this would still leave undistributed œ 1 million
of Commonwealth funds and a matching
amount from the States. We believe that this
sum should be available for particular
selected research projects to be carried out
by individuals or research teams. We therefore
propose to make œ 1 million available
for such particular research projects and to
set up an advisory committee to which we
shall refer requests for assistance from such
individuals or research teams. We will look
to this committee for advice as to allocations,
within the limits of the money available,
for such proposals. The committee
will receive proposals, in the main, from
research workers in universities, although
applications from persons working outside universities will not be debarred unless
such persons are working for Government
authorities. Commonwealth money from
this fund will be available on the advice of
the committee, subject, in each case involving
a university, to a matching grant from
the State in which the research is to be
carried out. As 1 ' have said, these research
grants are not intended for use exclusively
in scientific disciplines, nor need the total
amount be spent in the 1964-66 triennium.
While on this subject I take the opportunity
to announce that we have decide
that there ought to be a body to advise thW
Government on the most effective methods
of co-ordinating, and achieving results
from, expenditure on research through the
universities, through the Government's own
agencies, and through any other bodies t
which grants are made by the GovernmenW
What we seek is a situation in which, the
Government having decided what proportion
of national income can go to scientific
research, and having indicated its views of
the general fields in which advances would,
economically, most benefit the nation, some
competent advisory body would recommend
the allocation of available money
among the various governmental research
bodies, the universities, and others. We will
therefore study the various methods which
have been developed for this purpose i
overseas countries.
The end desired to be achieved is clear,
but it is also clear that the means to that
end adopted by other countries vary considerably.
But the best machinery tor Australian
conditions is not easily to be dccided
and the study I have announced will there
fore take place to try to arrive at the best
answer for us. In conclusion I state that
we are ready now to receive proposals from
the States in those fields where agreement
is necessary for action and, they now knowing
both the extent and the limits of our
assistance, to carry on the discussions
necessary for agreement to be reached, and
action to be taken.
I present the following paper-
Tertiary Education in Australia-Report of Cornmmittee-
Ministerial Statement, dated 24th
March 1965-
and move-
That the House take note of the papers.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS P. m. No. _ 34/ 1965
BISHOPS'I LETTER ON VIETNAM
Statement by the Prime Ministers the Rt. Hon. $ ir Roateze
On March 12, a letter signed by a number of bishops
of the Anglican Church was received by the Prime Minister.
It dealt with events in Vietnam.
Yesterday, the Prime Minister replied to the letter
in the following terms
" I have given careful thought to your letter
of March 12th, relating to events in Vietnam. As your
letter was published in the press, 1 shall give publicity
to my reply, when you have received it.
You urge that my Government should be seen
to be taking ' positive steps towardis an honourable and
peaceful settlement of the fighting in Vietnam.'
Now~ t hat all of us in our country want
peace is axiomatic, The whole strength of Australia's
diplomatic forces in countries to which they are
accredited is directed almuost daily to the removal of
difficulties and the promotion of peace. But before any
nation such as the U. S. A. " negotiates" for peace,
realism requires
that thie other party or parties to the conflict
should be willing to negotiate; and
that there should be a genuine cease-fire,
strictly and honourably observed; and
that there should be some reasonable assurance
that aggression and subversion will come to an
end, It is at this point that your letter surprises
and distresses me. Although you are urging some form of
political action upon me and my colleagues in relation to
the fighting in Vietnam, you go on to say that you are
' not concerned here to canvass the merits of the respective
attitudes of the North and South Vietnamese Government, or
the Governments of the United States and China,,'
Well, all I can say is that the Government is
and must be concerned. Indeed, it seems elementary to me
that unless we have some ideas on the merits of these
matters our actions will be those of expediency a nd not
those o01 principle. I therefore address myself to the merits,
to which, I fear, you attach little significance,
You refer to the Geneva agreements of 1951+.
These provided a military demarcation line at the 17th
parallel, separating North and South Vietnam with a
demilitarised zone of five kilometres on each side. Each
side was to ' order and enforce the complete cessation of
all hostilities in Vietnam by all armed forces under
their control'. / 2 
North Vietnam is under Communist rule, The
political views of Hanoi are not to be distinguished from
those of Peking, There can, in our opinion be no doubt that
the Geneva Accords have been consistently violated by the
Communists, partly by direct attacks across the line partly
by infiltr~ ation and supply, and partly by the establishment
and maintenance of the Communist insurgents know , n as the Viet
Cong, whose activities are directed to the overthrow of
government in South Vietnam and to the ultimate establishment
there of a Communist regime. These facts are not seriously
denied, In 1960 they were expressly conceded by the Government
and Communist Party in North Vietnam. At the request of the
Government of South Vietnam the United States has deployed
forces in that country, to aid in its defence and we, under
similar circumstances, have given military ana material aid.
These steps are denounced by the Communists as ' Luperialismt,
though it is quite clear that they have been taken in the
defence of local freedom and self-government against an
imperialist aggression which if not restricted by deeds, will
lead to the over-running of Louth-East Asia by aggressive
Communism and a complete loss of the existing freedom of non-
Communist countries. Are there no merits here to be considered by
Church leaders? There can be no true composition between
atheistic and materialistic Communism and countries with deep
religious beliefs, True, there can be, given good faith on
both sides, peaceful co-existence and mutual tolerance. But
these cannot continue if aggression continues and grows and
is unchecked except by fine words.
We have considered the merits, as any Government
must. We believe as do all those who have been prepared to
consider the merits, that the United States policies and
actions in relation to South Vietnam are right, and should be
supported; that they derive from a courageous and generous
acceptance of responsibilities for the protection of human
freedom. You urge that we join with some other authorities
' in bringing to a close a war that is costing so many lives
and reducing the economy of Vietnam to chaos. t
I agree that the war is costing many lives and
is damaging Vietnam. But how is it to be brought to a close?
The Viet Cong and the forces of Hanoi are backed by Communist
China, a country which rejects peaceful co-existence and
practises, as it has already shown in India and Tibet an
aggressive imperialism. Is the United States to withdraw,
and abandon South Vietnam? This would no doubt lead: to a
conquest which would end the armed conflict by conceding
victory to the Communists.
Or is the United States without withdrawal or
abandonment, to negotiate for peace With whom? About what?
These are two vital questions.
How would they negotiate with the Viet Cong, well
organised but hidden, practising the night attack upon
villages, determined upon revolution by violence? How would
they negotiate with North Vietnam, a country which has shown
that it will be bound by no agreement? a / 3 
How could they negotiate with Communist China,
the home of aggression, except upon a basis of assured
independence and freedom for South Vietnam and those other
countries of South-East Asia which are now threatened by
Communist expansionism? Sir, the change of heart that is needed to lay
a good foundation for a fruitful negotiation and a lasting
peace must occur in the Communist bodies. It will occur all
the sooner if aggression is met by resistance, if we remain
clear about what it is that we are defending and if we, and
all our allies, can make it well understood that we are not
concerned to conquer others, but that we will do our part to
preserve freedom where it now exists4 Freedom is, in this
world, not expendable. And free people are not aggressors."
CANBERRA March, 1965 



6' s
OPENING OF NE-. ' JI SCIENCE BLOC~ i: K AT ST. STANISLAUS
CO THRST 27TH Kk-RCHI. 126
Spe ech by the P rixwe j. nistr 1 Aet, L. rf lR9oo bLe $ ze
Reverend Father ? rincipal, My Lord Bishops and Ladies and
Gentlemen and fellow workers
I have been very pleased here today to hear
these kind things spoken about the policies that we have been
trying to pursue, Personally, as one of the authors of this
scheme, I have never understood why anybody should object to
it. ( Applause) And I am perfectly certain that 90 per cent.
of the people of Australia warmly approve of it. ( Applause)
My Lord Bishop and the Principal have both
mentioned a stum of money. 51e11, the last word that was given
to me on this matter yesterday was that the total completed
cost of the science block and equipment had not yet been
ascertained and that when they were, no doubt there would be
a further sum to be handed over. ( Applause)
Now I dontt need to discuss with you the
reasons, ladies and gentlemen, for these measures to encourage
scientific study; Ild rather prefer today to say something
to the boys. You grown-up people and parents, you can listen
in but most of you are really beyond being helped on these
matters. ( Laughter) I'd like to talk to the boys, if they
don't mind. I want to tell them that when I was a schoolboy
I used to regard all well-known politicians who came to the
speech nights as the most intolerable bores ( Laughter) and
threItore they are at complete liberty to count me out. I
assure them that I am an expert at receiving such compliments.
( Laughter) I just want to say two things to you. The
first is that this story, this piece of history about Father
Slattery and the work he did here, deserves to be known by
everybody in this country. It is part of a marvellous tradition
in your school and a great school is not merely created by
bricks and mortar or by having a lot of money or even by getting
a lot of boys to attend.
The greatness of a school depends on its quality
and its quality depends, to a very large degree, on the men
who have fashioned it. Some of them today are boys, but
tomorrow they will be adults and taking their place in the
iw. orld and helping to fashion the world and perhaps helping
once more to fashion the school.
It is a wonderful thing to have a-tradition.
But we must never be bound by tradition. WIe must never become
so traditional that we are unavailable to fresh ideas, Not
at all, But a tradition that serves to inspire you for the
future by reminding you of the efforts and achievements of the
past, this is of the very essence of a great school and you
have it here, and particularly on the science side In this new
building with its new equipment there will be every reason to
remember that one of the great scientists? scientific workers
or his time was here in this school and did this memorable
work. Therefore be proud of it and make up your minds that
you, yourselves, will contribute to it in due course, $ 69/ 2 
2
The second thing I want to say to you is this.
Several times already today, I have had occasion to mention
the fact that the explorers came over the lip of the mountains
and discovered these -plains and that from this very place, there
went out at least five of the greatest explorers we have known
in Australia. These are very stimulating memories. Much to be
learned from them, Much to be retained by thinking of them.
But they were concerned at that time, and properly concerned,
with extending the bounds of settlement. They were extending
physical boundaries in a sense, they were opening up country
that was a mere dream before and enabling people to live in it
and to grow in it and to have families in it and to enjoy the
fruits of the earth and to add to them. This was a great piece
of pioneering in that sense, extending the frontiers of the
eye, extending the frontiers of settlement,
But in this new wing those of you who are students
of science will be put on your way to extend the frontiers of
knowledge, the frontiers of scientific knowledge, and therefore
I don't want you to become pompous like an old politician but
please remember that in that sense every one of you who tackles
it seriously and does his best will be just as much a pioneer
in his own fashion as these old men with beards who came over
here so long ago and began to extend the frontiers of ci ,-lised
settlement. To extend the frontiers of knowledge is not only
our privilege, but it is our duty. None of us must ever be
content merely by learning what somebody else has discovered.
14e must do our best to think about it, to discover something
ourselves. You won't all be able to think of some new and
brilliant conception in the scientific world but you may very
well be able to think of some way of applying a piece of
scientific knowledge in a new way for the service of mankind
and in that way you wiil have e. xtended the frontiers of knowledge.
Now ladies and gentlemen, turning to you I must
say that I hope we will all encourage these ideas. ' le have, in
Australia, with al~ l our privileges because we are a privileged
people, a prosperous people a great obligation not just to
ourselves but to other people not so privileged, not so prosperous
around the world and if we are to honour that obligation, v* re
can't just be satisfied to think we will do it by providing some
money, We will do it to the best extent by providing them with
the results of our work and our knowledge of our achievement.
There is hardly a problem you can think of today, looking around
the world, problems of population, problems of hungry millions,
problems of all kinds, that does not involve the more and more
scientific use of resources to bring to them such skill such
scientific knowledge as we have in the fields of arriculture and
in dealing with cattle, in dealing with the whole problem of
food, in dealing with production for their own needs, It is in
these fields that we, the happy and the privileged, have a great
opportunity of making a powerful contribution, and the contribution
will start here. Itwill be encouraged, it will grow more
and more rapidly if all of us who are older and who profess to
have scientific knowledge constantly encourage these ideas and
determine to make some sacrifices ourselves to bring them into
fruition* to . S/ 3 
-3-
Now I hope, boys, that hasn't been too heavy.
After all, if you can stand a man lecturing to you on
logarithms, you can put up with me with the greatest ease
in the world. ( Laughter) At least I think so, looking back
over my own life.
Now, Sir, I dontt want to say any more than that.
It is a very great privilege to be here. I regret deeply that
my wife couldn't be with me but I am happy to report she is
doing very well, making a good recovery, ( Applause)
I therefore give myself the pleasure, and the
honour, of declaring this block open. Now I think I remember
that I have to unveil a plaque. Is that right? , Tell I will
do it.
C 



FOR PRESS: This document contains the overall programme
of engagements for the visit to Australia by Their Royal
Highnesses, the Duke and Duchess of Gloucester.
itinerary The visit will begin and end in Canberra. The
is as follows-March 1965
Sat. 13th to Wed. 17th
Wed. 17th to Mon. 22nd
Mon. 22nd to Thu. 25th
Thu. 25th to Sun. 28th
Sun. 28th to Thu. 1st Canberra at Government
House. Hobart, Tasmania at
Government House, including
visit to
Launceston on Friday 19th.
Privately at Mawallok,
property of Mr. Mrs.
Philip Russell.
Melbourne at Government
House. Visit to Snowy Mountains
Hydro-Electric Scheme.
April, 1965
Thu. 1st to Wed. 7th
Wed. 7th to Sun. 11th
Sun. 11th to Thu. 15th
Thu. 15th to Mon. 19th
Tue. 20th to Fri. 22nd
Fri. 23rd to Mon. 26th Privately at ' Ourrandooley'
( Mr. Mrs. P. J. B. Osborne)
' Markdale' ( Mr. Mrs.
G. G. Ashton).
Privately at Palm Beach at
residence ' Bomnbery' lent
by Mr. Mrs. D. A. Pratten.
Sydney at Government House.
Privately as guests of
Governor of Queensland.
Brisbane at Government House.
Canberra at Government House.
BACKGROUND NOTES Guard of Honour on arrival
in Canberra on Saturday,-13th March and at final departure
from Canberra on Monday, 26th April. All other arrivals and
departures will be without ceremonial.
His Royal Highness will wear uniform on three
occasions on arrival in Canberra, at the ANZAC day ceremony
and on final departure from Canberra. On all other day time
occasions, dress will be lounge suit.
There are no evening receptions but there are
late afternoon parties. 
-2
His Royal Highness will speak on the following
0occa sionsin Canberra at the Government's luncheon at
Parliament House;
in Tasmania at the opening of Tasman Bridge
Hobart, at opening of underground Hydro-Electric
Power Station at Poatina ( Northern Tasmania).
in Melbourne in response to Civic welcome by
Lord Mayor.
in Sydney at luncheon given by Commonwealth
Societies and at the oper. Lng of the Royal
Easter Show.
in Brisbane not at all. Total Six occasions.
As will be seen from the outlined programme,
about half of Their Royal Highnesses time in Australia will
be spent privately and without official engagements.
Prime Minister's Decpartment,
Canberra, 27th January, 1965, 
VISIT TO AUSTRALIA
BY
THEIR ROYAL HIGHNESSES
THE DUKE AND DUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER
13TH MARCH TO 26TH APRIL
1965
OUTLINE PROGRAMIIVE
PRIME MINISTER' S DEPARTMIENT,
CANBERRA, A. C. T.
Wednesday, 27th January, 1965. 
TRANSIT AT SYDNEY AIRPORT
AND
VISIT TO THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
SATURDAY, 13THMARCH SYDNEY/ CANBERRA
Arrive at Sydney Airport in transit for Canberra.
Leave for Canberra.
Arrive at R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn.
Welcomed by:-
Thc Governor Gncrr. l fnd tho Hon. . A. ne Sidney.
Th(. Prime Yinistcr and Dame Pattic Nonzies,.
Guard of Honour Royal Salute Inspection.
Leave for Government House.
Arrive at Government House.
Afternoon and
Evening No official engagements.
SUNDAY, 14TH MARCH CANBERRA
Morning Afternoon Evening Attend Divine Service at Church of St. John-the-
Baptist, Reid.
Receive Press representatives at Government
House.
Luncheon at Government House.
No official engagements.
Dinner at Prime Minister's Lodge.
MONDAY, 15TH MARCH CANBERRA
MorningHis Royal Highness Informal visit to Royal
Military College, Duntroon.
Her Royal Highness Tour of Canberra.
Luncheon at British High Commissioner's Residence
with Commonwealth High Commissioners and wives.
AfternoonNo official engagements.
Dinner party at Government House.
Morning Evening 
TUESDAY. 16TH M1~ RCH CAI~ BERRA
Visit National Capital Development Commission's
Planning Exhibition at Regatta Point.
Drive through commercial area of Canberra City
and return to Government House.
Luncheon at Parliament House.
Afternoon Evening No official engagements.
Dinner Party at Government House.
WEDNESDAY, 17t h MRCH CANBERRA/ HOBART
Morning
Afternoon No official engagements.
Leave R. A. A. F. Base Fairbairn for Hobart.
Farewelled by:-
The Governor-General and the Hon. Anne Sidney
The Prime Minister and Dame Pattie Menzies.
Morning TUESDAY. 16THMARCH CANBERR A 
VI S IT T Q T A SMA N IA
WEINESDAY, 17TH MARCH, 1965 CANBERRA/ HOBART
Afternoon Evening Arrive at Hobart Airport.
Met by:-
The Governor and the Hon. Lady Galrdner.
The Premier and Mrs. Reece.
Leave for Government House.
No official engagements.
THURSDAY, 18TH MLARCH HOBART
Morning Afternoon Evening Visit Hobart Town Hall and meet Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and wives.
Luncheon at Government House.
Official opening of the Tasman Bridge.
Attend State Government's Reception at Wrest
Point Hotel.
No official engagements.
FRIDAY, 19TH MARCH HOBART/ LAUNCESTON/ HOBART
Morning
Afternoon Evening Leave Government House and travel by road to
Poatina.
Luncheon at ' The Chalet', Poatina.
Official Opening of Underground Hydro Electric
Power Station.
Leave for Launceston Town Hall.
Arrive and meet Mayor, Aldermen and wives.
Leave Launceston Airport for Hobart.
Arrive at Hobart Airport and leave for Government
House.
No official engagements.
SATURDAY, 20TH MARCH HOBART
No official engagements.
V I S I TT O TA SMAN IA 
SUNDAY, 21ST MARCH HOBART
Attend Divine Service at St. David's Cathedral.
Lay wreath at Cenotaph.
Luncheon at Government House.
Afternoon) and
Evening No official engagements.
MONDAY, 22ND MARCH HOBART/ IMELBOURNE/' MAWALLOK'
Morning Afternoon No official engagements.
Leave Hobart Airport for Melbourne.
Farewelled. by:-
The Governor and the Hon. Lady GaLrdner
The Premier and Mrs. Reece.
Morning 
VISIT TO VICTORIA
MONDAY, 22ND MARCH HOBART/ IELBOURNE/' MAWALLOK'
AfternoonArrive at Melbourne Airport.
Met by:-
The Governor and . Lady Delacombe.
The Premier and Mrs. Bolte.
Leave by air for ' Mawallok' to stay privately
with Mr. Mrs. Philip Russell.
THURSDAY, 25TH MARCH ' MAWALLOK'/ NELBOURNE
Morning Afternoon Evening Travel by road from ' Mawallok' to Beaufort for
train journey to Melbourne.
Arrive at Spencer St. Station.
Civic welcome by Lord Mayor at Melbourne Town
Hall.
Arrive at Government House.
Attend State Government's Reception at
Parliament House.
No official engagements.
FRIDAY 26TH MARCH NELBOURNE
Morning Afternoon His Royal Highness visits Garden of Remembrance
at Springvale.
Her Royal Highness visits R. S. L. Village at
Cheltenham.
Their Royal Highnesses visit Monash University.
Luncheon at the University.
His Royal Highness visits Prince Henry's
Hospital and meets Members of the Committee
of Management.
Her Royal Highness visits the School for Blind
Children at Burwood.
Their Royal Highnesses return to Government House.
Dinner party at Government House.
V I S I TT O V I CT 0 RIA
Evening 
SATURDAY, 27TH MARCH MELBOURNE
His Royal Highness lays wreath at Shrine of
Remembrance.
Their Royal Highnesses leave for Caulfield
Racecourse.
Luncheon at Racecourse and remain afterwards
for the running of some of the races.
Afternoon
Evening Return to Government House.
Dinner at Government House.
SUNDAY, 28TH MARCH MELBOURNE/ COOMA
Attend Divine Service at St. Paul's Cathedral.
Luncheon at Government House.
AfternoonLeave Melbourne Airport for Cooma.
Farewelled by:-
The Governor and Lady Delacombe
The Premier and Mrs. Bolte.
Morning Morning 
THURSDAY, 1ST APRIL ISLAND BEND/' CURRANDOOLEY'
MorningLeave Island Bend by road for private visits
to ' Currandooley' ( Mr. Mrs. P. J. B. Osborne)
and to ' Markdale' ( Mr. Mrs. G. G. Ashton).
WEDNESDAY 7TH APRIL ' MARKDALE' / PALM BEACH
Leave ' Markdale' for Palm Beach to stay
privately at ' Bombery', lent by Mr. Mrs.
D. A. Pratten.
Visit Dairy Husbandry Research Foundation
Laboratories at Camden and
En route later visit the War Veterans' Home at Narrabeem.
SUNDAY, 11TH APRIL SYDNEY
Afternoon Evening Arrive at Government House, Sydney.
No official engagements.
MONDAY, 12TH APRIL SYDNEY
Visit Sydney Town Hall and meet Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and wives.
Visit Royal Agricultural Society's Easter Show.
Luncheon at the Showground.
AfternoonReturn to Government House.
Attend State Government's Reception.
EveningNo official engagements.
TUESDAY, 13TH APRIL SYDNEY
MorningHis Royal Highness lays wreath at Cenotaph
and visits Anzac House.
Her Royal Highness meets members of W. A. A. A. F.
Wing of the Air Force Association.
Their Royal Highnesses return to Government
House.
Attend Luncheon given by the Council of
Commonwealth Societies. / Cont'd
Morning Morning 
9.
TUESDAY, 13TH APRIL SYDNEY CONT'D...
Afternoon No official engagements.
Evening Early dinner at Government House.
Visit Royal Agricultural Society's Easter Show
and see Ring Events.
WEDNESDAY, 14TH APRIL SYDNEY
Morning No official engagements.
Afternoon Official opening of the Royal Agricultural
Society's Easter Show.
Evening Dinner Party at Government House.
THURSDAY, 15TH APRIL SYDNEY/ BRISBANE
Morning No official engagements.
Early
Afternoon Leave Sydney Airport for Brisbane.
Farewelled by:-
The Governor and Lady YoodNard.
The Premier.
( Luncheon served in Flight) 
VISIT TO QUEENSLAND
THURSDAY,
Aft ernoon
Evening 15TH APRIL SYDNEY/ BRISBANE
Arrive at Brisbane Airport.
Met by.
The Governor and Lady ay Abel Smith
The Premier and his sister Mrs. Lind.
Leave for Government House.
No official engagements.
GOOD FRIDAY, 16TH APRIL BRISBANE
MorningHer Royal Highness attends St. John's Cathedral,
Brisbane.
His Royal Highness ( possibly accompanied by Her
Royal Highness) starts the Brisbane/ Gladstone
Yacht Race.
Their Royal Highnesses leave Brisbane and spend
the Easter weekend privately with his Exellency
the Governor and Lady May Abel Smith.
TUESDAY, 20TH APRIL BRISBANE
Late morning
Afternoon Even ing Return to Government House, Brisbane.
Luncheon at Government House.
Attend State Government's Afternoon Tea party
at Parliament House.
Dinner at Government House.
WEDNESDAY, 21ST APRIL BRISBANE
Morning Afternoon Lay wreath at Shrine of Remembrance.
Visit Brisbane City Hall and meet Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and wives.
Luncheon at Government House.
His Royal Highness attends Reception given by
the Queensland Branch of the R. S. S. A. I. L. A.
at Anzac House. / Cont ' d.
VI SI TT 0 0UE EN SL AN D 
WEDNESDAY, 21ST APRIL BRISBANE CONT'D
Evening Dinner at Government House.
THURSDAY 22ND APRIL BRISBANE
Morning 3 No official engagements.
Afternoon EveningDinner party at Government House.
FRIDAY 23RD APRIL BRISBJANE/ CANBERRA
Morning No official engagements.
Luncheon at Government House.
AfternoonLeave Brisbane Airport for Canberra.
Farewelled by:-
The Governor and Lady May Abel Smith.
The Promier and his sister, Mrs. Lind. 
12.
VISIT TO THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
AND
FINAL DEPARTURE FROM SYDNEY
FRIDAY, 23RD APRIL BRISBANE/ CANBERRA
Afternoon Arrive at R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn.
Met by:-
The Governor General and the Hon. Anne Sidney
The Prime Minister and Dame Pattie Menzies.
Leave for Government House.
Evening Dinner at Government House.
SATURDAY, 24TH APRIL CANBERRA
Morning Visit National Headquarters of R. S. S. A. I. L. A.
Afternoon Meet Anzac Veterans at Government House.
Evening Dinner at Prime Minister's Lodge.
SUNDAY 25TH APRIL CANBERRA
Morning Attend commemorative ceremony at Australian War
Memorial on the fiftieth anniversary of the
Anzac landing at Gallipoli.
Luncheon at Government House.
Afternoon No official engagements.
Evening Dinner at Government House.
MONDAY, 26TH APRIL CANBERRA/ SYDNEY/ OVERSEAS
Morning No official engagements.
Luncheon at Government House. / Cont ' d. 
13.
MONDAY, 26TH APRIL CANBERRA/ SYDNEY/ OVERSEAS CONT'D...
Afternoon Evening Leave Government House.
Arrive at R. A. A. F. Base, Fairbairn.
Guard of Honour-Royal Salute Inspection.
Farewelled by:-
The Governor General and the Hon. Anne Sidney
The Prime Minister and Dame Pattie Menzies.
Leave for Sydney.
Arrive at Sydney Airport and leave for Admiralty
House.
Leave Admiralty House arrive at Sydney Airport
and depart for overseas. 



UNVEILING OF A PLA UE AT THE NEJ TELEPHONE EXCHANGE,
BATHURST,, J96.
Mr. Chairman, Your Worship the Mayor, Mr. Kelly, Mr. Iiuchetti
and all those other people who were referred to just now by
the Mayor, Ladies and Gentlemen, Girls and Boys t
Now that is fairly comprehensive. I thincz I would
like to begin by telling you that my wife regrets her absence
just as much as you do, but we managed and shae's a -%, oman of
strong mind to force her into hospital about eight or nine
days ago, and to keep her there. It's been a very remarkable
achievement, and I trust ahe will be there for another few
days and that she will come out completely recovered. She
wanted to come, partly because she likes to come with me
strange as it may seem ( Laughter) partly because she likes
visiting places of this historic interest and importance and
partly and this I say with infinite regret because I should
dearly love to defeat him politically partly because she has
a soft spot for Tony Luchetti. ( Laughter)
Now this event is of double interest because it
occurs in this city. I myself was at school in a place called
Balla rat in the State o17 Victoria, an old gold mining city
which, when gold had gone, became a prosperous community because
it was set in the middle of a magnificently fertile district,
Now you didn't actually have gold mining here but I think that
the historical records would show that when the gol~ d came in
from outlying places, the citizenry of Bathurst and perhaps the
tavern-keepers in particular managed to let a little of the
gold rub off on their fingers so that you have an old association
with gold mining back in the fifties, and you, in turn, when
all that had gone, or most of it had gone, found yourself a
growing prosperous community because you had a lovely district,
a lovely and fertile district set about you, So I feel there
is something a little in common between an old Ballaratian and
you ladies and gentlemen of Bathurst,
It's a very interesting thing that this city has not
just been uontent to rest on its laurels, hasn't been content
Just to say, " Well, we are the third oldest city in the whole
Commonwealth of Australia. We were established in the year
of ' Taterloo. We are, ourselves, an historic monument as a
town." 1 You haven't been content to do that because the
growth is proceeding apace. I'm indebted to the Post office
for an interesting figure I didn't come here to quote
statistics, I can assure you but in the year in which that
very great Australian and memorable Prime Minister, J. B. Chifley,
became Prime Minister 194-5 there were 826 subscribers on
the .3-athurst ' ikcchange. Nov that seems only the other day.
It's a tribute to the strength of Ben Cbhifley's personality,
the genuineness o-f his friendship that one remembers him
always as if it were the day before yesterday, and it was
194+ 5, Today there are 2,635 subscribers. That means over
three times as many in that relatively short span of time.
Now that argues it is one of the index figures, so to speak,
that Bathurst continues to grow and that as it grows it will
increasingly add to its historic significance a very real
economic and civic significance as one of the great provincial
cities in our country. And on all these grounds one is e/ 2 
2.
delighted to be here.
I noticed in one of the documents that you have
been producing for this great event that the first postal
deliveries were made here in 1828 and that the postal services
at that time were somewhat interrupted by bushr'angers led by
the redoutable Ben Hall who, unlike Ned Kelly, had not yet
become a popular hero. ( laughter) But bushrangers were
troublesome, and you remember that a great number of people
at that time, or some of them, in order to avoid or avert
their depredations, used to cut banknotes in half and send
half by post and half by other means so that they w-ouldn't
be worth anything until the tw~ o halves had been put together.
Well, the bushrangers went out of business shortly after more
modern communications were established and indeed, I think
that Gus Kelly would agree with me thal most of them have
now retreated to the fastnesses of Sydney and Melbourne,
( Laughter) There is one other thing I would like to say about
the significance of Bathurst because I really do believe that
this is a most significant place,. This is a commonplace to a
lot of you but it may not have been recalled by some. Five
of the great explorers in Australia made Bathurst their point
of departure on their great historic excursions into the
inland of Australia and down towards the south Evans, Oxley,
Cunningham, Mitchell and 3turt,
It is worthwhile recalling their names because there
were great and courageous men, literally going out into the
unknown and it does some honour to the Federal Parliament that
there should be a constituency today, an electorate of Evans,
one of Oxley, one of Cunningham, one of Mitchell and one of
Sturt. They heve been commemorated in perpetuity in the
Federal Parliament, the National Parliament of this country,
and their association with this city is wrorth recalling because
people like that represented the first real break-through
into the hinterland in Australia just as 4ent'iorth and
Blaxland who came over the mountains and came to here were
the first people to break through what seemed to be the
impassable barriers which confined the old original Sydney
settlement, . Jell, we know perfectly well that but for the work
of these people, but for t'aeir courage, but for their determination,
this land might not have been opened up for many, many
years and Australia would have remained a relatively poor
country a rather precarious colony perched on the coast.
All thai has changed. It is now a rich and well-balanced
country, growing steadily in strength and in significance.
And poised as you are here at the very beginning point of this
tremendous drive into the inland of Australia, you must
continue to be proud of your heritage and perhaps if I may
say so, equally determined as we all must be, to ? e pioneers
ourselves in the day in which we live, not to be afraid to
take a chance, not to be afraid to go out on to something
new because this is what our forefathers and your forefathers
did in their time and in this place.
Just one other thing I would like to say about
Bathurst because again in that respect that reminds me of
Ballarat. It is a city which has been endowed by those who
wont before with a sense of beauty. I think that the City
Square here is one of the most beautiful squares in Australia 9 e */ 3 
3-
and I hope that it will always be kept so just as I recall
with pride and pleasure the work done by he pioneers of
Ballarat in gardens and in statuary, and in particular, every
time I have come through Bathurst, sometimes on reputable
missions, sometimes on political exercises ( Laughter), I
have paused long enough to look with admiration at that
lovely tower designed by that great architect and artist,
John Moore. That is, I think, one of the lovely buildings
in Australia because it has everything it has proportion,
it has colour, the right kind of colour, it has setting and
it exhibits th pride of a proud community.
Now I haven't seen the design of the building
that will go up here. I hope it won't be too hideous.
( Laughter) All I know already is that it will be reasonably
costly and that will give great pleasure to Tony Luchetti
who wanted something costly not something trifling but
whatever it turns out to be, it will be a matter o1 immnense
advantage to this community, and it is a very interesting
thing and gives me great pleasure to be able to recall some
time that it was erected, begun, initiated in this 150th
year of his historic place.
Now I think I will now relieve you from the burden
of listening to me by taking you into my confidence on one
point. I have never been too clear this morning as to what
I do, whether I unveil a foundation stone that is already
laid or whether I lay a foundation stone and tap it and say,
" I declare this well and truly laid." I usually take
precautions on this matter by finding out in advance what
I have to do and then do it, in case I forget to do it at the
end of the speech. ( Laughter) So whatever it is, I now
have great pleasure in do--! ng it. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. _-/ 1965
196 CORAL SEA CELEBRATIONS
Statement by the Pime Minister, the Rt. on. Sir Robet MAie.
General Hunter Harris Jr., Commander-in-Chief
of the United States Pacific Air Force, is to visit Australia
as the Guest of Honour at the Coral Sea celebrations for
1965. General Harris will arrive in Sydney on the
2nd May and will visit all States during the following two
weeks to take part in the celebrations in each State
Capital arranged by the Australian-American Associationl.
Mrs. Harris will accompany the General.
CANBERRA, 31st March, 1965. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
CONSTITUTIONAL REVIEW
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 1st April 19651
Sir ROBERT MIENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 11.41].-I hope that I will
not disappoint either the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr. Caiwell) or anybody else
in this House when I say that I have no
intention whatever of making a party debating
speech. The Leader of the Opposition
did not do so either. I have no desire to do
it because I agree that the issues of constitutional
change ought not as a rule-and
there may be some exceptions to this-to be
settled or thought of in purely party
terms. Indeed, I am able to say that I find
myself in agreement with much of what the
honorable gentleman has said. I think he is
a little optimistic, if I may put it to him,
when he asks that all sections of the report
be placed before the people at a referendum
without further delay, because he will agree
with me that experience indicates that if that
were to be done the whole lot would be
lost. A great mass of proposals for constitutional
change cannot be put before the
people with any real expectation of getting
them through. It has been tried and it has
failed. The whole problem of constitutional
change in our country is bedevilled by the
fact that the disposition of the people is to
say: " When in doubt, vote The
change suggested needs to be crystal clear.
It needs to be one which does not lend
itself to misinterpretation or to absurd fears
3900/ 65. which are occasionally promoted. These requirements
are not easy to attain, but simplicity
on a matter which really engages the
public attention and to which the people
will direct their minds thoughtfully is
essential. I do not propose to cover the whole field
that the honorable gentleman has dealt with,
and for one very good reason-I am not
here to indulge in the luxury of offering a
lot of personal views on a variety of matters.
The Government has, in fact, under its
immediate consideration two aspects of the
reforms which have been indicated, and I
think I can say something about those, but
in relation to others I am not in a position
at present to make any definitive statements
of policy on behalf of the Government.
When I can, of course I will, because I do
not at all underestimate the importance of
these matters. One of them, the question of
the division of the Commonwealth into
electorates, on which the report has made
proposals which are supported by the
honorable gentleman, will no doubt be the
subject of discussion when we introduce
electoral legislation, because some of the
points he has made, particularly about
differen-tials, will very legitimately then be
open for discussion. I do not want to anticipate
that, but I do want to say something
which I do not think is at all controversial 
about two of these matters. I will start with
the last one mentioned by the honorable
member. With the proposition that section
127 should be repealed we entirely agree.
When any referendum is instituted that most
certainly must be one of the questions. It is
completely out of harmony with experience
and modern thinking and, indeed, with a
great deal of our own legislation in this
Parliament relating to Aborigines. The retention
of the old fashioned provision in
section 127 is quite out of harmony with
the elevation of the Aborigines into the
ranks of citizenship. But it has been customary,
and the wish has been made clear
in a number of petitions, to associate with
the repeal of section 127 the removal of
what has been called the " discriminatory
provisions" of section 51. On that I would,
with great respect, challenge the assumption
that is made. May I read the provision to
the House in order to refresh its memory.
Section 51 states-
The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution,
have power to make laws for the peace, order, and
good government of the Commonwealth with
respect to:-
( xxvi.) The people of any race, other than the
aboriginal race in any State, for
, whom it is deemed necessary to make
special laws:
It has been suggested that that provision discriminates
against the Aborigines of Australia.
I would have thought that the
contrary was the fact. Parliament has been
given power to make discriminatory laws in
relation to the people of any race-special
laws which would relate to them and not to
other people; laws which would treat them
as people who stood outside the normal
grasp of the law, enjoying its benefits and
sustaining its burdens in common with all
other citizens. I would have thought that
the perfect state of affairs in Australia would
be that any Aboriginal citizen felt that he
did' stand equal with every other citizen before
the law, enjoyed its benefits and took
his own part on a proper basis in sustaining
its burdens. I have no doubt whatever that
this provision in the Constitution was
designed having regard to conditions that
existed at that time and the possibility of
having to make a special law dealing with,
for example, kanaka labourers-perhaps a
special law to deport them from the country
or to confine them to some particular area.
There was a good deal of discussion about this at the time this provision was framed.
Therefore the framers of the Constitution
inserted this provision, but they left out the
Aboriginal race because they did not want
to discriminate against the people of the
aboriginal race. All we have to do now is to
cross out this reference " other than the
aboriginal race" and we confer on this
Parliament a power to make a special law
which relates to the Aborigines and to no
other people.
Mr. Reynolds.-But-
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-If you do not
mind I want to pursue this. I do not think
it is at all out of place. There is a second
point about it, and this does concern me.
If the Commonwealth, as one of its heads
of power under section 51, has the right to
pass special laws with respect to the
Aboriginal race, I wonder what limitations
will be on that separate head of power.
Would this enable the Parliament to set up
a separate body of industrial laws relating
to Aborigines or some other kind of lawhealth
laws, quarantine laws or laws under
any of the other powers of the Parliament?
It may well be true that it could because,
make no mistake about it, this would be a
head of power standing not inferior to any
other power contained in section 51. That
is a matter that requires a great deal of
thought. I do not want honorable members
to think that I have arrived at some positive
conclusion about it. I am raising it
here in order to indicate that it wants a
good deal of thought and that we would
want to give it a great deal more investigation
than we have before we favoured
changing the provision in section 51. But
we would be very happy to see the end of
qection 127.
The other matter about which I wanted
to say something concerns section 24. The
Leader of the Opposition has said most of
it, and, if I may say so, very well and
clearly. I do not want to subtract from what
he : has said. I just want to add a little to it.
Section 24 of the Constitution is a puzzler.
It reads-
The House of Representatives shall be composed
of members directly chosen by the people of the
Commonwealth, and the number of such members
shall be, as nearly as practicable, twice the number
of senators.
I confess that I do not ' know what " as
' nearly as practicable" means. If it means
mathematically practicable, then we must 
have 120 members and that is the end of it.
We have never had exactly -twice as many
members as senators that I can -recall in the
history of the Parliament, but we have been,
in a sense near enough. Today we are a
couple over that provision, with two other
members full of hopes. I do not think anybody
seriously t'hinks, that there could -be
an effective challenge at law to the existing
numbers. Nor, indeed, would I think that
if we went to 123, 124 or 125 members
we would necessarily violate the provision,
because what is practicable involves consideration
of hard -facts other than mathematical
considerations. Still, it would bea
bold man who would think that we could
make any sizeable addition to the numbers
of the House without incurring the risk
of running foul of section 24. The moment
somebody indicates that somebody is thinking
about increasing the number of members
of the House we will get the orthodox
complaint in some quarters that there are
already too -many members of Parliament.
This is the cheapest cry in the world, but
it is always produced. A good deal of
unthinking criticism is put forward when
any suggestion is made that the number of
members -be increased. I have read some of
it in the last few days. It is quite unthinking.
It therefore becomes necessary that I
should say what the Leader of the Opposition
' has already said. There is one single
fact that cannot be ignored if section 24
and the little collection of sections stand as
they are. Unless you are to have a perpetually
deadlocked Senate, you cannot
increase the numbers in the Senate except
by 24. If you increase the total number of
senators by 12 it will mean that at each
election 6 senators are elected for each
State. The result will be 3 elected on each
side. There is the very definition of a perpetual
deadlock. So if you are to have a
Senate that is workable-an unworkable
Senate would be a menace-you must
increase the number of senators so that at
each election each State will elect 7 senators.
You will then have 4 on one side and
3 on the other. This means increasing the
size of the Senate ' by 24. That would mean
increasing the size of the House -by 48
members. Mr. Uren.-Too many. Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-If they all
were like my friend I would be quite happy,
' but nobody in this place at this time thinks
it is necessary to increase the size of this
House -by 48 -members. We may think it
desirable to increase it by 10, 12 or 15 but
not ' by 48. Such a proposition would not
enter anybody's mind. Yet we are presented
with a choice in which we will make either
no increase in -the numbers, an increase so
nominal that it does not violate section 24,
or a vast increase ' by increasing the size of
the Senate ' by 24.
Mr. Duthie.-Why not wipe out 24?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-If my friend
from Tasmania wants to have an argument
about that, all I can say is that he ought
first to take it on with Senator Wright. The
point I am making is obvious enough to all
honorable members, though I think it has
been overlooked by some of the incipient
critics. The point is that this House has a
choice. It can either for all practical purposes
keep its numbers static or find itself
increasing the size of the Senate, under the
existing law, so as to be able to increase
the size of this House. In my view, it would
then be compelled to increase the Senate
by 24-nothing else would work-and be
required to increase the size of this House
by 48 or 46, whatever the figure may be.
It cuts both ways. If the numbers are to be
as nearly as practicable twice the number
of the senators, the position would be that
the number in this House would need to be
as nearly as practicable 168. Nobody proposes
that; nobody would think of it at
this time.
I have said all this to show to the House
that we adhere to the principle that is
involved in that part of the report that says
that the nexus ought to be broken. If it is
not broken, there is no flexible future for
this House. I have been reminded of my
long experience in these fields. It is indeed
long. I have been through a few referendum
campaigns and I have come to respect the
genius of the people for voting No. If we
go to the people with a proposal to amend
the Constitution to break the nexus between
the two Houses, the first question that will
be asked by those opposed to it-there will
be quite a lot of people opposed to it, particularly
in some States-will be: "' You want
this so that you can increase the size of the
Parliament. By how much do you want to 
increase the size of the House of Representatives?
That raises problems that do
seriously require a great deal of thought.
We would need to consider how these matters
are to be presented and the extent to
which we can go into details. We must be
as forthcoming on those matters as we can.
If we are not, we will be told that we are
hiding something and the result will be
disastrous from the point of view of ever
increasing the size of this House. I am not
at this stage proposing positively to give a
programme for the Government on these
matters. We must consider the various
aspects. They are associated in the public
mind with other matters concerning electoral
laws and the spread of boundaries, which, as everybody knows, are matters of acute
difference of opinion. As I have said, we
will by suitable legislation give the House
the opportunity for a debate and, therefore,
decision on these matters.
When I rose this morning all I hoped to
do was to raise one of two of the matters
that I do think are worth considering and
which have been exercising our m-inds quite
a lot. I wished to emphasise-it is very
desirable to emphasise this on constitutional
matters-that I really believe there is a very
substantial body of opinion in common in
this House. The qualifications that I have
put have not been so much qualifications
of principle as of application in the matters
I have dealt with.
BY AUTHOuRr: J. ARTHAM, COMMONWEALTH! GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



KEVJ MAYORAL DINNER 3DA-PRILs 196j
Oeech by the Prime Ninister the R S_ rRoert Menzie s
Mr. Mayor, Councillor Stephens and Parliamentary Colleagues,
Your Honours and Gentlemen
Man and boy, I have been coming around as Member for
Kooyong for thirty-four and a half years. I suppose I must
have attended a pretty high percentage of the Kew Mayoral
Dinners in that time and I am delighted to find that Councillor
Stephens has follow0red a great tradition because on not one
occasion can I ever remember not hearing something about the
grievances from which my native State suffers. ( Laughter)
And yet I have still. come around. Apparently there must be
some balancing factors somewhere.
He has put some questions to me which I don't think
I will endeavour to answter except in one or two particulars.
As he spoke, I thought I would like to put a question to him.
I think while he was up he might have explained on behalf of
the Board what its trouble was with the Government of Victoria
about the ring road. ( Laughter) This is one of the few matters
which I can observe from on high because nothing gives us any
greater satisfaction in life than to see the other fellow in
trouble. But I desist. I wouldn't dream of putting that
question to him. I think that's a matter that he might thrash
out with Dick Hamer in the Mayor's Room which seems to have a
rather attractive connotation about it the Mayor's Room or
is it a dry Qupboard?
I just want to say one thing about Tullamarine.
You know, really, this is one of those problems on whichyou
can't win. If somebody decides that something ought to be done
about a new jet airport at Tullamarine, there are screams of
rage and anguish from Sydney which appears to be under the
impression that the abolition of Mascot is under immediate
consideration. ( Laughter) And as far as Tullamarine is
concerned, well, we started this; there is a lot of work that
has been going on on the runways.
The volume of work, the volume of airlines traffic in
Australia is multipl-, ing at an enormous rate. That is something
that is worth remembering. And what was at one stage
contemplated as an adequate terminal turns out before long to
be quite inadequate for the enormous and growing volume of
business, All I can say is that if I were a Victoriar as
indeed I am, and a Melbourne man as indeed I am I think I
would be prepared to wait a little longer to get a very much
better air terminal rather than have one that was inadequate
from the viord go. This happens all the way round.
We, exercising our authorities, decided to buy a great
aircraft now called the F1i1A which was the TFX. It was a
matter of some controversy, you will remember, at the time.
All right, well we had a date for delivery. -e accepted that
date. 4e have since agreed to extend that date for a year not
because we couldntt get the aircraft by that date but because
our experts told us that all the teething troubles taat a new
aircraft has will be very much better adjusted and modifications
made in the United States of America, and if we wait for a year,
we will have a much better aircraft and have much less adjustment
and therefore much less loss of service when we take delivery ./ 2 
-2
of the plane, and we said " Yes" and that is something I recommend
to Councillor Stephens for his consideration. That's all,
I was interested in what he said about oil, offshore
oil because contrary to the belief that I entertained until
I came here tonight, I thought the State of Victoria was
extraordinarily prosperous. I owe that knowledge to all my
Victorian Parliamentary colleagues. It is quite true there is
a conference about off-shore oil drilling and it is very necessary
because there is a great argument which would be difficult even
for the most distinguished lawyers to resolve as to where the
State jurisdiction begins or ends and where the Commonwealth
jurisdiction begins or ends because some of the drilling may be
inside territorial waters as we narrowly define them within the
three-mile limit, and some may now be on what we are now calling
the Continental shelf and it is eminently desirable that people
who are going to drill for oil and who are going to lay out
vast sums of money in it should have some security of title,
that they should know that they had a valid licence without
being confronted some day by the proposition, " dell, youtve
got a licence from the State and not from the Commonwealth
and therefore it's no go." Or " You got a licence from the
Commonwealth and not from the State and therefore itts no go." 1
So, as sensible people, we are conferring with the
States through their Law Offices, to see whether we can't
determine some working principle under which the States themselves
who have Mines Departments and the like will, of course,
administer whatever scheme is worked out but under which the
people who are going to lay out their money will know that they
have a secure title. As some of this may be within the threemile
limit and a great deal more of it may be outside the threemile
limits I think we have been fairly sporting on this matter.
vie have said, " Let's pool our constitutional resources. Dot
let us have a lot of litigation and argument. Let us agree on a
system of licensing and let us divide the royalties fifty-fifty." 1
NowT that seems to me to be a very fair proposition and I hope
that in Brisbane it will be accepted.
But there was one other matter that was raised and
I did make up my mind when I was coming here tonight that I
wrould like to say something about it, You know, the Commonwealth
Government may have a very far-reaching responsibility. In
the public eye, their responsibilities frequently exceed their
pow--ers because tlheir powiers can be extremely limited in various
respects. For example, it would be in a broad way true to say
that it is the Commonwealth Parliament and Government that has
the responsibility for overall economic and financial policy.
This is true. But that authority or responsibility is affected
very obviously by. the fact that there are large tracts in the
economic and financial field which we can't touch.
For example, we have a system of industrial arbitration
in Australia which is the creation of the Constitution and
uhich really can't be destroyed except by an Act of Parliament
which repeals it. Nobody contemplates that. And therefore we
await the result of arbitral proceedings just as eagerly as other
people would because we know that whatever the result may be, it
may very well have a material effect on the whole of our
financial and economic policy for the year or ovrer a period of
years, So there are great limitations. oe* .6.3 
-3
There are bodies which have been established which
impinge on the Commonwealth's authority in exactly the same way,
Mr. Mayor, as you well know as a banker that although we have
some authority over banking and bank interest rates and the like,
we don't appear to have any authority over what have been called
fringe banking institutions which are not quite banks but which do
collect and use very very large sums of money including a large
quantity of short-term money in Australia, dJell, this is a
limitation on our jurisdiction and I am bound to say on our
behalf that I think on the whole over these last dozen years we
have managed to create and sustain an economic and financial
climate which has helped to produce great prosperity in this
country. ( Applause) And my old friend then put the question and this is
really what I wanted to say a little about, about the South East
of Asia, and in particular what goes on in Vietnam. It is
necessary I think to remember a few facts on this matter because
although ihese worls like North Vietnam and South Vietnam and'
Cambodia and Laos now come rather trippingly to the tongue, these
are after all a modern development, speaking in terms of political
boundaries, because we are dealing with what used to be called
Indo-China. Somebody said to me only this morning, " How many North
Vietnamese are there in South Vietnam?" 1 And I S3id " Well,
you might as well ask me how many Yorkshiremen are living in
the Home Counties in England because we are not dealing with
ide ntifiably different people."' But when the settlement
occurred and when great troubles broke out and when the Committee
of Control was established, a line was drawn along the 17th
parallel with a provision in the terms of the peace or of the
cease-fire that there should be a complete cease-fire and
that there should be a completely demilitarised zone for
five kilometres on each side of the parallel. And if all that
has foundered, I just want to remind you that in my opinion it
can't be attributed to any default or aggression on the part of
the people or governments of South Vietnam,
The aggression has been quite in the other direction,
and it has been made all the more effective because pockets of
what they now call the Viet Cong have been established some of
them deep into South Vietnam, some of them very very close to
Saigon and some of them e~ ng into Cambodia, and these are
Cormlurllst pockets whose main object is to destroy the Government
of South Vietnam and therefore open the door to conquest of the
South by the North, by Hanoi, and therefore as I venture to say,
ultimately by Peking.
Now this is a tremendously serious problem because let
me point out to you that if Vietnam fell as a whole, Thailand
would be under tremendous challenge with a long and difficult
frontier to defend and how long Thailand might be expected to
last under those circumstances is anybody's guess, And our
friend Prince Sihanouk there are no Press here, are there? in
Cambodia has rather made it clear that given peace and quiet,
he is quite prepared to be under the Communist rule just as much
as any other. Now this is a very serious problem and the Government
of South Vietnam invited the United States of America to do
something about it, They were well entitled to do that just as
they were entitled to ask us because we are parties to the South
a&amp; as** 
East Asian Treaty. aJe were one of the sponsors and we belong
to it and the obligations under the jouth-East Asian Treaty are
several as q~ ell as joint. It is worth remembering that.
South Vietnam though it isn't a party to the South East Asian
Treaty is what is called one of the protocol states. In other
words, an attack on it is regarded as something that brings into
existence the machinery of the South East Asian Treaty Organisation,
Therefore we, partly as a matter of obligation, and
partly as a matter of right, are taking some small part in the
operations in Vietnam and the Americans are taking a very large
port in the operations in Vietnam, but it is the fashion now
of extreme people in AustraJ~ ia to fasten on to the United States,
to raise questions " What are they doing there? Jhat has it
got to do with the United States?" If the United States paid
any attention to this thing and left, then * South Vietnam would
be a memory in a fortnight. That's all. And the whole of
South East Asia would be in imminent danger of falling into the
communist hands, What would happen under those circumstances
in relation to Malaysia you can well understand because Malaysia
is an integral part of South-East Asia and therefore vulnerable
if it is entirely surrounded by and attacked by people who have
very superior forces somewhere in the background. All I can say is
I am jolly thankful America is taking an interest in South
Vj~ tnam. It would be a very sad day for us if the United States
were not. It is worthwhile when we hear these critics say, " Jell.,
why do the Americans take a hand in South Vietnam?" does 0
anybody believe that they want to annex the country? You know,.
I have heard more nonsense talked about imperialism and colonialism
and neo-colonialism, and I suppose neo-imperialism, than would
fill volumes. It is all rather silly and rather nauseating.
They don't want to have South Vietnam as a colony, I cant
imagine any more uncomfortable position than to be the Colonial
Minister in an American Administration with Vietnam as one of your
colonies, This doesn't make sense,
Well are they there simply to attend to their own
defence in a limited and local sense? Of course not. Whether we
can live without a relatively free South-East Asia is a major
question for us but a relatively minor question, if you like,
for the United tates of America. This grudging habit of mind,
this great temptation all the time to be questioning the Americans
and their motives and so on and if one of us defends it, one is
told, well you are jusZ squaring off with the Americans"
Squaring off with I repeat: Why are they there?
Why are they losing men? TJhy are they sustaining battle casualties
and bombing outrages and all these things? Why are they spending
millions and millions and millions of money in the defence of
South Vietnam? The answer is quite simple.
Because they know that though South Vietnam may be of
minor importance to them, it has a particular significance for
the defence of the free world, for the defence of a world w. hich
still retains some religious principles and faith and doesn't
want to be overrun by a lot of materialistic and atheistic
Communist powers. And they know that. The Americans have had
wisdom, I think, on this matter. They have made it quite clear
that to them freedoma is not divisible so that you yield it there
and preserve it there. They believe that the great issue in the
world is: How far those people who are now free will continue
to be free. This is a tremendous and an imaginative and a
generous outlook on their part. We sometimes think they are not
000 0 
very imaginative about certain matters. I believe th'ey have
been imaginative on this to the nthc power. They know, They
see the world as a whole. They see the menace of an aggressive
communism as a whole and they have made up their minds that where
they have in the world people who are free and who want to live
their own lives and have no ambition except to live at peace and
cultivate their oun gardens they the United States of America
will put themselves in t he Iront of the defence. IC find this
admirable, Admir.. ble. And I have indeed great occasion I as
you have, to be thankful that that is their point of view.
Now that, I think Sir, is my answer to the question
about South Vietnam. The whole of this South East Asian
business is completely bedevilled by all sorts of cross currentp
and special issues. There is the attitude of Indonesia which
I think is unthinking and wild and really irresponsible but
still it is an attitude which has put our people into battle,
which has put thousands and thousands of British troops alongside
Malayan troops into the defence of Malaysia. These are not good
things. These are not happy things, but we can't be happy all
the time, We are an astonishingly happy people and we have every
reason to be. 4' e are jolly well off. Ie are very well provided
for, There has been a revolution in our economic position in
modern times in Australia and we have every reason to be thankful
for it. All these things have to be bought for some price and one
price that has to be paid is that we can't have all this comfort
and satisfaction to ourselves and leave it to the greatest power
in the world, the United States, to defend us, because ultimately
that is what it comes to in these countries, and then give
ourselves the luxury of saying, " Well, I wonder what they are up
to. You know, the Ameñ icans they oughtn't to be there. They
ought to cease fire. 4hatever the other man does, they are to
stop.", This doesntt make sense. Or when they are confronted,
by an enemy which is quite ruthless penetrating and uncommonly
successful, they ought to say, " W'ell, now, wait a moment. tUe
i. rould like to come and negotiate with you." It is like
negotiating with a burglar when he was well inside the house, and
making a composition with him " Well, you can have all the
jewellery as long as you leave me the banknotes." 1 This is
I think, a hopelessly impractical idea. Of course we want Z
see peace. ' Je never will see peace in this part of the world
until the communists are persuaded and persuaded by force if
necessary that they are not going to overrun decent, innocent
people outside their ambit.
WJell now, Sir, I think that is all I wanted to say
except to tell you that I have had quite an interesting time
tonight because I have seen about four men here tonight whom I
hadn't seen for donkeyts years. All of them are contemporaries
of mine to within a few months and I &amp; mf happy to say that I found
them all looking asto nishingly young. They thought so too
and I waited anxiously to be told that I did but none of them had
the gall to say that. However, we parted temporarily as very
good friends. Sir, I am delighted to be here. Thank you very much
indeed. You always entertain us magnificently and I am now
going to sit down and listen to Dick Hamer tell us all about the
Ringstrasse. 



FOR PRESS AIR-LINES DISPUTE
Statement by the Prime Ministter t. he J nHo. Sir Robert Menzies
As certain legal aspects of the current air-lines
dispute in New South Wales are before the Court, I will
confine myself to the political differences. Commonwealth
Ministers have met State Ministers in an attempt to secure
agreement. By courtesy of the Premier, I have had a conference
with the Commonwealth Attorney-General and the State Attorney-
General, in order to clarify my own mind as to the nature of
certain differences of interpretation of the judgments in the
recent air-lines case.
In the result, and after Cabinet discussion, I now
state the attitude of the Commonwealth Government.
Vle think that our first duty is to ensure the
safety, efficiency, and regularity of air navigation as a whole
in Australia. le do not think that this duty can be performed
by looking at one service in isolation, as if no adjoining
or intersecting services existed. If effective control of
air navigation and i high record of safety are to be maintained
in relation to a complex of international, interstate and
intra-state flying services, we be. l. ieve that it would be
completely unsound to look at each type of service separately,
as if the others did not exist, or to deal with individual
services within one of these classifications as if other
individual services did not exist. In the public interest,
there must be somre overall pattern and regulation.
; e think that this is true in relation to New South
Wales intra-state services, which have as one terminal the
Kingsford Smith Airport at Miascot, which is also the principal
airport for international services and a main airport for
inter-state services.
The paramount interest to be served by the New
South sales intra-state air services is that of the people
in the country and in provincial cities and tons. Each of
the two competing intra-state services, Ezst-West Airlines and
Airlines of has played its part in serving that
paramount interest. '! hatever re-arrangement of routes may
be made from time to time should be so made, within the limits
of safety and efficiency, as to enable each to carry on
profitably and thereby maintain its operational efficiency.
To solve the proolem, we beiieve that a completely
objective and co-operative approach is essential.
To this end, we have proposed that a Commonwealth
expert and a State expert should confer with each other, with
a right in them to appoint an umpire in case of differences
of opinion. The object of the conference would be to survey / 2 
2-
and allocate various routes and services, and to bring in
recommendations to both Commonv. realth and State Governments.
For our part, we will stand ready to accept these recommendations,
As every facility would be provided for speedy investigation
and conference, we should be able to anticipate a result within
two months. The Government of New South iales has, as I
understand it, not rejected the conference idea outright but
makes acceptance of it conditional upon East-Mest flying a
service between Sydney and Dubbo meanwhile. This the Commonwealth
is not able to grant. For its part the Commonwealth
would prefer that pre-existing arrangements should be restored.
This would mean that over the projected period of the
conference, Airlines of New South ales,-the holder of the
Commonwealth licence for the route, would fly a direct service
between Sidney and Dubbo as it has ( until recently) done for
many years. The Government of New South Jales has been reported
as wishing us to agree to a proposition that, in the meantime,
each of the two co-mpanies should take turn, month and month
about, in conducting the Dubbo service.
Our advice is that this is not practicable, since
the movement in and out of staffs and facilities involved
would be grossly expensive and wasteful, and could scarcely
be regarded as giving effective results to the people of
Dubbo, who are primarily concerned.
Under these circumstances, we cannot accept this
proposal. But we repeat our own, and hope that, in the
interests of all concerned, it will be accepted and acted
upon with all expedition.
CANBERiA,
4th April, 1965. 



CIVIC SERVICE, PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
CHELTENHAM? VICTORIA 4+ TH PRIL, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Sir, Recently I was in London, I started off thinking I
was on holiday and I ended up by attending the funeral of the
greatest man of our time. I was very impressed by a number of
matters associated with it. For example, his body lay in state
itn Westminster Hall, Westminster Hall is the most famous building
: tn our history. It is very old. It was built by V. illiam Rufus.
Dark, sombre, full of history. And there, on a little dais, lay
the coffin with its custodians in uniform; and along two lines
through the Hall there came the citizens of London, young and old,
thousand after thousand, paying their homage.
I had wondered very much myself whether this great
man, who was at the peak of his greatness more than twenty years
ago, might be forgotten by younger people' I knew that grey-headed
people like myself' would never forget him;, particularly those who
like myself were fortunate enough to know him and to know him
well, For us, it would be impossible to forget him. But I thought
that those who were children in the greatest moments of his glory
might now regard him as a remote historic figure of no more
particular interest than other historic figures in the schoolbooks.
I was delightfully pleased to see that a good half
of all those who came through were young, exhibiting every possible
mixture from those who looked quite usual to boys with long hair
and girls with short hair, They all came through solemnly, with
respect. It was a most amazing tribute and it confirmed in my
mind the belief which I have always entertained that one of the
great things in our character is a sense of continuity, that we
are not here today and gone tomorrow that we have had people
before us and we will have people af~ er us; we being influenced
by those before us, and influencing those who come after us.. This
is the continuing city in reality that is referred to in tho Bible
and it is a great characteristic particularly of our own people, and
there it was that day just as iz was a few days later in St. Paul's
Cathedral where the view, the picture, was unforgettable the
Queen there attending the funeral of her great Prime Minister,
Now I said just now that I knew him well. I d~ d
indeed. I was greatly privileged, and many weekends I havevspent
in his house and had many great matters to discuss with him from
time to time. I always remember with a sort of sombre pride that
on two occasions I disagreed with him &amp; id I assure you, my friends,
that took doing, because he was, of all men, the most formidable.
But one night he said to me at the dinner-table something that I
know he said elsewhere and which I know has now become familiar
in the books. We were talking about war because this was a time
of war. It was on every night, every day. And he gave me his
great slogan-In War, Fury
In Defeat, Defiance
In Victory Magnanimity
In Peace, 6oodwill. 9 / 2 
2
It's easy enough to say those words but they really
stood for what he believed in. Time after time in my experience
of him, when we were discussing some problem or other I would say,
" Don't you feel that such-and-such might be done" ani his answer
would be, " No. That couldn't be done. It couldn~ t be done because
of the nature of man." 1 And it is about that great element, the
nature of man, that I just want to say a little to you this
morning because we must never become so pessimistic, we must never
become so sceptical of human virtue, as to become cynical about
it. We must remember that there is something immortal in the
nature of man. It is a continuing thing, It is indeed a
continuing city in the heart and mind of man. The nature of man.
Now, it has been proved if I may start with a
practical example or two that we are not, in our race, very
great haters, In War, Fury. Yes, but you remember, not in
Peace, Hatred. In Peace Goodwill. Yesterday's enemy becomes
tomorrow's friend time alter time in the course of our history.
After all, after the Napoleonic wars, as the boys and girls will
reriem be r, Ithe French and the British were not what you might
describe as great friends. There had been a generation of war
between them, bitter wounds and bitter defeats and the want of
friendship, no doubt endured a long time. AMA yet in this
century France has Uen our ally and remains our aily in the
North Atlantic Treaty. These things are forgotten, merciftQlly
forgotten, because if we lived on our enmities for the rest of
our lives, we would die the most miserable of people. It is in
the nature of man not to nurture hatreds and not to live on their
memory. You know, Sir, I don't want to invade the field of
theology of which you are a master but the old observation~ that
God made man in His own image has, f think been rather misunderstood
by some people, at least who appear to think of it in terms' of a
human image, a human body, a human appearance, and so we in the
old pictures that we used to look at when we were in Sunlay
School we rather saw imaginary pictures of God as a man. This
doesn' follow at all. When God made man in His own image, He
wasn't creating something necessarily that had a physical
resemblance to Him. He was creating something that had the
God-like elements in the spirit and in the character. This is
it, If we are in His image, it is because we have within
us a capacity for rising to great heights of pure virtue, side by
side with a capacity for sinking to the lowest level of selfishness
and bitterness; but these God-like elements in the human
character, sometimes twisted sometimes ignored, I believe
survive and blossom and deveiop as life goes on. One has only
to consider at a time like this the immense sacrifices that
people have made, the highest sacrifices. This capacity for
sacrifice, this capacity for preferring other people to oneself,
this capacity for sayn, " 1I will contribute all if it is for
the good of the country, exhibited so frequently in war is a
God-like quality. The capacity for sacrifice. the whole idea
of sacrifice is at the very root of the Christian faith.
Man's incapacity for enduring hatred, I've said
something about. I believe that it is one of the great elements
in the nature of man, I think indeed, that all the time we
are with checks sometimes wi~ h what appear to be a full stop
that we are proceeding along the path of civilisation so that
one day we will be able to say I won't perhaps, you won't
perhaps, somebody will that we are a fully civilised nation. a / 3 
73
Now that brings me to the next little thing I wanted
to mention to you, We talk rather glibly, don't we, about Wiestern
civilisation or ancient civilisation or Oriental civilisation.
We take great pride in the fact that in this century, the most
' tremendous scientific marvels have occurred, not only in pure
science but in appl~ ied science in the technological field,
marvels have been brought aboui. Some of the young boys here
this morning might'be fascinated to know that I saw the first
motor car ever to come into our part of the State, and it wasn't
a motor car as we now understand it, It was a monstrosity called
a motor buggy. It looked like a buggy, and it was driven very
precariously with a sort of one-lung engine. That was among the
early motor vehicles in Australia, This is in my owm time, and
today there are so many motor vehicles on the roads that all those
who rule over us are tearing their hair~ almost literally to know
how they can cope with them, This is one of the marvels of
technical civilisation, I remember seeing for the first time in my life a
moving picture, a movie, It was out of doors, Nobody would have
thought of building a picture theatre in those days, and I remember
the picture vividly, it jerked like that all the time and it was
called " The Great American Train Robbery", ( Laughter3 Well, that
is only fifty-eight years ago and today we have talking pictures,
we have the marvels of radio, we have the marvels of television,
we fly through the air, I can be in four States in four days,
unhappily to make four speeches ( Laughter) because of the miracles
of flight. And all this has made us rather pleased with oiirselves,
hasntt it this half-century of enormous progress in the scientific
and technical fields,
Yet in this same century we have had two great warswe
have had some of the geatest outpouring of brutality and haired
in the history of man. Any body who wanted to sit in judgment on
this century in respect of non-technical matters might well say
that this was one of the most uncivilised centuries in modern
ftistory, Well, I don't want to go so far as to say that. That
would be extravagant because these wars have had their compensating
elements because of the nature of man, but I do want to remind you
And to remind myself' that civilisation has very little to do with
aircraft or radios or transistors or television sets, Civilisation
is in the heart and in the mind and those two elements will make
us civilised and the century a civilised one.
Sir, one other thing I would like to say to you is
this. We are a little inclined, aren't we, to make rather quick
moral judgments about the conduct of other people. One sees this
constantly in politics. In fact I don't mind admitting on my
behalf if not on behalf of Mr. Chipp that it is a constant
temptaiion and one that has to be resisted these quick moral
judgments on what other people are doing and are doing in good
faith. I had occasion to think about this recently, because I
have been talking to you about the nature of man and my poon
belief that as time goes on, with all its checks, the nature of
man grows stronger and better. This is the path of civilisation,
But recently, for example, I have been hearing
criticisms of the United States for intervening in a countr'y
called Vietnam. Very easy to be critical about what a great
country like the United States does. I venture to say that what
the United States is doing and the responsibility it is accepting
for the good of all of us is one of the greatest manifestations
of the nature of man, a very great piece of moral responsibility,
And you have only to ask yourselves the simplest of questions:
Why do you suppose that the United States, living in its own 00 0// 
,4 oontinent, the richest country in the world, the strongest
country in the world, why do you suppose it is engaging itsofinalittLe
piece of land in the South E~ ast of Asia and sending its men into it
and losing men there and spending vast sums and producing vast stores
of equipment? Why do you suppose they are doing it?
I hope I won't have anybody suppose that they are doing
it because they want to make South Vietnam an American colony&amp;
That would be too silly for words. That would be, in the homely
phr~ ase, buying trouble. I don't think any of us would want to,
have one of these countries as a colony. Of course not. Is it
because the Americans have enormous financial interests in that
colony? I venture to think they have practically none, Then why
are they doing it? Why are they, with all the temptations in the
world to be isolationists to say, " Well, we will protect our own
interest. We have the wide seas on each side of us" l; why do they
send their men and their equipment thousands of miles away across
the sea? The answer to me is perfectly irresistible, They are
doing it because they believe that what is at issue is human
freedom and they believe that human freedom ought to be defended
wherever it is challenged and that they, as the greatest power in
the world, should accept the greatest responsibility for it.
This is in reality, a tremendous piece of altruism on their part.
It involves a recognition that world power must be met by world
responsibility and that what they believe in and what we believe
in should be defended against attack. This is the greatest
exhibition of this kind that we have seen since Great Britain
stood alone in the last war.
It couldn't have happened, I think, fifty years ago,
sixty years ago when Americans were a bit inclined to say " We're
here, We will look after ourselves. Wde are not concerned about
the world." They are concerned about the world today. A very
good thing for us that they are and a very good thing for the
world that there should be a great power which makes it quite
clear that it is not moved by individual selfishness or a narrow
cultivation of its own national position but is moved by a feeling
that it is its brother's keeper. This is the last, and I think,
magnificent example of the nature of man.
And so, Sir, I end as I began. I can't think of
Winston Churchill without thinking of what he has said to me about
the nature of man. There are certain things that can't be done
or that certainly can't be done in the long run because in this
fashion, in this pervasive fashion, God has created us in his
own image, 



OPENING OF CHANNEL 10 TELEVISI. ON STATION
SYDNEY, N. S. W. -th APRIL3 1265
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon, Sir Robert Menzies.
It gives me quite a lot of pleasure to be associated with the
opening of your new Station. That is partly because your
Chairman and some of your Directors are very old friends of
mine, and their individuality guarantees that this will be a
highly, well-conducted Station.
There are other reasons, of course, for my pleasure. One is
that I think it is a very good thing for the future of television
that we should have as wide a choice as possible in the programmes
that we want to look at. I do not mean by that that there ought
to be so many that they cease to be effective, but I do mean that
a choice, the possibility of turning that knob and getting on to
another station is of tremendous importance.
I do not look at television as much as perhaps most people,
but I always have a very attractive sense of power when a
programme is on and I do not like it and I can Just turn the
kpneoobp lea ndfe egle t druirdin go fa nit , elecItt iomna kceas mmpea iugnn dwerhsetna nthde ye xcaacntl yd o hothwe
same kind service by me.
Choice is I think, in the long run, the guarpntee of quality
because if people are exercising their judgment in that vay,
this will soon become known and standards I think will tend to
be maintained and improved.
There is another thing about television which makes it fascinating
and, 1 thihk, sometimes almost terrifying. It appeals to the
eye as well as to the ear. People look at the performer,
whether he is a speaker or an actor, or whatever he may be, and
thay listen to him. They have an opportunity of forming a
judgment in two senses, which cannot be made merely by listening
to a voice over the air. I think indeed, that although your
prime function will be to entertain your vievers to instruct
your viewers in a m: W and insinuating way, you will occasionally
have on your station political people, men of affairs,
university professors, all sorts of people who have something
to say which may be contentious, and I think it is tremendously
valuable that people should be able to look as well as hear.
It gives them an opportunity of forming a judgment, so to speak,
in the round.
I think television is going to have a tremendous effect in
the future. Indeed, I sometimes tremble to think of what will
happen in due course when the premiums will be put on television
personalities and nobody will be nominated for a seat in
Parliament unless he is a clean winner on the screen. Well,
sometimes that might be good and frequently it might not, but
with experience people will cultivate an additional judonent
through the medium of television. / 2 
2.
Tihredore, I think you are entering upon an
adventure. It is a financial adventure of course, though
I have no doubt it will succeed, an adventure into a new
t. orld of entertainment and instruction, a newr world which
I believe is Zing. to be more and more signifcant as the
years go by.
I eomplixiient this Company on tio quality of those
who direct it l am, perfectly certain that under their
guidance this Station will have great success, and I
certainly wish it all the luck in the world*
-r 



LUNCHTIME RALL1, LIBERAL r'A1LTY OF N. S. W.
SYDN'EY TO' 4N HALL. SYDNEY APRIL, 196 j
Speech by the-Prime-Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Askin, Ladies and Gentlemen:
I am delighted to find Mr. Askin in such robust form.
I said to him outside before we came in that I didn't have any
reason to believe that he would be defeated by his enemies.
What sometimes happens in our party is that one is defeated by
one's friends. Half-hearted people.
The first thing I want to do is to urge all of you to
be whole-htearted. That will be the way to achieve victory.
( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
My mind goes back, of course, a good way in the history
of the Liberal Party because I had the great honour of beginning
it as Leader of the Opposition in 19' 44, and at that time I had
some hopes, of course, that with hard work, co-ordination of our
ideas, a revision of our policy, the accumulation of fresh ideas
and fresh drive we might win in due course. Well, we werent
successful in 1 I don't think that anybody imagined that
starting from as far back as we were we were going to win in 194+ 6.
We won a seat or two, And immediately ( do you remember? some of
the older of you may) the cry arose, a muted cry, the sort of cry
you hear in the corner of a club room " You will never win with
Menzies" ( Iaugnter) This became qui~ e a slogan, very encouraging
to me as Leader of the Opposition. ( Laughter)
In a reverse kind of way it did encourage me because
it annoyed me so much that I didn't let up for years thereafter.
And although " you couldn't win with Menzies" I suppose there are
some people who have said, " You can't win wih Askin". But we
did win and we have won seven consecutive elections since that
time. pplause) And this to a major extent due to the fact that
we have had inside our party the most fabulous loyalty-a loyalty
that has encouraged us, that has enabled us to ride oui periods
of unpopularity4 We've gone through thesb periods and we: have
gone through them successfully because we have had 1he complete
fidelity of our own people.
Now I think, Sir, that this period, the last twelve or
fifteen years in Australia is the most exciting period in our
history in the most exciting country in the world. ( Applause)
Let me repeat that to you: The most exciting country in the
world. It is part of my task in Canberra and in other parts of
the world to encounter people of significance and influence in
other countries and inevitably they will be heard saying tome,
tYou know, Australia is a tremendously exciting country. We,
ourselves, are taking an interest in it, We ( if they are in'the
financial world) are encouraging our people to invest in Australia"
because there is no country in the world that offers such an
exciting prospect of growth as " Vhis country of ours,
Now let us be proud of that because it is true.
Anybody who moves around Australia wouldn't need to have any
evidence of the facts that I have mentioned. Mr. Askin has just
mentioned the population. It is very interesting to recall that i
since 194ñ 9 I will just take one example the number of dwelling
units in Australia has gone up from 1,970,000 to 3,262,000.
Indeed it would be fair to say that most of the houses in Australia / 2 
-2
today have been built in our time. This is a tremendously
interesting factor and, of course, on all the material sides
black coal, ingot stee, all the area under crop in the country,
the increase in the sheep population all these things have been
going on, with their little variations, of course, from time to
time because life is like that, but in the end result they adAi up
to the most remarkable period of development that you or I have
ever seen anywhere. Now this is a matter that only needs totbe
mentioned, I donst need to elaborate it to you, but I just want
to add one observation if I may.
All this, and many other things that I don't need to
quote to you, have been going on during the period of office of
a Federal Liberal and Country Party administration at Canberra.
( Applause) Now, I am perfectly certain that when this statement
comes to be analysed, I will be told by our political opponents,
" Well but do you claim the credit for it? Do you think you did
it?" 1 And of course the answer is that I don't think I did it, but
I do think that the economic and financial policies of my govern.
ment have created a climate in which this could happen and did
ha ppen.
0 This is tlhe fact of the matter and in case somebody says
that is a little boastful, I want to remind you that at the last
State election in New South Wales, the then State Premier stated
categorically that the Commonwealth Government has had the main
responsibility for economic conditions. ( Laughter) Now he can't
have it both ways, or he couldn't have had the matter both ways.
If we have had, and he is quite right, the main responsibility
for economic conditions, then I think that our policies may be
taken to have contributed in a material way to the results that
I have been referring to.
Of course I know why the Premier said it, After many,
many years, I have a rough working knowledge of Premiers, I see
them with some regularity and I know they are never, professionally
quite satisfied. That's all right. But in thte last
election here we were unpopular. We had almost lost the 1961
" eWleelclt, i ont hearned yZohue reafreo. r e Tihte waCsonm'mto nwae ablatd h iGdoeav, e rnhme entth, o ugthhits, to say,
government that has practically lost your confidence, it has had
the responsibility and look what a mess it has made of it."
This was the whole sermon on that occasion. All right, I accept
it. Let Mr. Renshaw repeat that the Commonwealth Government has
the main responsibility for economic conditions and then Mr,
Askin and all of you will be able to point out that if that is
so then this responsibility has been discharged magnificently for
a long, long time. ( Applause)
ourselves NwowV ~ Mtrh. e reC hahaisr mabne, e n Is utchhi nka idte griese woorft hawchhiileev emaesnkti ngin
Australia, a degree of political success in Australia, and so
high a degree in the National Parliament of continuity of office
for our side, It might be worthwhile asking ourselves why.
Well, of course, from our point of view we have based ourselves
on the encouragement of private initiative and enterprise.
We have put into operation the most novel and effective series
of social service provisions that this country has ever had since
the old-age pension was first invented at the beginning of the
century and, of course we have set out, above all things and
particularly of late io help to create an educated democracy.
Now these have been Zhe driving elements in what we have been
doing. But Labor, what has Labor been doing? What is the cause
of this failure by Labor? And I say Labor because Labor is the
one thing all Over Australia. I know the Labor Government here ./ 3 
-3
is occasionally casting itself for the role of a Right Wing Party
while its principal Federal representative from this State publicly
announces his'steady translation to a position near the Left Wing
if not actually on its tip, so there is a little bit of jiggerypokery
going on here, But we know, don't we, that the Labor
Party is the same all over Australia. It has to be because when
it s outside rulers meet, they lay down rules of policy and of
actlon which are just as binding on the New South Wales Labor
Goverr~ ment as they are on any private member of the Labor Party
in the Federal Parliament. This is under their establishment.
And the result is that one is entitled to treat the Labor Party as
being the one thing all over Australia in Federal, in State, in
whatever it may be.
Now, Sir, everybody knows that the Labor Party has fallen
increasingly into the clutches of the extremists. You don't need
to know very much about the inside of politics to know how true
that is. Union after union has been infiltrated by communists
and communists have been coming into office promoting discord and
trouble. The Left Wing a term to which I see somebody objectsbut
the Left Wing at Canberra develops more and more its position
as the spokesman of Labor on foreign affairs. We hear them time
after time after time and we hear what they have to say about the
United States of America and American policy, because the Left
Wing of the Labor Party hates America and hates everything that
the Amtericans do, When I came in here this morning, there were
a lot of earnest workers holding up placards. This, of course,
is very largely an attack on the United States. I know it is
supposed to be an attack on my Government, but everything the
United States does on behalf of the free world is condemned by
the Left Wing of the Labor Party and you are much better informed
than I am if you know or can guarantee that the Left Wing of the
Labor Party won't be in complete charge of it inside the next
few years. The second thing about Labor is that it has lost the
capacity for evolving new ideas because, of course, it has to
rely on others to produce them and to tell them what they are to
do. Mr. Askin made a remark about-this which struck me as
profoundly true. They are not producing new ideas. When did they
last produce? Ever since they set themselves up as the Socialist
Party, the socialisation of the means of production, distribution
and exchange etc., have they ever produced anything new? The
truth is that they are the reactionaries in politics in this
country. They are living on the past, they are living on a little
stock of ideas that was established thirty years agro and which
they have been turning over ever since until it has got
frightfully shop-soiled.
We have been the party that has produced the new ideas,
You consider what has been going on in the field of export
development in the field of rural industry, in the field of
education, In the field of national development, in the field of
international relationships, and international movements of
money and balances of payments. We have been the initiators.
I can't recall a solitary initiation on the part of my opponents
for many years.
Now, a party that has lost the capacity for evolving new
ideas ought really to have a look at itself. We did fifteen
years ago. We came to the conclusion that we would have to run
through our stock of ideas and add to them and produce a platform
and a policy that would look forward and would have appeal to the
people of Austral a and in particular that would have appeal to
00 0 0 
the younger people of Australia to whom the future belongs.
( Applause) I was involving the Labour Party in a severe criticism
and saying that they were reactionary and out of date, and of
course they are, as out of date as socialism and that is about
as reactionary and out of date as any doctrine you have ever
heard of, but they still believe in it, they still hang on to it,
they still thinkc that this has some appeal to young Australian
men and women whom they underestimate shockingly. They seem to
treat the young people in Australia as if all they wanted to do
was to manage to live long enough to be paid something by the
government ( Laughter) ( Applause) and they are not like that, I
assure you. All the young Australian men and women whom I know are
keen, intelligent anxious to stand on their own feet and anxious
to carve out a future and you have a few million people in a
country like ours anxious to carve out a future, anxious to get
on with the job, anxious to engage in some adventure and I will
guarantee the development of the country without a moment's
hesitation. It is individuals, millions of them, encouraged
to develop their talents, encouraged to engage in enterprise for
risk and for reward have enough of them and you will have a
country that is growing and growing until I am able to say with
complete truth that it is the most exciting country in the world.
You know " Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive
But to be young was very heaven" ( Applause)
Those are fine words and worth recalling.
There is another aspect of this. I don't propose to
go through all the details, of course, because that would take
much too long, but I do want to say something to you about our
revolutionary approach to the problem of education. People very
soon forget the Commonwealth didn't have any direct responsibilities
in relation, for example, to university education. It was
my own Government that made the first little tentative grant to
the universities. It was my own Government that established the
Murray Committee whose report was the beginning of a revolution
in the university world and we adopted every last recommendation
in that report, and then we established a Universities Commission.
We established a body to report on tertiary education. We had
a.. special committee on teaching hospitals.
We have covered an enormous amount of ground in the
tertiary field and the result is that whereas fifteen years ago
the Budget item would be about œ 114, in the triennium that is
beginning now it will be more like œ 30M, and you, of course,
pay it, but ii has been under our policies that these things
have occurred. Go around the universities, go and see the
buildings going up, see the rapidly increasing number of prospective
undergraduates who can get in and get a university training
and give themselves a new chance in life. Have a look at these
universities, old and new, and you will find them seething with
activity, growing almost daily under your eyes. ( Applause)
And why? I venture to say with complete confidence
because of the revolutionary approach mal. e to these
matters by my own Government, a Liberal administration, Liberal
thought. This has been the beginning of a new era in tertiary
education in Australia, and it was initiated by us. Now remember
that and remember, as I do myself, with some pride, a go ~ 0 
Well then, our last initiation on this matter was in
respect of secondary schools and technical schools. it is
already rapidly being forgotten that as a result of the policy I
put before the people at the last election of which they warmly
approved, the money that we spoke of, a year for technical
schools, has already been taken up and will continue to be provided
for years into the future. This has put the States into a po * sition
ofI I think a very proper advantage in that they are able to do
more in building and equipment in technical schools to meet the
growing demand for technical training and knowledge in Australia.
Then we made our famous, and I believe contentious,
provision providing for science blocks and science equipment in
secondary schools ( Applause) meaning by that secondary schools of
all types, State, independent, most of the independent being church
schools. ( InterJector " Shamel") Shame? It would have been a
shame to refuse them. What sort of a shame would it have been if
the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, having decided to
help with science training in secondary schools, said, " Only State
secondary schools are to get this money. Those of you who have
had the enterprise or the particular desires to have your children
in other types of secondary school, you get nothing, although we
are the trustees for all the taxpayers in Australia." That would
have been a shame. ( Applause)
This is an item it is not a big item intrinsically
but has opened many doors and I am delighted with it because
think that it is helping io open up a new frontier in Australia,
You know, we can go along in the orthodox fashion and treat
education as following what I will call the orthodox routine lines,
the kind of thing that many of us have been through but what is
needed today in this age, in this young country, wizh so much
resource to be developed, so many challenging things to be coped
wh, what is needed is a higher degree, among other things, of
technical, scientific, technological training than we have ever
had before. This is elementary.
This is a technical age. The development in the
twentieth century has been, of course, ph~ enomenal, and here we are
in Australia, made up of a people of high average intelligence and
capacity for acquiring knowledge, with a very advanced standard of
living, with great advantages, and we have around us in the world
countries which are for various historical reasons and others,
backward countries who need help, whose population is pressing all
the time on their resources who are confronted every now and then
by the literal problem of siarvation, and they must be enabled,
they must be helped to develop along scientific lines their own
capacity to produce things for themselves. It is quite wrong to
4suppose they ought to be put in a position of living on somebody
else's kindness forever, They have to be encouraged to produce
things of their own in the problems of agriculture in the
problems of depasturing stock in the problems of factories, and
therefore we, as a donor country, under the Colombo Plan, have
ourselves an obligation to develop to the utmost our own capacity
for producing scientific and technological skill. ( Applause)
I went out, Sir, to Bathurst the other day to open a
science block at a sxhool, a school which had had a science master
many many years ago who was a pioneer in applied science, He
must have been a very very remarkable man. Sent the first wireless
messages across land from the school, did a great deal of
scientific work in X-Ray, with the most primitive appliances,
and today there is a magnificent science block thanks to this
policy, this revolutionary policy, with fine equipment so that
9 o* e/ 6 
6-
on the basis of a wonderful tradition which these boys have
inherited, they will be able to equip themselves to be pioneers
of a new growth of knowledge. Very appropriate to say that in
Bathurst? 2 because Bathurst after all was the new frontier itself,
geographically that was opened up by Blaxland and Wentworth and
the great explorers. This opened up a new physical conception
of Australia. It converted Australia almost in a stroke from
being just a limited penal settlement perched on the coast to
being the country that it has now become. And I said to these
boys, just as these great men had sought out new frontiers and
had discovered them, so they, themselves, would be the pioneers.
This is so much the kind of thing that we Liberals
ought to belieie in most passionately, that pioneering is not
dead that pioneering has to be encouraged, that all pioneers
don't need to be looking around with big beards on and wearing
bowyangs. This is an antiquated idea. We can all be pioneers
and the more talented we are, the more we can pioneer great
movements, great things, great bodies of knowledge, a capacity
to accept growing responsibility and therefore I point out to
you that this being our spirit, this being our approach the
Labor Party is beginning to discover, I think rather Mae that
their chronic talk about a depression or about referring to the
people as the proletariat I haven't yet met a chap down the
street who liked being called one of the proletariat but dont
let on to the Labor Party, I hope they will still continue to
use this rather fabulous expression.
Now, ladies and gentlemen, as time marches on, I just
want to turn quite hastily to the great problem of defence and
foreign policy because Mr. Askin had some sersi. ble things to say
about it. True, we the Commonwealth, have the primary responsibility
in a sense you might say the total responsibility for
conducting affairs relating to defence and foreign policy, but
whether we do it well or badly will determine the future security
and well-being of all voters in all elections for all Houses of
Parliament. This is one of those problems on which an unhealthy
attitude in a State Government could easily bring about difficulties
in the carrying out of a Federal policy.
If there is one thing on whicha we all ought to be
able to stand clear and together, it is the defence and security
of the country which in turn involves the foreign policy of the
country, how we deal with other nations. Now on this, of course,
as you know, Labor is hopelessly divided. Half the speeches made
on the other side of the House are busy explaining how wickedly
wrong the Americans are. The other half adopt the view which
is much more like our own and that is that if we are to view
our security in the broad, we might as well not on~ ly pay attention
to what we evolve inside our own country but to our relationships
with those countries upon whose help, mark you, in a great crisis
we would have to depend. ( Applause)
Now, let us apply that to the present state of affairs.
We have just, not long ago, initiated an expanded defence
programme which far exceeds anything that anybody would have
thought about a couple of years ago. It is going to involve
great national and individual burdens. I think it has the warm
support of the people of Australia but I am not so sure that the
support will be unbroken when we finally begin to pick up the
bill and see how we are going to pay for it. I don't know how
yet, we haven't got to that stage. e~** e9*/ 7 
7
But this is a colossal task, and it is a task which
involves to a ansiderable extent purchasing equipment in other
countries and it therefore involves to that extent drawing upon
our overseas reserves and therefore it has a direct relationship
to our balance of payments problem which we have from year to
year. And, ladies and gentlemen, when I hear my opponents
at Canberra throwing cold water on capital coming into Australia
I wonder whether they have the faintest idea as to, where we woull
be if we didn't have capital coming into Australia.
Does anybody suppose thateleven million people,
admittedly the best in the world I'm prepared to concede that
point ( cheers, applause) but does anybody suppose that eleven
million people with a continent the size of the United States of
America and with resources, many of which as yet are quite
untouched, can develop all the capital it wants for itself out
of its own individual savings? Really, nobody in his five wits
would pretend that for one moment, and therefore we can either
slow down our progress, slow down our increasing population by
cutting down on immigration or we can welcome overseas capital
to enable all our resources to be put to work and our development
' to continue. I don't know where the Labor Party supposes we ought
to get the capital we need. ( Interjector " What about Mr,
McEwen, he doesn't agree with Mr. McEwen agrees entirely
with what I am saying. I stated the policy of my Government on
this matter in my last policy speech and it represented the
unanimous views of Mr. McEwen, Mr. Holt and myself. My view is
that the Labor Party's policy would do more to damage national
growth and development in Australia than any other thing that I
can think of, ( Interjector :" What about the aborigines?") Isn't
it wonderful? Do you know why I take such pride in the educational
programme? Because I am hoping that after a generation or two
it will produce people who won't have such a passion for changing
the subject when they are losing an argument. ( Applause)
Now, ladies and gentlemen, I mentioned something
about defence, I ncw want to say a few words about foreign
policy. I want to know to what extent Laibor really challenges,
effectively challenges, our foreign policy, I don~ t quite
understand it because the other day the Leader of the Opposition
in Canberra said there was no hope of a bi-partisan policy
because nobody could agree with the Government's policy and
therefore, ladies and gentlemen, I am at a loss to know what
Labor's policy is.
All I know is that it isn't ours according to Mr.
Calwell and then of course, somebody comes up and says ( to
interjector) thai we didn't have one. In one of the long winter
evenings, one of you young fellows must come along and have a
word with me and explain the policy of the Labor Party on foreign
affairs because it would have all the charms of novelty.
( Laughter) Our policy is well known. We have a strong view
which I think most people in Australia share that the security
of South East Asia against communist attack Is of enormous
importance not only to the countries affected directly but to
ourselves In this part of the world. ( Applause) And therefore
we bave engaged ourselves in a variety of directions.
In the first place, we entered into my own
Government entered into the ANZUS pact with the United States
and with New Zealand and under that we have a great cloak of
vesee / 8 
protection under certain circumstances cast over us by the
United States of America. We entered into the South East
Asian Treaty, a treaty in which we are partners with Pakistan,
with Thailand, with the Philippines, with Great Britain, with
the United Statesl with France, with New Zealand. Under this
treaty, we have al undertaken to do what we can to protect
certain protocol countries, as they have been called, against
communist attack and one of them is South Vietnam, so there
we are4 South Vietnam one of the countries in effect assured
of our support under this treaty, provided she was willing or
prepared to ask us to come in because that was a condition
right through. Well she asked the United States of America, she
asked us, We are there, in a very small way, because we have
major commitments at this moment in and around Malaysia but
we are -there, we are contributing. The United States Is there
in a very substantial way with large forces of all arms and with
supplies and all the equipment that is needed to resist the
communist aggression. Now ladies and gentlemen, we are told
that the United States ought not to be there. In other words,
we are told that South Vietnam ought to be abandoned that the
communists from the north, the Vietminh, should be allowed to
come down and join up with these Vietcong pockets of communists
in the south and establish South Vietnam as a communist country,
a communist country ultimately dominated by the most aggressive
form of communism which is Chinese comirunism today*
Now, ladies and gentlemen what would happen then?
See, America is out. America has listened to the words of'the
boys outside and they go home. ( Interjector " Were they
communists?") I daresay, I thought their labels looked like
it, didn't you? ( Applause) But I wouldn't know , Ididn't
recognise any of them personally. ( Laughter) But, ladies anid
gentlemen, let us assume this " America Go Home. America Keep
Out. America Don't Have Any More To Do With This Business."
So Vietnam falls, What happens to Thailand? You have only to
look at the map when you go home. What happens to Thailand with
that long exposed communist frontier that would develop? What
happens to Malaya? What happens to Malaysia caught between two
fires? From a point of view of ordinary commonsense and of'
instinct of self-preservation, I can't understand how anybody
could say that the Americans ought to go out.
Let me put it in another way to you. Why are the
Americans there? ( Interjector " For profit") " For profit"
says some goat. ( Laughter) They are making a tremendous profit
out of being in South Vietnam; it is costing them thousands of
millions of dollars and they get nothing back. If that is profit
well you have introduced a new word to the dictionary, that jis all
I can say. ( Applause) It is easily summarised, ladies and gentlemen. They
are not there for money. They are spending money, vast sums.
They are not there in order to avoid exposing their own people
to risk because they have thousands of their own troops at risk
every day. They are not there because they have enormous business
interests in South Vietnam. Anybody who knows anything about
the economics of that country would know how absurd this is.
0000 0 0/ 9 
9-
Well why are they there? If they are not there
serving any selfish American interest, and that is quite
demonstrable then they must be there and I believe they
are there because this is, in the finest sense of the word,
an altruistic effort on behalf of free people wherever they
live. ( Applause) Sir, I am delighted to know that when my friend,
Mr. Askin, becomes Premier ( Applause) and his colleagues become
Ministers we will enjoy the support of people who on these
great matters have no ambiguities in their mind and no hesitations
in their souls. So my last word to you, because my time is up,
my last word to you, ladies and gentlemen is Go on in
strength, go on with confidence, go on with enthusiasm and you
will, beyond all question, win on May 1st. 



FOR PRESS P M. No. 37/ 1965
VISIT TO NEW ZEALAND BY MR. FAIRBAIRN, DFC, MP
Statement by the Prime Minter the Rt. Hon. Sj. lRobert Menzies
The Minister for National Development, the Hon.
D. E. Fairbairn, DFC, MP, will participate in the Anzac Day
commemoration in Wellington, New Zealand, at the invitation
of the New Zealand Government.
The ceremonies will commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the Gallipoli landing.
Mr. Fairbairn, who was elected to the Parliament
in 1949 and joined the Ministry in 1962, served as a pilot
in the Royal Australian Air Force during the Second Uorld
. Tar. He saw active service in both the European and Pacific
theatres of war and in 1944 was awarded the Distinguished
Flying Cross for his part in air operations over Europe.
Mr. Fairbairn will leave for New Zealand on
April 21. He will be adcompanied by Mrs. Fairbairn4
CANBERRA, 7th April, 1965. 



ANNUAL MEETING OF CONVOCATION OF UNIVERSITY OF
1" iELIBOURNE MELBOURNE 9TH APRIL, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies,
Mr. Warden, Mr. Chancellor and Ladies and Gentlemen t
I have one or two grievances that I will expose to
you in a moment but before I do i want to tell you that I have had
two singularly happy experiences here on this platform tonight.
The first was that the Registrar, the successor of the famous
J* P* Bainbridge who was Registrar in my time, held up a massive
minute book, leaned as he might be entitled to lean in a university
with an engineering school ( LaugZhter) on this thing, and it
colla psed. I am really here under false colours, under a complete
misapprehension. I had a letter from the Judge some time ago, no
doubt written with his usual lucidity, but I thought all I was
being asked to do was to come here to the annual meeting of
Convocation which in my time was made up of about twenty-five
people and to have a few reminiscent remarks to make you know,
of a civil kind but I had no idea that this old friend of mine
was a sadist un il three days ago I discovered and the print
was put in front of me that I was to come here and make what I
believe is loosely described nowadays as an oration the address
and I even saw the subject for the first time ( Laughter) : The
Commonwealth and University 3iucation.
Now, really, I am old and experienced but for a
long time now I have confined myself to doing one o1l these
formidable jobs a year. I once fell in for two. They take a long
time. For weeks and weeks and weeks you put in a few hours each
weekend because you are supposed to produce something wortchy of
the occasion, And I woke up to it ( I won't blame anybody else
three days ago, and naturally for the next two days, I had Cabinet
sitting until after midnight, and so whatever rough ideas I have
assembled have been assembled not with the midnight oil but with
post-midnight oil over a period of two days instead of two months.
And therefore you will understand my position. I have had no time
to prepare myself properly. I prayed for laryngitis ( Laughter)
but although the prayers of a righteous man avail mucli my prayers
were not answered. My prayers failed so all I could do was to
say, " Well, I will do my best" and I took a vow and the vow was:
Never again. So I warn all of you. There are no new pronouncements
to be made by me tonight. There is no controversy to
conduct. There are no new statistics, you will be glad to know
because the statistics of the university's growth and problems In
the last few years are now all too well known. And, of course,
on top of that I speak witha little hesitation, Mr, E! arden,
because in my own city I have recently been described as a
Johnny-come-lately in the educational field ( Laughter) and
therefore, of course, I must speak with immense reserve in
preserving my amateur status.
Now, Sir, therefore what I have to say to you will
be discursive, it will be occasional. It wontt I confess be
thoroughly or properly thought out and above ail things, f say
to those of you who are academically disposed, it will be unfit
for academic consumption. 0* .00 ./ 2 
-2
Now the Commonwealth has, in my own time, as the Judge
has reminded you, entered into the universities field in a great
and growing way, not, may I repeat, because of constitutional
responsibility but because the considerable financial power of the
Commonwealth has been allied to an acute consciousness on our part
of the need to save the universities from retrogression and perhaps
disaster. This is worth remembering.
The first grant ever made as a grant to the States for
universities was made in my own time in, I think, 1950 or 1951 and
it was a very modest amount of money, something a little over Li1M.
and that was done and then we established the Mlurray Committee
later on and when the Murray Committee's report came in, recommending
an enormous increase in Commonwealth subventions, we accepted
ito I confess that I engaged in a certain amount of low cunning.
I circulated the report the night before the Cabinet Meeting and
kept the Cabinet sitting all morning, afternoon and night so that
we might end up with a complete acceptance of the recommendations
and we accepted them, and that of course, as you have been reminded,
led on to the universities commission, the problem of the teaching
hospitals, the Martin Committee on Tertiary Education. This has
been the most astonishing development, though I say it mysel f, and it
has all been based on the proposition that what I agree is t e
considerable constitutional and practical financial powrer of the
Commonwealth has been allied to a genuine consciousness of the
needs of the universities.
Now I said " considerable financial power%. May I emphasise
to you this does not mean inexhaustible financial resources. If I
have one complaint that I can make about my academic friends, it is
that some of themnrot all of them but some of them, appear to think
that there is no limit to what can be produced financially. I've
even known one or two like that at Canberra, The skY is the limit,
they think. The sky isn't the limit. Considerable financial power
doesn't mean inexhaustible financial resources and that is not to
be forgotten. May I remind you admitting as I do that; with
uniform tax, with the ultimate control of the Commonwealth over the
borrowing programmes, we have vis-a-vis the States very great and
perhaps commanding financial powers that the task of a Commonwealth
Government in economic and financial policy is to preserve
a good economic climate in which. growth can proceed from a stable
foundation within the limits of its constitutional authority and
this, of course, presents classical problems.
There are those who may be heard to say, Ililell, why worry
about inflation? Itts only growth that counts. But wise men want
to have stability and growth. They realise that the stability of
the currency to the extent that it isn't affected by authg'rities
beyond the control of Parliament or by the terms of international
trade, which we don't control, or by seasonal conditions at home
which we don't control, is much affected by monetary control through
the banking structure and through the Commonwealth Budget',
Now, Sir, in a Commonwealth Budget let's have a look
at it on the expenditure side. Nobody need suppose that I am going
to expose the grisly secrets of the next Commonwealth Budget
because I don't know them so I have no temptation to disclose them,
We haven't got within months of that yet. But on the expenditure
side let's face up to it we have an enormously increased defence
expenditure enormously increased. We have incessant demands for
social benelits. We have great cash outlays on developmental
projects in Australia and we have increased outgoings to make up
the shortfall in loan raisings when the loan market weakens. Could I
elaborate one or two of these dreary-sounding items because they
are important? e / 3 
-3
Developmental projects. You will always find, and
perhaps you will within the membership of Convocation somebody
who will dispose of the whole problem by saying, " Jiell, of course,
the Commonwealth ought to conduct the whole of the works programme
out of loan money." Oh, how much I agree, if he could produce the
loan money. These theoretical approaches are not worth much.
Why is it that a Commonwealth Government, mine or any
other finds itself finding capital works provision out of revenue,
out ol the taxpayer? Not because it wants to but because in spite
of the enormous expansion of the loan market over recent years, it
just can't produce the amount of money that is needed, and we In
the Commonwealth have for years sought to solve this problem by
saying that when we had a loan programme and we raised loans on
the market, the States would receive the whole of the proceeds we
would take none for Commonwealth works, and that is why we spend
Commonwealth revenue on Commonwealth works,
And in the second place, of course, we said and I
think very properly, though without obligation if there is a
shortfall on the loan market, if we have approved of a loan works
programme for the States of œ C240M. and the loan market produces
œ 080M, we accept the responsibility for finding the balance out
of the Budget. Now these are very important matters, and if the loan
market weakens, it follows that there is a greater burden on the
Commonwealth Budget. These things have to be borne in mind when
you are confronting the problem of education, because after all
this may sound heretical there must be reasonable limits to
taxation, because if taxation is carried too far, it can inhibit
investment and growth. and above all that we know, in the brbad,
all of us, instructed or uninstructed by the critics, that in a
time of boom when there is overfull employment when there are
all these things, a surplus Budget may very well be called for as
a controlling factor, and in a time of recession, a deficit
Budget with its injection of credit into the system may very well
be called for.
Now, Sir, I am sorry to be so tiresome on this matter,
but all these things have to be watched. They all have a bearing
on university programmes which, I repeat, can't be unlimited if
every other factor is under observation and control. Therefore
looking back on it, I am really delighted to think how, with all
these principles in mind we have been able to find increasing
millions and scores of millions for university activity, But I
do beg of those who think that there is no financial consideration
tq be allowed into academic studies to bear in mind some of these
elementary truths about public finance,
Now, Sir, as I have just said, the recognition of this
truth hasn't so far involved any substantial modification of our
siqpport for university projects, but it would be an error to
suppose that demand can always be satisfied. This is something
that I do want you to have in your minds.
Nowv of * course so far I have been ta~ Jng a bout finance
but there are other elements no less important perhaps in the
long university view much more important, and they are these.
First of all, to preserve and improve the essential
nature of a university. This needs to be thought about much more
than it is by some people who have the advantage of not being 
0 0 
Johnny-come-latelies. The essential nature of a university to
maintain and improve the standards of teaching, of research and
of intellectual leadership these are the things for which a great
university like our own stands and must stand.
Now, Sir, what is the essential nature of a university?
Well, in the first place, if I may repeat a truism, we must aim at
some balance between the natural science and the humanities. I
repeat that. It needs to be repeated quite a lot. We have had an
awful lot of science in this century a tremendous amount of
technology in this century. The only way in which the world has
failed in this century is by man's inhumanity to man and therefore
the humanities which give breadth of outlook, a wisdom of judgment,
are of the mos supreme importance. There it is the balance.
In the second place, Sir, I think that the essential
nature of a university involves a high standard of attainment
leading to a widespread recognition of the degrees that the
university awards, a high standard of attainment, You might fill
Australia with a hundred universities, but if their standards were
low, their degrees iwould fall into contempt. It is vital to me
and to you in this university, that the degrees of the Melbourne
university should continue to rate high all around the world, and
that means a high standard of attainment.
We must have post-graduate and research work on a scale
which will improve the peaks of attainment. I don't talk about the
ordinary average level, but every university, every seat of learning
that has distinction has achieved it not infrequently by having
men of immense distinction, women of immense distinction in the
various faculties. These are the peaks. We are not to produce a
flat graph, are we? We are to produce one interrupted by peaks of
distinction. We must have work of that kind which excites the
minds of undergraduates, It is not a matter of Just going
through as a matter of routine, " Well I have to read this and I
have to read that. If I can get 5O-odd per cent., Itm through." 1
This is terrible. The best kind of undergraduate ought to be a
man or woman whose mind is excited, and it will be excited if the
student is working under or in direct or remote contact with people
of an immense standard in the post-graduate and research field,
And, of course, on top of that, a university must serve
to generate much-needed teachers to satisfy the future demands of
the students who are to come. Now this is not so much a definition
of the essential nature of a university. I don't profess that it
is at all exhaustive, but what I have mentioned refers to those
matters which achieved will make a great university and which not
achieved will make a poor one.
I think, Sir, that it is unwise for these reasons to
treat as universities institutions which fall short of these
requirements. That is why we have, as a government, in the light
of the Martin Report offered to support institutes of colleges
up. to a tertiary diploma standard. It is just because we believe
that you can't lower the standards, that you can't have things passing
as universities which are not universities according to the defined
structure that we ought to move carefully in this field.
Encouragingly, the more tertiary education we have in
the country the better, but it doesn't need, of necessity to be
university education in the sense in which we understand It.
It's a great pity for people to think there is no middle course
that it is either a university or it's nothing. There is plenty
of room as the Martin Committee pointed out, to have tertiary
institutions which will give most valuable instruction in the
tertiary field but which will not be universities. .1. 
r
Now, Sir Leslie Martin, in this last report a very
long, carefully considered, valuable report, with some aspects
of' which we haventt found ourselves able to agree has had
much to say of supreme value in this field, and having erposed
the problem more or less as I tried to expose it to you myself,
the Report says " To assist in this development, it is suggested
that each State Government should establish an
Institute of Colleges."
and then later on " The function.... should to consider
general plans for the expansion of technical and other
tertiary noa-unjyersitXy education...."~
and then later on it says, looking forward very appropriately-
" At some appropriate time in the fut ure, the
Institute might arrange for more advanced training
leading to degrees such as Bachelor of Technology..."
" The Committee's proposals envisage a greater
diversity of tertiary education in Australia but any
hope of achieving this diversity would be nullified if
Colleges attempted to transform themselves into
Universities, The responsibilities of Colleges to the
community are of a different kind."
Now that is worth thinking about. It is very easy for
somebody who is a little parti pris on some matter to say, " Oh,
yes, but there is such-and-such a technical school and it does
very good work." Of course it does. The R. M. I. T. does splendid
work and has tertiary elements in its courses, I don't deny
its I admire it. But the thing that is brought to our notice
here is that a university is one thing. It has some essential
structure which we are not to forget. And that a non-university
which may still be in the tertiary field can be an entirely
different thing. And the Committee, I thought with great wisdom,
promoted ways and means by which somebody having done some course,
a diploma course in one of these colleges in the institutes of
colleges, might pass from there to a university in orde4' to take
a higher course and take a degree.
Now, we are not going to settle this problem in a few
minutes. All I am asking you to do is to think about it, and I
start my thinking with two premises one, I want to see an
enormous extension in this country of genuine post-secondary
education. I will define tertiary education in that sense
genuine post-secondary education leading to higher skills of the
kind that people need both in industry and in business and in
other aspects of life, and I don't want to see the great name,
university, pulled do'wm, I donft want to see its standards low~ ered,
I don't want to see bodies or institutions called universities
which are not according to the structure that I have described.
And believe me, ladies and gentlemen, this is not a matter of
intellectual snobbery. We have lived too long for that kind of
nonsense, There can be no room for intellectual snobbery. There
can be room only for a high intellectual standard which ought to
be maintained. And that brings me to the last thing I wanted to say to
you and that is that the greatest problem of the lot today is the
problem of standards, maintaining the standards, not letting them 
6-
slip away, not letting them be swept away in the flood of numbers,
These are hard words I know in some sense, but standards are all,
If in fifty years' time the standard is no higher than it is now,
then it will be worthless, Standards ought to rise and rise all
the time. I had something to say about this when I was invited by
the University of New South Wales to do the Wallace ! Jurth Memorial
Lecture. Do you mind if I quote you a few lines of what I then
said? I had longer to consider them than I have had this time.
I quoted first of all the Robbins Report in England which said
this " Throughout our Report we have assumed as an
axiom that courses of higher education should be available
for all those who are qualified by ability and attainment
to pursue them and who wish to do so. What type of
education they should get and in what kind of institution
are questions we consider later on; and the criterion by
which capacity is to be judged is clearly a question on
which there may be a variety of opinions. But, on the
general principle as we have stated it, we hope there will
be little dispute."
That's, what the Robbins Committee had to say. And then when I was
discutsing thiis in the U-urth Lecture, I went on to say this and
again I trespass on your patience
" Far too many people in our country when they
urge the creation of a new university, seem ? o think of
it in terms of financial provision by governments, and the
bricks and mortar of practical construction, Yet the fact
is that the value of a university depends primarily upon
the standard of its research and its teaching. In short,
the greatest problem about the expansion of universities,
or the creation of a new one, is that of securing a highlyqualified
staff. Any man who has any share of responsibility
for the general national balance and prosperity cannot
fail to be conscious of such problems as the pressure of
numbers on financial resources, the pressure of numbers and
demand on physical resources, because these things form
part of the economic problems of the nation. They have to
be considered. They can produce some limitation upon the
financial provision by governments. But, in the ultimate,
the capacity to establish new universities or to expand
old ones is primarily to be judged by reference to the
maintenance of the quality of research and teaching and
the value of the degrees to be awarded.
" Greshamts Law, if I may say so, applies to
universities and their degrees just as much as it did and
does to money, In short, we have occurring under our eyes
a tremendous explosion in the number of those who seek
tertiary education. Our task is to see that they get it
without lowering the standards.
" Unless we can, by one means or another,
encourage and produce an increasing percentage of
university students who aim at higher degrees and
research work, then we will do a gross disservice to
university education by concentrating our minds
exclusively on numbers and on money." G. a/ 7 
-7-
Now these were my views, and as I stated them I don't
alter them but I was interested recently to read the journal of
the Royal Society of Arts, an eminently respectable body in
London of which, for some reason quite obscure to me, I am
Fellow. Sir John Lockwood of the University of London was speaking
on tertiary education in the Cantor Lectures. Now I will quote
a little of him, if you don't mind
" I want first of all to discuss one of the
major issues which is being faced by many countries
of the world. Social theory in most places insists on
the essential importance of equal educational opportunity
for all young people. The consequential logic of such
theory seems then to require that consumer demadai s the
basis of educational provision, For entry to higher
education, tHis principle would appear to mean that anyone
who has satisfactorily completed a particular period of
secondar education should have the right of access to
some form of higher education.
American State Universities have largely
followed this principle, and in areas where the American
practice has been developed, for example in the
Philippines
( I speak subject to the distinguished representative here from
Mindanao) " admissions and policies of universities are much the
same. The effect on a unlversity of indiscriminate
expansion to satisfy demand is incalculable. Educational
inflation may be socially desirable as a theoretical
proposition but it has an insidious capacitvto do damage
to the currency value of education."
Now I quote that. it's worth thinking about. Without adopting
it all, it is very well worth thinking about. And he went on
to say, a few minutes later in his lecture
" To the economist......'"
Well, I don't venture to speak for economists. They speak for
themselves with an infinite variety of tongues, but
" To the economist, a full ' open-door' policy
to meet ' consumer demand' is well-nigh stupid folly.
It is the very negation of wise and constructlve planning.
It takes no real account of the needs of the economy.
It is based on the self-interest of the consumer, and,
if uncontrolled, leads to an output of graduates who may
not find employment within their own speciallst competence.
India was an unfortunate example of this situation."
And I should add to that without adopting all those
words that it is fascinating to read of what has been going on
in the African countries about universities, about the conferences
they have had and about the way in which they are trying to
channel university education in such a way as to serve the
overall interests of the nation. Very interesting; very
difficult; much too complex to be gone into tonight.
The Chairman of the meeting at which Sir John Lockwood
made this speech was Mr. Walter James, who is the Editor of the
" Times" Education Supplement, and he said something quite
provocative and worth thinking about. He said 
-8
" There is one point I shiould like to put to
him ( that is, the speaker) about the relation between
a rapidly-expanding university system and schools in
the developed countries. ( A good deal has been said about
the under-developed countries.) Does he think that you
can expand the universities rapidly without bringing
a certain diminution of standards in the schools? I
have heard from a number of English people who have gone
to America the assertion that the sort of people we
should find teaching in sixth form in this country are,
in general, not teaching in American schools at all,
but in American universities."
Now this may be an exaggerated statement I don't know but
it does serve as do the last two citations that I made, to
bring back into our minds the kind of problem that we have.
Not a problem to be ignored, not a problem to be dismissed by
being told that you are old-fashioned or something of the
kind I'm not a bit old-fashioned on this business. My life
has devoted itself for years to the development of education
in this country. Nothing old-fashioned about it, It's mostly
been brand new. But I think we would do badly by getting
into our minds the idea that all you want is a lot of money
and all you want is a lot of builder's labourers and building
material and you can create a university. We must get that
out of our minds, You could have the finest buildings in the world
with all the greatest facilities in the world and have a thirdrate
university. You could have the most shocking buildings
and a great university. It depends entirely on the people
inside and how they look at it and the people who teach and
the people who investigate and the people who work, and the
great object of modern statesmanship is to reconcile the two
things to have the best people, the keenest people? the
most enthusiastic people doing research, doing teaching, 7
giv-ing leadership to their students, have them all in tha
sense and combine with them buildings in which they will be
proud to work and live and surroundings which will give them
happy memories in future years.
A 



SIR J0H19 MONASH CENTENARY
HELD AT I4ONASH STATUE, LNLITHGOJ AENU,
MELBOURNE 11TH APRIL, 1i96k5
Speech bZ the Prime Minipter, the Rt. Hogkbet enz es
Sir, Mrs, Bennett and Ladies and Gentlemen,
Itts a great, though I fear an undeserved, honour
for me to be allowed to speak to you today about one of the very
greatest men of our time. The Chairman has said kind things
about me. He might have multiplied them four times and still
have understated the case for Sir John Monash.
It was my good fortune to know Sir John Monash in
the last period of' his life. Itts quite simple for me to say
to you that he has various memorials., He has an assured place
in military history$ a place founded not only on his brilliant
understanding of the art and science of war, but also on his
unsurpassed capacity for communicating his ideas; in other
words, his advocacy in the greatest sense. That is one secure
place, an overwhelmixrVsecure place that he has in our history.
In the second place, he has a secure position in
the industrial development of this State. His work for the
Electricity Commission, his utter command of it, his lively
capacity for telling politicians where they got off and where
they got on, this contributed so much to the ultimate development
of the KLectricity Commission, now spreading or spread
all over the State of Victoria, that I am perfectly certain
that in that field alone he would never be forgotten.
He had, and has, a secure place in the educational
history of Australia. I remember years ago there was an appeal
being made on behalf of the University of Melbourne, my own
old university, and I was there not, I am happy to tell you,
as a speaker but as a highly interested listener and Sir
John Monash made the principal speech. WVhen he had finished
I turned to my neighbour, whoever it wasand said, " You know,
whatever else in his favour may be said about John Monash, he
is the finest advocate I ever listened to." 1 T hiLs wa s a
tremendous attribute of his. Tremendously involved as I have
briefly indicated in his own magnificent achievements in war, he
was a great advocate. He was a great advocate who knew how to
think who worked out his thoughts and who could then present
them to other people with such compulsion, such persuasion
that they began to wonder why they hadn't thought of it
themselves. He was I venture to say a s one not without some
experience in the field of advocacy, the greatest advocate
I ever listened to,
And on top of that, his name has been honoured in the
creation of the university which bears his name tand therefore
he has a secure place in educational history. Itwas a most
brilliant stroket if I may say so, Chancellor, when this
university was named after him because for a century or two
centuries or three centuries to come, young men and women will
be found to say$ " W1hy was this university named after this
man?" and they will then learn something about him, and in
that sense his great soaring spirit, his superb qualities will
be memorialised for centuries to come. / 2 
-2
And in the fourth place I hope I will be
allowed to mention this. He has this splendid memorial in
bronze, one of our treasures, a constant reminder in this
area which is, in itself full of history of the man who
made more history than most of us will ever be privileged to
make, And so, Sir, he has the enduring respect and
gratitude of all who lived in his time and of all who will read
of him with intelligence and understanding.
I said something just now about his quality of
advocacy. I got to know him a little in that capacity. It
may not be known to many of you but at one stage in his life,
he being the most versatile of people, he was a patent
attorney. I have always thought this was something of a
sideline because he was above all things, a most distinguished
engineer. But in a number of cases in the patent side of the
law, he was called as an expert witness. Now, we had a very
great judicial laiwyer in Victoria in my earlier days, the late
Sir Leo Cussen, perhaps the greatest judicial lawyer we ever
had on our own Supreme Court, and it was well reported that
Cussen had more than once said this was one of' the legends
at the Bar in my time that any solicitor who failed to
retain John Monash as an expert in any patent matter was prima
facie guilty of negligence. Now this was not a rash statement
made by a rash man but a very wise statement made by a very
wise man. I tell It to you because it serves to recall to me,
and I hope will recall to you, the astonishing versatility of
this great man, his immense virtuosity in whatever he touched
and that utter integrity of mind and force of personality which
conveyed with everything he said the stamp of truth and of
conviction. I had another experience I hope you will allow
me to recall it, I was, as you have been reminded, for a little
time in the Legislative Council, a happy state of affairs from
which I have long since escaped. And while I was there, I
was the junior honorary Minister in the McPherson Government,
and next to me was the other honorary Minister, the late Ted
Morley whom some of you knew who was Member for Barwon.
Well, up came a proposal from the Electricity
Commission from Sir John himself about some extension about
some trifling expenditure of Li1M. or something of that kind
which was in those days quite a lot of money, and we rejected
it. It was knocked out by the Cabinet, and the word went outyou
know how things do get out the word went out and it came
down to the S. E. C. and Sir John put his hat on, came up to the
top of Spring Street, arrived at the outer doors of the Cabinet
Room and if I kniow anything about him, demanded admittance.
Anyhow, the word came in that Sir John was outside,
The Premier, that most delightful and amiable of
men, Sir William McPherson said, " Oh, yes. Bring him in", and
he came in and we all stool up instinctively. Wte all stood
up. Ile were in the presence of a man we knew was a greater man
than we would ever be, and we stood up and he was given a seat
at the table. Other people responsible for branches of the
civil service of this State usually sat in the second row and
spoke when they were spoken to but, no Sir John was strong
on this matter. He was given a seat at the table. He looked
round towards the Premier and said, " Jell, Mr. Premier, I gather
that the Cabinet has rejected my proposal." " Well, yes, I
a* e. / 3 
-3
think that's right) Sir Johia." He said, "' 4ellp that can only
be because they have failed utterly to understand it. I will
now explain it." He sat there with that rock-like look, and
he explained it and one by one, we shrivelled in our places;
one by one, we ? Xcame convinced, or at any rate, felt that we
were convinced of the error of our ways, and for half an hour
he went on. He explained this thing step by step by step atid
we were left silent. It is quite true that my friend and
colleague, Ted Morley started impulsively to put a question
and said, in his exciiement, " Now look, John," and 1 ickedly-
I have always been a trifle impudent said, " No, come Ted,
come come, V~ hy dont you call him Jack?" And that settled it.
There was no more, not another word came out. And so Sir
John said, looking at the Premier " Wtell, Sir, I take it that
your decision is reversed and thaZ I now have approval for
my proposal and so that there will be no delay, I have brought
with me the Order-in-Council that will be necessary for this
purpose. He pulled it out of his breast pocket, passed it
around, it was signed and he went out.
Now I know that there are mixed feelings about
political people who are supposed to have all sorts of almost
endemic disqualifications but that is the only time in my
l. ife when I knew a man come in from outside into a Cabinet
and utterly reverse a decision which, at the time he arrived,
had been unanimous, I mention that because I thin. k that this
is something that must have characterised him all his life.
He didntt arrive at conclusions hastily, He
burned the midnight oil. He was reputed to live with a
dictaphone alongside his bed so that if he woke up during
the night, he could dictate a few notes of one kind or another.
He was never guilty of coming to any task inadequately prepared,
This characterised him, I am sure, in every aspect of his
l~ ife, but above all things having done that, he had the force
of character, the utter integrity, the persuasiveness of
language, the clarity of vision which enabled him to take
all the Ideas that he had and put them clearly into the minds
of other people. if you look back over the whole of his
life, I am sure you will agree with me that this remarkable
gift was not his greatest gift but it was a gift ix-rithout which
his even greater gifts might not have found their full effect.
And so Sir, I am most honoured to be here. It
is a wonderful priN4lege for me who happens to be, and who has
been for some time, the Head of the Government of the Commonwealth
of Australia to be able to come here and say a few simple
but honest words about a man who is beyond question one of the
very great men in my life and in yours. It is a great privilege
for us in this city to have had this man among us. It is a great
privilege for this State to have contributed to the life of
Australia and to the life of the world the services of so
notable a man. Sir, I thank you indeed for the opportunity of
speaking today. I would hesitate to describe what I have said
to you as an oration. On the contrary, what I have set out to do
is to convey to you with perfect simplicity and sincerity my
deep feelings about this great and famous man. 



FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE LIBERAL PARTY OF AUSTRALIA
HELD AT HOTEL CANBERRA. CANBERRA 12TH APRIL, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
We are twenty-one today and we have the key of the
door. That's something we ought to remember, politically.
We have indeed been either fortunate or wise, or a-mixture of
both because one of the outstanding things about this party,
twenty-one years old, is that it has secured the support in
Australia, I am quite convinced, of the young and ardent who are
ambitious and self-reliant. ( Hear, hear) That, I think is a
pretty good thing to be able to say and a better thing If we
maintain its truth. We attract the young and the ardent with
ambition and self-reliance. It is worthwhile recalling every
now and then that Australia would not have made the enormous
advances it has made if it had been a communitrof people with
dependent minds. The fact that Australia has grown as it has
demonstrates that we have people of independent minds who aim
to be contributors as well as beneficiaries.
I think when I have said that I have probably said
what is at the very heart of our own approach, of our philosophy
and, as I will set out to prove to you, of' our practice.
Now I know that if the leader of a party and if the
leader of a government in particular talks about what has
happened, he is told that hie is living on the past, I have no
desire to live on the past. I have no particular desire to
live in the past, but I think that it is worthwhile recalling
a few things because they may explain to us everyone of us,
' why we have had this remarkable success, politically, and the
reasons for what we must do if we are to continue because the
past is never to be ignored, the future is never to be regarded
as something that is entirely dominated by the past.
Itts very interesting to me, looking back over these
years, looking back to that time when to be the Leader of the
Opposition was not a frightfully lush occupation. I had a
secretary and a typist and I received a private member's salary
and a handsome allowance of œ 3O' a year for being Leader of the
Opposition. These times have changed very much and, I think,
for the better but in those days it wasn't easy.
And I remember all the preliminary work of creating
the party being put in hand in my office and I remember that
my then Private Secretary Eileen Lenihan, who did so much
tremendous work at that time, was ultimately presented by us,
when we became a party, with a silver dish with a suitable
inscription. This was rather single-handed business at that
time, and for no strange reason, my old friend, Mr. Anderson,
who has been one of the great valiants in this party ( hear, hear)
( applause) will remember well that when I set out on this
expedition and first of all found out how many different
organisations there were, he was thie leader of one which I
think was called the Service and Citizens. And there he was,
never in much doubt about his own mind, Bill, and therefore
when he came along, I knew that he would speak to his people.
We had a conference over there in that improbable-looking
place along the road and we ultimately began, as the President
has reminded us, 
2-
Now the first thing we did, the thing that our
opponents have not done, was to say, " Well, what do we learn
from our vicissitudes?" vie had been almost butchered in
194+ 3, 1 can speak about this with some detachment because
contrary to the public impression, I was a private member
at the election of 194+ 3, for a variety of reasons I needn't
go into. And there we were with a battered remnant in the
Parliament. I think that at that time that out of a House
of 74+, we had 17, After the following election we had
perhaps 20 and I will venture to say that there never was a
better Opposition in the world, ( hear, hear) because we set
aboutit the right way.
We said, " Now, here we are, despised and rejected"
and we were of course, at that time led by a leader whose
political life was regarded by most people as finished,
So we had no great assets either in the front or otherwise,
but we made up our minds Zhat we would come back, that we
would unify ourselves, that we would do the things that had
to be done folrget about the past and say to ourselves " 1we
must have one party full of unity and fire, and we musi have
a programme, a plati'orm, which will make people understand that
we have been thinking in the future." We set about it in
19.44. and 194+ 5 and we produced a new look if I may use that
phrase, for the nev party, and the effeci of this forward
thinking this liveliness, this being modern, being prepared
to be a little adventurous was that although we didx. It win
more than two or three seats in 191+ 6 ( and I remember it so well
because the cry went up in all the club armchairs: " You will
never win with Menzies") we went on and, in 194+ 9, had one of
the historic victories ol Federal politics.
What I want to say to you about that aspect of the
matter is that I don't mention it as if we might pat ourselves
on the back and be boastful. I want to ask you why, why we
won in 194+ 9 and why we have gone on winning ever since.
Now why? There is no simple answer to this, There is an awful
lot of luck one way and the other in politics but I want to
tell you that my belief is that over the whole of this period
of fifteen, sixteen years, we have won because we have been the
party of innovations. Not the party of the past, not the
conservative party dying hard on the last barricade, but the
party of innovations. And a number of the innovations that
have been made I don't think would have presented themselves
to the minds of most of us in 194+ 9.
Now I really haven't the time, nor have you the
patience for me to be going through a list, but I am mentioning
them in Lhis connection. These were innovations, these were
evidences of a lively mind and a forward-looking heart. This
is the whole thing that we must remember and that we must
continue to remember and act on in the years to come,
You take social services, They had a stock pattern.
Our opponents thought that they had a monopoly of interest in
social services, but you just look back on it and think of the
things that we p . uduced not our opponents the things that
we produced, the innovations in this field: The Aged Persons
Homes Act, one of the great social measures of our times ( hear,
hear), the Medical Health Scheme, the Pharmaceutical Scheme,
housing loans, housing insurance, these matters being handled
with great distinction if I may say so, and a meticulous
attention to detail by my colleague, the Minister for Housing.
( Applause) Ott S**/ 3 
S3
Foreign policy. We were told that we were just a lot
of dead and gone people, we had no foreign policy. It had never
occurred to us in Opposition to be offensive to our great friends
and therefore we had no foreign policy,-And yet, in our time,
what has happened? We have had the Colombo Plan and never forget
that it was devised by Australia. We have had the A1? IUS pact in
which we played a crucial part and we have had the South-East Asian
Treaty, now under some ecclesiastical fire ( Laughter) but I still
venture to think a remarkable treaty in that it exhibits the will
of nations free nations, to help to preserve the freedom of other
people. hese are three pretty considerable achievements, I think,
in the field of foreign affairs, and we are not exhausted by them
because quite recently my colleague, the Minister for External
Affairs made a speech, a statemdent in the House which I will venture
to describe as the finest statement on foreign policy to be heard
in the Federal Parliament. ( Applause)
In the world of finance, I have heard what my old friend,
the Premier of Victoria, had to say with great vigour this afternoon,
but I would remind all of you that when we came into office, the
financial agreement had been operated in such a way that when the
Loan Programme had been arranged and had been allocated, the duty
of the Commonwealth came to an end. We were the first government
to come to the aid of the States on their Works Programme by, in
effect I don't use the word technically underwriting the'
approved Works Programme for the year.
My colleague said something this afternoong I thought
rather honest about this, We have been called on to subscribe out
of revenue which we have to raise the shortfall in the Loan
Programme. If we look back over the period of office of this
Government, we would find that the shortfall of subscriptions by
the Commonwealth must have amounted to œ-700M. or œ. 800M, over the
whole of that time. This was a novelty.
I dontt know what the professors of political science
teach, except that I have always thought that it was perhaps not
very political and not very scientific ( Laughter), but that is a
mere discourteous remark on my part. I don't quite know what it is
that they teach but if they are interested in the history of
government relations in a Federation, then they ought to recall that
it was a Liberal Government, it was our Government, which for the
first time departed from the strict letter of the law under the
financial agreement. Wie did indeed, and undertook voluntarily a
policy which would help the States whose responsibilities on public
works are so high and who, if i may say so, attend to those
responsibilities so well so that we might be able to say, " Well?
we don't want you to be scrambling through the year wondering how
tmuch the Loan market will produce. If we agree on a works programme,
you may have the whole of the proceeds of the Loan market and if
there is a shortfall on the borrowing market then we will see you
through." Now I mention this, I don't wa-to argue about it,
I merely recall it to remind you that this was a revolutionary change
in the relations betveen the Commonwealth and the States in respect
of Loan raisings. Now so far, it's not too bad is it? These are
revolutionary changes. These weren't produced by conservatism,
these were produced by dynamism in a conception of what the
Commonwealth meant and what the nation meant and required.
You will recall I don't need to elaborate it what
we have done in the educational field. I am quite accustomed now
to being told by all sorts of people, professorial or otherwise,
that we are falling down on our job. What was our job when we oame
0 a0*/ 0 
back into office at the end of 194+ 9? It had nothing to do with
maintaining universities. Nothing whatever. We were the first
people to say, after the war with all this clamant demand for
University training with all this healthy desire on the part of
thousands, scores ol thousands of people to get a better education
and to be better citizens: " We will come into this field." i The
first Commonwealth scholarships were produced by us, The first
grant to the universities was produced by us a very small one, a
little quiet, tactful thing of about Vi~ m., Lut we produced it.
And then we appointed the Murray Committee and then later
on the Universities Commission and then later on the Martin Committee
on Tertiary Education. And what was regarded as an innovation in
1950 LiM. or œ 1 M. has now become œ 30M. a year. I know that
this produces its disadvantages, in a sense, for the States because
none of our programme could succeed without the co-operation of the
States, and therefore I am not saying that we are solely responsible,
but I am saying that we were -the first people to come to the
conclusion that tertiary education in Australia was of such overwhelming
importance for the future of the nation we must forget
all about constitutional inhibitions. We must simply set out to
use our financial resources to bring about a new era in the
university world, I don't care much what undergraduates say in a
noisy way at a meeting -I used to be an undergraduate myself an.
no doubt reasonably noisy but I do know that whenever I go round
Australia and look at a university and see the great buildings rising
to the sky, I take some pleasure in the fact that it is our
Government and our party that has produced these phenomenal results.
Science teaching, technical schools I don't need to go
through the whole gamut of this. I have made far too many speeches
, in it. I hope you will all have it in mind, but the point that
I am making is that this has happened because when wie were out and
broken and beaten, we didn't simply sit down and decide to refurbish
the slogans of the past, but we did decide that in the new world
we must have new ideas, forward-looking ideas, drive and imaginahion,
and all of these things are the result* This is what I beg of you
not to forget. It is not a matter of resting on your oars as they
sometimes say, and saying, " Well, look what a good job we have
done." Yes, we have done a few good things but I want to remind
you that the whole point of this is, that being out and looking
forward to being in we set about developing fresh ideas and drive
and imagination. And all of these things I have mentioned
illustrate it to you. I could give you a long list in the field
of trade and payments, the balance of trade and payments, what has
been done in the trade world with treaties and commissioners, what
has been done in the mineral world, to which David Fairbairn made
some short but valuable references this afternoon, I don't want
to take up your time with details on those matters except to say
one thing about the balance of trade and payments.
A campaign goes on from time to time in Parliament and
out of it to the effect that my distinguished colleague, Mr. Holt,
whose services to this party are beyond praise, ( hear hear)
( applause) is constantly assailed because it is sail that he
doesntt care what happens, He will take overseas money on any
terms and under any circumstances. This is an awful lot of
nonsense. There are all sorts of attempts made to create divisions
and they are created by people who have never read what he said
or what I said in a policy speech, but they are anxious to create
a countervailing rift in the Government to match that obvious
rift or is it two rifts? or three rifts? which exist in the
Opposition. sO~ g 
I just want to remind you of one thing. It is quite
true that in a perfect world, and if we had fifty million people in
Australia, we would sell our goods abroad, we would buy imports,
we would hope always to have some slight baance in our favour on
the balance of trade, and then, of course, everything in the garden
would be lovely, Anybody who is out of the kindergarten knows
perfectly well that eleven million people with this enormous
continent to deal with with new resources being turned up every
month, every year, can~ t deal with these matters, can't develop
resources alone, They would have to rely exclusively on their
own savings. It can't be done, and therefore we have adopted tti e
view, and I am sure you have too, that Australia has great valueto
gain by being able to attract investment capital and in part* icular
private investment capital into this country so that we may develop
the country and be fruitful and multiply and inherit our part of
the earth. Well, we are told that this is all wrong. I just want
to tell you that although we would always wish to see Australian
equity interests in overseas capital invested here and quite a
number of people who bring capital in understand that and act on
it the fact is that but for the inpouring of private capital
into Australia in the last dozen years, our development would have
stopped far short of what it is today. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
I did notice the other day that, reading Hansard
I don't know whether you read Hansard; I occasionally do I read
a powerful speech by somebody who gave me to completely understand,
an Opposition Member I hasten to say, you don't need overseas
capital. All you do is to create it inside Australia, You know
a nice docile Reserve Bank, plenty of money for nothing. Inflation?
V'ell, what does it matter? Ladies and gentlemen, I think we have
some reason to be proud and therefore you have some reason to be
proud of the extent to which development has occurred in Australia
with the blessing and practical support of people overseas,
The one thing I want to put into your minds about it
is this. If we don't have confidence in ourselves in Australia,
if we really don't believe in all the basic elements that make a
country like this, we can't expect other people to have confidence
in us and if other people had had no confidence in us nobody would
have Leen arguing about overseas investment, because ii wouldn't
have happened. It wouldn't have happened, They do this not because
they love our beautiful blue eyes or whatever wretched colour they
may be, not for a moment. It is because they look around the world
and they see Australia and they say, " Well, now this is a country
that has stability and a great future and resources, with a future
development of resources, This is the place for us to go with
our money." I don't take exception to that, do you? I think that
is rather an agreeable state of affairs, and therefore I ask you
to remember that because this again is one of the reasons for what
has happened in the last fourteen or fifteen years. This has been
going on and one of the basic reasons for it is that we have been
able, with imagination and a forward-looking eye, to produce an
economic climate, a temper of opinion, a temper of hope, which has
persuaded people that this is the place to be.
I'm putting all this to you, not as one who looks back
and says, " Well, I did rather well, and although I am doing rather
badly now, I hope you will hold it in my favour." 1 This is not the
point at all. When any government gets to that state, it is time
it was changed, and all these things have been done because we
haven't looked at it in that way. lie have gone on and on and on
with new ideas, with new drive, with a new vision for our country.
.1 6
5 
6-
And so, Sir, that is the lesson of the whole thing,
looking back over the twenty-one years complete re-thinking, a
revived attack on the future, modern and progressive ideas, but for
those things, we might have succeeded once on a catch vote. We
never could have succeeded in seven consecutive elections because
the people of Australia are not fools.
Now that is all I want to say about the domestic scene.
There is one other aspect of this matter that I thought I might
trouble you about in a rather disorderly sort of fashion and that
concerns our external policy, I think a policy in relation to the
United States, in relation to South-East Asia which is, if I may
use the expression, unanswerably correct,
I was rocked recently in the House of Representatives
when this was under discussion to hear the Leader of the Opposition
say that there never could be a bipartisan policy because on all
these matters the Labor Party could never agree with us, and I
wondered what it was about our policy with which the Labor Party
couldntt agree and what the Labor Party would itself do in
substitution for these policies if it were in office, and I can't
tell you the answer. Would it get out of the ANZJS pact? Would it
abjure our responsibilities under the SEATO treaty? Would it leave
Malaysia to fend for itself? Would it ignore South Vietnam and
this historic battle confused by all sorts of difficult things
but this historic baitle for the freedom of man in South East
Asia? I wish it would get up sometime and tell us what it would
do because it can't agree with us and therefore it must do something
apparently materially different.
Now, we have had a few discussions lately on Vietnam.
I have enjoyed the receipt of some correspondence from dignitaries
of the Church of England which I have received with great respect
although I am Presbyterian myself ( Laughter) but that doesn't
matter. I have now received another letter and within the next
day or two when I have become free of my engagements here I will
no doubt compile another answer. But it is quite clear tF~ t there
are mixed feelings about South Vietnam and at the last moment, the
Opposition has pretended to discover, and has been encouraged by
some headlines in the newspapers, that we are completely at outs
with the American Government, the American Administration, in
relation to Vietnam, and so perhaps at the risk of wearying you,
I ought to remind you of two or three things.
First of all, of course, Mr. Hasluck made a statement
in the House in which he stated all the views extremely well which
I ' repeated later on, perhaps indifferently, but he stated the
policy of the Government in relation to this matter. All I can
tell you is that I have every reason to know that his speech was
received with very great pleasure in dashington and with warm
approval. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
Well, then, I went down, making one of these weekend
speeches of which there are too many and which I am endeavouring
to eliminate, and I spoke at a place called Cheltenham in Victoria,
My. colleague, Don Chipp was there, In fact he took me there.
And as part of another theme that I was talking about, I undertook
to say something about the American actions in Vietnam.
I asked them why they thought the United States of
America was sending its men into Vietnam and spending vast sums and
producing vast stores of equipment, and I said, " Why do you suppose
they are doing it?" This is not a bad question, I put to you:
I hope I won't have anybody suppose that they are doing it because
they want to make South Vietnam an American colony, That would be
too silly for words. That would be, in the homely phrase, buying
* a00a / 7 
-7-
trouble. I don't think any of us would want to have one of these
countries as a colony. Of course not. Is it because the Americans
have enormous financial interests in that country? I venture to
think they have practically none. Then why are they doing it?
W iy are they, with all the temptations in the world to be isolationist
sa. ing " Well, we won't protect our own interest at home so much.
We have the wide seas on each side of us but we won't allow that
to influence us," WVhy are they doing it? They are doing it because
they believe that what is at issue is human freedom and they believe
that human freedom ought to be defended wherever it is challenged
and that they, as the greatest power in the world, should accept the
greatest responsibility for it.
Now I hope nobody thinks that to talk about human freedom,
after all the experiences of this century, is to talk high-falutin'.
This great issue, this basic issue of human freedom has wracked the
world twice in this century, '. as cost millions of lives and distorted
the whole economic history country after country. Don't let us
treat it as if it were an ex;.. ndable commodity. And I take off my
hat to the Americans who onl. y fifty years ago were deeply sunk in
isolationism, who had the Mon.:-oe Doctrine around them I take off
my hat to them because twircc not, in particular since the last
war, they have assumed encrimicas res-ponsibilities for the preservation
of human freedom including our own. ( Hear, hear)
Well this of cou:-se, was regarded by our opponents,
particularly those of wat I believe is called the Left Wing, was
regarded as absolutely sabre-ratt'.: g stuff you know, no relation
to the facts of life. And then Pr~ sid nt Jolhnson made a speech,
but before he did I , is asked a qucst-ion oh, this was a gaffe as
I have gathered since, an awful gaffe by me. So I thought well,
I am as capable of making a gaffe as the next fellow T will have a
look in the Hansard to see what it was because I had been asked
whether I was prepared to urge on the inited States that they should
negotiate a peace. Urge on the United States....... Nobody would
be silly enough to ask me to urge something on Peking because I
don't suppose they ever heard of me. I don't suppose they will ask
me to urge something on Ho Chi-Minh at Hanoi because we are not on
the closest of terms and therefore it was America. We had to say,
" Come, come" and so I was asked a question and I said, " What I was
directing myself to on each of these occasions was a suggestion,
about which some people have been quite vocal, that the United
States, instead of fighting should negotiate." I emphasise those
words " instead of fighting should negotiate.... negotiate
with an enemy which has violated its obligations in relation to a
cease-fire, negotiate with a country that has ignored its international
obligations, and negotiate with people who keep on shooting
when the Americans have stopped shooting." I see nothirgin that
that I would want to withdraw or qualify for half a minute.
Well then, of course, the fat was in the fire because
they said, " Well, the President three or four days later, he
said, ' Yes, I'll negotiatetIt hit the headlines, quite misleading
headlines and in case you have been beguiled by them, I think I
ought to Zell you what the President said. I have the full text
before me. What the President said at Johns Hopkins was almost,
word for word, what Paul Hasluck had said and what I had said in
the speeches that I made. He went on to talk about the principle
for which Americans were fighting in the jungles of Vietnam
" Tonight, Americans and Asians are dyihg for a world where
each people may choose its own path to change."
That was well spoken if I may say so. / 8 
408 I
" Only in such a world wil-L our. own. freedom be finally seue"
Th-at is worth recalling. If I may say so I can imagine a state of
af'fairs in which the United States of America could maintain its
safety and security with South East Asia in communist hands. I can't
imagine such a thing in the case of Australia, and therefore everything
that he says can be accented two or three times for us.
" Only in such a world will our own freedom be finally'
secure, This kind of world will never be built by bombs
or bullets yet the infirmities of man are such that force
must often precede reason and the waste of war the works
of peace. 1
This is the President at Johns Hopkins. Then later on he told what
was happening " Trained men and supplies, orders and arms flow in a
constant stream from the North to the South...."
( the North the innocent party I gather some people think) From North
Vietnam into South Vietnam, replenishing the Vietcong, already with
powerful formations of troops, the oommunists in their pockets in
South Vietnam and over the border into Cambodia, and the North feeding
them., And who feeds the North? ., fell, I dontt need to answer that
question. " Simple farmers are the targets of assassination and
kidnapping, ( This is Lyndon Johnson not myself)
Women and children are strangled in ihe night because
their men are loyal to the Government. Small and helpless
villages are ravaged by sneak attacks."
don't need to go on, He gave a vivid account of what is occurring
and then he put the same question as I had put to the worthy
citizens of Cheltenham. He said
" Why are we in South Vietnam? We are there because we
have a promise to keep,"
So have we dontt forget, ladies and gentlemen. The South East
Asian treaiy is a treaty which imposes upon us obligations which are
several as well as joint and South Vietnam is one of the protocol
states whose security is guaranteed by the South East Asian Treaty.
Therefore this applies to uss
" Why are we in South Vietnam? We are there because we
have a promise to keep. Since 1951+, every American
P'resident has offered support to the people of South
Vietnam. lie have helped to build and we have helped
to defend, Thus over many years we have made a national
pledge to help South Vietnam defend its independence"
and he went on to say ( so far from running for cover as some of
these critics thought he should) he went on to say,
I intend to keep that promise. To dishonour
that pledge, to abandon this small and brave nation to
its enemy and to the terror that must follow would be
an unfortunate wrong. We are also there to strengthen
world order. Around the globe from Berlin to Thailand are
people whose well-being rests in part on the belief that
they can count on us if they are attacked. To leave Vietnam
to its fate would shake the confidence of all these people
in the value of an American commitment and the value of
America's word...... We must stay in South-East Asia as we
did in ] 3urope. In the words of the Bible, ' Hitherto shalt
thou come but no further". 000060/ 9 
9-
Now I think somebody would need to have a great deal of
ingenuity and almost genius for falsification to find any difference
between that and what we have been saying, and that is why what
we have been saying has been received with such warm approval in
Washington. Then the President goes on a little later
" What is our objective in Vietnam? Our objective is
the independence of South Vietnam and its freedom
from attack, We want nothing for ourselves, only that
the people of South Vietnam be allowed to guide their
own country in their own way. We will do everything
necessary to reach that objective and we w~ ill do only
what is absolutely necessary. In recent months, attacks
in South Vietnam were stepped up. Thus it became
necessary for us to increase our response and make
attacks by air. This is not a change of purpose.
It is a change in what we believe that purpose requires.
We do this in order to slow down aggression. We do
this to increase the confidence of the brave people
of South Vietnam who have bravely borne this brutal
attack for so many years and with so many casualtieso... 6
We will not be defeated, We will not grow tired. We
will not withdraw either openly or under the cloak of
a meaningless agreementil
That's what he said that is what he means. That is
what the people of America siand for, and later on he came to the
question that has vexed some people well-meaning people people
of the highest intentions. He sail, " Should we negotiate?"
Well, of course, having regard to what he said, to negotiate in
the sense of abandoning the position would have been unthinkable.
Unthinkable. And he knew perfectly well that the one condition
that has been put forward by North Vietnam, by its communist
backers is that they won't talk about anything unless the Americans
get out. In other words, unless the Americans abandon South
Vietnam to their clutches. That has been their condition*
And therefore he said
" We have stated this position over and over again fifty
times and more to friend and foe alike and we remain
( no change of policy here) we remain ready with
this purpose for unconditional discussion."
That is to say, for discussions which dontt involve the condition
that has been put forward and which has now, I noticeg been
violently repeated, that we get out because we are not getting
out. We are there, and we are there to do our job and we will
do it. But if, under some circumstances, discussions could occur
which meant that we didn't abandon South Vietnam and that they were
not left exposed to violent attack from the north, then of-course
we have no abmition to have our men killed, we will be prepared
to discuss, This, in effect, is what the President said.;
This is so elementary, isn't it so simple that it is
hard to believe how it could be distortel or misinterpreted.
The speech by the President ought to be made compulsory reading,
I have read only a bit of it. It ought to be made compulsory
reading because I will venture to say that if the President of
the United States has no other claim to being celebrated in the
history of his country, he would have established a right by
this one speech and by this one simple policy. as~ go~ e 
Dontt be misled by the superficial readers or the headlineclutchers
who think there is a division between us, I am happy to
say that I have had very good messages myself from Washington about
what I have had to say and as I have indicated, Paul has too.
There is no Aifference between us on this matter. We
are in the closest, most constant contact. It is perlhaps one of
the things that our Government has done in these years that I have
been describing that beginning with a somewhat dubious relationship
with the United States, we have established an intimacy of contact,
a daily exchange of views in Washington on the most friendly terms
ihich I can only regard as one of the invisible but all-powerful
elements in the security of our country.
Now I am sorry to-have taken up so much of your time
on that. I hope I have been sufficiently clear in what I have
said because I set off to review the past and to remind you that
it was the result of an activity and imagination which must continue
for the future, and in the second place I wanted to deal with this
current matter to de monstrate to you that the foreign policy of
this government is one which may incur some momentary hostility
with other people but which involves the deepest friendship, the
deepest co-operation, the deepest mutual understanding, with the
great nations of the world.
OL a F 



OPENING OF THE A. P. I. AA ITA IAN/ AUSTRALIAN 65/ 0
S PORTS ASSOCIATION) CLUB
LEICHHARDT, N. S. W. 14TH APRIL,, 196~
Speech by the Prime, Minister? the Rt, Hon. Sir Robejpt Menzies
Mr, Chairman, Your Excellencies and Iedies and Gentlemen
I must say that having looked at this magnificent
room which is the only part of the enterprise that I have yet
looked at, I think all the newspapermen ought to be compelled
to come here to have a look at it and then when, in due course,
we build a modest new Parliament House at Canberra, they will
have no complaints whatever. ( Iaughter)
I just want to mention two facts before I engage in
a little excursion of my own interesting facts. I obtained
them and I was tremendously struck by them. I have been around,
as many of you know, for some time. I have been by good
luck oxr good management, probably good luck Prime Minister
for a long time, and when I began I claim no credit for this,
I may say there were 35 000 Italians in Australia, and now
, with all the movement thai has occurred, there are 265,0006
In other words, an increase by almost eight times. Now that
is a very remarkable thing. This represents, vationally
, peaking, the second largest movement into Australia. the
largest being from Great Britain, This is the second largest.
We have heard occasionally that people come here and
after a while they get tired of us, they don't fancy us very
much and they leave. We hear a good deal about that, and
therefore, I said, I would like to know what happened to the
Italians who came here. The answer is that the return rate
for Italians is one per cent. The average overall rate is
six per cent. Now all that demonstrates that this country has proved
vastly attractive to members of the Italian community the
Italian nation and that having come here, they do fit into the
Pattern of Auszralian life so well that they donft want to go.
Now this to me is something of tremendous significance, it
demonstrates the value of the kind of work that this club has
been doing to integrate into the Australian habits and customs
a number ol people, thousands of people who come from a
different kind of country, who have in many cases a different
kind of background and might therefore feel strange and in many
cases rather homesick for the country they have left, Therefore
t want to congratulate the Club and I want to express the
immense pleasure that I feel at the figures that I have just
been reciting to you.
Now having said that, I wonder if I might say something
of a general kind. The people of Italy I will describe them
in that way have had an immense capacity for moving out,
right through history. This is no modern novelty, Indeed I
want to remind those of you who are Italians that your ancestors
2,000 years ago invaded Britain, and it was a long way away
from Rome in those days invaded Britain and held it for some
centuries and left a lot of names behind and a lot of fine,
straight roads, Roman roads, all over the island. That argued
the questing spirit of the ancient Romans under great leadership. 
V 1 2-
I would also like to remind you that your language
derives directly from a language which has made its imprint not
only all over Western Eruope but over a great part of the
civilised world, because although very few people today can speak
Latin, or for that matter understand Latin very consecutively,
the truth is that all the Romance languages Italian itself,
French, Spanish, all these Romance languages as we call them,
have spread around the world. They are the whole basis of our
own speech which is very very much affected in the long run by
the ancient speech of Italy, as is that of the United States and
all round what we are pleased to call the English-speaking world
or the French-speaking wurld or the Italian-speaking world or
whatever it may be. So don't think that you have done something
rather peculiar by coming here in the last few years, You are
acting in the highest tradition of your country the highiest
tradition of the ancient Romans, and the Latin iongue and the
Latin writing. When I was a university student, I took a su~ bject
cciled Roman Law, which served to remind me very much indeed that
there is a definite line of indebtedness to the ancient home of
Roman Law over a considerable section of the world, You see
what I am getting at? Your language you have exported. -You have
taken it in one form or another all round the seven seas. Your
literature in one form or another ha s moved and tfound its place
all round the world. The legal systems which were devised in
Rome are not the common basis of the English system of law, the
English Common Law, though it has had its influence here and there,
but it has had a very big mark on the legal systems of Germany, of
Scotland and so on, so that in point of speech, in poinit of
literature in point of law, the people of your country I am now
speaking directly to the Italians who are here have been great
carriers of wisdom and of culture all round the world. They have,
so to speak, made it migrate to other countries and in this
cqntury, as we have seen in Australia we have had a great wave
of migration of human beings from Italy to Australia, No~ w this
is something that is good for us I hope and believe good for
you. This enriches our own life,
You know, if I might make a quiet, ccnfidential
admission to you, we native-born Australians are occasionally a
little narrow-minded about our own ideas and our own way of living.
We say, " Well, who are these fellows to tell us?" This is the
best proof that we have a lot to learn. And you corle along, and
many others from some other country but I am talking patticularly
to you who have come along here, and if you haven't shown. us the
error of our ways, at least you have shown us new ways in which to
walk, new ways to understand, and I venture to say that in one
hundred years' time somebody writing what I will call -' to use
ti~ at abominable word the cultural history of Australia, will be
able to trace in it the influence of your people who have come
here and settled here and contributed to the country a lot of
faculties a lot of ideas, a lot of standards that came in almost
as new things. This will be fascinating someday to trace the
pattern of what will then be described as our civilisation, the
pattern of Australian civilisation,
Now I have indicated very very briefly to you that
this is not the first time, nor is it the first country in which
people of your race have made this contribution. They have done
it all round the world. They have every right to be proud of
having done it and you have every right to be proud of the
contribution that you are making, * 0ee 0 / 3 
' 0 6 ' I 3-
Now the one other thing I want to say is that it
is a little simple, a little tempting to retain a special narrow
sense of' community and to say, " Well, we ItaJians stick together,
just as in the case of my own ancestry, ". 4e Scotsmen must stick
together." Well between ourselves we do quite a bit, you know,
We get on well with each other, We have a Scottish Society here
or there but what we have done by way of compensation for this
is to marry into people of other and not such fortunate races
like the &amp; ihglish and having married and intermarried and
identified ourselves in the community, then as you have not
failed to observe we are not unwilling to take charge of the
country and run ( Laughter)
Now this is an interesting parallel, isn't it? Very
interesting. Don't be exclusive. Don't get off but get in
get into the community, get mixed up with the community. Let~
everybody have the benefit of what you can contribute and you
get the benefit of what they can contribute, an integr'ated
Australian society. This is what we want and it is because you
have seen that with brilliant clarity that you have established
this organisation. This is the thing to do, and now that you
have such splendid premises, I am sure that the work will go on
afoot indeed, I rather think that if you are not careful,
there will be such a majority of native-born Australians coming
here to enjoy it that you may be a little squeezed, but'in that
case, extend it.
Good luck to you. Bless youb 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 8/ l965
1965 CORAL SEA CELEBRATIONS
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
General Dean C. Strother, the Commander-in-Chief of the
North American Air Defence Command, is to be the Coral Sea
Guest of Honour for the 1965 celebrations which begin in Sydney
on Monday, the 3rd May.
General Strother replaces General Hunter Harris, Jnr.,
Commander-ln-Chief of the Pacific Airforce, who had been
previously nominated to take part in this year's celebrations
of the anniversary of the Coral Sea battle, Due to the current
South-East Asia situation it will not be possible for General
Harris to be away from his headquarters at this time.
Mrs. Strother will accompany her husband during the
visit to Australia.
The band of the headquarters of the United States Pacific
Airforce will take part in the celebrations in each State as
previously arranged.
CANBERRA. lth April 1965. 



FOR PR~ ESS STATh'EENT BY THlE -PRD~ E MISTER
VISIT TO CANBERRA BY MRii. CABOTI LODGE
I have had with my senior Ministerial colleagues very
valuable discussions this afternoon on the subject of Vietnam
with the United States Special Ambassador, Mr. Cabot Lodge.
Mr. Lodge is visiting Canberra at the instance of the
President of the United States, and has brought with him the
views of the President and the Administration; to these he
has added his own detailed and first-hand knowledge of the
siturition in Vietnam. As part of the exchange of views
sought by Mr. Lodge, the Australian Ministers outlined our
assessment of the situation.
The discussions have provided a valuable addition to
our common understanding and have contributed to the already
very great degree of agreement between Australia and the
United States on the question of the checking of aggression
in Vietnam. Mr. Lodge conveyed the President's appreciation of
the contribution which Australia has made in the economic
and defence fields in South Vietnam.
CANBERRLA April, 1965: 



V I E TN A M
EXCHANGE OF LETTERS BETWEEN THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HON. SIR ROBERT MENIES, and
THE RT. REV. J. S. MOYES, C. M. G.,
AND CERTAIN ARCHBISHOPS AND BISHOPS 
CONTENTS Page
1. Bishops' letter
12th March, 1965
2. Prime Minister's Reply
24th March, 1965
3. Bishops' Letter
9th April, 1965
4. Prime Minister's Reply
April, 1965
PRIME MINISTER'S DEPARTMENT.
CANBERRA. APRIL. 1965 1 2
3 -6
7
11 17 
TEXT OF BISHOPS' LETTER
OF 12th MARCH, 1965
There are a number of us deeply concerned
that our Government should be seen to be taking
positive steps, with others, towards an honourable
and peaceful. actt.. lmunt of the fighting in Vietnam.
Already His Holiness the Pope, the
Secretary-General of the United Nations,; U Thant,
and the Lovrrnments of Canada, India and France have
urged through both private and formal diplomatic
channels their earnest desire for negotiations
leading to peace.
We are not concerned here to canvass the
merits of the respeclive attitudes of the North and
South Vietnamese Governments, or of the Governments
of the United States and China.
We have in mind, however, the attitude
of Her Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom
at the time of the Geneva Agreements in 1954, and
since. We also realise that liberal opinion in
thu as reflected by the " New York Times"
and by sober commentatois like Mr. Walter Lippmann,
by no means agrees with their Government's policy,
Although the U. S. A. was not a signatory to the
1954 Geneva Agreement, yet in a statement made on
21st July that year they undertook to refrain from
the threat of the use of force in the matter of
Vietnam, 
2.
It seems to us that our Government,
because we owe so much to our Ally, the United
States of America, is morally bound to help
our Ally, in the friendliest and most loyal
spirit, to avoid a policy that can lead to an
extension of hostilities, We would hope that
our nation, living as we do in the Asian world,
should join with the Pope. U Thant and the
distinguished leaders of the other Western
nations mentioned above, in bringing to a close
a war that is costing so many lives and
reducing the economy of Vietnam to chaos. 
TEXT OF PRIME MINISTER'S
REPLY OF 24th MARCH, 1965
I have given careful thought to your letter
of March 12th, relating to events in Vietnam. As
your letter was published in the press, I shall
give publicity to my reply, when you have received it.
You urge that my Government should be seen
to be taking " positive steps towards an honourable
and peaceful settlement of the fighting in Vietnam".
Now, that all of us in our country want peace
is axiomatic. The whole strength of Australia's
diplomatic forces in countries to which they are
accredited is directed almost daily to the removal
of difficulties and the promotion of peace. But
before any nation such as the U. S. A. " negotiates"
for peace, realism requires
that the other party or parties to
the conflict should be willing to
negotiate; and
that there should be a genuine ceasefire,
strictly and honourably
observed; and
that there should be some reasonable
assurance that aggression and subversion
will come to an end.
It is at this point that your letter
surprises and distresses me. Although you are
urging some form of political action upon me and my
colleagues in relation to the fighting in Vietnam,
you go on to say that you are " not concerned here to
canvass the merits of the respective attitudes of the
North and South Vietnamese Government, or the
Governments of the United States and China". 
Well, all I can say is that the
Government is and must be concerned. Indeed,
it seems elementary to me that unless we
have some ideas on the merits of these matters,
our actions will be those of expediency and
not those of principle.
I therefore address myself to the
merits, to which, I fear, you attach little
significance. You refer to the Geneva agreements of
1954. These provided a military demarcation
line at the 17th parallel, separating North and
South Vietnam, with a demilitarised zone of
five kilometres on each side. Each side was
to " order and enforce the complete cessation
of all hostilities in Vietnam by all armed
forces under their control".
North Vietnam is under Communist rule.
The political views of Hanoi are not to be
distinguished from those of Peking. There
can, in our opinion, be no doubt that the
Geneva Accords have been consistently violated
by the Communists, partly by direct attacks
across the line, partly by infiltration and
supply, and partly by the establishment and
maintenance of the Communist insurgents known
as the Viet Cong, whose activities are directed
to the overthrow of government in South Vietnam
and to the ultimate establishment there of a
Communist regime. These facts are not
seriously denied. In 1960 they were expressly
conceded by the Government and Communist Party
in North Vietnam. At the request of the Government
of South Vietnam the United States has
deployed forces in that country, to aid in its
defence, and we, under similar circumstances,
have given military and material aid. These
steps are denounced by the Communists as 
" Imperialism", though it is quite clear that they
have been taken in the defence of local freedom and
self-government against an imperialist aggression which,
if not restricted by deeds, will lead to the overrunning
of South-East Asia by aggressive Communism
and a complete loss of the existing freedom of non-
Communist countries. Are there no merits here to be considered
by Church leaders? There can be no true composition
between atheistic and materialistic Communism and
countries with deep religious beliefs. True, there
can be, given good faith on both sides, peaceful coexistence
and mutual tolerance. But these cannot
continue if aggression continues and grows and is
unchecked except by fine words.
We have considered the merits, as any
Government must. We believe as do all those who
have been prepared to consider the merits, that the
United States policies and actions in relation to
South Vietnam are right, and should be supported;
that they derive from a courageous and generous
acceptance of responsibilities for the protection of
human freedom. You urge that we join with some other
authorities " in bringing to a close a war that is
costing so many lives and reducing the economy of
Vietnam to chaos".
I agree that the war is costing many lives
and is damaging Vietnam. But how is it to be brought
to a close? The Viet Cong and the forces of Hanoi
are backed by Communist China, a country which
rejects peaceful co-existence and practises, as it
has already shown in India and Tibet, an aggressive
imperialism. Is the United States to withdraw, and
abandon South Vietnam? This would no doubt lead to
a conquest which would end the armed conflict by
conceding victory to the Communists. 
Or is the United States, without
withdrawal or abandonment, to negotiate for
peace? With whom? About what? These are two
vital questions. How would they negotiate with the
Viet Cong, well organised but hidden, practising
the night attack upon villages, determined
upon revolution by violence? How would they
negotiate with North Vietnam, a country which
has shown that it will be bound by no agreement?
How could they negotiate with Communist
China, the home of aggression, except upon a
basis of assured independence and freedom for
South Vietnam and those other countries of
South-East Asia which are now threatened by
Communist expansionism? Sir, the change of heart that is needed
to lay a good foundation for a fruitful
negotiation and a lasting peace must occur in the
Communist bodies. It will occur all the sooner
if aggression is met by resistance, if we remain
clear about what it is that we are defending,
and if we, and all our allies, can make it well
understood that we are not concerned to conquer
others, but that we will do our part to preserve
freedom where it now exists. Freedom is, in
this world, not expendable. And free people
are not aggressors. 
TEXT OF BISHOPS' LETTER
OF 9th APRIL, 1965
' le thank you for your thoughtful reply of
March 24th to our joint letter of March 11th. We
beg you to give further consideration to the urgent
request of our letter, in the earnest hope that
continuing discussion will clarify the real issues.
It puzzles us that you should be
" surprised and distressed" because we did not canvass
set forth and discuss in detail all the
facts. This, as you must realise, would have
involved hundreds of pages. So far from " attaching
little significance" to the " merits of these matters,"
we naturally attach the greatest importance to them,
as some of us have meanwhile made clear. We must
insist, however, on examining the merits of both
sides. The illegal activities of North Viet Nam are
constantly being brought to our notice. We feel bound
to point out that the South is not blameless. Your
reference to the Geneva accords of 1954 as having
been " consistently violated by the Communists" is
surely less than the whole truth of the matter.
Both North and South, and China and the United States,
have violated the agreements. Two serious breaches
of the spirit and letter of the Geneva agreements
have been committed by the South, with full knowledge
and approval, and active support, of the United States.
They are:-i. the continued refusal to hold free
elections; and
ii. the grant of military bases to a foreign
power.
As to the fact is that it was agreed at
Geneva on July 21st, 1954, that " General Elections
shall be held in July, 1956, under the supervision 
of an international commission composed of
representatives of the member states of the
international supervisory commission referred
to in the agreements on the cessation of
hostilities." These elections have never been
held. Responsibility for this rests squarely
on the Government of South Viet Nam, backed
by the United States. No authority known
to us disagrees that any fair and free election
since 1954 would have resulted in a victory for
the supporters of Ho Chi Minh. If people want
to be communists, guns will not stop them.
As to we remind you that
Paragraph ( iv) of the Final Declaration on
Indo-China of July 21st, 1954 reads; " The
Conference takes note of the clauses
prohibiting the introduction into Viet Nam of
foreign troops and military personnel as well
as of all kinds of arms and munitions." We
remind you further of Paragraph of the same
Declaration: " The Conference takes note
that no military base at the disposition of a
foreign State may be established in the
regrouping zones of the two parties..."
The main contention of your letter
is that we are indifferent to the moral and
religious elements in the situation, whereas
you and your Government are deeply concerned
with both. You think of the war as a crusade
being carried out by the Christian forces
of the " deeply religious" people of South
Viet Nam, the United States and, presumably,
Australia, against " the atheistic and
materialistic" forces of North Viet Nam
and China. We find ourselves unable to make
this clear moral and religious distinction
and, moreover, regard the making of such a
distinction as in itself open to grave moral
question. We can understand the desire to
L 
restrain the political imperialism of China, and
even the necessity of using force to do it, but
we cannot ourselves justify it on your grounds,
namely, that the United States and ourselves are
altruistically coming to the rescue of " local
freedom and self government".
The government of South Viet Nam rests
upon no basis of popular or democratic support.
It was from its beginning, until last year, a
dictatorship of the late Mr. Ngo Dinh Diem. In these
circumstances, it seems to us to be idealising the
situation to write of U. S. support of " local
freedom and self government."
As for your observation that " there can be
no true composition between atheistic and materialistic
communism and countries with deep religious
beliefs," we can only say that there are millions
of Christians in Russia and China who are compelled to
do just this. We have no right to criticise
them, since we have not ourselves been put to this
test. It seems to us preferable in this war, as
with all wars, carefully to keep references to
" deep religious belief" above the evil it may help
to resolve, and not to misuse it to bolster one
side of the case or the other.
On one of your political judgements we feel
bound to take issue. You say " the political
views of Hanoi are not to be distinguished from
those of Pekin." We doubt the validity of your
identification. Is it not like identifying
Moscow with Belgrade and Warsaw and Pekin?
Finally, you ask how the war is to be
brought to a close. We can only reiterate the
hope which was the main point of our original
letter, that you will use your great influence and 
experience to support the possibility of
negotiations. We cannot think that we, or
others more distinguished, are hopelessly
deluded in asking that negotiations become
the declared objective of Australian
diplomacy. In urging this plea, we are
supported by His Holiness the Pope, by
U Thant, and by the Governments of France and
India, to which has been added the commanding
voice of your fellow Prime Minister of a
Dominion, Mr. Lester Pearson, and Her Majesty's
Government in the United Kingdom. To all these
have now been added the proposals of President
Johnson himself. We feel no distress at
finding ourselves in such company. 
TEXT OF PRIME MINISTER'S
REPLY OF 20th APRIL, 1965
I have your letter of April 9th, answering
mine to you of March 24th, and have given it my most
earnest consideration. Fortified again, I may say, by close
consultation with the Minister and Department of
External Affairs, I will proceed to deal with the
substance of your propositions.
You dismiss the actions of North Vietnam,
in a single phrase, as " illegal activities". The
rest of your letter contains, in detail and at some
length, a critical attack upon South Vietnam and
her supporters. You accuse them of two violations of the
Geneva Accords of 1954. You should recall that the
United States and South Vietnamese governments did
not subscribe to the Final Declaration, but made
separate statements indicating that they would not
use force to prevent the execution of the agreements.
The United States declared that it would view any
renewal of aggression, in violation of the
agreement, with grave concern and as seriously
threatening international peace and security.
You allege two serious breaches by the
South, approved and supported by the United States.
They are, to use your own language,
1. " The continued refusal to hold free
elections".
This refers, as you make clear, to elections over both
North and South Vietnam. You then go on to assert
a proposition which I find astonishing. 
12.
Your words are
" These elections have never been
held. Responsibility for this rests
squarely on the Government of South
Vietnam, backed by the United States.
No authority known to us disagrees
that any fair and free election
since 1954 would have resulted in a
victory for the supporters of
Ho Chi Minh."
Surely nobody will deny that North Vietnam is
under complete Communist control, and that
" free elections" simply cannot happen. That
Ho Chi Minh would win in North Vietnam is clear
enough, for there would and could be no other
candidate. How you can blame South Vietnam for the
absence of a " fair and free election" in North
Vietnam therefore passes my comprehension.
Let me remind you too that if the
North had not actively sought to overthrow the
government of the South by force, and by
supporting the pockets of Communist Viet Cong
in their violent campaigns in the South, the
people of the South would be at peace, and the
way for orderly self-government would be open.
2. The second " serious breach" alleged
by you is " the grant ( by South
Vietnam), of military bases to a
foreign power."
The first answer to this is that it is simply
inaccurate. No " military bases" have been
granted to the United States. 
True, that country has sent some forces into South
Vietnam, at the request of that country, to
assist in its defence against unprovoked aggression.
So have we, in a small way. Such actions are in
strict conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations. I fear that you have overlooked the vital
fact that South Vietnam did not begin these troubles.
To play down the aggression and incitement from the
North, and to devote your major criticism to the
defenders, is a strange line of argument.
You next accuse us of " idealising" the
situation in Vietnam by speaking of support of
local freedom and self-government". How do you
suppose that freedom in South Vietnam can be fully
achieved and maintained when that country is torn
about by murderous subversion fomented and supported
from the Communist North? A life and death struggle
of this kind does not lend itself to theory.
Finally, you appear to pray in aid the
recent statement by President Johnson. I
respectfully suggest that you study the full text
of that statement. It powerfully supports what
my colleague, Mir. Hasluck, and I have been saying
about the course and causes of the events in
Vietnam, and is fundamentally at odds with your own
analysis. It explains the American presence and
actions. It faces the facts.
For example ( and I will not quote in
extenso) the President said
" Tonight Americans and Asians are dying for
a world where each people may choose its
ownpath to change. This is the
principle for which our ancestors fought
in the valleys of Pennsylvania. It is
the principle for which our sons fight
in the jungles of Vietnam." 
14.
" We fight because we must fight
if we are to live in a world where
every country can shape its own
destiny. And only in such a
world will our own freedom be
finally secure. This kind of a
world will never be built by
bombs or bullets. Yet the
infirmities of men are such that
force must often precede reason
and the waste of war, the works of
peace. We wish this were not so.
But we must deal with the world as
it is, if it is ever to be as we wish."
" But trained men and supplies,
orders and arms, flow in a constant
stream from North to South. This
support is the heart-beat of the war.
And it is a war of unparelled
brutality. Simple farmers are the
targets of assassination and kidnapping.
Women and children are strangled in the
night because their men are loyal
to the government. Small and
helpless villages are ravaged by sneak
attacks. Large-scale raids are
conducted on towns, and terror
strikes in the heart of cities. The
confused nature of this conflict cannot
mask the fact that it is the new face
of an old enemy. Over this war
and all Asia is another reality,
the deepening shadow of Communist
China. The rulers of Hanoi are
urged on by Peking. This is a regime
which has destroyed freedom in Tibet,
attacked India, and been condemned by
the United Nations for aggression in
Korea. It is a nation which is 
helping the forces of violence in almost every
continent. The contest in Vietnam
is part of a wider pattern of aggressive
purpose."
And later he said
" We will not be defeated. We will not
grow tired. We will not withdraw,
either openly or under the cloak of a
meaningless agreement."
And then " It should also be clear that the only path
for reasonable men is the path of
peaceful settlement. Such peace demands
an independent South Vietnam securely
guaranteed and able to shape its own
relationships to all others free from
outside interference tied to no alliance
a military base for no other country."
It is against the background of these clear
statements and for their achievement that the
President has said, once more, that he is willing to
have discussions. It is because we agree with all this that,
in answering a recent Parliamentary question, I said
that I could not support a suggestion " that the United
States, instead of fighting, should negotiate".
My colleagues and I must decline to be cast
for the roles of warmongers and supporters of
illicit action on the part of the United States or
South Vietnam. We are constantly aware of our duties
to our country and our people. One of those duties
is to do what we can to keep the peace, and to help
others to keep it. Another is to be acutely 
16.
aware of the need to preserve the security of
Australia. It would be a sorry day if, by
undermining the will and capacity to resist
in South-East Asia, we found aggressive
Communism moving nearer to our own shores.
We will observe our obligations under SEATO
and ANZUS not only because Australia has
pledged its word a reason compelling enough,
in all conscience but because those obligations
have been accepted on behalf of our own free
future. To sum up, my Lord Bishop, we have
never approached the problem in a negative way.
We have no desire for hostilities to spread or
to grow more intense, though, if this is forced
upon us, we will face the resulting situation
and not seek to avoid it.
Like President Johnson, we wish South
Vietnam and the whole of South and South-East
Asia to live in peace and international amity
and to have full and free opportunities for
economic development and national independence.
It is just because we believe in these positive
objectives that we find ourselves unable to
ignore the lessons of the 20th Century and to
acquiesce placidly in the destruction of the
independence of South Vietnam, either by direct
outside armed Communist aggression or by internal
armed Communist insurrection and subversion
stimulated and sustained, as I am sure you must
agree, through North Vietnam. 
17.
You have now twice publicly stated
your views. This letter contains my second answer.
You will, I am sure, understand that I must now
leave the issues to the judgment of public opinion.
I cannot, consistently with many pressing duties,
continue this correspondence. But it has, I think,
served a valuable public purpose. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 1= 96.
PRIVATE SIMPSON'S WAR RELICS
Statement by the Prime % inister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies. L
The war relics of Private John Simpson Kirkpatrick
" The Man with the Donkey" have been presented to the Australian
War Museum. They are the gift of' his sister, Mrs. Annie Simpson
Pearson of Brightlingsea, Essex, who has said that they should
remain the property of her late brother's beloved Australia*
They comprise Private Simpson's identity disc, his
service medals and ribbons, his Oak Leaf and scroll for his
Mention in Despatches and a bronze medal presented after his
death by King George V.
The story of " The Man with the Donkey" is well known
throughout Australia and Private Simpson has been honoured by
the erection of a statue near the Shrine of Remembrance in
Melbourne6 A replica of this statue is on display in the Anzac
Gallery of the War Museum in Canberra and his war relics will be
placed with it.
CANBERRA, 21st April 1965. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No, 1+ g0! 1962~._
PREMIERS' CONFERENCE
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies.
It should be understood that todayts meeting with
the Premiers was recognised by all of us as a preliminary meetings
We will assemble again on June 1st to arrive at definite
conclusions about the agreement which is to succeed the last one
made in 1959 to regulate the financial assistance arrangements
which have operated since that time.
Today's meeting was, therefore, exploratory. The
Commonwealth welcomed it because we thought it most desirable that
we should be put in possession of the views of the various State
Premiers both critical and constructive, so that we might have an
opportunity of giving them proper study before June.
I would like to repeat what I said in the Conference,
i. e. that I have never known a better meeting, Every contribution
was thoughtful extremely well-prepared and lucid, Nobody resorted
to Party political arguments. Everybody felt that we were
disoussing problems of great importance not only to the States but to
the Commonwealth-problems which we would all wish to solve in a
co-operative fashiion, due regard being paid to the reasonable needs
of the Commonwealth which, as we pointed out are not diminishing,
This was, I thought, recognised all round. tiobody would deny that
having regard to such rapidly growing items as defence expenditure
and the limitations of the current loan market, the Commonwealth
Government has quite a budgetary task ahead of itc Similarly, in
a growing community, the States have great responsibilities and
have a natural eagerness for progress.
We have agreed to meet again at the beginning of June.
I have indicated to the States that some days before June 10 days
if possible we will arrange to have discussions on the official
level between Commonwealth and State Treasury officers. In the
meantime, as I said to the Premiers we will give the most careful
attention to what has been said by Lhem because like them, we
desire to have some sound conclusions arrived a before the
financial year ends, This is the sixth year of the 1959 agreement
and therefore presents the necessary opportunity to consider the
terms and duration of a new agreement.
As I said to the Premiers, in expressing my appreciati. on
of the way in which they had put their respective arguments, I f
cannot attempt to anticipate what our answers may be; but I am sure
that the tone and temper of today's discussions will help us very
considerably. CANBERRA* 22nd April 1965. 



65/ 065
FOR PRESS: The Prime Minister, the Right Honourable
Sir Robert Menzies, announced today
that the Commonwealth Government would be represented at
the main Anzac Day Ceremonies and Church Services throughout
Australia by the following
CANBERRA April
10.30 a. m. Commemoration Service
at the Australian
War Memorial The Right Honourable
Sir Robert Menzies, M. P.
SYDNEY 21 st April
1.15 p. m. Anzac Commemoration
Service at St. Andrew's
Cathedral, followed by
Dedication of Field of
Remembrance Mr. W. J. Ashton, M. P.
23rd April
2.30 p. m. Children's Anzac Eve
Service at the Anzac
Memorial, Hydo Park The Hon. K. Mc. Anderson.
April
4.30 a. m.
8.45 a. m.
11.30 a. m.
5.00 p. m.
6.40 p. m.
1ELBOURNE 5.45 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m. Dawn Service at the
Cenotaph Official Wreath-Laying
Ceremony at the
Cbnotaph Service in the Domain
at the conclusion of
the March
Sunset Service at the
Cenotaph
Requiem Mass at
St. Mary's Cathedral The Hon. K. Mc. Anderson.
Senator the Hon. Sir
William Spooner,
K. C. MI. G., NM.
The Hon. K. Mc', Anderson.
The Hon. L. H. E.
14. P.
The Hon. L. H. E.
M. P. Bury, Bury,
April
Dawn Stand-To at the
Shrine of Remembrance
Anzac Commemoration
Service at St. Patrick's
Cathedral Anzac Commemoration
Service at St. Patrick's
Cathedral 11r. E. M. C. Fox, M. P.
Senator M. C. Cormack.
Senator Ivy '... dgwood. 
MELBOURNE ( Contd.) April
11.40 a. m.
2.00 p. m.
2.00 p. m.
4.30 p. m. Wreath-Laying Ceremony
at the Shrine of
Remembrance March of Returned
Servicemen through
Melbourne March Past Base at the
Shrine of Remembrance
Commemoration Ceremony
at the Shrine of
Remembrance The Hon. W. C. Haworth,
1I. P.
Mr. P. Howson, M. P.
The Hon. W. C. Haworth,
N. P.
The Hon. W. C. Haworth,
M. P.
BRISBANE 4.10 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.15 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
2.30 p. m.
3.10 p. m.
ADELAIDE 6.15 a. m.
7.00 p. m. April
Dawn Service, Anzac Square
Service, St. John's
Anglican Cathedral
Service, City
Congregational Church
Service, St. Andrew's
Presbyterian Church
Service, Jewish
Synagogue Service, Salvation Army
City Temple
Service, Albert Street
Methodist Church
English Low Mass,
St. Stephen's Cathedral
Service, Baptist City
Tabernacle Parade of Ex-Servicemen
Saluting Base, City Hall
Commemoration Ceremony
at the Shrine of
Remembrance after the
Parade April
Dawn Service at the
National War Memorial
Service, St. Peter's
Cathedral Mr. W. T. Gibbs, M. P.
Senator Dame Annabelle
Rankin, D. B. E.
Major M. Jellie.
Mr. D. J. Killen, M. P.
Major W. W. Blight
Major G. W. Shannon
The Hon. A. S. Hulme,
M. P.
Senator E. B. Maher.
Major J. C. Gpatles.
The Hon. A. S. Hulme,
M. P.
The Hon. A. S. Hulme,
M. P.
Senator E. W. Mattner, M.
Senator K. A. Laught. 
ADELAIDE ( Contd.) 26th April
8.30 a. m.
10.00 a. m. Solemn Requiem Mass,
Sti Francis Xavier's
Cathedral Saluting Base, Victoria
Drive, then Service at
the Cross of Sacrifice Senator N. E. Buttfield
The Hon. A. J. Forbes,
M. P.
PERTH April
5.35 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
3.30 p. m. Dawn Service and Official
Laying of Wreaths, State
War Memorial, Kings Park
Parade and Service,
Perth Esplanade
Service, St. Mary's
Cathedral Service, St. Andrew's
Presbyterian Church
Parade and Service,
War Memorial, Fremantle The Hon. F. C. Chaney,
A. F. C.
Senator M. F. Scott
The Hon. F. C. Chaney,
A. F. C.
Mr. R. Cleaver, M. P.
Senator M. F. Scott
HOBART April
5.45 a. m.
10.00 a. m.
11.00 a. m.
2.30 p. m.
3.00 p. m. Dawn Service at the
Cenotaph Service, St. David's
Cathedral Military Mass,
St. Mary's Cathedral
Anzac Day Parade,
Saluting Pais at Steps
of Town Hall
Anzac Commemoration
Service at the Cenotaph Senator J. E. Marriott
Mr. A. Gibson, M. P.
Senator J. E. Marriott
Mr. C. W. J. Falkinder, M. P.
Mr. C. W. J. Falkinder, M. P.
Prime Minister's Department,
CANBERRA. 23rd April. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 2/ 1965
Statement by the Prime Minister. The Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
His Excellency the Governor-General, Viscount De L'Isle, V C.,
K. St. J., will relinquish the office of
ujvernor-General of Australia on 6th May, 1965, when he will leave
Australia to return to the United Kingdom.
His Excellency Sir Henry Abel Smith, K. C. V. O.,
K. St. J., will be sworn in as Administrator of the
Commonwealth on 7th May, 1965.
CANBERRA 27th April, 1965: 



FOR PRESS. Statement by the Rt. Hon, J. McEwen. Deputy Prime
Minister, Minister for Trade and ind~ ustry, Leader
OF t Australian Uountrv Party, at the Annual
Co erence of the Aiustraiñ an Uountr ar Queensland,
DROUGHT RELIEF
A concerted effort to make better provision against
the effects of drought was called for today by the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Trade and Industry, Mr. J. McEwen.
Mr. McEwen, the Federal Leader of the Australian
Country Party, was addressing the annual conference of the Australian
Country Party, Queensland, at Warwick.
" All Gnvernments and the entire community must shake
off any thought that may exist that droughts are an act of God,
inevitable and quite inescapable, and that tremendous recurring losses
should result from them" he said,
Mr. McEwen recalled the loss of 25 million sheep in
the drought ending in 1945.
He said that the Commonwealth and State Governments
and representatives of farming and pastoral industry organisations
should consider jointly efforts to alleviate the results of drought.
More dams and the provision of adequate transp~ rt,
subsidised if need be by governments, were ingredients of dealing with
drought. The credit institutions of Australia should also have
policies, the will and the resources to contribute to alleviation of
the problem. In addition, Mr. McEwen called on farmers to take the
opportunities offered, particularly in Queensland, for increased
fodder conservation. Queensland, whose total exports per head were
above the national average, was ton important a State to go on
suffering from devastating, widespread droughts, he said.
COMONVEALTH AID
Mr. McEwen said Queensland had been helped by Commonwealth
financial assistance under Section 96 of the Constitution,
" I believe this is a very proper policy for the
Commonwealth to give additional assistance to those States least able
to cater for their own development need,
" I believe this is partimcularly so where the assistance
will increase the capacity for export, This helps not only the State,
but also the national economy at one of its most sensitive points
exchange earnings. " I am sure both the opportunities and the needs of
Queensland in these respects, are great. I am sure the Commonwealth
policies have been of value arid may be expected to continue." 
2.
COALITION UNITY
Mr. MeEwen said he associated himself completely with the
remarks by the Queensland Premier, Mr, Nicklin, in opening the
Conference on Tuesday night.
( Mr. Nicklin, ini a zefeceiict tLo the Country Party's
relationships with the Liberal Party in the Government coalition in
Queensland, said, " Wie have to be fully united in principle and purpose,
even though not in name, to retain the Treasury benches and to do a job
of work for Queensland, and I ask supporters of both parties to work to
that end.") Mr. McEwen said current problems of politics, industry and
finance, and particularly the darkening scene to the North, demanded
the highest quality personnel in political organisations and Parliament,
" Any single thing that-puts a strain upon the internal
Ssolidarity of the Australian nation, or in particular, upon the
Wrelationship between the two parties that form the coalition in Queensland
and in the Commonwealth Parliaments, is an act against the national
interest today," he said, CAPITAL INFLOW
Mr. Mc~ ven said later outside the Conference that Australia
had a vital need for greater export effort to meet its foreign exchange-_
problems and reduce its dependence on thn inflow of overseas -capital0
He said Australia's balance of Daymerts position could be
seriously affected by recent actions of the United States and British
4D Governments. The President of the United States had asked U. S. companies
to take measures which could result in reduced flow of investment funds
to Australia. The President had also requested American companies
Woperating in Australia to remit a higher proportion of their profits
back to the U. S. Mr. McEwen said that an inevitablg consequence of
these new policies of the U. S. Administration would be increased
borrowings raised in Australia to finance American companies in
Australia. The Britishl-Government hrtd now.. asked U. K. companies to
take similar action, which must affect British investment in Australia,
Mr. McEwen recalled that two years ago, at the Country
Party Conference at Lakes Entrance, Victoria, he had stressed the need
for Australia to earn more by exports to pay its way internationally
rather than by " selling a bit of the farm" every year,
Mr. McEwen said today the recent changes of policy by the
U. S. and British Governments had suddenly brought home the risk of
becoming too dependent on the regular inflow of overseas capital in
great volume.
acinIn spetko these things no t 10 bemoanthe US. nUK
actoand hep o h~ mfcreated for Austra la bu o s an the
answer is to increase exports," he said.
CANBERRA, 28th April, 1965. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH By
* The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
VIETNAM
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 29uth A pril' 19651
Sir ROBERTI MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister).-by leave-The House in
recent weeks has conducted an important
debate on foreign affairs in which the situation
in Vietnam was fully and anxiously discussed.
My colleague, the Minister for
* External Affairs ( Mr. Hasluck) devoted a
large part of his statement to Vietnam, explaining
developments there and the critical
significance of those developments for South
and South East Asia as a whole. Nor of
course do the implications end with South
and South East Asia. Whether an externally
directed Communist guerrilla subversion is
to succeed or fail has world wide consequence.
It has particular consequence for
Australia. In the first half of 1962 the Government
decided, following Upon a request from the
Government Of South Vietnam, that AuIstralia
should contribute militarily to the
defence of South Vietnamn. We sent at that
time a group of some 30 military instructors
to provide military training assistance. Since
then additional military aid has been provided.
The strength of the Army training
team was, in the first place, doubled, and
later still-comparatively recently-increased
to 100. A flight of six CaribouI
transport aircraft has been provided. We
have progressively increased our programme
of economic aid to South Vietnam
5040/ 65. so that it now runs at the rate of about
fLI million a year. A devoted body of ALIStralian
experts is at present at work in different
parts of South Vietnam, experts in
agriculture and the like. In addition to Australia
and the United States, some thirty
other countries are providing assistance or
have undertaken to do so in the military
or non-military aid fields. This includes
assistance from a significant and important
group of Asian countries, including the
Philippines, Malaysia, Japan, Thailand, and
the Republic of Korea, who are contrihuting
either economic or military aid.
The Australian Government is now ill
receipt of a request from the Government
of' South Vietnam for further military assistance.
We have decided-and this has been
after close consultation with the Government
of the United States-to provide an
infantry battalion for service in South Vietnarn.
In case there is any misunderstanding,
I think I should say, Sir, that we decided
in principle somic time ago-weeks and
weeks ago-that We would be willing to
do this if we received the necessary request
from the Government of South Vietnam
and the necessary collaboration with the
United States. This is not to he regarded as
something that has suddenly arisen Outt of
more recent events. 
There can be no doubt of the gravity
of the situation in South Vietnam. There
is ample evidence to show that with the
support of the North Vietnamese regime
and other Communist powers, the Vietcong
has been preparing on a more substantial
scale than hitherto insurgency action
designed to destroy South Vietnamese
Government control, and to disrupt by
violence the life of the local people. The
rate of infiltration of guerrillas from North
Vietnam has been increasing and last year
rose to some 10,000. The infiltration of a
battalion of the North Vietnamese regular
Army has recently been confirmed.
We have not of course come to this
decision without the closest attention to the
question of defence priorities. We do not
and must not overlook the point that our
alliances, as well as providing guarantees
and assurances for our security, make demands
upon us. We have commitments to
Malaysia which we are meeting. We have to
bear in mind, and make preparations against,
the possibility of other developments in the
region which could make demands on our
Australian defence capacity.
Assessing all this, it is our judgment that
the decision to commit a battalion in South
Vietnam represents the most useful additional
contribution which we can make to
the defence of the region at this time. The
takeover of South Vietnam would be a direct
military threat to Australia and all the
countries of South and South East Asia. It
must be seen as part of a thrust by Communist
China between the Indian and Pacific
Oceans. The task of holding the situation in
South Vietnam and restraining the North
Vietnamese is formidable. But we are conscious
of the magnitude of the effort being
made by the Government and people of
South Vietnam in their own defence. In
recent months the United States has taken
historic decisions to extend further military
assistance to South Vietnam. South Korea
has also committed substantial forces.
We have noted and welcomed the attempts
to open the way to agreement which
have been made, so far unsuccessfully, by
President Johnson and by the Prime Minister
of Britain through his representative, Mr.
Gordon Walker. We also welcome President
Johnson's proposals for a wide-ranging
economic programme. We will certainly continue
to play our part in the economic
development of the region. I make it clear that the Government has
no desire to have Australian forces in Vietnam
any longer than is necessary to ensure
the security of South Vietnam. In terms,
that is practically what President Johnson
said quite recently about the presence of
American forces in Vietnam. We and our
allies are not seeking to take over North*
Vietnam. The North Vietnamese must not
take over South Vietnam by armed force
or subversion.
Let me add one item to my statement.
Arguments have been going on for sonimc
time, publicly and privately, about this
matter. Some attempt has been made
occasionally-I do not think in this House
-to suggest that we are in some way at
odds with the United States on this question.
Therefore, I am happy to tell the House
that today I received from the President
of the United States of America a message
which I have his full authority to make
public. Mr. Jamnes.-Oh!
Sir ROBERT MENZIFS.-Yes, I am
like that. 1 never publish a message without
having full authority to make it public.
Therefore, the honorable gentleman may
he interested to hear it. I do not assume for
a moment that he will like it, but I think
he ought to hear it. It is in these terms-Am
Dear Mr. Prime Minister: I amn delighted at
the decision of your Government to provide : I
infantry battalion for service in South Vietnam
at the request of the Government of South
Vietnam. This action simply underscores the full co-opcration
and understanding that has existed between
our two Governments, and between both and the
Government of South Vietnam, in assisting South
Vietnam to maintain its independence. Like you,
we have no desire to maintain military forces in
Vietnam any longer than necessary to ensure the
security of South Vietnam. But we share your
belief that we must both respond to the needs
brought about by the aggression being carried on
from North Vietnam.
More broadly, this action proves again the
deep ties between our two countries in the cause
of world peace and security. As you know, my
personal experiences in association with Australians
during World War II have made this
a particularly deep and abiding feeling for me.
I am confident that our two nations, working
together, can continue to make great contributions
to checking the spread of aggression and to
bringing about the peace that South Vietnam and
South-East Asia deserve. Sincerely yours,
Lyndon B. Johnson. w
BY AUTHORITY: ARTHIIUR, COMMONWAI. T11 C( OVERNMENT PRINTER. CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No.-43Z1965
ADDITIONS TO THE NATIONAL ART COLLECTION
Statement by thePrjme Minister; the Rt. on. Si Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister announced today that, on the advice
of the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board the Commonwealth had
recently acquired a number of important paintings for the
National Collection. The first of these comprise the considerable collection
of Australian paintings which belonged to the late Mr. Richard
Paul of Sydney* The Commonwealth has been able to acquire this
important collection through the generosity of the beneficiary
of his estate and the co-operation of his executorsi the
Perpetual Trustee Company. The result is that for very much
less than market values the Commonwealth has acquired fine
examples of the work of Tom Roberts ( 1856-1931), Sir Arthur
Streeton ( 1867-1943), Elioth Gruner ( 1882-1939) and George
Lambert ( 1873-1930) as well as many other noted Australian
artists. The Prime Minister also gave details of other purchases
which resulted from a great deal of research in i'ngland and
France leading to the location of some important works by the
expatriate Australian painter John Peter Russell ( 1858-1931).
Russell was a fellow student and friend of Van Gogh, Toulouse-
Lautrec, Seurat and other noted French artists of the French
Impressionist era. As a result of subsequent negotiations, the
Commonwealth has acquired four of Russel's oil paintings:
" Paysans a Monte Cassino", " View of the Alpes Maritimes"
" Le Pont de Pecq" and " Bougeval near Paris", and three ol his
watercolours " Cliffs at Goulphar", " Piazza Lerici 1910" and
" Breton Fisherman;. The ? rime Minister pointed out that in addition to
acquiring these important works by noted artists of an earlier
period in our history, the Art Advisory Board is constantly
adding examples of the work of contemporary Australian artists
to the National Collection which it is hoped will ultimately
be housed in a National Art Gallery in Canberra. In the
meantime, many of the paintings acquired for the National
Collection are hanging in our Embassies abroad and others are
included in travelling exhibitions such as those now in
Europe and New Zealand.
CANBERRAI
2nd May, 1965 



INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS ON HUMAN RELATIONS
HED T 11LBOURNE. VICTORIA 3JF MAY. j96
Speech by thePe ' M4iister,,, t~ ien Sir RobertMenzies~
Mr. Chairman Such are the infirmities of human memory that I was
all ready to address you as Mr. President. ( Laughter) I am
very glad or sorry as the case may be to be reminded that
I am the President, though I fear I won't be very conspicuously
present for a very long portion of the proceedings. However,
I am here to open them.
The first thing I want to do is to read to you, wiith
the permission of the Council, the folloling message which was
sent by the Council to His Royal Highness, Prince Philip:
" The Chairman and Members of the Council of
the International Congress on Human Relations in
Melbourne send greetings and good wishes on the eve
of the Congress. We appreciate the keen interest
you have shoxm in the revolutionary technical changes
in industry and commerce and believe that this Congress
will assist materially in the understanding of the
great social problems of our day. The Commonwealth
and indeed the whole world will benefit from the work
of this Congress which you have supported by your
gracious patronage."
Prince Philip has now replied in these terms
" Thank you for your kind message which I was
delighted to receive. I am sure that each one of you
who attends this international congress will learn
something of value which will contribute to better and
happier human relations throughout the world. MY
begt wishes to you all."
Then there is another message from the Prime Minister
of Japan w., hich, very generously, has been done into English for
my benefit ( Laughter) " It gives me great pleasure to congratulate
you on the successful opening of the International
Congress of Human Relations."
I call that a very intelligent anticipation because it hasntt
yet been opened,,,...
" I would say it is a very timely project to hold this
congress at a time when all the industrially-developed
countries in the world are faced with difficult social
and economic problems resulting from advancement in
technology and automation. Japan is no exception.
Although Japan was well known for abundant human
resources until quite recently, the progress achieved
in industrial mechanisation has brought in its wake
an increasingl~ y serious labour shortage. Consequently
how to turn technical advancement to the true benefit
of the human being is now a widely-discussed topic in
our business circles. I am happy to know that Mr. Masaru
Ibuka is participating in this congress as a lecturer. / 2 
-2
" I am sure that Mr. Ibuka with his profound
knowledge and experience in modern management
will be able to contribute to this conference
in many ways. I sincerely hope that closer
co-operation will be further promoted between
Australia and Japan as well as among the
participating countries as a whole to solve the
various problems common to our industries."
Well, having read those two stimulating messages to you I just
want to approach the task of opening the Congress and o1 saying,
with your permission, a few words about its business,
Long experience has shown me now that the first
thing to do when you have to open something is to discover what
it is. I find this is no small advantage and therefore I
looked very closely to see what was the broad theme of the
congress, and there it was, and here it is The Social and
Economic Impact of Automation and Technical Change.
, Now Sir, in the presence of a great number of
pundits in this field, it is not for me to undertake a technical
examination of this theme. All I can do in a few minutes is
to present you with what you will regard as platitudes but which
I might hope to regard as a few elements of commonsense in
approaching this problem.
Change. Change is a fact. It cantt be ignored.
It must not be disposed of by wishful thinking, and yet the
curious thing about us human beings is that we are always
chronically demanding change and equally chronically afraid of
it, 1: think that's basically true. We are all progressives
in politics and we say so, repeatedly. There are no people in
the whole political arena who are not desperately anxious for
change and no voters that ever I have been able to discover who
don't share that desperate anxiety. But when it comes to the
point there is not much change, is there? There is a certain
amount of resistance to change. You get this curious paradox in
the human being. Well, on this problem we, I thinkl, might present
a question to ourselves: Does technological change threaten
full employment? Because a lot of people think, and very
seriously, that it does. That always seems to me to be an
error an error about as old as the Industrial Revolution.
I would just like to make the briefest of analysis of this
point with you. First of all I have no doubt myself that full
employment stimulates the demand for technological improvement.
In a human world we have just agreed that it is a surplus
of jobs over men, which is how some people will define full
employment, a surplus of that kind tends to mean, c. oesn't it,
a little less personal effort, some bidding-up for the employees
who are required for some enterprise some initial increasing
unit cost of whatever it is that is being produced.
Well now, of course, there are some industries,
perhaps represented here this morning, which believe they can
pass it on and if they believe they can pass it on they think
that is all right. They will accept the causes of the passing on.
But in industries which have to meet the market in a competitive
world and those industries include an increasing number of
manufacturers in Australia, for example, for exportc, rising
9 o / 3 
-3
costs which result from the initial application of over-full
employment or full employment will stimulate two things. One
is technological advance. This will at once be seen as something
which provides the answer, something that reconciles the new
standard of pay or the new standard of competition for labour
with the need to produce and to produce effectively for a market.
So technological advance is stimulated, in my opinion by full
employment, and market advance is also stimulated by l
employment because as the pressure comes on so the search for
the market and particularly for the variation of the market wiill
grow stronger and stronger.
Now that is one side of the picture as I see it
full employment really stimulates the demand for Lechnological
improvement. The other side of that proposition is this that
technological imp3rovement need not threaten employment. All
sorts of short-term expedients may have to be applied to cushion
the impact, the immediate impact of new labour-saving devices
and I anticipate you w~ ill be hearing some expert views on those
matters before you finish. But it would be to despair about
the reality and substance of human progress to ignore the
dominant facts that technological advance will cheapen the
processes of production and therefore give rise to a greater
demand and therefore directly and indirectly stimulate employment.
I emphasise " and indirectly". One has only to
recall the history, the modern history of the motor car industry
and its mass production to roalise that what is indirect is
even more extensive than what is direct in the employment f~ ield
and yet this has been in an industry where immense technological
progress has been made. And again, technological advance leads
to new types of production, new commodities to create new
demands and to meet new demands. Whole new industries can
arise as indeed they have been increasingly during the last
forty years.. I just pause for a minute to emphasise this point
that the advance in technology leads to new types of production.
One is frequently conscious of the fact to take Australia by
way of example there is a certain orthodoxy in our minds about
what we can sell to other countries, just as, I venture to say,
British industry was for a considerable time handicapped by
o similar belief that there were certain things the world could
buy and if they didn't want to buy those, it was just too bad.
Now we Australians here have constantly to be on the searLch for
a new product which a new market will be willing to take, and
in order to do that there will need to be the most tremendous
pressure in the technological field not a fear of it but a
use of it, a stimulation of it for those purposes.
There is another aspect in my own country which
is also quite material, W1e need here, and are at all times
moving towards it, a better and a speedier application in
industry both primary industry and secondary industry of
scientific and technological research because that will tend to
reduce costs and therefore to increase the stability of the
whole economy. The process has been a little too slow, I
think in the past, I have a strong feeling that there are
many Items which could lead to great technological advance which
are sluggish in their journey from the lab, to the farm or to
the factory. This is a matter to wihich we are constantly
directing attention and of course that will be no threat to
full employment. 6n the contrary, this constant application of
000 1+ 
new ideas to stimulate old productions and to create new
ones is the best guarantee, properly considered, of useful
employment for a rapidly-increasing population.
I venture to say, Sir, that it is dangerous
to be distracted by isolated instances or to suffer from a
fear of becoming a technologically-advanced community.
Nobody need fear that. On the contrary, we should all pray
for it. The great questions, Sir, on which this conference
of distinguished minds will throw much light are therefore:
Are we willing to respond to the challenge of change? Are
we competent to respond to the challenge of change? And in
all this the role of education is of course of supreme
moment not only scientific education, not only technical
education, but also education in humane letters without which
our whole sense of proportion and perspective can weaken with
disastrous human consequences as we have had every reason to
learn in the course of our lifetimes,
Sir, those are purely preliminary observations.
I don't profess, as I said at the beginning, that there is
any novelty about them but I have found it interesting to
bring a few of my own thoughts together in this fashion.
I wish this congress great success. I can't imagine a better
time at which to hold it. I can't imagine a more useful theme
to discuss. Men are thinking about it all over t'ae world.
You can throw so much light on it in this conference that you
will be able to provide that light in other countries around
the globe. I wish you every success. I now declare the
Congress open.
0 VP 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BYv
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
VIETNAM
MINISTERIAL STATEI ~' 1 C i3Cf~ I"~
l1
rVIENTd
[ Fromn the " Parliamentary Debates," 4th May 1965]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) Speaker, I have
listened to the speech of the Leader of the
Opposition ( Mr. Caiwell) with acute depression.
' It seemed to me to demonstrate
an approach to these great and vital
problems that I would hardly ' have expected
to hear described in this place. Indeed, he
summed it all up in the second last paragraph
of his speech. May I remind the
House'that he said-
Let me sum up. We believe that America must
not be humiliated and must not be forced to
withdraw. Having said that by way of summary, he
has said that in the clear view of ' his party
America should be required to go it alone
with no assistance from us. That, really,
is a pretty neat, short summary of the speech
that he has made. I will come back to it
because there are a few things that should
, be put straight on the record, if they need
to be put straight.
The first thing that I want to mention,
as briefly as may be, is ; the grievance with
which he began. It is quite true ' that he
did not elaborate it today. I am supposed
to have concealed from the Leader of the
Opposition and the Deputy Leader of ' the
Opposition ( Mr. Whitlam) the fact that I
161/ 65 was going to make a statement on Thursday
night. He did not say much about it today
but has been very vocal about it in other
places; so there is a widespread belief
entertained ' by some people who are
apparently willing to believe anything that
this was, for some low cunning political
-reason, concealed from them and that I
sprang it on Thursday at 8 o'clock. I just
want to say something about that because
it will be useful for honorable members to
become aware of the basis of discussions
* between governments, because ' these allegations
display a woeful ignorance of how
things are done between governments and
between nations. The announcement of the
provision of fighting forces by us for South
Vietnam was not one that could be made
without a great deal of preparatory discussion,
not only on ' the military level but
also on the political level where ' the last
responsible decisions have to be made. It
has to be remembered that Australia has
commitments as a member of the South
East Asia Treaty Organisation and that one
of the protocol nations under S. E.* A. T. O.
is South Vietnam. We have commitments in
respect of Malaysia which have been fully
stated and debated in this House. We have
joint interests with the United States of
America and with New Zealand under the 
Security Treaty between Australia, New
Zealand ' and the United States of America,
and we : have, of course, a responsibility
for the defence of Australia, including
Papua and New Guinea. So we have a
variety of responsibilities, each of them
importing some contingency that may or
may not arise.
1 had some exchanges with President
Johnson towards the end of last year in
which the possibility of increased military
activity was envisaged and in the course of
which we agreed that there should be, at a
suitable time, discussions on the military
level. These took place, in fact, in March
and the result of the talks was available
to us early in April. We made our formal
decision in principle on 7th April, that
decision being that we would be willing to
provide a battalion, should it be requested
and should all the circumstances render its
employment useful, fitting in with the
general pattern of what was being done. So
it was a decision in principle. But that was
not the end of the matter. Before an actual
decision could be announced, discussions
had to occur with the various governments
with which we are associated and, in particular,
with the Government of the United
Kingdom, the Government of the United
States and the Government of South Vietnam.
A great number of broad details had
to be considered and certain more detailed
arrangements made at the government level.
Very properly, I wanted to have all these
matters quite clearly established before
making any announcement to the House.
I need not elaborate. All of us who are
familiar with this kind of international discussion
will realise that not one of us is
entirely his own master in respect of the
timetable. Statements have to be synchronised
very frequently in one country and
another, and any statement made would
need to be made with the concurrence
of Sou'th Vietnam, as the nation
requesting our help, with the United States,
with whose troops ours would be associated
in South Vietnam, and with the United
Kingdom, which has accepted great responsibilities
in relation to Malaysia where we
have already made a substantial contribution.
So we have the three governments.
When on Wednesday of last week a story
about the battalion broke in sections of the
Press, I felt a great deal of embarrassment because the time -had not quite arrived
when I could feel that our relevant discussions
had concluded. On Wednesday a
rumour was circulated ' that I would be
making a statement on Thursday night and
that that statement would relate to the provision
of an Australian battalion. At that
time I literally did not know whether I
could be ready -by Thursday night. The
Leader of the Opposition inquired at my
office on Thursday morning at a time when
I was heavily engaged on a matter of some
urgency. He said he would like , to know
what was happening. That was a very
reasonable request, I thought. He said that
he had plans to go to Sydney in connection
with the election campaign and could hardly
change them. He added that he thought
t'h't any statement might be made or could
be made on Tuesday night, that is, tonight.
After this ' had ' been conveyed to me, the
Leader of the Opposition was -told that it
was possible that I would ' be making a
statement on Thursday night ' but : that it was
not certain and : that when I knew definitely
I would -let ' him know. He was told that if
I found myself in a position ' to make a
statement I would hope to be in a position
to give him the ' text of it -by 5.30 p. m. I
' follow these rules, if I may say so, very
strictly. At 4.45 p. m. the Leader of the
Opposition -inquired again as to whether
there were any further developments as ' he
and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition
were about to leave for Sydney. He was
told that ' it was still not certain ' that I would
be in a position ' to make a statement-it
was possible, even probable, but not yet
certain. The Leader of the Opposition said
that he was leaving the honorable member
for Melbourne Ports ( Mr. Crean) in
charge and -asked if I would let the honorable
member for Melbourne Ports know
of any further development. This I agreed
to do. I think the Leader of the Opposition
would agree that that is a straightforward
narrative of what occurred.
The final international messages which I
thought I should have before making a
statement arrived at something after 5.30
and I then decided that I would make
the statement at 8 o'clock. The honorable
member for Melbourne ' Ports, who was leading
the Opposition in the absence of -the
Leader, was informed of this as soon as
possible and was told : that ' the text ' would be
available ' to him at 7 o'clock, and this was 
done. The result of all this was that when I
made my statement I was in a position to do
so with the approval of the President of the
United States, the Prime Minister of Great
Britain and the Prime Minister of South Vietnam.
I will not need to say to honorable
members that, in view of the spread of newspaper
headlines on this matter, I simply
could not defer my statement until today,
without acute embarrassment to myself and
to the other governments concerned. Clearly,
I could not have made my statement over
the weekend because it is in this Parliament
that such a statement ought to be made.
This Parliament is entitled to hear all of
these matters direct and to have the opportunity
of debating them. Therefore, the
choice was to make the statement on Thursday
or -to let all the rumours flourish, to
let the news go on breaking all around the
world and then come along today and make
the statement.
Mr. Clyde Camnieron.--How did the
Press get the news?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I wish I knew,
but I do not. The Press certainly did not get
it from me or from the Government. For all
those reasons I made the statement. The
notion that either the Leader of the Opposition
or the Deputy Leader of the Opposition
was deceived or that something was
concealed from them is really shown to be
completely without foundation. Each of
them ' knew that if I did make a statement
it would be related to this question, because
the dogs were barking it around the
premises. The newspaper stories had made
that quite clear. Perhaps I have mixed up
two notions in saying that. Notwithstanding
these circumstances, the two honorable
gentlemen opposite left the House-no
doubt for very good political reasons-and
they were competently represented by the
honorable member for Melbourne Ports
who had a copy of the statement and heard
it. Therefore, the grievance to which the
Leader of the Opposition made a faint reference
at the beginning of his speech, is without
foundation.
I now turn, as he did, to the merits of
this matter. Where does the Labour Party
stand? I have been asking myself this question
for some time. We heard the answer
today. The Labour Party is against us on the
merits. This is a clear cut issue of whether or not we should provide forces in South
Vietnam. The Opposition says You should
not do it for a variety of reasons which
I invite honorable members to study and to
understand, if they can. I turn to the
merits for three reasons. One is to establish
the rightness of our position under all the
circumstances that exist. I do not propose
to repeat what I said in my statement to
the House on Thursday, because I dealt
with the substance of the matter and the
merits of the case on that occasion. But
I do want, once more, to remind the House
that, when the 1954 Geneva Agreements had
been entered into and they were reported
in statements to the House, I myself made
a statement relating to this matter right here.
I said that the Government of Australia
would view aggression in violation of the
Indo-China settlement as a threat to international
peace and security. That was a perfectly
explicit statement. It is because we
believe that there has been a breach of
international law and a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations that we have,
in relation to the present matter, notified
the President of the Security Council of our
decision, adding these words-
This decision has been made at the request of
the Government of the Republic of Vietnam and
it is in accordance with Australia's international
obligations. That is the formal ground on which we
stand. But this is not a matter that lends
itself to decision with reference to formalities
only. Therefore, it is necessary to continue
an examination of the merits of the
matter. I must say that the Leader of the
Opposition rather puzzled me because in
the course of his speech-he was courteous
enough to give me a copy of it when he
came into the House-he made two statements
of really splendid simplicity. One
was-That there has long been, and still is, aggression
from the North and subversion inspired by the
North, I do not for one moment deny.
Here is a proposition of fact which I
thought would represent common ground
on both sides of the House. I am very glad
to have it stated by the Leader of the Opposition.
I have said it in my statement and
on other occasions. That there is aggression
from the Communist North is not denied,
and that there is subversion from within,
fostered by the Communists of the North,
is not denied now by the Leader of the 
Opposition. 1 have ' heard it denied in a
sense, but it was not denied today. This is
a very significant fact. It describes the
origin of the whole of this business in which
we find ourselves involved.
A little later in his speech the Leader
of the Opposition made another statement
which I will read. He said-
I agree that the pace of North Vietnamese
aggression-and that is the only term for it-has
increased, though estimates as to its extent vary
considerably. So, here is the admission that while all
this is going on the pace of aggression
from the North, the pace of the positive
action by the Communist North, has increased.
That is the state of affairs-it is
now common ground between the Government
and the Opposition-in which we have
had to consider whether we should withdraw
from the scene, whether we should
make our contribution by words, whether
we should leave the United States to go
it alone, or whether we should, with all
our partnerships and involvements and all
our risks in this part of the world, determine
that we will play our part, although it may
be a small one, in positive action. Broadly,
that is what we have done and why we
have done it.
I do not understand how my friend, the
Leader of the Opposition, can delude himself
on this matter. He used some fine words,
some rather emotional words, towards the
end of his speech. But does he really believe
that Australia should walk out on this
matter? This is the question. Does he really
believe that the United States of America,
of whose actions he has approved and reapproved,
ought to be allowed to continue
to carry this burden and that we, as one of
the S. E. A. T. O. powers, with South Vietnam
requesting our help, should say: " Sorry;
there is nothing we can do about it"? This
is a very serious position, I venture to say,
for the Leader of the Opposition to get into.
It certainly is not a position that we want
to get into.
It is in the continuing interest of this
country-to put it on no higher ground
than that-to be regarded and to remain as
a valued ally of the United States, which is,
in this part of the world, our own most powerful ally. 1 would hate to be the head
of a government which had to say to the
United States on an occasion like this:
Sorry; we can do nothing about it. We will
help you with debate in the United Nations.
We will offer some fine words and some
good sentiments. -But, as for practical action,
no; that is for you. American soldiers from
the Middle West can go and fight and die in
South Vietnam, but that is not for us". I
think that is a disastrous proposition for
any opposition to put forward.
I do not want to prolong this speech. The
whole essence of this matter seems to me
to be clear. The Leader of the Opposition
may be right; perhaps I oversimplify it. I
am a great believer, when it comes to determining
international obligations, in simpliiing
a proposition so that it stands out
stark and clear and so that we all know
what it is we are deciding, what we are
debating, and what we are to do about it.
From things that have been said one would
think that this decision by the Government
was not entirely consistent with statements
repeatedly made by us in this House. Indeed,
an attempt has been made here and there
to suggest that this decision came rather as
a surprise, a little bit out of the blue. May
I remind the House-I am sure the Leader
of the Opposition needs no reminding-that
this approach of ours has been stated
repeatedly in this place and from this table.
, I have just quoted what was said after
the Geneva Agreements were entered into.
Without labouring the matter, everybody
knows that announcements have been made
from time to time about sending military
instructbiors to South Vietnam. The number
has grown from a small 30 to a substantial
100-very substantial, considering our own
requirements in this field. We have provided
aircraft: Caribou aircraft have gone
there. We have provided a substantial
amount of economic aid. We have supplied
much appreciated groups of people of a
military order, and equipment of a military
order-not large in numbers, but very significant
from their moral effects not only
on the problem itself but on the opinion
and feeling of the United States of America.
Therefore. it is idle to say that this is something
new and that we have a new approach.
The Minister for External Affairs ( Mr.
Hasluck) made an extraordinarily able 
statement in this House comparatively
recently in which he outlined the whole of
our policies in these matters in the clearest
possible terms. I have, in my own fashion.
though not as well, tried to say very much
the same kind of thing. I do not think anybody
has any ambiguity in his mind as to
where we stand. Certainly nobody in the
American Administration has any; certainly
nobody in the United Kingdom Government
has any; certainly none of our friends
and allies in these various places have any:
Why should there be any existing in this
place? It has all been completely clear.
And now the Leader of the Opposition
criticises. I would say to him that he had
better look at himself, at his colleagues and
at his Party. He has really, of course,
disclosed their approach. He has not, I am
happy to say, got down to the level of one
or two of his supporters by suggesting that
this was an indecent bargain for dollars,
which I thought was a monstrosity of a
proposal and which, as I have said, reveals
only the murky recesses of the minds of
the people who make it. The Leader of the
Opposition has not said this: He would not
dream for a moment of saying it. But he
has put his case in the curious, evasive and
defeatist terms to which we have listened
-today. I say defeatist, inactive. He says in
effect: Kind hearts are more than coronets.
Do not let us have actual forces used to
repel force-to repel open Communist
attack, to repel Communist aggression and
subversion from the Vietcong. No, do not
let us use force to meet force, because that
is wrong." I noticed that the Labour Party-I suppose
it is permissible to describe it in that
phrase-issued a policy statement not long
ago, on 18th February. I have been enriched
with a copy of it and it has one or two
interesting things to say. It states-
In its statement to the Security Council on
February 7th, reporting the air strikes against
military installations in the south of North Vietnam,
America insisted that its object in South
Vietnam, while resisting aggression, is to achieve
a peaceful settlement maintained by the presence
of international peacekeeping machinery and that
it would not allow the situation to be changed
by terror and violence.
Then it goes on-
This statement of American purposes is
uinexceptionable. Thg Australian Labour Party starts by
saying: " Yes, that is right. You say this is
what you are doing. This is the object of the
exercise. You are going ! to repel the
aggressors. You are going to attack their
lines of communication. You are going to
do everything you can to produce stability
and get rid of civil war in South Vietnam
Then it says: It is all right if the Americans
do it, but it is no good to us. God made
the United States our protectors and we
ought to leave it to the United States
Now Sir, : this is a matter which, I venture
to say, is unarguable, but the last point
that the Leader of the Opposition undertook
to make was that in South Vietnam there
was a poor government-a corrupt government.
This word " corrupt" comes -trippingly
to the tongue. Every government of
this kind is corrupt or it is "' Fascist".
I know of no evidence that the Quat Government
in South Vietnam is corrupt. I
certainly have had no evidence that the government
of Ngo Dinh Diem was corrupt.
I thought he was a brave and honest little
man, and a patriot. But to say, " They are
corrupt. They do not have ordinary elections
in South Vietnam what sort of nonsense
is this? On the honorable gentleman's own
showing, South Vietnam is torn apart, torn
to pieces, by the activities of the Vietcong
in all their little pockets around the country.
In those circumstances there cannot be the
peaceable processes of election, there cannot
be what we call a democratic self govering
system if people are in that position.
Why are they in that position? It is
through no fault of their own, and no-one
suggests it is. They are in that position because
the Communists have set about two
tasks. One is to make life intolerable for
the South Vietnamese along their northern
frontier and to cross over thousands of
people to : help the Communist forces, and
the other is to maintain a system of Communist
subversion which is designed -to overthrow,
by force, the Government of South
Vietnam and to substitute for it a government
which will never be elected by the
people but which will be a simple Conmmunist
dictatorship corresponding to that of
Ho Chi Minh in North Vietnam.
Therefore, I venture to say there is a
good deal of humbug in talking of South
Vietnam as though it -were exposed to criticism
because of the manifold difficulties it 
has had in securing stability, just as there
is more than a shade of humbug in saying
that what we ought to be doing is getting
on with the work in the Mekong Valley.
I ask members opposite to get on with it;
to go along pretending that there is no
fighting going on-pretending that the
Vietcong are not there and pretending that
there is no North Vietnam. Really, Sir, this
is the height of absurdity.
I recognised -the somewhat pathetic note
in the honorable member's speech when he
turned to his own people and said, metaphorically
and literally: " We will be unpopular but we will stick to it. You must
remember that we are ready to suffer in an
unpopular cause". All I can say is that I
wish he were willing to suffer in a good
cause of his own, because I have not the
slightest doubt that on the merits not only
we in Australia, but also all those governments
and people with whom we are associated
in this tremendously important exercise
which is so significant for the security
of our own country, are on the side of the
great majority. If 1 may end on a horribly
political note, it is a good thing occasionally
to be in a big majority.
UY AU I OIITI: I A. AR I IUR. COMMONWEAILTIH GOVERNMLI4Ir I'KINFILER, CANIItRKA 



141UiL iij AT PAkiitU" 4 JJij
Sir and Ladies and ( C. ntlemeti s
I mabout to essay a task proposinZ your health,
Sir, Nov I don't think you were around the precincts this afternoon
but if YOU had WOODS YOU might haVe gathered that there wre som
differenoes between ^ rthur Qklvell and ayseif. ~ iV the effluxion
of tim and the athusiasm of the axment w are mw an the one
avetengtho Isn't that right, Arthur? C ~ ughtr) ivrything I
says he will ape. with, will add to and wiil adorn*
M~ w my task tonight is to Propose the toast of Ris
xcellency the Governor-General who Is, unhappIll, aiwut to leave
us. He has n ' t cme to the 00001u51l = m~ L ta) leave us beoOMus
, Aen Hear bMjesty The % usen was awd enough to approve of his
aipointmnt he made It quitie CNrthat there was sm limit to
thie mea; Uhe Ins served out his tiMme istt hat the right
expression, air? ( LAi4ghtew) withk IMens success.
The 0overnr-4eewrej has beean, in on with quito
a number of his Predeoessors in facts I suppose, with all, though
there were some I didn't know a robust occupant of this post,
I mean bF that that he has never been unwiling; z to contribute a
fev views; he has always spoian the mind of a Udghl--tnlentoad and
very brae man. I have had no trouble with bin, if I wa~ say so.
( Laughter) Hie knos this bmmuse one of his great eeoszs
then 31r Vdi1em alia's vwas a little given to expreesting hiss mind
in certain areas with vigour and ocasionally I had to go out to
tarrali-1a stand ouate his stukg having made an appointment,
stand to attention, may to my self, R1oi, Menuies don't ran sway
from Itt, ( Laugter) a" then soIn and make my " to thes Governor,-
Cerrlt and then he would says " My dear Vallov, do, sit dova,"
very disaril s you mee.
The h would says Odhat do you want to ame no
about?" and I, once or twice itsmyed the task of saling to
hmt awoufyo kniow you sailt so-and-soSi. u in the Northern
, errito2' y.' It's a funny things Isn't ft, tMu it In onl~ y in the
, vorthewn Territory in Jid -* rms here tonight? ( Laughter) It's
onl~ y in the Northern T3eritory that people succumb to the temptation
to s~ things. Ju4 L vould breuthe three times invzurds you know,
,. nd say think perhaps, 31w, that wasn't entirely well advised. 8
hen I had'done taiis I was in a swaet beoase I was frightened
of his. ( 1AUghter) I conede that point.
11. would smile and say, 08it dovwn* and ' There to~ y
be a great deal In whamt jr. u say. 4ell that was wietiing and
then realising I was on the point or collapses be did what the
. Prsent Qovernor-Ceooral ocoasioral4 does~ or roguirly does and
said to me1 You like a drink?" and If unj ari ever ne" Ad
one, I irasothe man*. 40119 1 haven't had to hiove that kind of expori enoe
4th you, JAr becuue from first to last, ever since the dav that
IOU we" e appo~ ntod, I have boon veri, very happy to kno you, and
all of us hmbeen~ lapy to know you as a man of imnense Charect
and If you will allw~ me to say so distngaisbed ability and
aieat eourage andi truditiona Thts, I thiinks hans bomin a very go 
r a 2.
thing for us and I am quite certain, Sir, that you yourself feel
that it has been a good thing for you because you have been all
round Australia, you have seen people at all angles, you have been
into all the corners of Australia and you have made your voice
clear in almost every corner of Australia and always to the
immense satisfaction of the people of Australia.
Therefore the first thing I want to say to you
is that I am proposing the toast of a very distinguished and very
gallant man of whom all of us know a great deal. I have been in
a state of a little difficulty, Sir, about the next thing I want
to say but I think on the whole you would like me to refer to
it. When you, Sir, came here, you brought with you a
wife who had the most enormous tradition of courage and the most
enormous individual courage. She was a very great lady and I shall
always recall the courage with which she bore herself at a time
when ordinary mortals might have been depressed and sorry for
herself. Do you mind Sir, if I refer to her because, really,
her period out here with you, her bravery in the face of difficul-
O ties moved everybody in Australia. I say that without the
slightest hesitation. And of course her death was an irreparable
loss to you. Now I don't like to have to speak about these matters
because they are really rather emotional but I thought about this
and I thought, " No this Governor-General oan't leave Australia
S without knowing tha he leaves behind him not only memories of
himself but memories of her" and therefore I take the liberty on
behalf of all of you of referring to that very great lady.
And then when she left, His Excellency was, I
think, singularly fortunate to have had in succession two daughters
very young not to be expected to face up to the formalities and
responsibilities of Vice-Regal existence and each of them in
her turn Kate and Anne, did a marvellous job, and everybody
here ton ght would want me to say how marvellous that job was,
how well they did. And of course although they were daughters
and if I may say so, daughters have something rather special ( a
number of you will understand this perfectly), they have something
rather special, young Philip, the owner of the traditional name,
young Philip Sidney has been here from time to time, quite a long
time, one way or another, and I would like to say to him, Sir,
through you, how much we have enjoyed having Philip here and how
convineed I am that he will some day be a Member of the Federal
Parliament, and I am keeping my fingers crossed in ease he gets
muddled up with Arthur Calwell ( Laughter).
The other thing Sir, I would like to say is this.
It is sometimes forgotten the dovernor-General of Australia is
not only etpected to be a man of distinction, as he is, but he
is also to be recognised as the personal representative of The
Queen. Now this is a very significant statement the personal
representative of The Queen. In other words, the perfect
Governor-General is one who knows The Queen and whom The Queen
knows, who represents The Queen because The Queen would wish him
to represent her. This is, I think, tremendously important at
the outset. And when the end of the term of office comes, then
it is equally important to remember the reciprocal aspect of this
matter that the overnor-General who has represented The Queen,
who is known to The Queeh, goes back home and finds himself
representing not The Queen but Australia representing us,
speaking for us, understanding us, and that is why it is such a
lovely conjunction of the planets to have a Governor-General who / 3 
ma. rprsent The Qmmse because The ( Qan knav hin, mepects
hs who has been 1er personal pWrsentativ. and who an his return,
wundwruerstand mw, speak for uus, ii the rather tattered sentence,
an Australian Ababssadr, osarxwyxt h hi. both ways an lanense
aummt of reprseanttimal authoritty and if I may say so to YOU,
ir, a very pat ofe espet, and what in evon mor importaft
thma rospeot, affcttone Now, iAdicated toyou at the beginiing that
Atbr Ca3vell and I having oasposed our differenes over the
dinjor adjomRment, leoaUed that this is. a bi-partisan ocassion,
and, Arthur, I knav that with your usual facility and talent,
you Vill support me before I propose the toast. 



65/ 059
FOR PREISS: THE WINSTON CHURCHILL ~ M0IJhaL TRUST
Statement by the P~ jme Minister. the lit. Hog3
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, presided
at the first meeting of the Uinston Churchill Memorial Trust
held at the Australian National University this morning.
Representatives from all States of the Commonwealth, and
from the Northern Territory and Papua-New Guinea
were present. The purpose of the meeting was to set in train
arrangements which would enable fellowship holders to be
selected before the end of this year. The problems of
administration were considered. The necessity of keeping
costs to an absolute minimum was stressed so that the maximum
amount would be available for fellowships. State and
Territory headquarters will be set up to receive app'., ications,
to screen applicants and to make recommendations to the
National Committee. Members indicated that this could be
largely done on a voluntary basis. State Committees which
would be working committees would be broadly based and
composed of representative citizens, not representative of
particular bodies, The National Chairman of the Trust, T, J,
Kilpatrick announced that œ-2,200 000 had been raised at an
expense ratio of 2.25% which is tUi lowest on record for an
appeal of this nature, Sir Patrick McGovern is Hon. Treasurer
and Mr. F. M. Wheeler has been appointed Hon. Secretary.
The Finance Committee under the Chairmanship of
Sir James Kirby has been empowered to make recommendations
to the 1Bcecutive Committee with respect to the investment
of funds so that the security of the Fund is ensured but also
having regard to a reasonable level of income and a hedge
against any inflation which might occur over the course of
time. The Fellowship Committee under the Chairmanship of
Sir Reginald Shol). is meeting to consider the details
concerning the award of fellowships. It is expected that
advertisements calling for applications will be published
before the end of June.
CkNBERRA, May, 1965. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON THE
SECOND READING
OF THE
STATES GRANTS ( SCIENCE LABORATORIES)
BILL 16
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 18th May 19651
kSir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyongrime
Minister) move-
That the BUi be now read a second time.
This Bill seeks authority for the Government
to continue, during each of the next three
financial years, grants to secondary schools
for the construction and equipment of
science laboratories. Such grants were first
made in the present financial year by authority
of the States Grants ( Science L-aboratories
' and Technical Training) Act 1964.
Operations in this year have demonstrated
~ the value of this form of aid and have re-
WSulted in assistance in varying amounts being
given to an impressive number of secondary
schools. State Governments have been paid
18,900 for provision of laboratories in
~ State schools and this grant, since it was
* ma de on condition that State Governments
did not reduce their own contributions, has
resulted in the States being able to under-
583 1/ 65 take programmes to provide science laboratories
and equipment in 293 more secondary
schools than would otherwise have been
possible. New South Wales intends to provide
facilities in 80 schools, Victoria in 167,
Queensland in 11, South Australia in 18,
Western Australia in 7 and Tasmania in
The States ' have not, for their own good
internal reasons, been able to spend in this
year, all the money made available to them.
However, they have committed it and the
-assurance of a three year programme which
the Bill will give, will enable them to plan
for accelerated spending in the knowledge
that they are assured of the necessary
finance. In the case of indcpendent schools,
œ 1,334,000 was provided this year for
independent schools in the States and
œ E47,000 for independent schools in the
Australian Capital Territory and the
Northern Territory. Of this total sum, 
œ 1,200,000 has already been paid to independent
schools and by the end of June
virtually all the funds provided will be
in the hands of the schools and be represented
by laboratories which have been
finished, laboratories which are under construction,
or by modern equipment. In all,
189 independent schools will have been
assisted, 120 by way of grants for laboratories
and equipment and the remainder
by grants for equipment only. At present
708 independent schools are registered with
the Department as being interested in receiving
assistance.
Here again the provision of a three year
programme will enable independent schools
to plan their building programmes ahead in
the knowledge of the amount of assistance
they will receive and the year in which they
will receive it. The scheme has been greatly
assisted by the co-operation of State Governments
most of which have, amongst other
helpful actions, agreed to provide equipment
to independent schools through the same
channels as those through which they provide
equipment to Government schools.
thus ensuring equipment being purchased
at the lowest possible cost.
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia
Western Australia
Tasmania All States
Australian Capital Territory and Northern
Territory Government Schools The Government has been greatly
helped, too, by the advisory committees in
the States which have recommended
priorities among the many independent
schools which have sought assistance under
the scheme. The Advisory Committee on
Standards has made a most significant contribution
to the success of -the programme
in independent schools. This Committee
has developed a series of laboratory plans
and its members, who all have much experience
in science teaching, visit applicant
schools and give advice on the most suitable
laboratories to meet their individual
needs. Broad proposals for the next three
years have been submitted to the Commonwealth
but have not yet been agreed in
detail. The programme will provide
million for science laboratories and equipment
over each of the next three financial
years. With the permission of the House I
would like to * have incorporated in
" Hansard a table showing the distribution
of the proposed grants among government
and independent schools for each o
the next three financial years.
Roman
CatholicOtherTotal Total
1 1 1 1 i
f
1,355,000 1,022,600 524,200 337,700 258,500 I120,900
3,618,900 377,700 237,900 109,900 60,300 58,400 25,100
869,300 f
121,700 139.100 83,. 300
64,200 36,900 19,500 L
499,400 377,000 193,200 I124,500 95,300 44,600
464,700 1,334,000 47,100 E
1,854,400 1,399,600 717,400
462,200 353,800 165,500
4,952,900 5,000,0000
I commend the Bill to the House.
BY AUTHIORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTHI GOVLRNILNFr IRINI'Lli, CANBERRA.
STATE GRANTS ( SCIENCE LABORATORIES) BILL 1965
SCIENCE BUILDINGS AND EQUIPMENT IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS-ANNUAL DIVISION BETWEEN STA-rES AND
TERRITORIES IIndependent 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 6 r/ 077
SPEECH
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON THE
SECOND READING
OF THE
STATES GRANTS ( TECHNICAL TRAINING)
BILL 1965
[ From the Parliamentary Debates 1 8th May 1965]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 8.11l].-1 move-
That the Bitt be now read a second time.
This Bill extends for the next three financial
years the grants for State technical colleges
and schools first given by authority of the
~ tates Grants ( Science Laboratories and
Wechnical Training) Act 1964. As with the
science grants œ 5 million will be provided
each year and the distribution between States
remains unchanged. These grants are given
in an area where independent schools do not
perate, and the grants are confined there-
. ore to State institutions. They are intended
to facilitate the training of young men and
women in trades schools and technical colleges.
Trades schools include schools of
automotive engineering, printing schools,
school' s teaching carpentry and joinery and
many other skills.
Experience of the first year of this programme
has indicated that it fills a most
important place in the Australian educational
scene. For every scientist or tech-
5831/ 65 nologist, many highly skilled technicians and
tradesmen have to be trained. The equipment
to train these people must be adequate
in quantity and up-to-date in quality. It has
become clear in the course of the first year's
administration of the scheme that equipment
has been neither adequate nor up to
date. The size of the Commonwealth grant
in relation to past State allocations for technical
training has been so generous that the
States have found considerable difficulty in
stepping up their construction and equipment
programmes within the first year of
the scheme. But with the assurance of three
more years of finance at this level, they will
be able within that time to make a substantial
impression on the needs for wellequipped
training facilities.
Some examples of the States' proposals
for the new triennium will illustrate the
nature of the programme which this Bill will
facilitate. In New South Wales work will
be undertaken at colleges in Cooma, Wauchope,
Wollongong, Gunnedah, Newcastle, 
Cowra, Leeton and Blacktown, as well as
in the metropolitan area, and much equipment
will be installed. In Victoria, the State
has made proposals for the grants to be
spent in a number of technical schools and
colleges on building and equipment to teach
science, applied science, metallurgy, the
engineering and motor trades, woodwork
and plumbing. In Queensland, the proposals
cover the Central Technical College and
technical colleges at Bundaberg, Cairns, the
Coorparoo School of Food, Eagle Farm,
Ithaca, Kangaroo Point, Rockhampton,
Yeronga and the Queensland Agricultural
College. Projects range from chemistry and
electrical engineering to plumbing, sheetmetal
and bricklaying, with animal science
and dairy technology buildings at Gatton.
In South Australia grants already have
been made in 1964-65 for Education Department establishments and at the South
Australian Institute of Technology and
Roseworthy Agricultural College, and the
proposals for the triennium include substantial
expenditure on an automotive trade
school and further expenditure on engineering,
food technology and at Roseworthy. In
Western Australia, building already has
taken place at five schools and the proposals
for the triennium include a substantial
equipment programme and a very large
expenditure for the Fremantle Technical
School. In Tasmania, the whole of the
expenditure in the first two years of the triennium,
amounting to over œ 334,000, will
be spent on the new general block at the
Hobart Technical College.
I commend the Bill, which will have such,
an important effect on the training of skillejl
personnel in our country, to the House. 9
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR. COMMONW\ VEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA 65/ 079
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON THE
SECOND READING
OF THE
UNIVERSITIES ( FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE)
BILL 1965
[ Front the " Parliamentary Debates," 18th May 1965]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) [ 8.11-I move-
That the Bill be now read a second time.
In October 1963, the Parliament passed an
act to provide finance for universities in thc
various States during the calendar years
1965 and 1966. In November 1964,
* Parliament amended that act to make
some additional provision for higher
academic salaries in State universities during
1964. The present Bill is for the purpose
A~ a mending the previous legislation in order
1 make more Commonwealth funds availate
in respect of the three years 1964, 1965
and 1966. More finance is necessary to
increase the capital grants to universities folfollowing
the Government's acceptance of
the recommendations in the Tertiary Education
Committee report, and to provide for
increases in recurrent costs resulting from
acceptance of the increases in academic
salaries which were recommended last year
in the Eggleston report. Funds are also
required to give effect to the Government's
583 1/ 65 decision to support an increase in fees paid
to part-time academic staff, and to provide
further amounts for research in State
universities. As recommended by the Tertiary Education
Committee, the Commonwealth will
meet half the cost of certain additional
capital works to be undertaken during the
next 18 months at the following universities
-Macquarie, La Trobe, Bedford Park,
Newcastle, Townsville University Collegeand
for a start on a second university institution
in the Brisbane area. The total value of
these works is œ 2,450,000 of which the
Commonwealth will pay 1,225,000. The Bill
makes provision for the Commonwealth
contribution. Honorable members will recall
that in November 1964, following consideration
by the Parliament of the
Eggleston report, an amendment was made
to the Universities ( Financial Assistance)
Act 1963 to permit payment of the estimated
cost of increased academic salaries during
1964. We have since obtained from the 
Australian Universities Commission precise
figures for each State university for each
of the years 1964, 1965 and 1966, and the
present Bill revises the interim grants for
1964 and increases the grants for
1965 and 1966.
The Government has now decided to support
higher fees for part-time academic staff
commencing from 1st July 1965. The Commonwealth
is prepared to join with any
State in providing funds to support a maximum
fee of œ 6 per hour for part-time lecturers,
together with appropriate rates for
other part-time academic staff. Where a
State decides on a lower fee, that will be
the limit to our support. This decision is
in accord with the advice of the Universities
Commission and the revised First Schedule
to the Act incorporates the higher rates for
both full-time and part-time academic staff.
In October 1963, the Parliament also provided
œ 500,000 as the Commonwealth's half
share of funds to be specially set aside for
research in State universities. This money
was used during 1964 for post-graduate
research activities, which are closely bound
up with post-graduate training. The Government
is now proposing that a like amount
be provided for the same purposes during
each of the years 1965 and 1966. The total
cost to the Commonwealth over the three
years will be œ 1.5 million, and the distribution
among the State universities will be as
the Universities Commission has recommended.
The final provision in this Bill to which
I wish to refer is the recognition of the
Univcrsity of Newcastle in its own right. It will be remembered that in response to a
request from the Government of New South
Wales, the Government has agreed to
recognise the independence of Newcastle
from 1st January 1965. The Bill does this
by making provision in the schedules for
the University of Newcastle to the extent
contemplated when that institution was part
of the University of New South Wales, and
the sums set aside for the University of New
South Wales have been adjusted accordingly.
The amendments now before the House
require Commonwealth grants for State universities
of œ 6,947,000 above those
originally made for the years 1964, 1965
and 1966. The total Commonwealth contribution
to State universities over those
three years will now be about œ 64 milli
In conclusion I point out to the H1
that we arc not proposing any funds in this
Bill in support of teaching costs in medical
hospitals. I shall explain why that is so. A
report from the Universities ComMissi
was presented to the Government a few d m
ago, but there has been no opporit 0
take decisions and carry them forward into
this Bill. Nevertheless, I assure the House
that the Government will deal with this
matter promptly, and I know that the
House will agree that when we are ready
to announce our decisions we should do so
for the benefit of all concerned, without
waiting for resumption of the Parliament.
Honorable members will see what I mean
by that. Normally, one would wait until the
House was sitting, but as there will be an
interval, the sooner these decisions are q
known, the better. I commend the Bill to M
House.
BlY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



FOR PRESS DISCUSSION ON RESTRICTIVE TRADE PW4CTICES
Statement bV tq. Prime Minister,_ th t. Hn Sir Robr
Menzie s
Over a considerable period of time,
Ministers have heard representations and comments from
various representative groups in relation to the proposed
Trade Practices Legislation. These have proved of
considerable value to us in considering a very complex
problem. 1e indicated to these groups that we wiould
hear them again before actually introducing a bill. We
have done this today. The bill will be introduced tonight
but the debate will not be resumed until the Budget Session
after the Parliamentary recess. There will, therefore, be
ample time for us to consider all the comments we have
heard and, of course, such further comments as will emerge
when the terms of the bill become public knowledge and those
affected have had a full opportunity for closely studying
those terms.
CANBERRAI 19th may, 1965. 



YOUNG LIBERAL RALLY
HA4dTHORN TOWAN HALL. , E3URNE, VIC. I 21ST MAY, 1965
S pee ch by t he Prime Miitr Rt o SShL ZrRqboy etJ42sj
Sir and Young Liberals: It is great fun for me to come here, It is
thirty-six years ago, which is before most of the Young Liberals
here were born, that I first stood for Parliament you must treat
me with respect;( Laughter) I am an old and doddering follow
it is thirty-six years ago, ( whistle blown) I couldn't even.
whistle like that. ( Laughter) This was in the days when th
Legislative Council was a distinguished body and I aspired to its
membership. ( Laughter) Having been in it for thirteen months
I left it quite voluntarily. But the biggest meeting I had In
the whole of that campaign was in the supper room at the Hawthorn
Town Hall I must tell the Mayor about that. There were fifty
people there. That was the biggest meeting of fifty-six meetings
I had in 1928 and the smallest meeting was four ( Laughter) at the
Glen Iris Bowling Green and of the four, three were members of
my committee. ( Laughter3 Now I tell you that because I think it
may encourage you to realise that you may have small beginning$.
You can't start off you know, completely winning. I learned a
lot in the course ol that campaign.
Then about two years later, I sat down in my
house with two other men, and we decided that there were too many
of the old brigade who were running the Parliament, we really
ought to do something about it. So we started the Young
Nationalist Movement. I am telling you this because I would
like you to realise that I have been young myself ( Laughter) and
nobody understands better how you feel than I do because we were
a bit disgruntled and we said, " Vie will form the Young Nationalists."
And we were terrific, tremendous. We made speeches at street
corners. We received over-ripe tomatoes on our faces ( Laughter)
in the vicinity of the Prahran Market; an egg or two descended
on us, It was really great fun. These were spirited days.
( Laughter) But because we knew what we were at, because we
believed in things because we had enthusiasm just as you have,
at the very next election in Victoria, we came in with very little
short of half the Members on our side of Parliament belonging to
the Young Nationalist Movement. That's worthwhile remembering.
Because however necessary it is to have people of experience and
judgment and what-have-you, it is vital for any party to be
refreshed constantly by young people who come in with their own
ideas, with their own fervour with their own determination to do
something about the state of Lhe nation, This is, believe me,
the most important thing in the world. And so whatever I talk
to you about tonight, you must understand that what I really ought
to do is to say I move a vote of thanks to you, and that would
be eloquent in its own way.
But what I really want to do is not to talk down
to you as if I were educating you, as if I were patronising you
because this is the last thing in the world I should ever dream
of doing. I am talking to you as a veteran in politics and I
am talking to you as my successors in politics. I am ialking / 2 
2-
to you as people upon whom the future of our country in a
political, and vastly important political sense, depends.
And so I just want to talk to you about one or two matters
as I would wish to talk to members of my own family, knowing
that before long inevitably there will be great changes in
leadership, in personnel, but that inevitably there will be
a growing need for people who believe in things and who
know why they believe in them and who are determined to
promote them. And this Young Liberal Movement whose tie
I am wearing tonight is therefore, in my opinion, the heart
and soul of our side of politics and it is indeed the heart
and soul of the future of the nahion.
Now we have been having a good deal of discussion,
a good deal of controversy ( though it is sometimes difficult'
to discover exactly where somebody is in these matters),
about the position of Australia internationally. There are
people, some of them of eminent respectability, who keep
on saying that we are all wrong, that our foreign policy,
our approach to the rest of the world ought either to be
one of peace at any price or in the alternative, one in
which we leave the responsibilities to other people. I have
had considerable controversies about this matter myself, as
the older among you will remem~ ber,
I had a correspondence Epistles to the Bishops
( Laughter Applause) and one advantage I had over the Apostle
Paul was Lhat when he wrote an Epistle to the Romans or tile
Corinthians or whatever it might be, as far as I know there
was no reply. ( Laughter) But I had replies. Well the
problem was exhibited. I think it was clarified7 and the
more I think about it, the more I realise that this business
really does and must give us furiously to think: What is it
we believe in what is it we stand for. Not as a section
but as Australia because I beg of you, never let it be
said about the Liberal Party that it speaks for anybody
except Australia not for just some people, not just for a
party, but for Australia. I sat down, knowing that I was
coming here, and said to myself t" de11, now, this might be
a good opportunity of doing a little quiet analysis, for
the benefit of my younger colleagues, of our foreign policy
and in particular our desires, our objectives in relation to
the countries of Asia." 1
Now, of course, the first one which apparently
needs to be stated frequently is that we desire to live at
peace with all of these countries, with mutual understanding
and assistance. Now this is true. We have some reason to
be irritated, in fact that is a mild understatement, with the
President of Indonesia but we have continued to do everything
in our power to maintain some friendly contacts with Indonesia.
We have been criticised for some of them. Of course we want
to live at peace. Nothing could be more terrifying for us
than to think we might by erroneous judgments or foolish
actions find ourselves in conflict with the whole of the
people of Asia. Of course we don't want that. We don't
want it for two reasons.
One is that there is no future in that kind of
position and the other is that there is no sense in that
position. We want to live at peace. ! e want to understand
our neighbours. We go to great pains to see that we do.
But at the same time, Sir, our next objective is that we are
to defend our own security and that of our territories -I
say " territories" because, technically, that is right -and
** so / 3 
-3
of all these people in Papua and New Guinea for whom we have
assumed, in the eyes of the world, tremendous responsibilities,
I hope nobody will want to make us believe for half
a minute that a defeated Australia an enslaved Australia is the
kind of Australia in which we would want our grandchildren:-
mine or yours or yours to have to live. This is a matter of
national security preserving our integrity as a nation,
preserving our own right to live our owm lives according to our
own standards. Now these two things are not easily reconciled, are
they? A desire to be on the best of terms with your neighbours
and at the same time a resolute intention to defend the security
of your own country. No reason why they shouldn't be reconcilable
but for some of the events that we have been looking at recently.
But we have recently been looking at events in South-East Asia
which exhibit in the most practical terms the aggressive quality
of world communism, and in particular the aggressive quality
of Chinese communism because as the Russian communists have
played it a little -more and more softly so have the Chinese
communists emphasised more and more that they have no patience
with peaceful co-existence, they are out for world domination.
These are not just phrases. These are demonstrated
in the field. India knows all about it, because India has been
invaded. Tibet knew all about it because Tibet was overrun.
Laos knows a great deal about it because in that country the
vexations the conflicts in an attempt to create a peaceftul
government have been enormous bnd have by no means finished.
And of course in Vietnam we have, day by day a demonstration
of the fact and these facts can hardly be denied; I have not
heard them seriously denied that inside South Vietnam there
are great pockets of what they call Viet Cong who are communists
and who are out to overthrow the Government of South Vietnam by
force, by terror, and who intend to convert South Vietnam into
a communist community just like North Vietnam under Ho Chi Minh.
These are the simple, painful, horrible facts and this is all a
matter of communist aggression.
These facts are not very well understood. I hope you
will make them well understood. I have had to listen or read
r'emarks from eminent people who don't seem to understand that these
are the facts. It has been said to me as you may recall that
it is really the fault of South Vietnam that there haven't teen
free elections in Vietnam. Now I ask you free elections in
VietnamJ Can you imagine a free election in a communist country?
Did anybody seriously believe that there could be a free election
in Ho Chi Minh's territory? And how would you like to haVe an
election being organised and the ways and means worked out-: and the
electoral act created if we at this very moment were having a
civil war in our own country, with not a thousand or two of Viet
Cong but with scores of thousands of Viet Cong grouped in centres,
invading villages, masscring people all done in the closest
communion with the communist power from the North. To talk in
this theoretical, academic way about free elections is really to
ignore all the facts of life. There can be no freedom, or free
election, or effective self-government in any country which is
being torn asunder by aggression from outside and insurrection
from within. Therefore we, in Australia, have found ourselves
compelled to face a problem which the United States of America
with its immense power has also had to confrontl What can we
do to preserve the freedom of our Asian friends7to help them
to remain outside communist control? Now this is a problem 0 0 0 0a 
that hasn't arisen all of a sudden. I want you all to remember
that this Government which I have the honour to lead thought of
all this quite a long time ago. We were one of the promoters
of the South-East Asian Treaty, and the South-East Asian Treaty
has been in existence ever since, and in it you have the United
States, you have France ( a rather hesitating partner at present),
you have Great Britain, you have Australia and New Zealand, you
have Pakistan Thailand, the Philippines and that treaty which
set out to establish the proposition that we wanted to protect
people's freedom we wanted to draw a frontier against communist
aggression in Asia has, I think, had considerable significance.
Under that treaty one of the protocol countries, as it was
expressed, is South Vietnam one of the countries an attack upon
which the SEATO powers would regard as an attack upon them.
And so the first reason why we are there if you want to be
technical about this matter is that we bound ourselves by
treaty to be there should the South Vietnam Government ask us
to come, in just the same way as did the United States of
America. All right. Well how do we offer to protect, to do
what we can to protect our friends and I am talking about our
Asian friends. Dontt let people get away with the idea that this
is a line between the Asian people and the Australian people or
the American people. It's our Asian friends, it's the people
of Vietnam, it's the people of Thailand the people of Laos, the
people of Malaysia these are the people in South East Asia with
whose freedom we are concerned, and in order to concern ourselves,
we believe we have to do this in concert with our allies and,
as I have just indicated, pursuant to our treaty obligations*
Now, in concert with our allies just think
about what that means. Most astonishing business. I don't
want to advertise it though no doubt it will be well attendedbut
Sunday afternoon in the Richmond Town Hall there is to be
a great meeting, a mightyprotest against the Federal Government's
decision to send Australian troops to fight in Vietnam, And to
my intense astonishment among the speakers are Mr, Calwell
( Laughter) and of course, Dr. Cairns. ( laughter) Now I said
to my intense astonishment because I don't think quite honestly
Calwell and Cairns agree on this matter at all ( Laughter
Applause) but with our distinguished opponents in the Ialor
Party, a good deal depends on whether you are reading the first
edition or the late City because things happen in between,
don't they? Now, let us go back to the first edition on the 18th
February of this year I repeat, of this year 18th February,
the Federal Labor Party issued a statement on these matters.
This was very good. The Executive had attendedi a great deal
was said to and fro and I know who are the " tots" and who are
the 11frots"~ ( Laughter) and then the statement came out.
Could I read you three paragraphs of it, in a clear voice?
( Shouts of " yes") t
" In its statement to the Security Council
on February 7th reporting the air strikes against
military installations in the south of North Vietnam,
America insisted that its object in South Vietnam,
while resisting aggression, is to achieve a peacelul
settlement maintained by the presence of international
peace-keeping machinery and that it would not allow the
situation to be changed by terror and violence, 0 0 0 
4 " This statement of American purposes is
unexceptionable 1
Mark that " unexceptionable". Although there are various
interpretations of the E~ nglish language, that doesnt seem to me
to be very ambiguous. " Unexceptionable". This is what was said
by the people who are going to invite people Sunday afternoon
at Richmond to condemn the sending of troops to Vietnam, Well
let's go on. " and the case for the American action of recent
days, as based on the aim of shortening the war and
achieving a negotiated settlement which would establish
and maintain the rights of the South Vietnamese people,
deserves sympathetic Australian understanding."
This is the best thing they ever said. ( Laughter)
" At this moment, it seems clear that President
Johnson is determined to limit the areas of American
retaliation to the factors believed to be assisting
the Viet Cong attacks."
Isn't that right? He has said so time after time.
Well, now what do they mean on Sunday by saying, " Yes,
that's all right for the United States. We quite agree that the
United States is justified in putting Am~ ericans in there or on the
water the Navy, the Army, the Air Force. This is all right.
It is quite unexceptionable that they should do that in order to
help to preserve the freedom of South Vietnam and the people of
South Vietnam, but ( and this is the appendix that will be produced
on Sunday afternoon, let it be understood) that's good for the
United States. It's not good for us. Not good for us. What we
ought to be doing is to say to the United States ' Look, it's
your job. You do it. We'll give you a few kind words, We'll
make an agreeable speech or two, but when it comes to the business,
you understand it's for you."'
Well, really, I am happy to say I know the American
Administration very well and I know that we enjoy some repute with
them because we don't say that kind of thing, because we have made
it clear right through that although we, to a very large extent,
depend when it comes to the last desperate thrust on American help
and American power we don't regard this as one-way traffic. I.-hen
vie executed the ANHUS pact with the United States~ we didn't believe
for a minute that this meant that America was to hlp us but that
we were not to help America.
There is a great and continuing reciprocity about
international engagements. V~ e must never forget it. These are
not one-sided things* You may be disposed some people may be
disposed to say, " Oh, yes, but we are a small country what can
we do? It's very little, and because it's very little, perhaps
if we didn't do it, it wouldn't be noticed." Look, my friends,
I remember the first time I ever made a speech to the American
Congress. Itv been a little bit lucky or they have been
unlucky because I have made about four now over the years.
But the first time, I reminded them that in Lhis century, they
had become the greatest power in the world and that in the
nineteenth century, Great Britain was the greatest power in the
world, and in the nineteenth century when Great Britain, by her
command of the sea, commanded the strategic position of the
world, she was an unpopular country, hardly had a friend in
Europe delivered Europe from Napoleon, delivered Europe time
a e / 6 
4 6-
after time hardly a friend. In France, perfide Albionthe
whole attitude of criticism of a great power, a powerful
power, one that could help us. It's the old business you
know, the old business. Rich relatives and poor relations.
( Laughter) Not too many thanks in Pie world. And she was
unpopular. I said all this to the American Congressi-ten, and
I said, " In this century, you have the power and you are
beginning to worry as to why people aren't more grateful to
you for what you do, and you do wonderful things for the
world. Forget about it. Don't think you are doing anything
for public gratitude. Realise you are doing it because
intrinsically it's the right thing to do, and if it comes to
having a friend or two, well I now declare Australia to be
your friend. ' ve are quite small but even a small friend is
better than none.' ( Laughter) ( Cheers) And quite frankly,
ladies and gentlemen, they have never forgotten that. I ha ve
been reminded of it every time I have been there since. I
don't think they ever will because they realise that our
policies in Australia have been policies of action uip to our
capacity for action and not just kind . yiords.
Now all this adds up to something which is at the
very heart of all this. Of course we wrant peace. J! e are not
going to try to secure peace by appeasement or by surrender.
I would have thought that the world by now would have discovered
that there is no future in that. Jewant peace, a peace
based on understanding, a peace based on a genuinely friendly
approach, a peace bc'sed upon not exacerbating any little
differences that may occur between us and any of our neighbours,
but when it comes to the stage where there are hundreds of
thousands of armed people engaged in war-like operations in
Vietnam and the very frontier of freedom is in that country,
then we must make up our minds that we are not just bystanders.
This is not only thie freedom of South Vietnam, it is
our freedom. It is the freedom of all countries in this part
of the world that is involved, and therefore we say, and I am
sure you agree iwith us, we are not appeasing, we are not
retreating, we are not going to subscribe to any foolish view
that the right way to solve the South Viotnam problem is for
the Americans to desert South Vietnam and for us to go out with
them. Wlhat fantasylJ You settle an argument with communism,
aggressive coimunism, by yielding at the field and delivering
millions of people into its clutches. This is not the
Australian spirit, and it is because I have nevar doubted as
to where the Austr, Iian people stand on this matter that from
first to last we have said what we have said and have done
what we said. Now, time marches on and my years are not illimitable
and yours are to come. It may be in theory that when you have
come into your estate politically, it may be thought that we
were wrong. I hope It won't be. But when you have come into
your estate, I hope that you will have concluded in your own
time that there are some things in life for which you must
stadfor which you must battle, in which you must believe,
whatever the dogs are barking. This is the secret of liberalism.
It is in your hands. 



65/ 08!
FOR PRESS NEW ZEALAND TROOPS FOR VIETNAM
Statement by the Prime Ministers the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert
Menz~ . s.
I am delighted to hear of Ar. Holyoake's
announcement. Nothing will give Australian soldiers
more satisfaction than to be in company with troops
from New Zealand. In addition to this, the effectiveness
of our contribution will be greatly increased.
CANBERRA, 27th May, 1965. 



FOR PRESS No. 47/ 1965
PRIME MINISTER'S VISIT OVERSEAS AND
TIE COMMONdEALTH PRIri3H MINISTERS1 MEETING
Statement by the Prime Minister. the Rt . Hon S Roq bcrt Menzies
I shall leave Australia at the end of next week
to visit the United States and to attend the Commonwealth
Prime Ministers' meeting in London commencing on June 17th.
My wife will accompany me, and also my Private Secretary,
Miss Craig. The Minister for External Affairs, Mr. Hasluck
also will attend the meeting in London, travelling direct to
London from Australia. Mr. Hasluck will be accompanied by
Mrs. Hasluck. In Washington I am planning to have talks with
the President and senior members of the United States Government.
I shall also stop briefly in New York.
The Commonwealth Prime Ministers' meeting in
London will run from June 17th to June 25th. Government
business after the meeting will occupy space of about one
week following which I shall return to Australia for Cabinet's
discussions on the Budget and also for the economic consultations
which it is the Government's practice to arrange prior to the
Cabinet Budget meetings.
The matters for discussion in Washington and
London come chiefly under the headings of world political
situations and economic affairs. They will include, on the
economic side, reviews of the capital inflow situation. The
London discussions will include consideration by Prime
Ministers of the report of senior officials concerning the
proposal to establish a Commonwealth Secretariat.
3ir John Bunting, Secretary, Prime Minister's
Department, Sir Richard Randall, Deputy Secretary, Department
of the Treasury, Mr. G. J. Yeend, Assistant Secretary Prime
Minister's Department and Mr. R. Woolcott Senior Exernal
Affairs Officer, Department of External Affairs will accompany
me. Sir Alan . esterman, Secretary, Department of Trade
and Industry who is at present overseas on Departmental
business, will be available in Washington for the purposes
of any trade matters which come under discussion.
CANBERRA, 28th May, 1965 



PR~ ESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RT. HO5N. SIR ROBER~ T MENZIES AT P-ARLIAMEN
HOUSE. CANEERRA. AT 3 P. M. ON 3RLD JUNE, 196i
PRIME MINISTER You will have a few questions, gentlemen but~
perhaps I ought to say something about the Premiers' Conference
and the Loan Council because there may be a few things there
that need a little clarifying. If you start with the revenue
grants, under the arrangement that we ultimately worked out',.
the position is this that in the current year t~ ie figure is
calculated at œ C34+ O7M. and that will, under the arrangements
we have now made, rise on the same assumptions. That is to
say, on the basis that population increase and average wages
increase resembles the period that is just concluded the
last five years that would rise it is estimatqd,
to œ 51OM. in 1969/ 70. That means that unless extraordinary
circumstances arise and if they do these figures might well
be increased the position would be expected to be that the
payments to the States will rise each year over the preceding
year by ( I will leave out the fractions for simplicity) œ 35M4.
in 1965/ 6, by f29.9 ( call it œ P3014.) in 1966/ 7, by œ 32M. in
1967/ 8, by œ E34M. in 1968/ 9, and by œ 371. in 1969/ 70.
Now thle point to be remembered about this is
that there are virtues from a State point of view in having a
five-year term I think the last one was six, but this time
we proposed five and that was ultimately agreed to. That means
that over that period of five years, the States can plan ahead,
knowing with some precision what they will be getting, year by
year. I don't need to point out to you that the Commonwealth
has no such assurance itself. Steeply rising defence expenditure,
for example, which goes up in 1965/ 6 by something of the
order of œ C80M., to œ C90M4. will, of course, put heavy burdens on
the Budget, Any shortfall on the Loan market to meet the
programme of works that was agreed on will of course involve
burdens on the Budget. A good deal of delence expenaiture will
be in the works field. That will add to the existing pressure:-
on resources of men and materials pressure wi ch already is
leading to bidding-up for scarce labour, particularly in the
skilled field where there is a considerable shortage. Therefore
the Commonwealth is left and I don't complain about this
with problems affecting its normal expenditures and its fiscal
policy and its defence policy which are all difficult but
which we will have to cope with from year to year. f think it
is worthwhile emphasising that because the position of the
States has a measure of stability and assurance that our own
position couldnft hope to have.
As to the amounts, what we ivrre aiming at was
to get a five years' agreement, This I think is very important
for the reasons that I have just mentioned the States
themselves like to know where they are, and I have had a lot
of experience in these meetings now, going over many years, and
each time there has been a discussion either about a period
agreement or before that, from year to year there has been a
little bit of what might be politely called bargaining. There
is no novelty about it. Somebody finally says, " Yes I would
like another quarter of a million, another half a million,"
and everybody goes into the corner, and out comes the quartermillion
or the half-million,
Any addendum to what has been proposed, mark
you, comes out of our Budget, not out of any other safe. And
./ 2 
this has been done. For example in 1959, ( 1 wasn't here, I
was out of the country but the current agreement just expiring
was then worked out anA agreement was finally arrived at) the
State of New South Wales and I think there was another State,
received some extra grant. New South Wales secured a million
on that occasion, This was part of the price of the securing
of an agreement. Nobody complains about that, Nobody thinks
it is extraordinary. I suppose it has affected every State from
time to time over my period.
This time Mr. Bolte didn't find himself able to
agree to the five years' proposition. Mr. Askin had put up a
proposal which modified the one that I had put and modified it
in a way that was satisfactory to us and that secured the agreement
of five States but Mr. Bolte wasn't able to agree to it
and he made an argument which was worth consideration. He
pointed out that when the 1959 agreement was made ultimately
concluded New South Wales having obtained on that occasion the
extra million, the difference in the per capita grant to his
State, as compared with New South Wales was I think I am right
in saying 9/ 7d,, but the precise figure doesn't matter. What
he did point out was that by the effluxion of time and circumstances
that gap had risen by so that the differential
today was 13/ 7 don't hold me to the 9/ 7, but the difference
was And we considered this because we were very anxious
to get an agreement. If we didn't then one State at any rate
would come up next year and say, " We want to reopen this
argument. We are not bound by any agreement." Well that is
no good to any of us. We do want to have some certainty over
a period of years and so we had a look at it and decided that
we could meet this position by giving an extra payment to Victoriaby
the Commonwealth, not at the expense of any other State an
extra payment which would reduce the gap by and therefore
leave it as it was in 1959. We thought this was an equitable
thing to do. I went in and stated this to the Premiers and
Mr. Bolte said that under these circumstances he would be
prepared to become a party to the agreement, so that in the
result we have a five years' arrangement with all the States at
the expense of what I think amounted to about œ-600,000 a year to
Victoria. So that there is no novelty about this and really
I can't see that there is any particular grievance, If' I ha
been proposing to reduce what was going to another State, under
provisions to which they had all agreed at that stage( they had
all agreed), if I had said, " Well, I want to subtract something
from you who have agreed, in order to secure an agreement by
Victoria, that would have been something of a grievance. I
didn't. I said, " We loave all your allocation untouched, the
ones to which you have agreed, and we will add this out of our
own funds in the case of Victoria." Well, I don't need to
elaborate that. Those of you who have been familiar with
Premiers' Conferences over a number of years will not be
unfamiliar with these procedures and will not use offeasive
words about them because they are quite normal.
On the borrowing programme, we put forward a
proposal which we ultimately modified, and that was that we
decided that instead of holding the amount of the Loan Works
Programme as it was last year, which obviously would involve the
doing of a little less work because costs have risen, we decided
to increase our proposal by œ C514. and this was accepted by all the
States. This means, for example, that in the case of New South
Wales, which I think has roughly 4+ 0 per cent., this might be
oo .6 / 3
2 -r 
3
worth œ 2M, But anyhow, the borrowing programme was increased by
There was a proposa put up by New South Wales that it
should be given, in the semi-government field, on which we were
proposing a standstill, the right to get for the Grain
Elevators Board, Of course that relates to wheat storage and
is therefore of great significance. We at once indicated that
we would support that. So that was added to the semi-government
programme that we had indicated.
There was another matter discussed in the Premiers'
Conference that is perhaps worth a little explanation and that is
this business of off-shore oil and gas. This is becoming an
interesting topic because of the discovery of gas cff the
Victorian coast and various enterprises have been seeking for and
obtaining permits to search in these areas and the question, of
course, inevitably has arisen between the 6ommonwealth and the
States as to who has the jurisdiction. The States say that
within the territorial limits which, being old-fashioned, we
can call within the three-mile limit they have the sole jurisdiction.
We dontt agree with that as a matter of law but we
on the other hand assert that outside territorial limis and on
the continental shelf which has a total area about twenty times
the size of the terriiorial waters, the jurisdiction belongs to
the Commonwealth. Now obviously you couldn't go on forever having a
wrangle about Constitutional power because this becomes a rather
important matter, People want to get on with the job and they
want to know where they stand. So our proposal was that the
Commonwealth and the States should agree to set up what I will
call a joint operation on this matter, the actual administrative
work being done in the States Mines Departments, under which we
wouldn't argue about Constitutional power, but we would each
reserve our Constitutional rights but we would agree that there
should be a commnon administration, whether it was inside
territorial waters or further out on the Continental shelf.
The proposal that we had put before at Ministers' meetings was
that under these circumstances if these became productive, if
production was achieved, royalties should be shared fifty-fifty
by the Commonwealth and the particular State off wuhose shores
the find was made. That hadn't strictly been agreed to but we
thought there was a chance it would be.
There was another question left open. It is rather
interesting, W! hen they grant permits to explore and the man gets
one of these permits, when he explores and finds, then he has
a particular area assigned to him which he can develop and that
leaves all the other portions of the area ready for re-allocation.
In the United States in particular this has become quite a
valuable right in the government because oil or gas having been
found, the remaining sections in the area are more valuable and
people pay for them* We had originally, at the Ministers'
meeting said that any proceeds of these sales should be divided
fifty-fifty. When we met the other day, I said I had got the
Cabinet to have a look at this and we were perfectly happy to
adopt the attitude that if that happened the State itself would
take the whole of the proceeds. We would make no claim to any
proceeds on this reallocation but that we should have fiftyfifty
on the royalties, production having come in. The States
will aJ~ so, I may add, get the proceeds of licence fees that are
paid. The one matter on which we come in is in the matter of
royalties. Wlell, this offer was within a few minutes accepted
by the States. This clarified the whole of the argument and
4 0 0 e a 
we anticipate now that agreements can be concluded and executed
in the next few weeks. I urged the importance of time because
you can't get enterprises to spend large sums of money unless
they know they have some sort of title, some sort of protection,
and they are not going to be caught up in an argument as to
who is the landlord, as I might say. Well that is cleared up,
That was a very useful matter,
I think that is all I want to say by way of
clarification on the Premiers. There is just one other thing
I have just been reminded of. I am going away as you know and
Mr. Hasluck will be away very shortly. Senator Gorton will
be away leading one of these teams, and Mr. McEwen has agreed
to act as Minister for External Affairs during our absence.
Well now, any questions?
QUESTION Have you thought Sir whether you will hold a
Referendum later or earlier Lhan ihe six months? period?
P. M. I haven't really worked that out. We will
obviously have to present our measures In the Budget Session
which I imagine will mean a referendum in the earlier part
of next year.
Q. Can you have it as late as that, Sir? Musn't it
be not more than six months?
P. M. Yes, it must, It depends on when it goes through.
I mean, if we were able to bring it on early in the Budget
Session*,*.
Q4 I thought you put the Bill through last week.
P. M. Oh1, no, In fact I am glad you mentioned that
because it ought to be made clear that we have not yet
drafted the amendment. There have been one or two points
raised that we are considering, particularly on the aboriginal
side. When we settle those matters and we present a bill,
or bills whatever it may be, then of course the whole matter
will be debated in the House, and we will have an eye on the
timetable, because there is a limit within which you can put
them, and we will have to observe that. But that will be to
a large extent controlled by when we can bring it in and how
long the Parliamentary debate can last.
Q. It doesn't look like this year then, Sir?
P. M. Well, look, don't hold me to it. I would have
thought probably not. But it will certainly not be later than
the earlier part of next year. It might be this year.
I don't know,
Q0 Sir Robert, can you give us an outline of the
scope of the talks you propose having in Washington and
London?
P. M. I don't think I can. My experience of talks with
the Heads of Government and so on is that you start off by
saying, " This is what I am going to say." You end up by not
saying it. You have to approach these talks in a rather more
flexible manner than that. It is quite clear that in the
United States I will have some talks about the financial
position vis-a-vis Australia, the new rule. There may be one
or two aspects of commodities that I may have to have some
talks about. I am not clear yet, but I will be, and I have no
*# eee. 
P. M. doubt that the position in South-East Asia will also be very
( Contd.) closely discussed. But you can never be dogmatic in advance
about those things. The main thing is to go in knowing quite
clearly in your own mind all the things that you would like
to achieve if you could. Man proposes but Presidents
dispose
Q0 You expressed some sympathy the other day, Sir, at
closer ties with New Zealand. Do you intend raising that
with Mr. Holyoake?
P. M. Oh, I don't know. That will no doubt crop up in
London. But we have certain matters under examinationrow
about exchanges of Members of Parliament and so on and I
think it unlikely that I will be discussing the question of
some trade arrangement sometimes falsely called a free
trade area or something of the kind because that is a matter
which is under most competent handling on behalf of the
Government by the Minister for Trade. If I thought that
had to be discussed in London I would have wanted to take
him there. I am not anticipating that in London we will have
any substantial trade discussions at all.
Q. In his letter to you, the President invited you
to raise at any time any specific American investment measures
that were hurting Australia. Do you have any specific cases
in mind to raise with him?
I don't think so. I may tell you that I have been
armed with a brief. It is here on the table and I will read
it before I leave.
Q. In London, Sir Robert, do you intend to see Mr.
Callaghan and Mr. Brown as well as the Prime Minister?
P. M. W4ell, it is the usual thing. I would expect to.
Qo Mr. Holt has indicated that he feels perhaps the
English situation, as far as the economy goes, is more
important to Australia's immediate future than the American
capital curb position.
P. M. look, it is very hard to say much about that because
I think I saw that there was some modification announced only
in the last twenty-four hours. I'll catch up with those in
London. I always do see the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
whoever he may be, and Mr. Brown occupies a new and rather
powerful position on the economic side. There is no doubt
I will be seeing him. In fact I will be very surprised if
both of them dontt participate on oacasions in the Prime
Ministers! Conference meetings. Quite the usual thing.
Q. Have you got a short list to take to The Queen on
another matter, Sir?
P. M. No. And if I had, I wouldn't announce it. Look,
I'm gald you riased this matter. There is a great misconception
about this business. Some chuckle-headed fellow in
some English paper announced that we had been hawking this
job around. I said something about this in the House. This
is utter drivel. Even " The London Times" has got some
nonsense that I have just been reading somewhere. This is
not how it happens. I am a bit of a stickler on this
business. I don't approach anybody until I have had a talk
to The Queen. The Queen's position has to be respected in
/ 6 
6-
this matter. The Governor-General is her personal representative
in this country, among other things, and I have in the
past alw~ ays had a talk with her. We have discussed names.
We have discussed qualifications. We have had an intimate
talk about these matters, and in the long run I get to an
agreement on this matter and it is then only that I say,
" Well, now, I have Your Majesty's approval to approach Mr. X.
or whoever it may be" l and that is the first time that anybody
is ever approached at all. I have stuck to that rule this
time, You can take it quite positively nobody has had the
faintest approach made to him. I would regard that as a gross
discourtesy.
Q. Has the Cabinet any collective view on the question
of whether it should be an Australian or a non-Australian,
Sir?
POM&amp; I think if the Cabinet has a view on anything, it
will say so,
Qo Well, may I ask you. Would you say so on behalf
P. M. INo, I am not prepared to discuss that, Nor indeed
are you to assume that I have some prejudice on that matter,
because I haven't. I have never adopted the attitude that
an Australian is excluded. I think we have produced as
good a percentage of people of consequence in this country as
any other country that I know, so that that question of
prejudice is to be put on one side. I am only prejudiced
against one thing and that is against me being Governor-
General. ( Laughter)
Q. Sir Robert~ will you be having any discussions in
London about a possible visit by the Queen Mother next year?
The South Australian Government have extended an invitation
to her.
P. M. Look, that matter will be dealt with at the
appropriate time. You ask the Lord ivisyor of Adelaide that one,
Q, It has been announced.
P. M. Oh, 7 has it? Oh, well that's fine. Usually these
matters are announced from the Palace. Anyhow I am not
announcing anything. Anid after all if an invitation does
go, it goes from me. It doesn't go from anybody else. I
would remind you of that. I am announcing nothing.
Q. Have you any engagements in Europe, Sir, or are
your calls entirely in America and Britain?
P. M. No, I will be in America for a few days Washington,
New York for a couple of days. I aim at arriving in London
about four days before the Conference begins in order to have
the necessary preliminary talks and work and I think I will
have to remain in London for a few days three or four days
perhaps after the Conference ends, but I will then come home.
Q41 That will bring you here early in July, won't it?
P. M. Yes I think somewhere about the 9th I'm not sure
what it is, Mu I have to be back in time to have these
conferences that we have with the people in the industrial
and trades union field and so on, and then we go on into
our Budget discussions which I think will probably begin
about the middle of July, so I can't be back much after the
8th or 9th. / 7 
Q Sir, there is a vacancy in Cabinet at the moment.
Can you say if this is to be filled in the near future?
I expect it will be filled shortly after my retur'n.
I noticed a fantastic story about this. Poor John McEvwer
and I are always having a brawl about something, I gather,
and we are having one about the Cabinet vacancy. Now this
is just utter nonsense. When Harrie Wade died, the vacancy
was filled by a Country Party Minister because the Country
Party has its proportion in the Cabinet itself, and John
McEwen and I had a talk about it at that time and I said,
" Well, we needn't worry because the vacancy will be filled
by the promotion of a Country Party Minister.~ There is no
argument about that, otherwise you would be down to two in
the Cabinet." t There has never been any argument about that
at all. Then, both being of Scots derivation, we decided
that we wouldn't rush into deciding who the one to be
promoted should be because they are all fairly new. ' 4e
would like to have a look-see, and we are having a look-see.
Wie were reminding each other of it the other night, There
is no argument about it. It will be a Country Party Minister.
That's never been in doubt and McEwen and I hope we will have
our judgment matured sufficiently by a little time after my
return to come to a conclusion about it. It won't at any
stage give rise to any differences of opinion,
Q* Sir, is there any difference betueen you as to which
Country Party Minister it should be?
P. M. We haven't discussed that yet, I think I told you.
We said we would wait so we could form our own opinion. I am
not aware of any difference for the very good reason that we
haventt discussed it, All we have done is to agree I
confirmed it the other night having read a piece of nonsense
in some paper that we would have to come to a conclusion
on this before very long. I don't expect there will be any
argument about it at all. I know the field but I don't know
who the choice will be and I venture to think neither does
he yet,
Q. On the subject of arguments, Sir, Mr, McEwen has
announced that he and Mr. Wheeler are deadlocked on the question
of the secondary industry section in trade. Do you propose
to break that deadlock?
P. M. The position is that the Public Service Board has the
authority to deal with promotions of this kind and we have
decided that the Public Service Board's authority must be
preserved. If a Cabinet began to give orders to the Public
Service Board contrary to its own judgment on a matter of
internal administration like that then you could say goodbye
to the independence of the Civil Lervice and introduce
political control, and the Cabinet believed that that is
wrong, and therefore this is a matter, like all matters of
this kind which has to be worked out between the Trade Department
people and the Public Service Board. Every Department
does this from time to time. At present they are not in a
state of agreement but I hope they will be in due course because
I think it is important that it should go ahead.
Q. Sir, can you say anything about the replies from the
companies that you wrote to about American investment in
Australia? 09s a. / 8 
-8-
P. M. No, except to say that we had replies from I think
practically all of them and that they have without exception
been very helpful and I have written to each of them and
acknowledged that and the result of all this is under analysis
in the Treasury.
Q. The Treasury White Paper mentioned the replies last
week, Sir.
P. 14, Yes, well I don't propose, of course, nor would you
ask me to say what these replies were. These replies are
all made to us confidentially. We are asking about the
particular activities of particular companies and what their
plans are and all this, when I wrote I made it quite clear,
would be regarded as confidential as far as they are
concerned. We may draw certain general conclusions but it
would never do to indicate the business of some particular
company.
Q* Can you say anything about the general conclusions
to be drawn, Sir?
P. 14. No, I can't. As I said, these matters are being
analysed by the Treasury.
QO Is there any way of ensuring that legislation gets
more orderly and les8 hurried consideration than it had at the
end of the last Parliamentary Session, Sir?
P. M. I don't think there was anything unique about the
end of the last Parliamentary Session. I have been in
Parliament for thirty-six years or something and it has always
been the same.
Q9 Isn't it about time it was changed, Sir?
P. M. Well, I said that thirty-six years ago. You know,
you musn't underestimate the difficulties of this business.
Our position in this place is really quite peculiar because
we have these two Sassions in a year. I remember in the old
days in Victoria the Sessions began in July. You had the
whole of the six months to work out legislative proposals and
for the draftsmen to do their work. We are rather short of
dgroaodf tsdmreanft. s meDnr, a ftansdm enb eacraeu sen oto f toth eb e fapcict kethd ato fyfo ue vhearvye btuhseh,
Autumn Session and then the Budget Session, we live 1r ~ je
most constant pressure of Cabinet meetings and Cabiidtt e4ings.
I was asking the other day for a few facts on that. It might
amuse you to know that in this Parliamentary Session just
ended,, taking that period from 16th February well, I start
on 16h February. Parliament opened a little after that;
we have had 25 Cabinet meetings we have had Cabinet meetings
on 25 days, and in the course of those days, we have had 4+ Q
sessions of Cabinet because we frequently meet at night when
the House is sitting. The General Administrative Committee
which is the other section of the Cabinet met about eight
times, the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee met approximately
half a dozen times, the Legislative Committee about a
dozen times, and other Committees about fifteen times, I
think it almost a record. Now all this involves constant
pressure, and I quite agree with you, if we were living in a
perfect world, we would hold up the meeting of Parliament
until we had had all these meetings and discussed all these
things and got a lot of precise instructions to the draftsmen.
0006* 0400/ 
9-
P. M. I think there would be a great deal of resentment if we held
( Contd.) up the sitting of Parliament while all that went on, though
no doubt it would contribute very powerfully to avoiding
a last-moment rush. But you know, we musn't pretend to be
too superior about these things. dhen you were a student,
I bet you did more work in the last month of the year than
you did in the whole of the previous eleven put together.
Otherwise you were a remarkable exception.
Q. Sir Robert, Mr. Brand has said that he has received
a letter from you on the standard gauge rail project,
P. M. Yes..
Q. i wonder whether in those circumstances you would
be prepared to releas4 the text of the letter.
POM. No, no, I am not.
Q. Alternatively, would you say something about the
matters that are giving the Commonwealth some concern?
P. M. No, I won't. I have sent a long and detailed letter
to the Premier of Wjest Australia. I am not in the habit of
publishing my letters to Premiers, particularly when they are
on complex matters. I will get an answer in due course.
W~ hether the matter will then be publishable or not, I don't
know, but not now.
Q. Sir Robert, you will have read last week that the
Federal A. L. P. executives severely censured Senator Kennelly
and Mr. Hawke for having put forward a proposal for making
a deal with the D. L. P. Have you any comments to make?
Pemel No, I don't like interfering in the neighbours'
quarrel. Good luck to them whoever they are,
Q. Sir, the Australian Government's note to the Soviet
Union said the sending of an Australian battalion to South
Vietnam was in no way contrary to international law. it
didn't mention the SEATO treaty. Is there any reason for
that?
P. M. No. The SEATO treaty is part of our international
law.
Q. Sir, can you give any estimate on when the Government
might be considering architect-s' submissions for the new
Parliament building?
P. M. Oh dear no. Oh, now, come. Didn't you know that
I am proposing to set up a committee not to discuss the
plan of the building but to discover what ought to be in
it, what the requirements are, including the requirements of
the Press, including the requirements of Private Members,
including the requirements of Ministers, including the
requirements of the staff, the Library all the things.
You nan't start talking about architects or designs until
you have determined what it is that is to be in the new
building.
Q. When do you think that will be determined? * 000060*/ 10 
10
P. M. ' dell you are asking me about the speed with which
a committee will act. 4e won't debate the setting up of the
committee until we resume. I would think that it might
very well take the better part of a year because it is a
very complex matter. There are a lot of unsatisfactory
things about a building like this, as you know and as I
know. When we get to the stage of building a new Parliament
House we will need to look to the future a bit, we will need
to anticipate that there will be some expansion in due'course,
as there must be in the numbers in Parliament as the
population goes up, and there are a few things that have to
be made quite clear. There ought to be some section, for
exarple, in a new Parliment House which is the executive
wing which is controlled by the Cabinet itself so that you
don't have to go to the Speaker and say, " Please may I have
a room, I am appointing a Minister." That ought to be
a separate matter. But it must have, of course, easy and
immediate access to the House. The accommodation for Private
Members is really quite inadequate and I don't venture to
speak for you but I would think that you have found that
the Press accommodation in this building, with its p lacing
and all that kind of thing, most unsatisfactory. All these
things must be worked out properly so that when the Committee
reports and its report is adopted that this is what the new
building should contain, then you get to the stage of
discussing how you are going to go about it, whether you are
going to have a competition, an architectural competition
with sails on the roof ( Laughter) or, you So the
architects can remain a little easy on this aspect for a little
time to come.
QQ Have you noticed where Mr. Calwell and Mr. Wentworth
seem to have joined forces in being angry over what they call
the predetermination of the site?
P. M. I am aware of that but I still believe that a great
majority of the people on both sides of the House prefer the
site which was announced seven years ago. I think so. It
wouldn't be uncommon to find individuals disagreeing, naming
no names.
Q6 Do you think you will get the cost within the Opera
House budget?
P.. e -Jell, by Jove, I hope for less than that, yes. But
you never I haven't a clue.
Q. Sir Robert, could I ask you something about Jashington.
When you go there, it has been suggested that perhaps
Australia's economic intelligence out of Washington has not
been what it might have been and perhaps we were warned a
little too late of the American proposals in regard to the
capital curbs and also both Mr. McEwen and Mr. Holt referred
to the work of the American labbies in lead and zinc and sugar
and wool. Will you be looking at this aspect of Australia's
operations in Washington with the idea of enlivening it?
P. M. If there is any defect in that field, I will no doubt
discover it. I don't know. I have no predetermination on
that matter. It may be, of course, that the President, like
one or two other political leaders that I know of, makes hiown
announcements Znd doesntt give notice of them a fortnight
ahead. That's not uncommon.
Sir Robert, do you plan to lead the Government at the
next election?
P. M. I dc. n't know. I don't know anything about my future.
I have got to the stage where I do not ask to see the distant
scene one step enough for me and the next step unfortunately
is into the aeroplane to go on another of these journeys. 



65/ 086
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER
SIR ROBERT NENZIES, AT THE AUSTRALIAN EM'BASH,
WASHINGTON, U. S. A. ON 9TH JUNE, 1965.
PRIME MINISTER I had a very interesting experience last'night.
Just as I was about to go out to dinner with the Secretary
of State the President rang me up and asked me to come to
breakfast. It reminded me of the first time I ever was
invited to have breakfast and have a talk was by Stanley
Baldwin many years ago. What he wanted to see me about was
what he had referred to initially earlier and that was the
appointment of an Ambassador to Australia. He has got his
mind settled on an Ambassador and it's not for me, of course,
to announce the name of his Ambassador but he has got his mind
fixed on it and they will be taking the steps necessary to
secure the usual agreement in the next few days, and I think
we may anticipate an announcement say in a week.
Q* There is some technicality here, isn't there?
( Then followed a brief discussion between the Prime Minister
and the correspondents dealing with the United States procedure
in that after the President announces his intention to
nominate an Ambassador the Senate has the responsibility to
approve the nomination. This was not clear on the recording.)
Q. d~ ell, all this means is that it could be brought to
announcement within a few days, couldn't it?
P. M. Yes, he could announce his nomination. dIell, I think
as soon as he gets the ' bll clear" from Canberra hie will make
that announcement at once. He knoixis a good long time has
elapsed since the previous Ambassador left. It was clearly
on his mind because it was the first thing he mentioned when
I went in to see him at the White House.
Q. What time did you have breakfast, Sir?
P. N. 8.30. I'm a night worker myself. I don't get on too
well with conversation at breakfast.
Q. How long did you stay, Sir?
P. M. For about an hour and a quarter.
Q6 How did you like the bacon and eggs, Sir?
P. M. Jell, it's exactly what we had.
Q. The rzesident's favourite?
P. m. Is it? Well, my breakfast normally consists of a glass
of orange juice and one piece of toastt However, it was
very interesting.
Qe Was anybody else present or just you and the President?
P. m. Th ' re were four other people but two of them weren't
concerned but the other two I think might have had some
interest in this problem. a a a a a./ 2 
-2
Q. Sir, I take it the President did, of course, give you
the name of the neivr Ambassador.
P. M. Oh, yes, I know who it is.
Q4 Is it a career diplomat, can you tell us that?
P. M. Oh, no, you mustn't ask me that now. I think it is
his right to make his own announcement. And I think it will
be well received,
Q6 Would you give us a run-down on your visit, Sir?
P. M. Yes, I think I could in some sort of fashion. Apart
from this matter of the diplomat, my talks with the President
have been almost entirely on Vietnam and the problems thot
are associated with it. He gave me the opportunity yesterday
morning of having three-quarters of an hour with Maxwell Taylor
who, of course 7 is fresh from the scene and he gave me a
singularly lucid account both of the military and political
problems in South Vietnam and filled in a lot of detail and
some background that I hadn't fully understood ;, efore. It
u; ill be very useful from our point of view to have the benefit
of his observations. On both fields both the political and
the military, there is no doubt that ihe next couple of months
will not be easy because of the wet the monsoons and in
that period the Viet Cong will no doubt be making extra
effortsi But I found no lack of either confidence or
resoluteness, either with General Maxwell Taylor or with the
President himself or with Mr. Dean Rusk or with Mr. McNamara
I saw them allb I have had very useful discussions with
Dean Rusk about a variety of matters that we're concerned
about ' With the Stat3 Department. I don't say that we broke
any particularly new ground but we brought each other up to
date in the thinking of our own countries. I had a good
talk yesterday afternoon with Mri McNamara. He was able to
give me a satisfactory report on the... 4what I used to-call
the what's it called now? Fill in which he sees
no reason to believe that there will be any delay in delivery.
As you know, we postponed the date for a year in which we were
to get ours because, quite obviously with the new aircraft
of a highly sophisticated kind like Lhis there will be teething
troubles and we thought, and rightly, that it was better to
have those attended to in the place where the plane is manufactured
and where it is designed rather than in Australia because
they would have far more facilities and the job could be done
in a much smaller time. So we decided we would take the
fully vetted machine even though that meant waiting twelve
months for it, But I believe we'll get it on the date.
Q* Sir, there has been considerable excitement by the
statement yesterday of the role of the United States Forces
in Vietnam.
P. M. Yes, I heard about that. I don't understand it.
Q. Is that the Australian role? Or some new idea that the
Australians will be there to fight if necessary?
P. M. It never occurred to me to the contrary. I don't think
that the 1st Battalion of the Regular Army would thank you very
much if they were cast for the role of onlookers. I always
thought this matter was simple enough. I don't know why there
should be thought to be much novelty about it. We send our
troops in. They are under the command of an Australian soldier
a 1P 0 ./ 3 
-3
P . M.
( Contd.) Q0 P. M.
Q P. M.
QO P . M. 0 Bee 01/ 1
who, as usual in these circumstances, will have of course a
direct line of communication back to the Australian Government
in case he wants to bring anything to our attention. But
the Australian Battalion will be associated with American
units under what might be described as a brigade formation
which in its turn will be under the command of an American.
I don't think either the United States or Australia anticipates
that they are going to conduct completely independent
campaigns; the notion rather is that they will be associated
with Vietnamese forces and be in position to lend them
assistance where that assistance is necessary. And, of
course, there is good sense in that. We are there to help
to defend South Vietnam and therefore of course, must work
in the closest co-operation with the local forces and the
local authorities. Related to that, Sir, now that Australia is playing a
more active role in Vietnam, will we be consulted by the
Americans on policy for the future of the area?
Oh yes. Oht yes. We have a very close association with
them. I discussed with Dean Rusk, for example, whether
there was any way in which it was necessary to improve the
exchange of information, or the exchange of ideas, Neither
of us could think of one but if there is any blockage
anywhere it will undoubtedly be removed, but I don't say
there is any blockage. Our Commanding Officer on the spot
is fully informed about military activities. On the
political side, our own Ambassador is closely in touch with
the American Ambassador and, of course, with the Prime
Minister so that we get a good run of information there
. and as between the Department here and in Australia there
is a completely frank exchange of information. So there
will be nio complaint on my side that there will be any
failure of consultation or advance information. We'll get
all that. Sir, does this extend to Indonesia/ Malaysia as well
as to Vietnam? No. No. I'm talking about Vietnam because the
Americans have no forces in Malaysia. We have, under a
different obligation. You see, we regard our participation
in South Vietnam as essentially a SEATO exercise from our
point of view. The reason for that is quite clear, for the
Treaty itself in the American view and in the Australian
view these were both announced a long time ago imposes
obligations that are several as well as joint. It is for
that reason that South Vietnam being one of the protocol
countries under the South-East Asian Treaty, we regard it
as an essential ingredient an invitation from the Government
of South Vietnam because that is provided for in the Treaty
and, of course, we had that and we are there.
Sir, the other members of SEATO obviously do not view
the situation in the same light.
Well, I think there is some reason to believe*..-,, For
example France believes that the obligations are joint and
not several therefore there has to be unanimity, therefore,
in effect, somebody has a veto, That's a view that we
reject. But we don't comment on what others the other
parties in the SEATO Treaty, it's for them, and if we 
4-
P. M. regarded ourselves as having a several obligation, well, we
( Contd.) grasp it by the wheel and act under it, and we [ lave. if
some other country has a different view, well, it makes its
own judgment.
Q. Sir, what of General Taylor's hopes for the future?
Pam@ Oh, well I think that I might safely say, without
becoming General Taylor's spokesman that he's got a
realistic view of' the immediate dif'liculties but an optimistic
view about the ultimate result.
Q. I An optimistic view?
P. M. Yes.
Qo -Sir, can you tell us anything about your talks with
Mr. Connor yesterday?
P. m* Yes, we had a sort of run-down particularly on the
question of the financial policy. I was able to give him the
text of what Mr. Holt had said, publicly indicating the
policy step by step of the Australian Government on these
matters and Mr. Connor found this very satisfactory. His
approach to our problems is quite a sympathetic one, quite a
helpful one, and we ourselves, of course, found out from the
American companies in Australia, the major people I think
there were about 74 to whom I addressed a letter and we had
full and frank information from I think 73 out of 74, so it's
a pretty good reaction and the broad effect of it was that
we were able to conclude that the impact of the new policy
on investment passing into Australia will not be as severe as
it was first thought either possible or likely. In short, I
think we've got a good working mutual understanding with him
and with his Department. We had some little anxiety well
not littleT: about the development of these big iron ore
deposits in the Jest and the bauxite deposits in the North,
ach of which involved massive amounts of money and on which
arrangements, largely through a banking consortium, had been
arrived at. We had a little doubt at the moment as to whether
they might continue but they've been completely approved,
so there is no hitch on that side. That's very important
for us.
Q. Sir, can you tell us a little bit more of your talks
with Secretary of State Rusk. I understand you discussed
not only Vietnam but also Malaysia, Red China, Indonesia.
P. M. Yes.
Q. Would you care to give us something on these points?
P. M. I don't think so.
Q. Sir, the President is being troubled at the moment by
a local group of intellectuals who are opposed to his Vietnamese
policy. What would be the public reaction in Australia,
Sir, in general, to our troops being in Vietnam?
P. m. Very favourable, overwhelmingly favourable. As a matter/
of fact, curiously enough, my political opponents as recently
as last February produced a statement of policy which completely~
upheld the American presence in South Vietnam. But since then
they have been a little bro'ibeaten by what you call intellectuals
and a certain amount of philosophical doubt has entered
into their attitude. We really got to the point in course of
o 
P. M. discussion in the House of it being necessary to point out
( Contd.) that it was a strange doctrine that it was quite right and
proper for Americans to be engaged in South Vietnam but
quite wrong and improper for Australians to be engaged. it
looked to me rather like leaving everything to the United
States. We all know that the United States is getting'a
little browned off about being the world's gendarme and
that's why they attacht great significance to what we can do
to show the flag and show our-co-operation even though
intrinsically it may be small. It has a symbolic value
here which is far beyond the numbers, but I think, I am sure,
it has given great encouragement to the President, for the
very reason that you mention. I had to make a speech at
the White House and it's a real business trying to remember
w~ iat you said but I think one or two of the philosophic
doubters were present. In fact I know they were. And I
fell back in consequence oxi Shakespeare who said " And thus
the native hue of resolution is sicklied o'er wi~ h the pale
cast of thought" and that resolution is the operative word.
Q. Do you expect to be troubled, Sir, if that's the right
word, by the same kind of intellectuals, if that's the right
word, in Australia?
P. M. No, It accustomed to them. The more people I suc-. eed
in putting into universities in Australia and I have had
a fairly big hand in all that the more intellectuals there
are, or aspiring intellectuals. But if the Government
proceeded by purely intellectual processes, the country
would fall into a grave state of disrepair.
Q6 Sir, do you think the Australian and American people
will have to be prepared for some reverses in Vietnam in
the next couple of months?
P. M. Yes. It stands to reason that in this monsoon season
where there is a great deal of cloud and rain and therefore
air activity is limited or inhibited and the guerrilla boys
have all the benefits of mobility and working under cover,
we must expect to have some reverses and what we have to do
is not to get -them out of proportion because under these
circumstances there will be reverses, but if they're matched
in the broad by a progress over all, then they have to be
taken and seen in their proper degree. But I am sure that
in the next two months we'll from time to time read about
some successful attack by Viet Cong on some battalion or
some formation there, That is in the nature of a war
against the concealed enemy. ; ide had it, you remember, at
one stage in North Malaya. It took a long time to 3lean
up*
Q&amp; Sir, could you give us an appraisal of the Indonesian/
Australian situation, the relation between the two countries
and what your hopes may be?
P. M. 4ell, wetve tIraughbitmade it clear to Indonesia tat
we have every desire 6o be friend7y with a large neighbour
of that kind, very close to us, with a great deal of interest
in common, and that there is one matter alone on which we
completely depart from them and that is on " confrontation"
the policy towards Malaysia and on that we have of course,
not only offered our views but we have comLiitted l'orces,
That was under a declaration I made on behalf of the Government
some time ago which was made not under formal
obligation but unilaterally that we would be prepared to
5 0 0 0 0 6 -/ 6 
-6
Pam. associate ourselves with British Forces in helping to defend
( Contd.) the territorial integrity and political independence I
think those were the words of Malaysia. And that's
understood. Every now and again it produces some extravagant
speeches but I think one must learn to live with extravagant
speeches. They dontt disturb us unduly.
Q. Sir, do you feel ttiat the ANZUS arrangement is
satisfa ctory?
P~ j~ jI do. I do, completely. By the way, somebody told
me this morning that I'm supposed to have described the
Australian battalion as the first batch or some such phrase.
Certainly a phrase I never used or thought of. The broad
. inference 1bias that we'll keep piling in more forces now.
I think it is proper to say that in all these discussions
nobody has asked for more. There has been no kind of
pressure put on. On the contrary they understand very well
the nature of our defence build-up and the fact that this
takes time bringing in the new compulsory service people and
getting them trained and getting them equipped and organised,
This is not done overnight and they have a very accurate
idea of the military strength we possess and the military
strength that we aim at achieving over this period. But
certainly we haven't reached a stage at which we have to
give consideration or they have to suggest further forces.
After all, the battalion has barely just arrived or is
arriving. Early days to be talking about what happens
thereafter. So I have given no hint publicly or privately
about expanded forces. No inference is to be drawn from
thiat one way or another because who am I to know how the
circumstances will develop in the next year or two years.
We are pretty fully stretched at present not only in terms
of manpower but in the terms of the Budget, I think it is
becoming pretty clear that this year's Budget w~ hich we will
begin to discuss when I get back home will find a further
increase in the Defence Vote by something in the order of
or œ C90M. wrhich in our Budget, of course, is a very
substantial item,.. coming as it does or as it will at a
time when the Loan market is a little weak and when,
therefore, the Commonwealth support for the Loan programmes
whiich have just been arranged with the States rqay turn out
to be quite substantial on the Budget itself. Last year
we had a very lush Loan market. This year we can't expect
it to be as good and this means that you may find yourself
having to support or supplement the Loan market with X
millions out of the Budget. I wouldntt like to say how
much but it very probably would be substantial; and at a
time when the Loan market is a bit weak, there is a
disposition for the redemption obligations to grow because
fewer people convert and that again is a Budget item. It
comes into the cash position. So that we have a large
Budget problem and apart from that, as I've said, of course
there is the manpower problem. 
PART TWO
PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES) AT THE AUSTRALIAN EMBASSY,
WASHINGTON, on 9TH JUNE, 1965
Aft pr the Prime Minister had discussed the impact of the Defence
bui4Ld-up on Australia's Budget and resources, he commented further
on Jnited States' awareness of Australia's development problems)
PRIKE MINISTER After all there is a great awareness here of
the fact that the problem of growth of Australia and the
development of resources is one of great importance to us
and as we're an Ally, they want to see us growing stronger and
Ithat's quite right. And when their enterprises have gone
into Australia they have been active and they have been
profitable. Some of them export quite largely and the
Americans are realistic enough to know that you can't just
chop off the supply of capital without in the long run
hindering the development of these very enterprises. So
that there is a common interest their enterprises want to
succeed and we want them to succeed because we want the
country to grow and our resources to develop.
Q. Sir7did you extend an invitation to President
Johnson to visit Australia sometime in the future?
P. N. Look, there's no need to. He knows that, But if you
want to know whether I said 114hen are you coming out or what
have you, no, no, there's no point in that. He would like
very much to come to Australia and of course we would like
him to come, but not a very good time, I think, to be asking
people to come away. I'd like Mr. McNamara to come to
Australia but Mr. McNamara has got a plate full at present.
It doesn't make it very easy for him to get out of the country.
But they are all friendly. They would like to go but we
haven't got to the stage of sending them an invitation.
Q4 I wasn't thinking in terms of a formal invitation.
P.* I V It might be quite embarrassing, you see, because
they might have to say I do know the President's
outlook on this matter and he would certainly like to come
but I wouldn't have thought there was any chance this year.
Q. Sir.. one other thing related to Vietnam. Since the
announcement has been made, has it been possible to assess
the reaction in Asia to Australia's decision in Vietnam?
P4N. I donft think it has really. We get vague general
remarks, approval here, and silence there. There are people
concerned with what's going on inside South Vietnam as to
whether there might be some resistance on the part of the
local inhabitants to outsiders coming in with forces, and on
this I discussed the matter not only with Max-rell Taylor but
through our own Ambassador and with senior military officers
we sent up recently to look over the ground and they are all
of the opinion that this is welcomed and that is very
important. It is to avoid any resistances or resentments of
that kind that the military arrangements involve the close
association of American troops with troops of South Vietnam.
0 0 0 0 
8-
Q. w Sir, reverting back to Mr. Connor again, I was
wndering whether you discussed any trade barriers.
PA4No, no, I didn't want to become involved myself in
specific arguments about specific commodities because, vwell,
this is not my field. I'm not the expert in this field.
My colleague the Minister for .' rade is., He and his people
are constantly in negotiation with them, I think Dr.
Westerman was here in the last few days. No. I don't horn
in on that. I occasionally may offer a broad remark which
perhaps registers somewhere but not in detail.
QO Just back to Vietnam if we might for a minute, Sir.
Was General Taylor able to assure you or make clear the
views of the South Vietnamese themselves on this war? Are
they still wholeheartedly behind it?
P. * He thinks the morale is good. Yes. Of course the
war will begin to build up when the Viet Cong morale falls,
but of course, the Viet Cong morale we may assume will be
pretty good during this wet season because of the reason we
mentioned earlier. Every now and then they have a little
bit of a coup.
QO You mentioned earlier, Sir, that you couldn't
foretell what might happen in the next few years, or
something to that effect. I was wondering is it the opinion
of General Taylor and others that this war might go on for
some years? No, I wouldn't put that view into his, They have
to look at this thing as any other person would, step by
step as it develops. I think any estimate as to the
length of this trouble will be affected by whether during
the wet season the Viet Cong really do make what I'll call
some permanent headway and on that he's both confident and
resolute. After that, who knows?
Q. In other words, the next two months will be
crucial? or three
P. 0 1 think the next Iwo/ months in a sense will be
crucial but in any event will be difficult, and morale
will have to be maintained and these, as I said earlier,
any little setbacks that occur here and there will have to
be seen in their proper proportion and not regarded as the
writing on the wall. But I think the public morale is
pretty good on these things. One mustn't expect too much
unhappiness. 



AMERHIECLADN -AAT UUSNTIRVAELRISAINT YA SSCOLCUIBA TINOEWN YLOURNKCHEON TH JUNE 16
S ech by the Prime Mini1ster, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzie
Mr. Floyd Blair, the President of the American-
Au tralian Association has thrown a little bit of a fly over me
when he suggested in his introduction that I ought to talk about
ovrseas investment. But when I look around here and see so
max7 people who have a practical interest in investment in Australia,
I dare not say a word in case I spoil what is already very good.
Nor indeed would I have you suppose we sit and bite our nails and
cu se whatev3r measures may be taken in the United States because
though you may occasionally think to the contrary we do know
th re are other people in the world, and that other countries have
pr blems very frequently quite like our own.
You have a balance of payments problem that is by no
me ns to be laughed off one understands that. d4e have too,
pe iodically not that we have not had our flush periods in terms
of our overseas reserves. But the last year, and in the current,
or the anticipated financial year, there will be a good deal of rundow.
But, still, we are not going bankrupt, and for the sake of
thl world we hope just as much as you do to see an early recovery
oi the full strength of the dollar. This is, from the world's
po nt of view, a matter of outstanding importance. I know the
world has a great number of problems today. There are problems
of international liquidity. These are very individual problems
be ause some countries are much more affected than others.
Hoxever, my idea of a perfect paradise speaking as an Australian
wo ld be a position of absolutely rugged strength sterling, of
absolutely rugged strength for the dollar and a successful general
el ction. These are very simple requirements.
But I would like to yield to Mr. Blair's blandishments
in the other field and say something to you about Vietnam and
pT ase don't think that I am casting Australia for a great role
on this matter though I think we always do as well as we can.
I lso know, not being entirely a fool, that the practical contribut.
n of Australia to the struggle in Vietnam is widely understood
an well appreciated in the United States. Its value may be
pr ncipally symbolic, but it also is intrinsic and nobody is better
aw re than I am of the feeling which exists in many parts of the
Un ted States that you do not want to be cast in the role of the
wold's gendarme in perpetuity. You must become a little tired of
having so many people in the world saying, " WIell, they're the
gzoatest power. It's their responsibility. Let them attend to it."
Now, I want to emphasise that has never been the
a ; itude of my country, and never will be. We know you are a
stong and a great power. We know that your strength is of vital
si ificance to us. But we do not leave everything to you. We
ar) your junior partner and we propose to continue to be an active
on contributing one, recognising mutuality that attaches to
al engagements of friendship. This I think is something that,
of course, is understood but that needs never to be forgotten.
In the nineteenth century, Great Britain was beyond
qu stion the greatest power in the World. In those days her command
of the seas gave her in effect command of the world. And who are
we her children in Australia, to complain about this tremendous
inieritance. But all the time that Great Britain was the greatest
po er in the world, never let it be forgotten that she was probably ./ 2 
2
the most unpopular one. Tt must have been very difficult in thiose
days to go through Europe without encountering scepticism, dislike,
enm ty and jealousy, I do not need to define these things to ' you
because you are enjoying the benefit of them today. That is part
of the price of admiralty. you expect to have a word of thanks.
You don't get it and all I say to you is don't expect it. The
warld isn't like that. All you have to do is say one thing, and
I ow you do " We are the greatest power, and therefore we have
the greatest responsibility because power and responsibility will
alw ys tend to equate themselves."
That is why people look to you and look to you not in
va in, But I think what does need to be said is that a great
por is not cynically to be presumed to be acting about a matter
in ure narrow self-interest, I see that very great Frenchman,
General de Gaulle, made a speech yesterday.... Anything I say
abaut him must be said with profound respect because he has been
a great and famous man and has done in his time great things for
his own country. But when he goes on record as saying that
America is engaged in a " dirty business" in Vietnam, then I really
thi Ifkta e have reached the limit.
4hy are you in Vietnam? This is my favourite question
i.* thenever I encounter the doubter and the sceptic. Why do you
sup pose the Airericans are in Vietnam? " For profit," 1 some fellow
saii to me one dayi Australia, " for profit". " Yes", I said.
" It's a new conception of profit. You've added a new meaning to
a wbrd in the dictionary I compliment you".
Souh VetWell, why? iBecause, in the short run, is the freedom of
Souh ienam essential to the freedom of California? I don't
suppose so. No. Is it because the freedom of South Vietnam is
not unimportant to your friends in Australia? I know that you think
ot' jthat but this is not the essence of it. You know, I may be
the most naive fellow at the age of 70) and having been a Prime
Minister far an awful long time I ough,, to have got aver any of
teerather boyish attributes; I may be extraordinarily simpleminded.
But I think what is going on in South Vietnam is one of
the greatest demonstrations by this country of the loftiness of
its responsibilities that I have ever seen. This is a matter of
vas~ t importance. Why?
Because it has to do with freedom. People say freedom
is amuch abused word, 7 it is a sentimental word. It may be much
abused, but there is nothing very sentimental about freedom, about
humn freedom because human freedom has a sort of universal quality
abaut it. I am concerned about my human freedom in Australia.
Bu theyoung man round the corner in Saigon, he's concerned about
his~ human freedom. It is the same kind of human freedom-that we are
con cerned about and the same that you are concerned about.
~ Jh~ neerfreedom is struck down anywhere in the world, we feel the
impact of it because our own freedom has to that extent been
re duced. No matter for whom the bell tolls, it tolls far thee.
That is the essence of it.
In my opinion, freedom is one of the great innate
attributes of human nature and it is therefore universal in its
inrer aspects. It is not divisible. You cannot sell out on the
freedom of one country and think you have protected the freedom
of your own. Freedom is not divisible. Freedom is not expendable.
Thdugh I do not want to appear to be using words of extravagance
on this matter, we are, in our way, in South Vietnam for the same
reasans you are in South Vietnam because we both believe that
this is not merely a battle against the people who happen to be
communists ( that has got merit in itself) but this is a battle
a. 0 to 0 
-3
fori the defence of things that have just as much validity in
Okip homa or Canberra as they have in Saigon. This is a matte'
of the freedom of human beings.
Let us elaborate a little on that. If we have a
stra ggle of this kind and we have agreed that itts not just a
straiggle against something but for something, what is it for?
What are these principles that we are concerned about? One-of
the, if I may be so old-fashioned as to remind you, is the-right
of every nation to its own sovereign independence, not to be
pus aed around by other people and not to be nibbled away by
subfrersion the almost divine right of every nation to have its
osovereignty. I get very annoyed with conferences here and there
1he somebody wants to discuss the internal affairs of some other
cou try and I have a fixed principle each country has a right
to un its own internal affairs in its own fashion and not to be
interfered with by bu~ sybodies. You cannot run your own affairs
unl~ ss you have a recognition of your free sovereignty unless
you~ are free from aggression, from attack and from undermining.
Now, it is this divine right of men to live free from
agg~ ression, free from unprovoked violence living in their own
homes in their own country without fear ol attack, which is one
of he great human rights and it is because these humaan rights
are the same wherever vie lve that we find ourselves in a common
cau o. Mow, I hope I am establishing i. n your own minds what
I a~ n trying to establish the freedom of my country. OJe are
righit out there on the end of the line. Suppose the United States
had~ done what some people would Lñ ave had you do stood clear.
I wo) nder how long South Vietnama would remain an independent
country. I wonder how long it would be able to resist being
ove rrun by Ho Chin Minh in the North and ultimate], y by Communist
Chi a. I wonder how long Not too long, one might suppose.
And~ if South Vietnam went how long do we suppose Thailand could
sta ~ d unaided because if it were a bad thing to go into South
Viet. nam, it would be an equally bad thing to go in to defend
Tha land or an equally bad thing to go in to defend Laos. I tell
you I can see this murkyr shadow 0coming down over the whole of the
South-East Asian peninsula, pointing first at Malaysia, then at
Indonesia with all the strange things that go on in that country,
and Ithen across a strip of water to my own land, These are
tremnendously important things. Our freedom and not just our
freedom is part of that total freedom which your country has
refi sed to abandon.
I Really, it is essential to come back to the original
que~ tion which I always put to myself. Why is America in South
Vie nam? What would be the position if she were not? What would
be the impact on the world's history? I do not want to see a state
of iffairs well, I will not be here anyhow but I do not want
my children or grandchildren to see a state of affairs in which
fre,. dom is in an embattled position in the United States of
Aine. ica and has disappeared in most of the other countries of the
worL d, This would not do because freedom is universal.
Freedom is not divisible. Freedom is something that you cannot
a 00 0. * 0/ 
4
sell out and attacks upon which you cannot appease. It is
something which vhen it is successfully defended has such things
ito say to the human heart and the human mind, lights such fires
iln them that all around the world the defence of freedom will
inmd itself justified by the high feelings of free people who
now that they have been delivered and who therefore live in
hope. That is a pretty long sort of sermon. But I really
intended to say to you, on behalf of my own country, that we
aire vastly indebted to the United States for its stand on these
natters. I am certain that all the people of the free world are
tlstly indebted. You will have critics, you will have grumblers,
~ ou will have doubters, but in the long run, perhaps not in the
xry long run, I think you may feel that you are the actors and
~ he spokesmain for an almost unanimous free world opinion. 



PRESS CONFERENCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME M4INISTER,_
SIR ROBERT MENZI3S , JN LONDON, ON 1 9T JUE, 165
PRIMEIMINISTER In vieiw. of what has appeared in the Press here,
I tought I ought to say something about the suggestion by
rumah about the withdrawal of the Australian Forces. I think
Iought to say right away that I do not propose to quote what
o her people say in the Conference. I think this is not right.
I$ fact there is a general rule, which is sometimes broken, to
t at effect. But where a statement is made which affects my
p sition what I have said or what I have done, then I regard
myself a-liberty to say something, and on this occasion what
D Nkrumah put forward was given publicity by his delegation
p~ resumably, and it is very important therefore to note what it
w s that he put forward.
He said he thought that Australia and New Zealand
could make a magnanimous gesture by withdrawing, in the case of
A Iustralia, the troops already in South Vietnam, and delaying the
djespatch, in the case of New Zealand, of the artillery unit that
tlhey are proposing to send. He also said that an appeal should
emade to the United States to terminate bombing in North Vietnam.
Now you will not fail to notice that these are all
ropoalsfor the weakening of the Military position of what I
ill call " our side". There was no suggestion that any appeal be
9ade to North Vietnam to refrain from reinforcing or supplying, and
~ o appeal to the Viet Cong to cease fire, nothing of that kind.
his was purely a one-sided proposal and as such I dealt wiith it,
What I said in substance and almost in terms, I
Shink, was that these two proposals were calculated to weaken the
osition of South Vietnam and the forces defending South Vietnam and
orrespondingly to strengthen the position of the enemy, without
lny concession being made by the enemy at all, and such a proposiion,
Ias not prepared to accept for one minute, and I therefore
ejected it and quite rightly,
I would just like to make it clear, if it needs to
made clear, that if this mission succeeds in establishing some
asis for negotiation some basis for a conference, and manages
to secure as part of that a general cease-fire on the part of all
. lements, that of course would be a very different matter, and one
jrhich naturally we as one of the sponsors of this mission would
trelcome. I There is one other aspect of this conference which
I think I should mention, and it's this. As I think I pointed out
g ast year when I got back to Australia, there is a new vocabulary
r rsing in these meetings. People use words in different senses.
Pwwe are, of course, treated and defined by others as being
jcommitted while they themselves say they are uncommitted, This is
a subtlety which needs a little study.
WJhat is meant, I gather, after two days, is that you
are committed if you either publicly support the action of the
United States or publicly participate in the defence of South
Vietnam, but you are uncommitted if you confine your support of
China or Hanoi to urords, This is a distinction of immense
subtlety. It has to be borne in mind because, really, to be
accused of being committed, which in my ease is an honourable
crime, by someone who is equally committed on the other side, seems
to me a little odd, Now I wanted to say that because there is a
lot of distortion going on in some of the columns here in London.
e a e 9 / 2 
I / 3
-2
PRI E MINISTER What I now say will be increasingly true in
( C ntd.) future years as the numbers of those present
gro r. This year we have twenty-one Prime Ministers. ge have, I
6up] kose fifteen topics that will need to be discussed and if
eve sybody wants to make a speech on each, that will be three
hun red speeches and of course that horse won't gallop. In the
old days, everybody could speak on everything but it can't be done
tod y. For example, yesterday we were surveying
pol tical problems of the world and we were dealing in particular
wit the general survey of Africa. Well it is the African Prime
Min sters who speak and by the time that they've spoken,( I am not
say ng they spoke at any undue length; it was very informative
and interesting) but by the time they have finished, time's up,
you might say, and this is going to happen more and more. So
tha more and more there will be views expressed that will not be
ar ued out in the conference. Nobody other than an African
spoke on the African problem. None of the rest of us spoke, nor
I suppose ever will, until we come to the communique to see what
goes in. This is no complaint. It is inevitable. This is a
phenomenon we will all have to take notice of in the Prime
Miristers meetings. I am sure we will have to devise some ways
anc means of restricting either the length of statements or the
re etition of arguments already put which will enable both sides
to be stated where there are two sides to the question. It is
go ng to be a bigger problem as time goes on.
There is another matter connected with the
Au traliaiposition on these discussions. Nothing has been said so
fa: to detract from the position of Malaysia, and I am hoping we
sh l1 come out of this conference with another declaration in
support of Malaysia like the one we had last time, and so far I
halren't heard anything that would suggest that we cannot. But one
vi w we take very strongly is that you cannot treat Vietnam in
is lation because manifestly if the Communists overran South Vietnam
an the whole position was lost there would be imminent danger to
La s to Thailand, and I would think certainly to Malaysia, which
is already of course occupied on one front. Therefore we have
tr. ated the problems of South-East Asia as a whole, saying you
ca mot break them up into fragments, and what would normally be
ot resoluteness of mind about South Vietnam is strengthened because
to us South Vietnam is part of a pattern and it is in relation to
the whole area that we see the overall threat and the overall need
fo resistance. One further point I would like to make about
t e mission is this. I did not expect Mr. Senanayake would be able
to, join it because the very reason which prevented him from
co~ ming to this conference would obviously prevent him from going on
almission of this kind which might take some time. His Budget
cdmes in a month earlier than ours and as you know, he has a
d~ tficult series of problems, financially and economically, in his
oihn country. Certainly his absence or unwillingness to join this
m: ssion is not to be treated as a criticism of the setting-up of
Smission and on the contrary, Ceylon made it quite clear that it
voured this view, this action, as indeed most of us did.
We do not take vote õ but clearly there was a
s bstantial consensus of support for the Wilson proposal. 
-3
QUE. STION : Can you clarify for us the New Zealand angle?
P. M. : No, I can't. The Prime Minister of New Zealand is
here. He is of age. He can speak for himself,
Q* I would have regarded Australia as one of the
Governments principally concerned in South Vietnam.
I just wondered what action the mission was going to take
to sound out your own views on the basis for a negotiation.
P. M. dell, we haven't been treated as a party principal
and I must say that the mission proposes to approach the
United States and I would anticipate it would visit Moscow,
Peking Hanoi, Saigon, Washington, and it will maintain
contacl in one way or another with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, but it had not occurred to me that
it needed to come to Canberra to ask me what my views were.
Q. Could you give us the basic principles on which a
settlement could be reached, You mentioned a cease-fire,
but could you take it from there?
P. M. We, ourselves have always believed that if there is
to be a cease-fire It must be all round and reciprocal.
In other words, if there is to be a cease-fire on the
part of the South Vietnamese and the Americans and the
Australians, whoever is there, then there must equally be
a cease-fire on the side of the Viet Cong, however one can
get at them or identify them. A cessation of reinforcement
or maintenance of any kind from North Vietnam, a cessation
of aggressive conduct on the part of North Vietnam in
other words, a full respect for the territorial integrity
and political independence of South Vietnam and that
nothing should be left which would involve South Vietnam
after an armistice in being left to the mercy of the
Communist groups in the Viet Cong. In the long run, what
we want is an independent South Vietnam, living in peace,
able to conduct relations in an atmosphere of peace, able
therefore to establish a democratically-elected government
with some probability of stability and with some assurances,
however they may be obtained or guaranteed, that she be
left alone to live her own life.
Q4 Do you see any possibility of the removal of the
division between North and South Vietnam?
P. M. I would not have thought so in my time not that I
am blaming myself for it, but I am stating it as a
chronological proposition.
Q. Inaudible,
P. M1 Don't get this out of proportion. Australia is not
Iliuknede r criticism. What Ghana did was to say " I would
to make a suggestion." He said, " I make this
humbly and I suggest to my friends that they might help."
I don't call that an attack. I had to reject the
suggestion, that is all.
Q. In your opening presentation, you used the x.. ord
that the two proposals made by Ghana were " calculated"
to weaken the position in South Vietnam. Do you use
the word " calculate" in its strict sense? a0 00/ 
PrM. No, I dont meau_' Udesigned-Oh no. I am
prepared to assume this would have the effect of
I am glad you raised that point. I am not challenging
the bona fides of the suggestion by Nkruniah. All I
challenged instantly was the effect that it would have,
QO Has Australia ever had in a conference like this
a direct request like this to do something externally?
P. M. No, not in my time, but perhaps this is the only
time when the circumstances might give rise to it, because
we do have forces there,
Q. Do you hold out at this time much hope for the
success of the mission, in view of the differences of
opinion we have had so far.
P. M. I don't know that I will want to say very much on
that. I think it has some hope of success, but for us to
speculate about it and sort of begin to lay the odds, I
think might have no good result. I think it is a very good
thing to have this mission) that this is a very well worthwhile
exercise. Those who might think this might operate
to the disadvantage of China can think so only on the
footing that they believe that China will not call it
off. That will be for China to decide or for Hanoi to
decide.
Q. How much do you feel that Mr. Wilson's suggestion
might help him with his own political troubles in Britain?
P. M. I wouldn't make any such suggestion. I think that
is a good cynical view, but it is not mine. Mr, Wilson
discussed this notion of his with me at great length before
be produced it. I happened to be the senior Prime Minister
and I happened to be in a place where he was and therefore
there was a chance to talk and he took me into his
confidence in this matter and we discussed it and tossed
it around and I think from everybody's point of view it
is a jolly good proposal and well worth pursuing.
QO When did he make you aware of this proposal first?
P. M. I think it was the night before. This was a highly
secret proposal. Yes, I heard about it within twenty-four
hours of the announcement.
Q. As far as you are aware, had he made any proposal
of this kind to President Johnson while you were there
last week in this respect?
P. M. I don't think so.
Q0 If the mission succeeded in obtaining a real ceasefire
these are circumstances in which you might then
consider the withdrawal of the Australian troops?
Q. dtell, we would then consider the position as the
Americans would. We would not be likely to withdraw while
they remained because we're there with them and for a
common purpose.
Q. Have you had any discussions with President Nkrumah
outside the conference? e see &amp; 1 
P. M.
Q. P. M.
Q. P. M.
Q. P. M.
Q. P. M. No. We haven't had much chance to have any private
discussions with anybody since it began. I am going to
Chequers tonight. There are bound to be one or two Prime
Ministers there and Dorneywood tomorrow night, and I
suppose there will be more there.
Do you think there's a possibility that the Commonwealth
will become so cumbersome that it will cease to
make any worthwhile contribution in the future?
I'd sooner not answer that. I'm a little what's
this modern word? I'm a little unclear in my mind.
There is no question, as far as you know, of Ghana's
membership in the mission being dependent upon Australiars
withdrawal...... Oh dear no. No suggestion of it. I'm afraid one or
two of you may still be under the impression that this was
a sort of demand. It was put up as a suggestion. This
was done when we resumed yesterday. He even said that
he made it with due humility, and it was never at any time
associated with Ghana's membership of the mission.
He didn't raise it on the first day?
No. This was the first and only time this proposal
was made. In other words, this came as a kind of second thought?
I don't know whether it was a second thought or a
third thought. All I can say is the simple fact that he
mentioned it when we resumed our conference yesterday
morning. At the conclusion of the conference the
Minister for External Affairs Mr. Hasluck, said " Might
I make one point on this question of why should the mission
not visit Australia? The thought in Mr. Wilsohts mind,
you will recall at the outset, was the Mission would go
to those powers who have it within their competence to
stop hostilities if they wish to do so." For the same
reason I think it unlikely that they'll need to visit
London. 



FOR PRESS 655.
Extract from opening address to the annual
conference of the Australian Country Party June
23, at Wagga by the Rt. Hon. J. McEwen, Acting Prime
Minister, Minister for Trade and Industry, Leader of the
Australian Country Party
VIETNAM There 13 controversy as to whether Australian
troops should be in South Vietnam.
This is a free, independent country recognised
by the United Nations.
Australia had hoped that the United Nations
would be an organis'tion cxpable and willing to protect free
countries at least small free countries.
We will work towards the United Nations becoming
such an Authority, but at this stage we have to face the fact
that it has no such power or will at present.
Today the United Nations is unable, and many
of its member States unwilling, to protect South Vietnam from
falling victim to the Communists of North Vietnam and
Communist China. The United States is not engaged in South
Vietnam to protect American soil or American interests.
She is there to defend the freedom of a small
nation freedom from domina. tion by Communism.
For Australia, far more so than for the United
States, this is not just a conflict of ideologies.
Vietnam is the only fighting front in the
world today where the forces of freedom are actually fighting
the Communists. Every Australi. n must note that this, the only
fighting front, is dangerously close to our front door.
Some assert that this is a war wvich can't be won.
The argument goes that even if the United States
wants to persevere in this struggle, Australia should not
become militarily involved.
To me, this line of argument ignores the plain,
hard facts of our defence situation.
There are too many episodes of recent history,
to justify any confidence that any country with a small
population can safely work on the principle that if we mind
our own business, the rest of the world v; ill let us dwell in
peace. Incident after incident shows this to be
a completely unreal and dangerous approach to our defence
, nd security. 
Nor can a country with our limited population
and present resources, geogro ica; lly situated as we are,
realisticilly think that vie can, by our own enceavours, take
care of all contingencies which might arise, invrlving our
security. In a1n age when v. a. ons and military equipment
require great resources, and higLhly-developed technology,
only the greatest of industrial powers, can alo 1e really
indeprenlent military powcre in their own right.
Unable to depend on the United Nations, what
is the courseof safety to us?
There is only one. The crea. tion and maintenance
of alliances wiith po erful and reliable friendos.
This must be the simile basis of our ap. roach
to defence. We have forimed alliances.
f course, v. with Britain, and New Zealand, with
whom we have a long and, proud history of standing together
in military affairs, for better or for worse.
And also w-ith t1e createst military and industrial
power there is the United States.
The United States, under ANZUS, is pledged to
defend us to safeguard our security.
But like any alliance, ours with the United
States must also be a two-ay alliance, for bettcr rr for worse.
You can't make alliances, you certainly can't
keep them, if you are going to take the view that:
" We want to be looked after in any event, but
wve'll pick aznd chloose when we'll support our
partner. Te won't esupport him unless we are
sure he's . ign to win.
This is the answer to those who say we should
not be in Vietnam because they think that in the circumstances
the United States can't win a clear-cu. t victory in that
troubled country. To merit thle NiJ re ty commitment of the
United States, vital to Australia not -uet for today or
tomorrow, but for years, pCerhapr generations in the future,
, ustralia must support our great and powverful ally in the task
she has assumed, of prcvcntinc further encroachment by the
ommunists in South :' ast Asia.
This is a stru-gle which could affect the
safety, even the survival, of our own country.
If Vietnam fall, . hat are the prospects for
peace, and for freedom, in Le in Thailand in alayysia?
What are the prospeats for utrl1ia 11 million
eople holding an i-mmense countr, with tremendous resources
nly now beginning to be e-ploitel, 
A country in Australia's position cannot
afford the luxury of doing only uwhat is comfortable? doing
only that which does not involvo rieks.
Our conduct today must ansure we merit the
unhesitating support of our a. llies wen their support is
needed. Of course, we detest r: ar, but notso much as
we detest the thought of lms of our froedom to Communism.
Of course, we w: o ul---! ork with the British and
Americans to restore peace.
But I mean peace which preserves the freedom
of South Vietnam not a Deace which le-.~ s to Communist
victory by Treaty. As I said before, Vietnam is the only fighting
front in the world today " here the forces of freedom are
actually fighting the ComiLiunists.
Every Australian must note that this, the only
fighting front, is dangerously close to our front door.
Australia hel-ped the British, New, Zealanders
and . Malayans to stamp out the Communist terrorists in Malaya.
Today they are finished there.
We put them out by fighting them not by
signing a treaty with them.
Co .: mun-ism is here in Australia. I believe that
never before have Australians had such real ~ round to
recognise the da4nger to our freedom from Communisrm.
The Country Party w, as the first, and for a
time, the ONLY political Party in Australia declaring that
ommunism should be banned.
Let us again lead the fight against this
pernicious menace,
7, V A year ago Australia held reserves in foreign
exchange of œ 854 million next week at the end of this
Einancial year our reserves jwill have fillen to œ 680 million.
Having re~.: rd to all of the factors which
nfluence Australia's balance of payments, it would not be
n unreasonabl-guesstiimate that in a year's time our
eserves may have fallen by as much ag. in.
' Phis estimate pays some regoard, but not an
unduly pessimistic regard, to the U. S. A. U. K. policies of
minimising capital outflow.
So one of Australia's greatest needs xIill
ontinue to be, to increase export earnings to pay for the
mports of capital equipment : and raw mnterials, which provides
he , iuscles and sinews for the industry 3so essential for our
rowth. 
-4
This year Australia will buy no less than œ 1,400
illion worth of imports, œ 500 million more than 5 years ago
hen imports were controlled at somewhere about œ 900 million a
ear. There is nothing wrong with dipping into reserves
to pay for these imports. That is what reserves are for.
But neither a business nor a country can go on
iving on its savings.
If Australia is to maintain continuously a high
evel of imports, then more anid more foreign exchange, must
e earned by our exports, by exporting more, by exporting
ifferent products, by getting better prices for our exports.
If prices had remained at the levels of 1963-64 on
hese 3 commodities alone, Australia would have earned an
additional œ 135 million export income in the financial year
nor closing. If prices of ALL export commodities had returned
to the more reasonable levels of 1952-53, Australia's export
i come would have been œ 300 million higher this financial
y ar. There must be fought a constant battle to improve
A stralia's earnings from exports. More in quantity! better
p ices. Australia has now entered a new phase of export
o gigantic quantities of crude minerals iron ore, coal, and
b uxit e. It is a. matter of great interest that, to date,
t ese sales and prospects of sale are almost in their entirety
td Japan. The historic Australia-Japan Trade Treaty of 1957
h -4s transformed the trading relationship between Australia and
J pan and, perhaps more important, transformed relationships
b tween the governments and the people of our two countries
alel counts this is good beyond c ofculation.
However, I have said on earlier occasions that
A1 stralia is not to be exploited only as a quarry. It is time
nn for us to see a growing development of the sale of these
ra materials after somie processing.
WAH A T Australia knows that historically wheat has been
pr duced in surplus to the co. mnercial market.
In recent years most of this surplus has been taken
of the commercial market and disposed of on concessional
te ms to the needy countries.
Part of the Australian proposal now is to deal with
wh at, surplus to commercial demand.
We concede that the country which produces wheat
su'plus to its commercial opportunities ought to be prepared
to sell some of that wheat at less than the commercial price
to the needy ought not to be the responsibility only of those
couhtries which produce wheat in export quantities. 
That, in short, all the more affluent countries
whether wheat exporters or wheat importers should make a
money contribution to a fund which would be used to buy surplus
wheat at less than the going commercial price, and provide it
on concessional -terms to the needy.
That, in broad terms, is the Australijn approach.
DROUGHT It is proper that governments should concern
themselves with the problems of drought. The industries
affected by drought are essential to the national well-being,
and much that could be done to alleviate the consequences of
drought can be done only by governments.
In the livestock industries, drought is primarily
i problem of feed and water, but in practical terms transport
acilities and transport costs become a major part of the
roblem. I am hopeful that the present drought may bring all
Australian Governments collectively to face the fact that
irought is a recurring phenomenon of the Australian environment.
Not only does great personal hardship occur with tremendous
uffering to livestock, but the whole economy of a country sunh
as Australia is set back when a major drought occurs.
Clearly there is opportunity for more water
conservation by governments and, in very many cases, need for
more water conservation by the landowner.
It is quite practicable to-day to hold reserve
tocks of grain for feed without the risks that applied in
arlier times, of destruction by pests.
I believe there should be special consideration of
redit policies to enable farmers to hlve better reserves of
ater and of fodder.
In drought transport needs to be adequate and
inexpensive. It is not easy to mitigate the consequences of
drought for the grain grower, but the certainty that he will
have recurring experiences of loss of production through
drought and indeed, recurring experiences of failure to be
able to plant his crop in many districts through excess rain
must be sufficiently taken into account in assessing his costs
for the purpose of stabilisation schemes.
Over the whole field of drought consideration, the
assistance of the scientist and the extension worker must be
fally invoked. Most important work in relation to the drought
f eding of sheep has been done, but I very much doubt whether
tae result of this work has penetrated all sheepowners'
uaderstanding. In a comprehensively organised approach to mitigation
oC drought consequences, I believe the Commonwealth Government
w uld co-operate with State Governments.
This whole subject of drought is one on which the
c) untry voice must be heard. 4 5/ 6 



PRESS CONFERNCE GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, IN LONDON, ON 27TH JUNE. 196S.
PRIME MINISTER,: There is a passage in the communique about the
voluntary contributions to the United Nations to get it out
of its present financial troubles, Great Britain and Canada
having made announcements. I reserved the decision of
Australia and perhaps that requires a little explanation.
What I said was there were two aspects to the
matter. One was that we all wanted to see the United Nations
solvent but that the nations who hadn't paid and about whom
the Article 19 argument was being waged, must consider whether
their position was being weakened or strengthened by these
voluntary conti butions. In other words, if the people who
hadn't paid comt to the conclusion they can go on refusing
to pay because the other people will make up the difference
by voluntary contributions, it may be that the Article 19
point will never be determined and I think it should be
determined and determined quite soon.
I indicated that we had a good record of voluntary
contributions but I did want to discuss that with my colleagues
as to which way the balance might lie. You might have noticed
that the United States had not announced any voluntary contributions
yet and I don't know whether they will at all. They
may have similar considerations in their mind. This question
requires a little thought from the point of view of are we
handicapping ourselves in the Article 19 argument.
There was some discussion about whether the
Prime Minister of Great Britain should be Chairman of the
Mission. The overwhelming view of the conference was that he
was doing it as Chairman of the conference not as Pr~ ime Minister
of Great Britain. There was a great deal of argument if one might
call it such about Great Britain being committed against the
North Vietnamese, Some members of the Conference appeared to think
that they were not committed one way or the other. The fact is
that most of them were. They think Australia is committed
as indeed Australia is because Australia has produced troops.
Australia was committed before then quite clearly as a matter
of publicly-stated policy.
Countries like Tanzania and so on are equally
committed not by troops but by the plainest public declarations
in favour of China and against America.
I think there is a good deal of double talk
about committed people and uncommitted people on this matter.
In fact I think on two or three occasions I said so,
The end result on Malaysia I thought was not
unsa t isfa ctory. The shadow of the Afro-Asian conference at
Algiers has been rather heavily cast upon this conference.
It may seem odd because it has nothing to do with the Commonwealth.
It is an entirely different body which has some
membership in common, Still it was very much in evidence and
I thought at one stage there was a disposition to go a little
cautiously on the subject of Malaysia and the Indonesian o 12 
-2
confrontation and this might muddy the waters at Algiers and
therefore the end result was very satisfactory from our point
of view because they once more quoted what we said last year and
added words bringing it up to date, so I think the Malaysian matter
came out pretty well.
There are a few comments I would make on disarmament.
You know or can guess how these communiques are hammered out over
a long day, but you get to a conclusion which isn't exactly in the
form you would have liked yourself but in substance is near enough
to be acceptable. This disarmament question includes one or two
illustrations of that
" They hoped that early progress would be made towards
an acceptable agreement on some of these measures
including the limitation and reduction of stocks of
nuclear weapons and delivery vehicles,"
Now this standing by itself, a reduction of stocks of nuclear weapons
unaccompanied by reductions in conventional arms and armaments
seems to me to be inadequate, and so I made the point and the words
were added " and a phased reduction in conventional armaments"
which brought it back into balance. Everybody agreed that that
was right but it had perhaps been overlooked in the draft.
This reference to nuclear-free zones arises because
the Organisation of African unity and the Latin American States
have been working out the idea of a nuclear-free zone in their own
countries. I explained the reason why my Government rejected the
idea of a nuclear-free zone South of the Equator.
Somebody credited me with talking about nuclear
visitors, which was a new phrase to me and I not having uttered it,
don't know what it is, but I can repeat the point that I made with
the greatest of pleasure, because I have made it elsewhere.
I said that if we were to enter into agreement for a nu clea r-free:. zone
south of the equator and were in a position to enforce suchagreements
as we had miade, the only effect would be that our
opponents being situated north of the equator could fire nuclear
weapons at us or at our friends without retaliation because we
would have banned our friends from discharging nuclear weapons
from south of the equator. That would be a ridiculous position
it would help our enemies and hurt our friends.
We are not starting a nuclear war and Australia is
not a nuclear power and has no intention of becoming one, wIe
agree that there should not be a proliferation of nuclear weapons.
We think they ought to be kept in as few hands as possible,
responsible hands, and we would fear very much the escalation of
small wars if a number of powers themse~, ves possessed nuclear
weapons. This has been stated by me many times in the Commonwealth
Parliament, If some other people in entirely different circumstances
want to set up a nuclear-free zone, that is their business.
That is the background to the disarmament passage.
Now letts turn to Rhodesia which occupied an
enormous amount of time this year as it did last,
From the very beginning of this meeting, the British
Government made it clear through Mr. Bottomley that they wanted
a state Of affairs in which there would be steady progress towards
majority rule unimpeded by reactionary constitutional changes,
immediate improvement in the Political status of the African
population and the progressive elimination of racial discrimination. P a e ./ 3 
-3
They also made it quite clear that they wouldn't recommend to
Parliament Parliament being the one authority on this matter
the grant of independence to Rhodesia unless they were satisfied
it was on a basis acceptable to the people of the country taken
as a whole. In other words, to the majority of the people on a
conception of adult suffrage, Now this seemed to me to be clear
enough. Over what period the change to complete majority rule
should occur that is of course a different matter. Nobody but
the extremisis could imagine that it could be created tomorrow
morning and perhaps none but an extremist on the other side would
believe that it could never be created. This is the problem of
Southern Rhodesia, the two extreme views no change complete
change tomorrow morning. I think there is a growing support for
the idea that this has to be phased in some careful way so that
over a period of time the movement is steadily towards increasing
the African vote until you get a majority and they will be in
charge of Parliament. This, I imagine, is the view of the British
Government and it was the view of several of us who spoke on this
matter. Now the communique itself as in the case of last year's
set out first of all what the British Minister said and then what
some other Prime Ministers said. The British Prime Minister was
urged by other not the other Prime Ministers you will observe
but other Prime Ministers, because I was not one of them nor were
indeed two or three others..., was urged to convene a constitutional
conferenge at an early date, say within three months and there
were certain other, in effect, directions contained in that
paragraph. These were the viei~ s expressed to the British Government,
not by the conference, but by certain Prime Ministers with
strong views on these matters, principally African Prime Ministers.
My approach to the matter was and is that I think that
the British Government having the complete responsibility on this
matter is having to deal not with a Crowm colony but with a selfgoverning
colony which has been self-governing for many years, that
the British Government should not be handicapped by too much
iiublic instruction, that it was rather a mistake to be talking
a ' bout a conference within three months. It was quite unrealistic,
particularly as obviously there must first of all be some rnegotiations
continued between Great Britain and Southern Rhodesia and as
Mr. Wilson pointed out in the last paragraph of the communique on
this point if there is undue tardiness, if there is no willingness
to engage In these discussions then the British Government would
consider whether it should call a constitutional conference between
all the relevant parties.
Now it is quite clear that the United Kingdom understands
the difficulty of this matter. This is not a problem which lends
itself to shouting from the sidelines, It is a very serious and
difficult problem and so far as I am concerned I would like to
see an attitude of mind on both sides in which discussions continued
in a constructive way between the Governments of Britain and
Southern Rhodesia, leading in due course whenever that may be, to
the holding of a conference in which all aspects of the matter can
be thrashed out from a constitutional point of view.
All this cannot be done in three months, but I think
this is rather a bravura touch put in to exhibit their sense of
the urgency of the matter. A little quietness and a little
deliberation would be of great value on this matter. 0 0 0 / 4 
I must say I thaought Mr. ' Wilson and his Government
went as far as any Government could go on this matter.
Later on there is a reference to immigration to
Britain. I would like to point out that this was not discussed
by the conference as a conference. I take the strongest possible
view that every countryts immigration policy is its own business
and this is not open to debate at a Prime Ministers' Conference*
It happened that bilaterally the Prime Minister of Great Britain
had talks with some of the countries affected by the immigigtion
laws and that is why the matter was referred to. One or two of
them mentioned it in the conference itself, but there was no doubt
whatever no lack of unanimity about the proposition that the
extent ol immigration into Britain was entirely a matter for the
British Government. I want to emphasise that there was no immigration policy,
for example, of Australia's mentioned. It i-s, in this case,
entirely a matter for the British Government, and obviously our
own is entirely a matter for us. Now this is a very vital
principle. There's a little disposition in the new Commonwealth
I'm using words with extreme moderation to want to discuss and
deal with domestic problems in other countries and this, of course,
if pursued will become fatal to the Commonwealth. An association
of free, independent, autonomous nations are not going to have
their internal business tossed around in conference and the
inurigation policy is, of course, a perfect example. Every country
there at the table has its own policy and I think would agree must
jealously guard its own rights to determine the composition of its
own population. The reference that was made to the meeting of Commonwealth
trade ministers is preceded by a reference to an offi* cials?
meeting. I myself pointed out that there was no value in convening
a meeting of Commonwealth trade ministers just out of the blue to
sit down to discuss an almost infinite variety of trading problems,
some of which concern one country, some two, some three, but very
few of which concern the lot and if such a meeting occurred., they
would be bound to say we musi refer these matters to officials.
Therefore, commonsense suggested that the officials should meet
first and do a bit of work on this matter before the ministers
themselves met. Well that view was accepted and was included in
the communique. The Commonwealth Foundation speaks for itself; that was
accepted all round without any difficulty.
The Commonwealth Assembly didn't leave the barrier.
Well perhaps I'm wrong, The starter started it but it didn't go
for a furlong for the fairly obvious reasons thai we have the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and this seems to all of us here to be merely duplication.
The Commonwealth Secretariat. There had been a difference
of opinion about what the functions of the Secretariat ought to be.
Some of my colleagues obviously felt it ought have a very wide
commission and be able to conduct investigations and make economic
recommendations, exercise some supervisory power over works of
development. There were others of us who said that that would be
fatal, that it would require an enormous secretariat for a start
and would give rise to a good deal of resentment around the Commonwealth
on the part of people who thought they were quite capable
of conducting their own developmental ideas. In the long run, the
ea e so o o 
limited proposition was approved. The Secretariat is to be what
I will call a facilitating body, not to be an executive body. It
is not to seek to extend its jurisdiction in a hurry and must
proceed cautiously in a pragmatic way, and that being accepted as
it was, I think the Secretariat might serve a very useful purpose.
As you already know, Arnold Smith was appointed. In
fact, I gather that during the discussions he had an overwhelming
volume of support and in the conference where his nomination was
approved unanimously. I'm supposed to have had strong views about
various people. I don't know why. I read in one paperthat used
to be a pretty accurate paper, to the effect that I have been
carrying since Suez a sort of vendetta with a gentleman called
George Ivan Smith. I had never heard of him at the time of Suez;
in fact I wasn't conscious of his existence until his name appeared
on the list of nominees. Sir John Bunting reminded me that he
was once at a dinner which I attended. That's the nearest I have
ever got to him. I have no views good, bad or indifferent
a bout him. It has to be remembered that there is great advantage
in a venture of this kind in having a man who has what I will call
civil service experience, who is accustomed to the processes of
government and how they are worked out, who knows how the political
animal operates as all senior civil servants do, and of course in
this field this man was outstanding.
Peiris of Ceylon, whom we didn't nominate, but whose
name we said ought to be under consideration because people have
a very high opinion of him turned out to be not available because
he has been appointed the Lbassador of Ceylon to W~ est Germany.
There is no reason why if the Secretariat carries out
its designed functions and doesn't extend them there is no reason
why the whole experiment should not be extremely useful.
I'm told that one or two points ought to be made on the
guide lines of the Commonwealth mission.
It must be remembered that this mission has been appointad
by the Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference and is responsible
to it as a conference. Men are not appointed to the mission simply
in order to air their own views, but to represent what is
undoubtedly a wide cross-section of opinion in the Commonwealth
itself. It became desirable to set out what ultimate objectives
are during their consultations with the parties principally
concerned, You will notice that paragraph is the suspension
of air attacks on North Vietnam. This is accompanied by and
these are regarded as completely hanging together, a North Vietnamese
undertaking to prevent the movement of any military forces.
I make no secret of my view that in the second paragraph
we should have said " a suspension by North Vietnam" to balance
the suspension in the first paragraph, but the general view was
that the United States was not likely to suspend attacking the
lines of communication and supply of the enemy merely on an
undertaking, The undertaking would have to be effective before
any result appeared under I dare say that is right.
Total cease fire on all sides, I might say, includes
a cease fire by the Viet Cong; whether the parties involved will
include the Viet Cong is not a matter for me, but for the mission. .6 
-6
They will go around and see if they can establish
a basis for a conference. I don't quite know how you establish
the basis for a conference with people who live in ambush and
who come out of ambush and who presently have a nice healthy
cover from cloud and rain. This is a physica problem, but
following the usual communist technique, they have a political
aspect and call themselves the National Liberation Front and
these are designed for political purposes.
It may be that if the mission ever reaches Hanoi,
Hanoi may say " tie want to have some representative of the
Viet Cong." 1 That would be entirely intelligible, since the
Viet Cong are obviously working under their direction. There
is no reason at all why they shouldn't send for one or two of
them, but the mission will determine that.
The difficulties of the mission are very great, but
at the same time I think there was merit in the Commonwealth
as such taking the initiative to indicate that whatever our views
are, if a genuine conference could occur and be brought to accept
genuine propositions which involved the freedom of South Vietnam,
then the experiment was worth making,
Q. You told us Mr. Wilson talked at length with you before
putting up the proposal for a mission. Could you tell us what
influence on his thinking that talk might have had?
PM. I haven't a clue.
Q. Has the Australian Government had any indication of the
Viet Cong's willingness or otherwise to talk with the mission?
PM. No, We have no means of communicating with them.
I asked because there was a new Chinese agency report
this morning that they would not meet the mission, but this did
not come directly from them. It came from China.
Pm. Yes, that would not surprise me. Let's be sensible about
this matter. As long as North Vietnam and the Viet Cong think
they are on a good wicket and are making headway, they won't talk.
When they come to the conclusion they are not winning, that will
be a different matter and that is why the United States an4 the
rest of us who aro involved have to keep banging away at it.
Q. Some days ago when someone asked you about the future of
the Commonwealth you said you were " unclear". Do you feel any
more inclined to be clearer after the last week?
PM. No. I have no views to offer on that at all.
Q* Do you regard the declaration on Malaysia this year as
being stronger or more valuable than last year?
Pm.* Temi No. I think that approximately it has the same effect.
The ainthing was to get a recognition of Malaysiats place and
Malaysia's right to preserve her integrity and to ask her friends
for support which, of course, is the precise principle that any
of the African countries would apply in their own case,
Q. Might it not be slightly stronger because it refers to
the country's integrity and gives support to the country, whereas
last year they gave support only to the Prime Minister? 9 a e e e/ 7 
-7
P. M. I see the point you make. Yes from that point of
view it might be regarded as more comprehensive. Yes, thank
you very much.
Q. In his second statement on the peace mission, Nkrumah
said the mission had been placed in the absurd position of
having to discuss with one of those who authorised the mission
the terms upon which Australia itself was prepared to
disengage itself, Do you accept the premise here that we
are engaged in the struggle and therefore we ought to be one
of the countries with whom the mission should confer?
P. M. Oh no. That is quite unreal. True we have a force
there and in that sense we are engaged in the struggle and
we strongly support the American action, but the mission
doesn't need to come and talk to us. Its main problem is
to get in touch with those whom I may call " the other side".
QG Do you want to comment on his proposition that the
National Liberation Front and the Saigon authorities are
rival governments engaged in a civil war?
P. M. I think that is the communist line and 11m sorry that
he has succumbed to it if he has. Civil war, really. Here is
a settlement made and ihere is a line of demarcation. -There
is a guarantee of no fighting across the frontier, no attack
on South Vietnam, but yet you have all these attacks plainly
organised by the Viet Cong, obviously organised from the
north. In fact they hardly make any secret of it and their
supplies all come from the north. They don't produce any
munitions themselves, except for a few homemade things. They
all come from the north, so the north is intervening in breach
of the treaty on a large scale and to convert that into a
civil war when it is really a war by the north against the
south is just playing with words. W~ e don't accept that
proposition any more than we would have accepted the
proposition with Malaya a few years ago, when the communist
bandits up in the north were engaged in a civil war. At that
time nobody thought of it, but now it's the line,
Q6 Do you think the Peking Government is making headway
with some countries of the Commonwealh?
P. M. Yes, I do. I think that the influence Le~ t's
put it this way. I found this year perceptible signs of
penetration by China in at least an ideological way, I
think they have a real influence and perhaps a growing
influence in some African countries. I won't particularise
who they are.
Q9 Were you heartened by the fact that the Commonwealth
nations appear to have rather snubbed China over the Algiers
Conference?
P. M. Oh, don't ask me what their reasons are. I know
nothing about the Afro-. Asian conference, but after all, when
the erstwhile revolutionary head of the Algerian Government
is plucked out of his place and, I gather, put on trial and
another goes in, I think if I had been one of the Afro-Asian
countries, I would have said we had better determine how
this thing settles down otherwise we might be holding a
conference in the middle of a counter-revolution. * 9 e 9 / 8 
-8-
Q Would you regard the communique as a victory for
the moderate elements in the conference?
P. M. I won't adopt those words but I'll say I think the
ultimate communique was a good deai better than at one stage
I feared it might be,
QO Ther'e is one-line reference to some discussion of
Chinese membership of the United Nations. Could you tell us
something about that?
P. M. You hardly need to be told that some of us don't
recognise Communist China and are not to be told at a country
Commonwealth meeting that we should. What any Commonwealth!
does in its diplomatic recognition of another nation is its
business and nobody else's, There have always been a number
who either have recognised Communist China or want to persuade
other people to do so, but if it had a one-line reference, it
had a one-minute discussion. There is a reference to the
importance of China being a party to any genuine disarmament
scheme but I've said that myself, more than once. Tht'
a praclical problem.
Q, Given the fact that most of the current disarmament
negotiations of any value take place in the framework of
United Nations, doesn't it make some sense that China might
be brought
P. M. Now you want to argue with me. The Australian
Government's view on the recognition of Communist China....
Q6 Not the recognition of Communist China, but its
place vis-a-vis the United Nations.
P. M. Well, one seems to be almost consequential on the
other, if you recognise them. You first of all have to solve
the problem of Formosa and this is a problem which is neatly
dodged by almost everybody who discusses this matter, but
I don't want to make a long statement on that. We have stated
our views and our reasons many times in Parliament,
Q6 Can you see an alternative way in which China could
be brought into disarmament talks of some kinds outside the
United Nations?
P. M. Well, after all China has been involved in some
discussions in relation Lo South-East Asia I don't think
it is at all impossible on an overwhelming matter of world
significance like disarmament to have people coming to.
conference whether they are members of the United Nations or
not, simply in their capacity as significant powers,
QO One last question on a subject which has become
rather touchy Could you tell us whether you have discussed
the Governor-6reneralship with The Queen since you have been
here?
P. M. Why has it become rather touchy? Only because some
fellow in the " Sunday Mirror" has to write a think-piece
about somebody, You know, it is most awful nonsense. There
is a limit to folly on these matters, When a Governor-General
is appointed, The Queen will announce it. 0 0 a./ 
9
Q. But have you discussed it yet with The Queen?
P. M. I have had a preliminary talk with her. All these
names that have been bandied around, they dwell in beauty
as in the eye of the beholder.
Q. Could you go further Sir?
P. M. No. I have a strict sense of courtesy in my
dealings with The Queen.
_ 1_ 



P. M. 48/ 1965
FOR PRESS 65/ 090
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Honourable John McEwen
The Acting Prime Minister, the Rt. Honourable John
McEwcn, said today that invitations had been extended to
representatives of national organisations to participate in a
series of economic consultations to be held on 14th and 15th July.
Mr. Mc wen said that it was important for the Government
to obtain first-hand and up-to-date information and views on
developments in the economy from those who were actively engaged
in business and industry. Regular consultations of this kind,
which had begun in 1962, had greatly assisted the Government in
its consideration of economic policies.
A committcc of Ministers would meet representatives of
a group of national organisations in Canberra on the aftecrnoon of
Wednesday, 14th July. The organisations invitoed to attend were:
Associated Chambers of Commerce of Australia
Associated Chambers of Manufactures of Australia
National Farmers' Union of Australia
Australian Primary Producers' Union
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council
Australian V.' ool and Meat Producers' Federation
Australian Bankers' Association
Master Builders' Federation of Australia
Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries
Australian Council of Retailers.
At 10 a. m. on Thursday, 15th July, Ministers would
have discussions with representatives of the Export Development
Council, and at 11.30 a. m. with representatives of the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council. At 2.30 p. m. Ministers
would meet representatives of the. Australian Council of Trade
Unions. CANBERRA.
2 8 JUN. 1965 



AUSTRALIA CLUB,. LONDON
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
28TH JUNE, 1965
On the whole I think that what I ought to do is to say
" thank you", to say that I concur with all the bits that didn't
relate to me and to sit down, because I am here in a glittering
company. Hlere is Lord Baillieu, very modest about himself, one
of the great Australians of my lifetime. I see sitting along
here, with characteristic modesty, Alec Douglas-Home. I have
no bias about him at all. All I do is to say that I have
said and I repeat, that I think hie's the greatest man in the
Kingaom and, what is more, a rather tolerant man, because some
of you will recall sitting at an Australia Club Dinner in another
setting when he made a speech about me and I made a speech about
him, and he thought fit on that occasion to make a certain amount
of play about my name remember? Some of you will. He had
discovered that my proper name was " Mingies" and this, of course,
is quite right. I very well remember many years ago being at a big
dinner in London and the gentleman with the red coat, who had
a fine Home Counties accent for public production, vwith a good
Scots burr on his tongue in private, nipped across to me just
before I was to speak and he said " Excuse me, Sir, but am I to
announce you as Menzies or by your proper name?". W~ ord of this
must have reached Alec because on that occasion he made a little
play about the name, and I recalled it with my usual courtesy,
and said that after all we all have a lot to learn and when I
get back home and I am invited by the vicar to go to the concert
of the year, I will expect him to say " And now Miss Flora Smith
will sing for us ' Hume Sweet Huniel". This put a very great
strain on our friendship because three days later he said for
me, " You know, you've made life very troublesome for me. I can't
go to the House of Lords now without being confronted by ' Hume
Sweet Hume'. And I claim some credit, therefore, for the fact
that some time afterwards he left the House of Lords and became
the Prime Minister of this country.
As for Peter Carrington, well he's in the House of Lords.
Hefs the leader of the Opposition in the House of Lords and he's
4. eveloped a line of eloquence which I didn't suspect when he was
in Australia. I remember that after he became the High Commissioner,
I was up at his house for dinner, and after we had
absorbed some frugal provisions and pre-prandial drinks we walked
into the dining-room and on the right as we walked in there was
a portrait of the La~ y Car ing ton with one " Ir" and I said to
him with my usual blushing modesty: " How do you explain this?
Is this a legitimate ancestress of yours~ because you have two
1jr's" He said: " You needn't worry, th name is Smith".
Sdon't need to tell him that he has a great and affectionate
place in the Australian mind.
I'm glad that he referred to Lord Slim and Lord De L'Isle
because I imagine, though I'm constantly being asked questions
about it by the Press, that it's not the easiest business in the
world to be a Governor-General. I've always thought it a
revolting job. You have to be nice to everybody you have to
make a speech but you have t6-Ntake great care that~ it doesn't cut
across the policy of the Goverrimnt, and this I think is a
painful task. o eo o / 2 
-2
I must say that Lord Slim sol~ ved this problem very
easily. He made his own speeches and apologised to me afterwards,
Although Lord De LtIsle, that gallant and distinguished man who
has just ceased to be our Governor-General, didn't quite go so
far as that, I thought he went as near as a man could possibly go,
and I'm delighted that they are both here.
I think it would be a mistake if I didn't say to you that
on all of these occasions I'm delighted to see Lord Bruce. I can
remember him at a time when I was so nervous about even speaking
to him that I found it difficult to speak at all. He's been here
a long time and there are foolish people, I suppose, somewhere in
Australia who still manage to think of him as rather more English
than Australian. I want to take the opportunity of saying in his
presence that so far as I'm concerned, I regard him as one of
the greatest f'rime Ministers that my country has ever had, and
when he ceased to be Prime Minister of Australia, he served
Australia with vigour with force, in this country for years and
years. The name of tanley Melbourne Bruce will never lack a
place, and a high place, in the history of Australia.
Now that we have observed the ol~ d Chinese practice of
meeting each other and exchanging confidence, I wonder if I might
say something to you on my own account because in the last ten
days I've been attending that joyous, jocund thing known as the
Prime Ministerst Conference.
I can remember the time when there were a few of us, and
we sat at the table and there it was, and at the end of a day or
two, we finished our discussion but this year because of the
advance of independence and sell'-government, there were 21 of
us you are only entertaining one Prime Minister, one out of
21 and as each Prime Minister is allowed to have three acolytes
sitting with him, that's a total of 84+ and then there are other
necessary people connected with the Secretariat and so on so that
we sit in Marlborough House with 100 people in the room.
I don't know how you chaps feel but I find it very
difficult to conduct an intimate discussion in the presence of
100 people. This problem is solved by some who give their
speeches to the Press it's a very private meeting you understand,
but in some strange way a number of speeches reach the Press,
sometimes before they are delivered. Therefore, some of the old
intimacy has disappeared and yet it is essential that in a Prime
Ministers' Conference we should endeavour to get to the point
and to register with each other some views about some of the
great problems of the world.
' dell, on this occasion we of course had something to
say about South Vietnam and I want to say something about it to
you myself, because as it turned out we had no time to discuss
the merits of the South Vietnam position. W'e were concerned to
discuss whether we ought, as a Commonwealth to appoint a mission
to go around to the contending parties and lind out whether there
might be some basis for a conference which might lead to peace.
Now that's a modest ambition but still we all thought it was
one worth trying to give effect to but at no time did we discuss
the merits of this matter.
Now, on my way here, I came through the United States of
America where the merits about South Vietnam are hotly contested. 0 1e93 
-3
I come from my own country where the merits are hotly contested.
I come here where I have no doubt, though I wouldn't be dogmatic,
tile merits are hohy contested. But you are not to suppose that
the Prime Ministers' Conference sat in judgment on these matters
or formed an opinion on the merits, but as I happen to have strong
opinions on the merits, I wonder if you would allow me to give
some expression to them here.
Now start with Australia. I don't thing logically that's
the right order but tonight let's start with Australia. We have
the strongest views on this matter, Wde are committed in our public
views and we are committed by a thousand fighting men and a number
of Air Force people in South Vietnam. Now why are we committed?
The answer is one that deserves a little thought.
Unless you are completely theoretical, unless you become
bemused by academic considerations, you must understand that in the
long run the future of freedom depends on defending freedom where
it's attacked. And in South-East Asia we have this position.
We had all the troubles about Vietnam, North Vietnam, South Vietnam,
we had a borderline drawn, we had a demilitarised zone a little on
each side of it, we had undertakings that nobody would cross that
frontier in order to attack on the other wide, and before we were
very much older, the Government of North Vietnam which if I may
say so I think is not unrelated to the Government of k~ king,
found It desirable to incite in South Vietnam the activities of
what we call the Viet Cong rebels armed from the north, not
armed by themselves because they have no resources from which to
arm themselves, but armed from the north, supplied from the north,,
And they began to conduct with all the advantages of a guerrilla
outfit, to attack South Vietnam and the government of South
Vietnam, and, of course, at this time with the monsoons blowing
from north-east and from the north-west, they are able to pursue
their attacks under cover of the cloud and the rain and with all
the elements of surprise.
Now it's perfectly clear to me, and I hope it is to you,
that if this were allowed to go on uninterrupted, the effect would
be that South\ Vietnam would become a communist country just as
North Vietnam is, and if it did, then what would become of Thailand?
What would happen in Laos? What would happen on the flanks of
Malaysia to which not only Australia is committed by her arms but
Great Britain in a very large measure? What would become of these
c2ountries? Theso are practical consideration;;. And because we
realise that the abandonment of South Vietnam in that sense, and
because the Americans realise that the abandonment of South Vietnam
in that sense would mean that the communist tide would sweep right
down to the Timor Sea, we thought we ware not without interest in
it. It's not funny to have a country, a great country as
Peter Carrington has described it, a country with great energy
and great achievement and great hope and a great sense of
independent freedom it's not funny to have it exposed over a
few miles of water to a victorious, onward movement of the
communists, These are the simple facts and the Americans looked
at in the same way. So, you know, I ge~ a little worried about
the misunderstandings that exist between this country and the
United States of America.
There are misunderstandings. There's a bit of a
disposition here to criticise the United States of America. There
always has been in smaller countries a disposition to criticise
great countries. Loet me remind you as I have reminded the
0 a0&amp; 0 a0 0/ 1+ 
Congress of the United States and the present President's allies
in the White House that in the nineteenth century which we look
back uponapart from one or two incidents, as a century of
industrial progress and peace and happiness, Great Britain wa$
the great power of the world. How many friends did she have?
How deeply was she loved on the continent of Europe? You've
only to put your mind back to realise that great power which
involves great responsibility has never in our lifetime or our
recorded history involved great popularity.
There's so much nonsense talked about popularity. In
the long run people don't vote for popularity, they vote for
quality and strength and purpose, and in the whole of the nineteenth
century, Great Britain was in that position, and the remarkable
thing in this century is that after the first fifteen or sixteen
years of it, the United States has found itself the greatest
physical power in the world, and I am happy to say has shown a
great willingness to accept the responsibilities ol~ that power.
Let nobody speak cheaply about them. Everybody here
knows my view I am as British as a man could be. Nothing that
I say detracts one whit from my feeling about this country and
its people and its history and its destiny. But don't let us
overlook the fact that in this century the United States, having
come to immense power, having enormous resources, might have been
tempted to say, " Very well, we can live in our own country. We
are st rong we have our resources. Why should we worry about
other people?" 1
And the glorious truth has been that they have not taken
that view. The glorious truth is that, just as Great Britain
did in the nineteenth century, so in ths century they have
accepted the responsibilities of power, and we do ourselves no
good if we fail to realise that profound truth, indeed that most
encouraging truth, most encouraging for all of us.
Now in South Vietnam anyone could say in a cynical
way " Of course Australia would want to take a hand in South
Vietnam because South Vietnam is on the outer perimeter of
Australian defence." 1 I accept that comment. But why are the
Americans there? Now this is a question that all these university
lecturers ought to ask themselves. Why are the Americans there?
I put this question in rather a rhetorical fashion at
a meeting in the Sydney Town Hall. You know what we politicians
are like, we like to put out a rhetorical question, saying to
ourselves, " I hope no-one answers that". I said, " Why are the
Americans there?" and there was, as usual a character up in the
gallery who said, " For profit" and I had to point out that it was
a strange and new definition of profit to be in a country that
cost you millions and from which you got nothing. I couldn't allow
it to be resolved on a commercial basis.
Whiy are they there? Do you know that this is one of
the wonderful things about our time that this country whose
friendship with Great Britain whose friendship with the rest of
us is vital to the future of the world, this country is in South
Vietnam not because South Vietnam as South Vietnam means much to
it but because it believes, as I believe, that freedom, liberty,
call it what you like, is neither divisible nor expendable, but
wherever it's attacked there is the frontier and you either
defend it on that frontier or you engage in the worst kind of
appeasement. Appeasement from weakness was understandable, * a 0 0 1 
appeasement from strength is unpardonable**
It's not so many years ago that the best kind of
American opinion was: Never put troops onto the Asian mainland.
Strategically it's wrong. Tactically it would be disastrous.
But they put them there and they're putting more there and
then having put their troops in and we having agreed that we
would put troops of ours in, somebody pops up at the Prime
Miites Conference and says: " I appeal to the Prime Minister
of Australia to withdraw his battalions"* In other words, " I
invite him to perform the most shameful act in Australian history.,"
And, " I think we all ought to invite the United States not to
bomb north of the border."
Not to bomb? To concede to the enemy all the rights
of uninhibited supply down the route which keeps putting in
material, trained men, and all the time to think: " You stop
doing that and you Australians walk out on them" and this will
be a contribution to pea cet
Look, gentlemen, we're at war. Don't let's make any
mistake about it Welve got into the habit now of using that
strange vocabulary you're not at war until something else
has happened -but there's a war going on in South Vietnam.
Night after night under cover of the clouds and the rain, the
Viet Cong are coming in blasting villages and cutting the
throats of innocent citizens, and the forces opposed to them
are counter-attacking them. If this isn't war what is it?
But if it is a war, then who are we to say to the
United States, the most formidable factor in the defence of
South Vietnam, who are we to say to them: " You are not to
attack the enemy's lines of communication, you are to allow him
to have it all for free, and you must remain on a rather doubtful,
difficult defensive". e
Gentlemen, these problems which, as I say, we didn't
discuss ontthoirmerits in the Prime Ministers' Conference, are
the greatest problems you and I have had to think about, whether
we've thought about them or not in the last four or five years.
This is a tremendous issue.
If the United States of America paid attention to the
theoretical people and said; " Yes, you've persuaded us. W'e'll
leave," and if we said: " All right, we'll leave too" and we
leave South Vietnam to its own resources, what do you suppose
will happen? I had a correspondence in Australia with some extraoprdinarily
learned gentlemen who were bishops and they wrote letters
to me about this matter and I wrote a couple back, and th&amp;~ y
didn't seem to me to understand the truth of the issue at alL-.
You can't solve this by sitting back and saying: " We all hope
for peace," because that's what the communists are always saying.
There hasn't been a peace rally in my own country for years that
has not been organised by the communists, and when they establish
a set of cut-throats in groups running into many thousands in
South Vietnam and they are called the Viet Cong by us, it turns
out that by the communists they are known as the National
Liberation Front. But this is the technique.
If we succumb to that and keep out and if we all keep
out including the United States, South Vietnam will be in the
hanas of North Vietnam before we are very much older. And if
e o e e e e / 6 
6-
it is, theni what the bishops were saying to me about free elections
will prove to be the sorry nonsense that it was. You can't have
a free election in North Vietnam. It's a communist state.
Any of you ever hear of a free election in a communist state?
OfP course not. How can you have a free election when you're
being bemused and battered all the time by guerrillas, by rioters,
by people who come in under cover of the rain and the cloud ' and
murder your citizens. I've been through a few noisy election
campaigns in Australia, but never through one conducted on that
principle. We must get out of this habit of thinking that because
you, and therefore we, are on one side of the Atlantic and the
Americans are on the other, that there is some difference,
Fundamentally there can't be any difference, Fundamentally, the
future of the world for the next ten years will depend on how
far we understand them and they understand us, how far we are on
the same lines of communication, how far we share their information,
how far we share their plans and their objectives, because
unless we do, then we'll reach a state of affairs in which too
many people here in Great Britain will think it is not their
business the Americans are in that and some people in
Australia not too many while I'm alive, will be saying that we
should Jaave it to the Americans.
You can't leave the peace of the world to the greatest
power in the world unless you are prepared to abandon your own
share of responsibility. We're all in this together, It is
just because to me, venerable as I am, but still in a sense, as
you might say, a modern Prime Minister, it's just because to me
the greatest events in the last twenty years in world history have
been the events associated with the outlook of the United States
of America, with the willingness of their people to come in and do
what they can, with the willingness of their Presidents one after
the other to come in and give leadership and accept responsibility.
This is a tremendous event in modern history. All I can say is
that I hope without becoming blind people, without abandoning
our rights to criticise our rights to suggest, that we will always
do that. I do hope that we won't fall into the fatal error of
thinking that all this tremendous emergence of American
responsibility is merely some form of imperialism, I hope you
will always remember that this has nothing to do with imperialism,
This is counter-imperialism. I'm sick and tired of hearing these
words about imperialism and neo-colonialism. They rattle round
the room at any conference we have.
The fact is that the new imperialism will be resisted
and defeated and kept only if all of us on both sides of the
Atlantic, and on my side of the Pacific realise that, in the
words of William Pitt spoken a century and a half earlier about
different circumstances: " We are one people", and itts because
we are one people that what has been going on in South Vietnam
on the merits has had support not only of the United States but
of my own fair country. 



65/ 09;
FOR PRESS LP. M. N16
RANN OF KUTCH
IND IA-PKT TO s-IE AGREEMENT
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Commenting on the agreement reached between
India and Pakistan to a cease-fire in the itann of Kutch,
the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies said in London
yesterday " Every Prime Minister at the Prime Ministers'
Conference was anxious to see a settlement
in the xiann of Kutch. A great deal of work
was done by way of private discussion. de
are all delighted that the very active
intervention of the British Government should
have assisted a peaceful conclusion."
CANBERRA, 2nd July, 1965. 



No. 694
FOR PRESS 65/ 094
CABINET DISCUSSES DROUGHT
The Acting Prime Minister, Mr. McEwen, announced that
in the course of a meeting in Melbourne today the Cabinet had
further discussed aspects of the drought in Eastern Australia.
Proposals which have recently been received from the
Governments of New South Wales and Queensland for Commonwealth
assistance towards drought relief measures instituted by those
states were under study and. would be further considered by
Cabinet. As had already been announced the Commonwealth was closely
watching banking aspects, having regard to the needs of farmers
and graziers in drought areas. It was in touch with the
Reserve Bank about this.
The Reserve Bank had itself been conducting consultations
with the trading banks to ascertain the requirement and
availability of banking assistance being sought for drought
purposes. The Government was also examining taxation implications
for farmers and graziers of transactions in which they may be
involved as a result of the drought, such as the disposal of
stock and subsequent restocking.
The Treasurer had already clarified those taxation aspects
which arose from donations of fodder and cash towards drought
relief. CANBERRA. A. C. T.
7th July, 1965 48/ 65T 



FOR PRESS P .0/ j0196
OrL. RSAS VISIT BY MINISTER FOR ARMY
Statement by the hctini Prime Minister the Rt Hon JMf. McLen
The Minister for the Army, Dr. Forbes, today
leaves on an overseas visit to Malaysia and Vietnam, where
he will review the aonditions under which elements of the
Australian Forces are living and operating.
The Minister's itinerary has been specially
planned to enable him to see as many Australian soldiers in
South Vietnam, Malaya and Borneo as practicable.
Dr. Forbes will be away from Australia until
18th July and, during his absence the Minister for the
Navy, Mr. Chaney, will act as Minister for the Army.
CANBER , A
7th July, 1965. il~ 



FOR PRESS P. M. No, 1/ 1965
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE
Statement by the A ctting Prime Minister the Rt. 7on. J. IMcEwen
Mr. McEwen, the Acting Prime Minister, today
commented on reports in some newspapers related to Government
discussions yesterday concerning finance for drought-affected
landowners. i4r, i cEwen said that after the Cabinet meeting,
he had handed out a statement on this matter wlhich obviously
had been misinterpreted in some quarters. The Cabinet
had discussed the drought situation including the matter
of finance, in the light of circumstances that the Treasury
had been in close end frequent consultation writh the Reserve
Bank on this subject.
Mr. McEwen said that the Government and the
Treasury were appreciative of the understanding of the
problem by the Reserve Bank and of the attention which it
had been giving to it. There was an understanding of the
problem by the Reserve Bank satisfying to the Government.
CANBERi A
8th July, 1965. 



PRESS. RADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCE
GIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, AT PARLIAMENT HOUSE,
CANBERRA 13TH JUJLY, 196-1
PIME MINISTER : I think, gentlemen, I ought to begin by asking you
whether the procedures that I have adopted in the past are satisfactory
to you.
I noticed one complaint somewhere that I had fallen into
the bad habit, I gathered, of starting off by saying something for
myself instead of confining myself to answering questions. Well,
I am pretty sure you will agree that as there might be four or five
topics on which you would be interested today, it would be a great
mistake to have a question on one and then a question on another
so that the whole thing became completely confused. I don't want
to restrict your questions at all but I do think that it might be
more orderly if I said something about the first topic and then
heard your questions on it and then passed on to another it being
open to you, of course, all through, to raise questions that you,
have in your mind to which you think I might give a useful answer.
If that is agreeable, I think I would like to begin by
saying something about the position in Viet~ am and our presence
there and how it has come about. I wouldn't have thought there
was very much doubt about this benause this has been very freely
debated in Parliament over quite a time but perhaps I might help
by summing it up a little,
Some gentlemen who have communicated with me recently seem
to think that I am doing something all by myself that I am involving
Australia in war, that I am helping to escalate that war into
something bigger. Strange Christian sentiments indeed,
Well, of course, I can't plead guilty to that because as
all of those of you who follow these matters know perfectly well7
our attitude towards Viet Nam, the placing of Australian forces in
Viet Nam was not just the decision of one man, it was a Cabinet
decision, announced by me publicly in Parliament on April 29; th and
thereafter debated in the Parliament the better part of two
s ittings. So that the idea that this is a sort of one-man frolic
is absurd. On top of that I think I ought to take the opportunity of
saying that so far as the Government parties are concerned -' both
Government parties every member of both porties entirely supports
the action of the Government in this matter, so that it is rather
foolish to talk about it as a sort of one-man decision,
I am not avoiding my own responsibility the decision of
the Government is entirely in line with my own view and I have never
had any reason to make any apology for it or any qualificatibn or
put any qualification upon it. Not only did we make this decision
and announce it in the Parliament but the President of the Security
Council was informed and the SEATO Council was officially informed by
my colleague. It is perhaps as well to recall that Australian defence is
not a solitary defence, It is a defence which is involved with
certain international treaties under which we have rights and under
which we have obligations. I don't need to mention them to
gentlemen like you who are familiar with them the South East / 2 
2
Asian Treaty, the ANZUS Pact, our uni-lateral obligation to Malaysia,
publicly stated and debated in this Parliament and in the Press
all of these things are matters which involve us the defence of
New Guinea and Papua which we have accepted as part of the defence
of the mainland of Australia.
We have, as a matter of fact, a considerable variety of
obligations but we are also, I am happy to say, in possession of
a considerable variety of rights. In other words, there is
mutuality about all these agreements and that has much to say to
the safety of our own country.
South Viet Nain happens to be one of the protocol states
under the SEATO Treaty and that means that the obligations under
the SEATO Treaty w~' hich include military obligations, extend to
that country, buz on one condition, of course, and that is that the
government of the country concerned asks us to come in. We don't
go in against the will of the government of South Viet Nain and vie
haven't done so. I~ n the same way, the United States of America
hasn't gone in against the will of the Government of South Viet
Nain but is there by invitation. All this is an expression in
action of the SEATO obligations.
Now I find that there are some people who say, why
should Australia be in South Viet Nam?" 1 It would be quite proper
I think to answer that by saying, " Well, why is the United States
in South Viet Nain?" Her obligations are no greater than ours.
In one sense, her interests may be thought to be somewhat less
immediate than ours, But I notice that those who query Australia's
presence have not been so vocal in querying the presence of the
United States. -ell, why is the United States there? Wvhy are we there?
Obviously to resist armed aggression and subversion the very
thing that SEATO is directed to and the very thing which is
contemplated by the Charter of the United Nations that any
country finding itself under attack is quite entihed to defend
itself and equally entitled to ask its friends to come to its
assistance. And therefore everything that has been done here is
in complete accord not only with the South East Asian Treat' but
also with the Charter of the United Nations.
Now just let me pursue that a little further. Suppose
the United States of America, now building up its forces in South
Viet Nain so that they total, as at present, something of the
order of 60,000 suppose the United States said, " All right, we
will withdraw." This would give great pleasure to the pacifists.
No great pleasure to us in Australia if we value our own state
of security. Suppose they withdrew. Does anybody with his five wits
doubt that before very long Chinese communism., acting through North
Vietnamese communism, would sweep down through South Viet Namn,
would put itself in an early position to control Thailand, to
render the position of Malaya almost intolerable, putting Malaya
between two fires and would therefore in the long run and not
so very long run at that we would find ourselves with aggressive
communism almost on our shores, just across the water.
And it is because of these elementary considerations of
national safety that the SEATO Council when it met and my
colleague, Mr. Hasluck, was there on May 5th of this year
reaffirmed ( I will quote their words) that " defeat of communist
campaign is essential not only to the security of South Viet Nam
but to that of South East Asia as a whole." That is what the
* e ./ 3 
-3
SEATO Council had to say and it is very well to keep it in mind.
We are not pursuing some strange warmongering eccentric
activity of ouz. c. urn, We are grown-up people. We have an imnlanse
respcns ' ibility to zhis country and the best way of discharging that
responsibility is to see that with our friends we stand across the
path of aggressive communism.
It is very interesting to notice that this is a view not
peculiar to us. The Foreign Secretary in the present British
Governzment, Mr. Michael Stewart, made a notable speech about this
in the House of Commons at the beginning of April. I wonder if
I might try your patience by quoting just two paragraphs from it.
He observed that after the signing of the Geneva Agreement
in 195W, both parts of Viet Nam both parts, North and South
continued to endeavour to put themselves in order and to make
economic and social progress, He continued and now I use his
words " These possibilities remained open until in 1959
there was a call by the Government of North Viet Nam for an
intensification of the Viet Cong activities in the South and
for full-scale guerrilla warfare against the Government of
South Viet Nam. Not only did the Northern Government call
for that; they then proceeded to help it with more weapons
and military advice, as was made clear by the majority
report of the International Control Commission in 1962.
Faced with that situation, South Viet Nam appealed
to the United States for help, and the United States responded,
but it is important to notice that in 1959, when this pressure
from the North began, and even as late as 1961l, two yeais later,
there were still only 700 members of the United States armed
forces in South Viet Nam. It cannot be claimed that the
action taken by the North was the result of a considerable
United States military presence in the South. The action from
the North preceded the arrival of the United States forces
in any considerable degree in the South."
No9w , it won't be irrelevant for me to add to that that
in 199 the economy of South Viet Nam was beginning to flourish
and the country was developing, at that time, a considerable
stability. I would like to point out also that it is widely
agreed that the Viet Cong th,, s replaced its serious losses because
itI-has hosd t'iam by recruitment from the Nort,% h. Up to thie end
of 1964 thii--t is only the end of last year it was estimated
that 40,000 infiltrators had come down from the North; in 1964
alone, 10,000 came in.
I reported to Parliament on April 29th that there had
occurred the infiltration of a battalion of the North Vietnamese
regular army. Wdell, I needn't go on. That's continuing.
And if we have those facts in mind, here is something........
I am not allowed to call it a war I gather, because somebody
thinks that there is a war only il~ there is a declaration of war.
Strange, remote, academic notion that is, in the modern world.
All I know is that there is fighting going on and the people
involved in it might very well be mistaken enough to think they
w. re engaged in operations of war; as of course they are.
The communists themselves from Hanoi and from Peking
describe this, themselves, as a war of liberation. a 00 / 1 
But we are not allowed to call it a war, which is just
too bad. Well, it is a war of liberation from their point of vievi.
This is the grandiloquent name they give to a series of military
operations which are obviously designed to overthrow the Government
of South Viet Nam, to convert South Viet Nam into a communist
state and to extend the boundaries of communist influence so many
miles, so many iriles, hundreds of miles nearer to us.
Well, I am not going to engage in word-spinning arguments
about phrases that can be used. I think it is quite foolish at a
time like this for people to think that they can solve this great
problem by what I now believe is called an exercise in semantics,
because the facts are not that way.
There is a war going on, and United States forces are
engaged in operations of war defensive war against an
aggressor. And Australian forces are engaged in operations of
war defensive war against aggression, side by side with the
forces of South Viet Nam.
Under those circumstances, our position is just as the
position of the United States is that until the aggressor is
really prepared to negotiate for an effective peace which will
leave South Viet Nam in command of its own affairs, then the
fighting will need to continue.
We are all very conscious of the risks of this business.
There are risks always in these matters. But the very notion that
the contribution to peace is to abandon South Viet Nam and walk
out on them is, I think so fantastic that 95 per cent, of the
people of Australia would find it entirely unacceptable.
Now, we had a look at this matter at the Commonwealth
Conference. There are various views expressed in a Commonwealth
Conference. There are now twenty-one of us I was almost going
to say with twenty-one different views but at least, let us say,
a wide diversity of opinion. And let's face up to it there are
some of the new Commonwealth countries who are opposel to American
action and therefore opposed to what we are doing who lean in the
direction of China. I won't mention their names7 but it is quite
clear that some of them do.
And the Prime Minister of Great Britain said: " Well,
don't let us thrash out our various views pro and con, because we
wil. n~~ e There will be complete opposition between A
and B and between C and D. Could we make an effort to break this
jam by sending a mission from the Commonwealth to Hanoi, to Peking,
to Moscow, to Washington to see whether there is some basis on
which a conference, a peace conference, could be heldT That is
all to discover whether there is some basis on which a conference
may be held." And in the long run, with I think one dissentient, this
was agreed to and the members of the mission were appointed,
It was quite extraordinary to me that one representative
objected to Mr, Wilson being the Chairman of the mission. Whby?
Because Great Britain had and has publicly expressed her support
of what the Americans are doing. Therefore we were told " You,
Great Britain, are committed" but the very remark was maae by a
gentleman who was equally committed by having made a joint
communique with Chou En-Lai upholding China and denouncing
America, and having been brought up in the old school, I still
like words to mean the same kind of thing where they are used. 00 
Of course most people there are committed in the sense
that they had views pro or con. One or two of us were committed
because we had committed forces, but that didn't make our
commitment any clearer. It made it more practical if you like,
but it still remained true that we had taken our stand and we
knew what side we were on, and the mission was appointed,
Well, you know what has happened. It is just as well
to remind some of these people in Australia there are very few
of them of course who think that I stand in the way. I r all
important stand in the way of any peaceful settlement. it is
very interesting to remind them and perhaps to remind the public
that there has been a score of attempts to produce some kind of
settlement, settlement consistent with the freedom of South Viet
Nam, Let us never lose sight of that.
It has been before the United Nations. They sent their
Secretary-General, or they said to him that he might consider
visiting Peking and Hanoi and he got the dusty answer which
everybody else has had ever since: United U~ ations intervention
in the affairs of Indo-China can't be tolerated.
This is the communist reply. " This firm stand of ours"
they went on, " is unshakeable and admits of no exception." 1 Well
then, the co-Chairman of the Geneva Conference tried something.
The seventeen non-aligned nations passed resolutions and sent
them forward and got the same rejection. President Johnson has,
of course, done everything I think that a man could$ in all his
statements, to encourage peace, but the only answer to him was
that it was a swindle, ( These genteel words are used quite
freely a swindle.) The British Government sent my old friend,
Mr. Patrick Gordon Walker, around. He couldn't get through the
door. " Nothing to do with you," they said, The President of
India, he suffered a similar fate. The Americans, not long ago,
tried a temporary suspension of bombing north of the line. This
had no effect whatever. And in the case of the Commonwealth
mission, well, as I don't need to tell you, the answer has been
in the rudest possible terms " Nothing doing. V1e will not
confer. We are the people," they say, " who will not under any
circumstances arrive at any peaceful negotiation unless all-those
people who are engaged in defending South Viet Nam get out.!.
In other words, unless there is surrender, there will be
no negotiation. Strange, strange, bedlamite sort of idea I. t is,
but that is the one that they have put forward.
I remember that at the conference the Prime Ministers'
Conference one of the Prime Ministers, heavily influenced, by
the Chinese, I regret to say objected to the mission because
he said it would be putting China in the dock. I ventured to ask
him why China, if China was a peace-loving country, should feel
put in the dock by being asked to negotiate for peace, That
was a littJe difficult that question, but he still persisted that
this was putting China in the dock, and of course in that sense,
he was right, because although this mission hasn'Z achievedw
anything positive because it hasn't been received, it is perfectly
true that it has made it clear to the world as to where the*'
objection to peac~ e exists and who are the people who are responsible
for carrying on this dreadful operation of war in Viet Nam.
Now I don't know whether there is anything more that I
need to say on that matter in genoral. I should tell you that
the Department of External Affairs has put together a compendium,
suitably indexed, containing the documents relating to Viet Nam
9 a 6 
the first half of this year and I am told that there are
sufficient copies available for each of you to take one away
at the end of the conference. They contain verbatim extracts
from all the statements and documents and reports that are relevant
to this matter. well
QUESTION Can you tell us, Sir, if there is any chance of the
stalemate in Viet Nam ending in the foreseeable future?
P. M. Well, it would take a wiser man than I am to answer that
question, you realise, with any dogmatism, because I had the
great advantage of quite long discussion on this matter with
General Maxwell Taylor in New York and, of course, in London and
elsewhere. The monsoon season is on in Viet Nam and they have a
north-east monsoon and a north-west monsoon and the clouds come
over and the rain comes down and this is ideal hunting time for
guerrillas, Therefore it is to be expected that the Viet Cong
would in this period have some success from time to time. And
they have had some successes. They have also had some failures.
The casualties each day are quite formidable,
But there is a strong feeling of confidence that by the
end of the monsoon season, the progress of the Viet Cong will have
been somewhat disappointing from their point of view and that
this might have its psychological effect on Hanoi.
It is elementary horse sense, I suppose, that as long
as the other fellow thinks he is winning, he is not going to talk
settlement. Well, whether he will still be thinking he is winning
at the end of the monsoon season in the next two or three months,
I dontt know, but I saw no symptom whatever of any doubt, any
weakening of resolution on the part of the United States,
They are increasing the numbers of their forces, t hey
are devoting a tremendous lot of energy to this matter because
they know, as I think most sensible people would agree, that you
dre not going to get a settlement on this matter while you are
being on the face of it pushed around. You will get a
settlement when the other man begins to think that there is~ no
future in it, and therefore we have to make up our minds that we
will go through a very difficult period.
Things may be worse before they are better in fact
I think the President said something to that effect in the last
day or two. But this is no reason for any pessimism; this is
one of the inevitable circumstances of an operation of war
you will notice I didn't say " a war" an operation of war,
conducted under these circumstances of weather and, of course,
with all the advantage that guerrilla forces have of secrecy,
choosing their own time to strike and of sheer terrorism against
the civilian population.
These are trcmendous advantages, but in the long run,
they won't be good enough. You can put me down among the
optimists on this matter,
Q, Mr. Prime Minister, on the political side, some observers
say that some kind of nationalist Viet Nam unified under a
communist r6gime will be preferable to a South East Asia in
flames. Could your Government contemplate a Titoist-type
nationalist communist government at South Viet Nam ostensibly
free of Chinese domination? 
7-
P. M. I would contemplate a communist regime in South
Viet Nam with the utmost horror,
Q. Do you think it can be avoided, Sir?
P. M. I do. But only if we stand firm. Only if we refuse
to allow our morale to be whittled away by a lot of
philosophic doubters,
Q0 Sir Robert, there have been reports from Viet Nam
showing that the boots and clothing of members of the First
Battalion have been literally falling apart. Does this
suggest that our troops have been let down by bad planning
and that they were sent to Viet Nam before the Army was ready
to put them into the field properly equipped?
P. m. I have no reason to suppose they weren't sent in a
properly trained and equipped fashion. I read what you have
referred to and no doubt the Minister for the Army, who is
reported to have been there on the spot, will be back and
taking an active interest in these matters,
Q, Were you surprised, Sir, to read these reports?
P. M. Oh I can't say one way or the other about that,
Every time I find myself in the tropics under much more
comfortable circumstances I wonder how your clothing lasts
anyhow. But everything that can be done must be done, that's
quite obvious. There can be no beg pardons or excuses on
this matter. None.
Q, Sir Robert, you referred to the United States
increasing its forces in South Viet Nam. Was there any
suggestion in your discussions with President Johnson that
we might be asked to increase........
P. M. No, none. None either there or anywhere else, I
may tell you it is very well understood that we are in a
rather special position. We have limited resouroes. We
have our obligations that we are performing in Malaysia,
We have forces in Viet Nain. We have our particular obligations
in relation to Papua and New Guinea and, of course,
our own defence. I found no lack of understanding. In
fact, on the whole, there was great appreciation of the fact
that we had rather stretched our resources to do what we did.
Q. Sir, were you given any indication in Washington
of how far the United States might go in terins of commitment
of forces in South Viet Namn?
P. M. Oh no. All I know is that they are increasing. But
you mean to say did they tell me, " Well, we will build' them
up to X thousand"?
Q. Yes, Sir.
P. M. Oh no. They are not so silly as that. That's a
piece of information of interest only to the enemy. They
are not in the habit of doing that.
Q, Apart from commitment of troops to Viet Namn, did
you get the impression that the US administration would
welcome when we could afford to do it an expansion, a
general expansion of our defence base? 3. / 8 
-8
P. M. It was never raised. They are very familiar with the
very sharp expansion that we are now engaging in. I found
them very clearly understanding of that problem.
Q. Sir Robert, have you been informed of the Philippines'
decision which amounts virtually to not sending 2,000 troops
to Viet Nam?
P. M. Well I haven't been informed of this but at the moment
I am not frIghtfully well informed. I have been in bed most
of the time since I got back home.
Q9 Sir Robert, do you think the Malaysian situation and
the Viet Nam horror are part of the same problem?
P. M. All these things, I think, fall into the same pattern.
As I said earlier, if South Viet Nam went and the communlats
came in, well, anybody can imagine the pressures that would
arise, the internal subversions that would be promoted in
Thailand and in Malaya proper, and that would mean that Malaya
proper would find herself once more in the same sort of
trouble as before with the guerrillas in the north and at the
same time defending herself against confrontation on the
Indonesian side. Therefore this is of tremendous importance
to Malaysia and the position and defence of Malaysia,
Q. Sir, if you think there is no doubt about Australia
being at war in Viet Nam, how would you define the Australian
position vis-a-vis Indonesia and Malaysian Borneo?
P. M. In exactly the same way. There are operations of war
going on along the frontier, You know, don't fall into the
error that some of these gentlemen have fallen into of thinking
that we are engaging in a lot of legal technicalities. We
are not. I Make a great distinction. There are operations
of war because fighting is going on and fighting is an
operation of war. What is the use of arguing a lot of stuffwho
has declared war on whom. Some even had the impertinence
to suggest that this has been a frolic of my own. Everything
that we've done has been done by the Government of this
country and with the entire support of all the members of the
political parties who stand behind the Government. I am not
arguing about words, They don't interest me for this
purpose.
Q. Relating to that, Sir, do you think it would clarify
the situation as far as other countries perhaps are concerned
if war were to be declated?
Pam. For us to declare war? For America to declare war?
For North Viet Nam to declare war? It would be an interesting
exercise but purely academic. They would go on fighting in
the same way and in the same places.
Q. Sir, you have often said that the real aggressive
imperialists today are the major communist powers.
P. M, That's right,
Q. Do you think that while this remains true of China,
that the Soviet Union may be moving away from a policy of
aggr~ essive expansionp 0 00 
9-
P. M. I like to think it is. Yes I rather like to think it
is. I think there are material dilferences today between the
Soviet Union approach and the communist Chinese approach,
and I think that the events of the last few years have rather
supported that idea, I think that it is reasonable to hope
one can't be dogmatic but it is reasonable to hope that
peaceful co-existence will become more and more real from the
Soviet Union outwards but of course as I don't need to
tell you, the communist Chinese have an entirely different
view, They regard the Soviet Union as a lot of miserable
revisionists. They are pure Marx-Engels-and-let-the-battlego-
on,
Q. Sir, a few months ago in this room you told us of a
consultation you had in London aimed at getting some order of
priority on strategic situations in our part of the world.
Can you say whether you have made any advance in implementing.....
P. M. I have had discussions on them but they are not of a
kind that I could announce.
Q. What you were saying earlier, Sir Robert, about the
problems of being committed in several areas, do you mean to
say we couldn't send any more troops to Viet Nam?
P. M. I didn't say anything of the kind. I simply said that
the question had not arisen.
Q. Could we send more troops to Viet Nam?
P. M. That's a purely hypothetical question, I am an old
man, as I have been reminded in the last two or three days,
much too old to sit down here and prophesy about the future,
Q. Sir Robert, I will carry on that question. How far
do we go in the situation of Viet Nam? America is a very
very big country, we are a very small country.
P. M. That's right,
Q. We've got to follow the line, but where does the line
draw? Where does it stop? How far do we go?
P. M. Well, we start off by trying to win.
Q* Granted. Where do we go from there?
P. M. Well, let's win first.
Q-Sir Robert, can you comment on a report that Mr, Wilson
has asked for a British bomber base to be set up in Darwin?
P. M. I can't comment on that at all.
QO Did you have any conversation with Mr. Wilson on
strategic bases in Australia in this regard?
P. M. I had some discussions on defence, on common problems
of defence in London but they were private.
Q. In those talks, can you say, Sir, whether the Viet Nam
and the Malaysian positions were regarded as a common problem
in England? 000 00/ 1 0 
10
P. M. I must say that I think that the British Gover'nment,
and indeed I think all parties in Great Britain, are very
conscious of the importance of South East Asia. I think that
this occupies an increasing place in their minds andift their
planning. I have no complaints about that at all,
Q, Do you think the Americans appreciate this, Sir?
P. M. Oh yes very much.
Q. Sir, at Mascot airport on Sunday night you said that
your conversations with the American Presideni coming and
going were of immense value to Australia.
Pam. gIell I hope so.
Q. Can you enlarge on that at all or particularise?
P. M. No, except on the old-fashioned view that our safety
out here, our future the question as to whether we will
have free Press conferences in twenty years' time largely
depends upon how far the United States of America is prepared
to continue to accept responsibility in this part of the
world. I think this is of vast importance. That doesn't mean
that we have to go and bow three times and s~ y " Yas, of
course you're right" but it does mean tLat for us to be on
terms which enable us to talk frankly and in a friendly way
and in a receivable way is of tremendous importance.
Q. This is not new, Sir.
P. M. I know it isn't
Q. You spoke as though it were something special,
P. M. Oh no, I think it is getting better, that's all,
Q. Sir Robert, judging from Press reports that we have
heard from overseas, there seems to be an increasing confidence
amongst the Commonwealth Prime Ministers in the situation in
Malaysia. Could you elaborate on this?
P. M. I think cm the whole the Malaysian section of the
discussion worked out pretty well. You must get rid of the
idea that we are now a monolithic structure in the Commonwealth.
We are not. We exist to debate our disagreements,
primarily, and therefore when one gets a decent amount of
agreement on something that is a good day, and there was a
splendid amount of agreement on Malaysia the right of Malaysia
to defend itself and the right of Malaysia to enjoy our,
support, not necessarily military support which we give: but
support diplomatic, moral, whatever it may be. Yes, I
thought that portion of the discussions came out very woll.
Q. That's judging from the outcome of the previous
conference?
P. M. Yes that's right. I thought this, on the whole, was
rather betier.
Q. Sir Robert, is Australia using its offices to try and
bring the fighting factions within Malaysia together Mr.
Lee Kuan Yew and the Tunku 0 00 0/ 1 1 
11
F~ M. Oh, look we have our diplomatic representatives i14
Kuala Lumpur and in Singapore. They both have the closes
access to the people concerned. I think these differences,
you know, can easily be exaggerated myself. Anyhow it i6
in our interests and in everybody else's interests to see:
them disappear and that is our constant desire.
Q. In your discussions in Britain, Sir, did you get
any indication as to whether Australia as a traditional
and dominant outlet for British capital investment has
any special status under Mr. Wilson's programme to curb
capital outflow?
P. M. I didn't myself engage in discussions on their
financial policy. We just had no time in the complex of
other matters.
Q. Sir, at the beginning you said, " Some gentlemen
have communicated with me recently who seemed to think
that I was the one who was involving Australia in war in
South Viet Nam." Could you enlighten us on that, whether
you have had a large mail bag on this subject?
P. M. No. One letter signed by sixteen people, Kept
me awake all night*
Q9 This is since your correspondence with the bishops?
P. M. Oh yes. But even that consisted of As I said,
my epistle to the bishops made me feel quite like the New'
Testament except that the A1postle didn't ever get a reply
and I did.
Q. You've been quoted here as saying in London at the
last Conference that certain people seem to be under the
influence of communist China? Could you elaborate on
that?
P. m. I think there are distinct symptoms in East Africa,
in particular, of Chinese communist penetration.
QO Does this mean that there is general concern within
the Commonwealth?
Pam* Oh, I wouldntt say it gave rise to general concern.
My views on that problem are not necessarily those of a
majority. I wouldn't know.
Q. Are your views that this will hurt the Commonwealth?
P. M. Assuming that all these countries remain within the
Commonwealth, it would hurt the Commonwealth. Yes,
Q. Do you see a future for the Commonwealth, Sir?
P. M, Well I wish I knew. Look, the whole point about the
Commonwealth is that now there are twenty-one. Twenty-one
Prime Ministers arrive. That means that we meet in a room
at Marlborough House and there are 100 people there. There
is a new fashion that has arisen in the new Commonwealth
andyou boys will be delighted to hear this to engage public
relations officers so that the speech made in private is in
the press before it is delivered sometimes. It's a public
relations exercise very largely, and all this I think is very
puzzling. .0*/ 12 
12
P. M~ tThere are twenty-one Prime Ministers today what,
in a year's time twenty-five; something like that, and
everybody wants io make a speech, except me, and that moans
that if they all have a go at everything, and there are
set speeches made and duly published, the conference will
last a month and nobody will be able to afford the time
to attend it. There's a great problem here in these
growing numbers as to how far we can devise somie
machinery by which you shorten discussions or perhaps work
from committees or groups. I don't know. Some of us gave
a little thought to it in London but without any finality.
There is no doubt about it. It has completely altered the
character of the meeting because now it is a matter of
expressing views, of seeking to get support for some
pressure on somebody else. There is a growing disposition
to want to interfere with or sit in judgment on the
affairs of other individual countries. This is not the
old Commonwealth.
Q, Does this suggest, Sir, that your support of a
Commonwealth Secretariat is waning?
P. M. My support of a Commonwealth Secretariat hasn't
waned. It has always been pretty clearly defined.
That is to say that the Secretariat ought to act as a
Secretariat. It ought to act as a means of facilitating
the exchange of knowledge, of getting papers prepated
so that when people meet they will know what the other
man has in his mind and te prepared to discuss it
intelligently. That's what a Secretariat is for.
There are some who would like to see a Secretariat
which in effect achieved executive action, which could work
out economic plans and discuss the position of this
country or that, what assistance it ought to have and
from whom. And you know, when it gets to that, I think
that will be the end of the penny section. In fact the
penny section is rather a ludicrous reference because as
a rule it is the million pounds section. It depends on
how this works out. The Secretary-General appointed is
well aware of this. I have great hopes that he will
restrain it from too much empire-building, but if it
became too formidable and too much disposed to go in on
a variety of problems, like the Secretariat of the United
Nations which has to I think that there would be great
internal strains in the Commonwealth, considerable
resistances which might not be favourable to its existence.
Q. Sir Robert, do you think that the Secretariat could
usurp the moral leadership role the British Government now
exerts?
P. M. Well if it tried to, that would be the end either
of the Secretariat or of the Commonweaith, the new
Commonwealth.
Q. What steps are being taken to stop this, Sir? How
far did it go in the conference?
P. M. Oh, we had a discussion on this in the conference
itself when we were settling the terms and conditions of
the appointment. 99./ 1o3 
13
Q9 Any time period for the Secretariat? A testing
period, a trial period set for it?
P. M. Well, the first appointment was made for five years
for the Secretary-General. But we discussed this and I
aired my views on the matter and Mr. Pearson of Canada took
the same view and this was finally the received idea in the
ccnfarence that it must have a modest beginning, it must
not try to extend its jurisdiction in a hurry and that its
usefulness will largely depend on how it conducts itself in
the first year or two. But it is a highly experimental thing.
Q. Sir, as a result of your talks with President Johnson,
is there likely to be a greater Budget appropriation for
defence this year than there might otherwise have been?
P. M. Now! Harold.. ( To Mr. Holt) He tells me the book
is closed.
Q. Sir, did you return from London with the name of our
next Governor-General?
P. M. I have nothing to say about that yet. I haventt met
my Cabinet.
Q. Can we expect an imminent announcement, Sir?
P. M. I don't know.
Q. Sir, can you give us your views on the situation of
the United Nations, the contribution towards the deficit
that has been made by some nations about which I believe you
said you reserved your own decision?
P. M. Yes, well the deficit in the United Nations of course
arises from the fact that some of the countries like the
Soviet Union and France and so on, have declinel to pay for
these peace-keeping operations. It went to the Permament
Court. It was decided that they were liable to pay and. there
the question arose as to whether Article 19 ought to be'
enforced. No pay no vote. Good simple rule to which I
subscribed heartily.
Well, in the meantime, they are not paying and the
Assembly has been held up because they don't want to become
involved in this imbroglio. Thle British Government announced
that it would find ten million dollars as a voluntary.
contribution, and Canada offered a voluntary contribution.
I said that we had never been backward in the past in making
voluntary contributions but I did want to discuss with my
colleagues one matter, If the people who are not in
default make up the lag for those who are this year, is
this going to be the rule next year? Does this mean that
you abandon the enforcement of Article 19? Will it be
conducive to getting them to pay up under Article 19 if
they find that other people will pay instead? And I would
like to think about that with my colleagues, not in any
miserable piking spirit because we dontt want to see the
United Nations go broke, but we do want to have some clarity
in our minds as to what it is we are doing. That's all.
QO Do you think the United Nations can survive? of0 0 0 ./ 11+ 
P. M, You know, you are developing a fascinating interest
in survival. This is the second question of that kind
you have put to me. I am largely devoted at present to
my own problem of survival.
Q. Talking of that Sir, there are a lot of rumours
around that you are thinking of going out at the end of
this year. Would you comment on that at all?
P. M. Well, any self-respecting man of my age must give
thought to his fuiture and to his duties and I am doing that.
I dontt know what the result will be, but no doubt following
my traditional practice, when I have arrived at a conclusion,
Ifll say it.
Q. Do you think you will arrive at that conclusion
within the next few months, Sir?
P. M. I haver.~ t a clue. Haven't a clue. I thought I
might run a little Gallup poll around here. There was a
Gallup poll wasn't there? I was fascinated to find that
per cent, of my opponents wanted me to retire. The
nicest compliment they've ever paid me.
Well any more, boys, any more?
Q. One question, Sir, if I may. Joan Sutherland. Do
you intend to see her during this
P. M. 1 Oh, look, I don't know. I' love to of course. I
got back two days late to see her opening in Melbourne which
I had been invited to attend. Oh no, I am a Joan Sutherland
fan, 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. _ 2/ 196
ECONOMIC CONSULTATIONS
Statement by the Pr mje Miniter_ the Rt HonSir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister and a group of senior Ministers
this afternoon had discussions with representatives of national
organisations representing industry and commerce. After the
meeting the Prime Minister said that such meetings, which had
been held regularly in recent years, did much to inform
Ministers of current economic trends and prospects. Todayts
meeting had been most valuable from that point of view and
would assist Ministers in their forthcoming Budget discussions.
Representatives who attended the meeting were
Mr. H. G. Ferrier, President, Associated
Chamber of Manufactures of Australia
Mr. F. G. May, President, Associated Chambers of
Commerce of Australia
Mr. A. F. Havard, President, National Farmers'
Union of Australia
Mr. T. 3. C. Walker, President, Australian 4oolgrowers'
and Graziers' Council
Mr. L. H. Heaslip, Vice-President, Australian
dool and Meat Producers' Federation
Dr. A. A. Dawson, Chief Executive Officer, Australian
Primary Producers' Union
Mr. H. McE. Scambler, Chairman, Australian Bankers'
Federation
Mr. V. T. Edwards President, Master Builders'
Federation of1 Australia
Mr. N. J. L,-wrance, Immediate Past President, Federal
Chamber of Automotive Industries
Mr. G. L. McCowan, President, Australian Council of
Retailers Tomorrow morning, Ministers will have separate
discussions on the economic situation with representatives of
the Export Development Council and representatives of the
Manufacturing Industries Advisory Council. In the afternoon,
Ministers will meet representatives of the Australian Council
of Trade Unions.
CAN BERRA,
14th July, 1965. 



FOR PRESS RETIREM" ENT FROM THE SENATE BY SENAITOR
SIR WILIANM SPOONER,, KCMG, M
The following is an exchange of letters today
between the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies and Sir
William Spooner
" My dear Prime Minister,
I refer to the various discussions we have
had since I resigned from the Cabinet concerning
my position in the Senate.
At these discussions I expressed the view
that when the time was opportune, I would like to
retire from the Senate and you have been good enough
to understand my desire to do this.
For my part, I think it logical that having
retired from the Cabinet I should make way for
someone else with a political future to have the
opportunity to obtain the benefits of that treining
and experience in the Parliament which is necessary
in politics, Naturally I regret leaving political life
which has been so interesting and where I have made
so many friends. I take pride in the fact that I
know that the long personal friendship which you and
I have enjoyed will continue.
As you can imagine, I have given the matter
a lot of thought. As a result, I am quite firm in
my own personal desire to retire altogether from
politics. That indeed, this being sog I feel it is
proper that I should,
I hope that you will not see any difficulties
in the way of my now doing that which I would like to
do. Yours sincerely,
H. SPOONER 
do 2-
" My dear Bill,
Thank~ you for your letter of today. I fully
understand and respect the reasons which have led
you to your decision to retire from the Senate,
I share your regret at leaving political life and
I warmly reciprocate your references to the long
friendship which you and I have both politically
and personally enjoyed.
You can look back with pride on the work
which you hcve done for our country over so many
years. No man could have devoted his talents to
public service with greater fidelity and zeal,
I have greatly admired your immense capacity for
work and the thoroughness with which you have
examined and directed the affairs of your various
Depa rtments, I will greatly miss my constant contoct
with you. Indeed your departure from the legislative
scene leaves rfle with a genuine sense of loss.
However your reasons for your decision do you great
honour, I do not know who will succeed you but he
will certainly inherit from you a great tradition
and a fine example.
With my warm regards, Yours sincerely,
R. G. M~' ENZIES.
CA N MRA,
Th-th July, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. Mi. No. 5+/ 1967
DEATH OF ADLAI STEVENSON
Statement by the Prime Minister the Rt. Honr Sir Robert
Menzies
The death of Adlai Stevenson is a great
loss not only to his own country but to the world.
He added to his great ability a singular capacity for
expression and an engaging personality which won him
many friends. The Australian Government shares in the
general sorrow that will be caused by his untimely
death. CANBERRA, July, 1965. 



65/ 1 n0-
œ 2-i Mas P. M oN. J196
UAL4= 1 HC9 FOR PRIME MINISTER&amp;
Statmat n thhePO W inNs lr, the RtH&amp; Sir Bbert Menij
Wha the Budget sitting* of Cabinet hav*
concludd, there vill be soe temporary reduction In
the pressure of my duties, I propose next week to
take advantage of thin by going into hospital In
Mlbourne for a few days, for a general check-p.
CANB&amp; RRAv
21st July, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 57/ 1965
LORD C-ASEY'S APPOINTMENT AS GOVERNOR-GENERAL
Statement by the Prime Minister? the RtHon. Sir Robert Menzies
This appointment gives us great delight and satisfaction.
I am certain that the people of Australia will welcome
it warmly. I know that Her Majesty The Queen has most
readily and happily agreed that a distinguished Australian
might be her representative in Australia, and in approving
this appointment, she has expressed her particular pleasure
concerning it,
As is well known, Lord Casey has, over many years,
given most excellent service to Australia in many public
fields, and to -the Commonwealti also. His name stands
very high within Australia and overseas.
It is a matter of great pleasure, officially and
personally, to me and my colleagues that this new honour,
and this new high field of service, which he will perform
with great distinction, will now be his. W4e send, as all
Australians will send, sincere congratulations to Lord and
Lady Casey. No time has yet been fixed for Lord Casey to take
up office, though it is likely to be within a period of two
months. It will depend on arrangements still to be made
with Lord Casey and, of course with His Excellency the
Administrator Sir Henry Abel 9mith, who will continue in
office until Lord Casey is sworn in. It will be appropriate
for me to refer at a later time to the work of Sir Henry
Abel Smith, but I mention at this stage that the Government
most greatly appreciates his service to the Commonwealth of
Australia. MELBOURNE
28th July, 1965. 



FOR PRESS: P. m. No. 58/ 196~
INDEPEN~ DENCE OF SOUTH VIET N4AM
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menz&amp; s
The Australian Government was informed by the
United States Government of the further decisions now announced
in Washington by the President for the defence of South Viet Nam.
The Government has in fact been in continuing touch with
Washington about the course of United States policy, and I have
already conveyed to Presjcbnt Johnson o1ir support for these
further efforts by the United States to preserve the independence
of South Viet Nam. I have also assured him of Australia's
continuing assistance in the defence of South Viet Nam.
The armed forces of South Viet Nam, the population
centres in the rural areas and the col. mtry's installations and
transport and communications systems are currently under
heavy military pressure and attack from the Viet Cong. At
the same time, the Viet Cong, in pursuing their campaign of
insurgency and guerrilla warfare, are strengthened and
supported by the supply of men and equipment from North Viet
Nam on a substantial scale. The South Vietnamese Armed Forces
are maintaining their courageous efforts to counter these tactics
but it is clear that additional assistance from outside is
necessary. We support also the steady purpose of the United
States to pursue every political and diplomatic effprt to
open the way for international discussion. de earnestly
hope that these further evidences of United States' resolve
will help convince those now seeking to overthrow by force
the Government of the Republic of South Viet Nam that they
cannot succeed and that there will be an end to the senseless
violence and bloodshed opening the way for a peaceful solution
in Viet Nam.
MELBOURNE, 29th July, 1965. 



Sta t ~ eFr M~ u. terh ~ Ro~ 4~~
yialpate In~ ea I texiatmI eniit to ba h~ in Mcmtn
by C t~ Pdoli © fi eian l %, a
yattW~ 1l bmd atudies to Lwa w dotaied plam fog
AustrXIM pv~ Ilc to It mae on Ile laotee Dme uk~ : 09
St Lanvc fox'o the Autl@
thgGOQMM V~ g&amp; Zgto I-zza beo-0: 0t 00 09~
&amp; ad 010awl
Mniote O'G &amp; at ftaQt 9 Qo3
ili lmzo ~ vAot~ ahdm, 1t -V7UAW
~ rIn nu gwitM; Wi lnagiaaba nQ9wl
29th Jdl, IL965 



EMBARGO: NOT TO BE PUBLISHIED, BROADCAST, TELECAST O CABLED
BEFORE MIDNIGHT ON FRIDAY, 30TH JULY, 1965. ( EST)
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 59/ 1 96
VISIT BY BRITISH MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE
Statement bte _ Primee minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The Rt. Hon. T. F. Peart, British
Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, will visit
Australia in September at the invitation of the Australian
Government. Mr. Peart will be accompanied by his wrife.
Sir Robert said that the Government attached
a great deal of importance to the visit as the United
Kingdom is a major market for Australian produce.
On present planning the visit will be for
about twelve days, during which Mr. Peart will meet Ministers,
officials and primary producer representatives. Mr, Peart's
itinerary will also include opportunities for him to see
something of Australian agriculture.
ME. LBOUdRNE, July, 1965. 



P. 1M. No. 6o/ 1965
MALAYSIA AND SINGAPORE
Statement by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Details of the separation arrangements being now
available, Ministers have today been studying the implications
of the establishment of Singapore as a State separate from and
independent of Malaysia.
I feel that I need to say at the outset that no
prior consultation or discussion with the Australian Government
took place. But the separation having occurred, we fully
accept it, and direct ourselves to the future.
The changes that have taken place flow from
considerations of internal political relationships between
Singapore and Kuala Lumpur. It was recognised in the negotiations
preceding the establishment of Malaysia that special
arrangements were necessary for the incorporation of Singapore
in the Federation. The structural changes now agreed upon
reflect an assessment on the part of the parties concerned that
those special arrangements have proved unworkable. We regret
deeply that it was not found possible to make a full success
of the Federation as established in 1963, but at the same time
we are glad that thae new arrangement recognises that the two
entities must continue to work together in close association.
We, for our part, apply ourselves with all goodwill to co-operation
with both Malaysia and Singapore for their future security
and welfare, since we believe? as they do, that this separation
should be regarded as the beginning of a new approach to the
task of working together to forward their common interests.
Various aspects of the separation will require
examination in some detail by the Australian Government and,
no doubt, in some instances, consultation with other Governments,
including the Governments of Singapore and Malaysia will take
pla ce, A central and most important matter is the continued
and combined defence of the region. Malaysia and Singapore face
the same defence problems, and Singapore's facilities are
involved in the defence of both. We welcome the agreement of
the two Governments to establish machirmry for ensuring a
common defence effort. We hope that this will be set up with
speed, and that it will be effective. The particular Australian
association with this common defence will require study in the
light of the new circumstances. But we are determined to play
our part with all the other countries concerned in continuing
a common resistance to attacks upon the Malaysian area, an area
which will still include Singapore, though it is no longer part
of the Federation of Malaysia.
I have today sent messages to the Prime Ministers
of Singapore and Malaysia expressing our satisfaction in that the
new arrangements provide for continued co-operation between the
two States in many fields, including economic affairs as well as
defence. 0000 / 2 
-2-
The Australian Government has recognised the
State of Singapore and I have informed the Singapore Prime
Minister that we will be happy to establish full diplomatic
relations with Singapore at the level of High Commissioner,
and that we wish Singapore well in its new sovereignty and
look forward to a continuance of close and friendly relations
with the new State and with Malaysia.
CANBERRA August, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. i. No. 61/ 1965
AiYOINTMENT TO CA3INET
Stateme2_ t by the Primein r the t. Hn Sr obert Menzes
ir. C. E. Barnes, iMinister for Territories,
has been appointed a member of the Cabinet.
Mr. Barnes will take the post left vacant
in the Cabinet following the appointment of Mr. Roberton,
formerly Minister for Social Services, to Dublin as
Ambassador. CANBERRA, 13th August, 1965. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER. THE RT. HON.
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, K. T. H Q. C. 3 M. P.~
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRSENTATIVES
WEDNESDAY, 18TH AUGUST, 196~
I wish to inform the House of two decisions
concerning defence which have been taken by the Government.
The first has to do with the strength of the
Australian forces in Viet Nam. The Government has decided
to provide support units to the Army battalion there to make
it up to what is known as a Battalion Group. The support
units, which involve about 350O troops, include artillery,
engineer, armour, signal, light aircraft and logistic elements.
Honourable members will have a full opportunity
in the External Affairs debate which begins this evening to
discuss the general situation in Viet Nam. All I wish to say
at this time is that in recent months open aggression against
the people and Government of South Viet Nam, instigated and
sustained from the North, has continued to grow. U. S. assistance
to South Viet Nam is being increased by the introduction
of substantial additional forces whose purpose is to prevent
a communist military victory in that country. It is important
that the efforts of the South Vietnamese Government and the
large contribution of the U. S. Government should be supplemented
by assistance from other countries. At the same time, every
political effort continues to be made to bring the issues in
South Viet Nam to international discussion. It is our
conviction that all these actions give the best prospect of
opening the way ultimately to peace in South Viet Nam.
The second decision taken by the Government
concerns the size of the National Service intake. The intakes
of National Servicemen will be retained at 2,100 each quarter
in 1966 ( that is, a total of 8,400 during the year) instead of
reducing them to 1,725 each quarter ( 6,900 during the year) as
previously planned. The maintenance of the annual intake at
the higher level of 8,400 will result in an Army strength of
40,000 in 1967 instead of the previous figure of 37,500.
The Government's decision has been taken in the
light of the successful introduction of the National Service
Scheme and bearing in mind all the various commitments. at
home and abroad, which our forces might be required to
undertake. It is a continuation of the Government's policy
of taking measures as appropriate which will lead to steady
improvement in our defence capability. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hion. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 19th August 1965]
Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister) Speaker, I must
say that I listened with great interest and
some pleasure to the remarks of the honor-
7j3 ble member for Fremnantle ( Mr. Beazley)
in relation to Malaysia, because I think that
this problem requires a. cool judgment and
a just appreciation of what has been done,
and with what he said on that point I find
myself in complete agreement. We have
hopes-1 hope that they are well foundedfor
a genuine co. operation between
Malaysia and the newly independent State
of Singapore. We have a friendship for both.
We wish them both well, but we do desire
above all things that on those matters on
which co-operation between them is of
great importance they will find it possible
to co-operate in the most effective way. I
do not desire to say any more . tonight about
Malaysia: although it could, lend itself to a
good deal of discussion because this debate
Dohaf s V* iceotnncaemn. t raHteedre , i tsaeglaf ina, roIu fnede l thuen dperr obsolemme
D little embarrassment because several
speeches have been made in the course of
this debate which stale so effectively the
essence of the matter that, coming as I do
tonight, I must feel that I am engaging in
tedious repetition. But, still, this is a matter
of immense controversy. I have been
challenged-I do not know why-more than
once to state the Government's position. I
10143/ 65 thought I had stated it pretty crisply. Therefore,
with great respect to my colleague the
Deputy Prime Minister ( Mr. McEwen) who
made a brilliant exposition of this matter
this afternoon, and others who have spoken,
I will just put it in my own way tonight
in the hope that I can say something reasonably
comprehensive.
The debate began as a debate by the
movement of an amendment by the Leader
of the Opposition ( Mr. Calwell). The terms
of.. the amendment are before honorable
members. I just want to refer to one or two
aspects. The amendment readsthis
House urges the Goverment-
I think this is what might be called -the
operative part of itto
strive for a cease fire now, to be policed
by a United Nations peace-keeping force, and for
a conference of all parties directly involved, including
representatives of both the Government in
Saigon and the Vietcong, to seek a -settlement
which will both end the agony of the Vietnamese
people and establish their right to choose their
own government.
My friend, the honorable member for
Moreton ( Mr. Killen) submitted this to a
somewhat devastating examination, I
thought, this afternoon but I must say
something on my own account. The first
part of the amendment is taken, of course,
from the Prime Minister's Conference. The
honorable gentleman must be aware of the 
terms of the resolution carried at the Prime
Minister's Conference, and the setting up
by that conference-matter to which I
shall refer a little later-of a mission
designed to ascertain whether there was
some basis upon which a conference could
be held. To the extent that he adopts that
resolution, of which I was one of the promoters,
I welcome some bipartisan policy
on this vexed matter.
He speaks about the representation of
the Vietcong. I do not want to te dogmatic
about a matter of this kind because,
compared with some other aspects of this
problem, it is not the greatest of matters.
But : I would have thought that there was
some difficulty about having representation
of the Vietcong in such a conference, if
we obtained such a conference, because it
would seem to present difficulties of a kind
that would be inevitab: e in the case of
guerrillas who always work under cover and
are not always susceptible to conference.
Such direct representation would not be
necessary now, strictly speaking, because
what is the Vietcong? It represents
the hands which are ordered by the
voice of Hanoi. Do not let us forget that.
In any conference, if we were lucky enough
to get one, what Hanoi said would go with
the Vietcong. Make no mistake about this.
Therefore, it is with Hanoi, and behind that,
with Peking, that an effective conference
needs to occur.
Then, finally, the Leader of the Opposition
said, I thought rather piously, . that the
Vietnamese ought to be enabled to establish
their right to choose their own
government. That is, in one sense, although
not in every sense, what this war is about
-the right to choose their own government.
They will have no right to choose their
own' government-none whatever-unless
the aggressors are defeated, or unless they
abandon their activities. I would have
thought, that, in famous words, every school
boy would know that to ' be true.
I turn from the terms of the amendment
to offer a few observations on some aspects
of this matter which have given me great
occasion for thought and on which I have
arrived, I think, at clear views, and on
which I think I ought ta state those views.
A lot of people in Australia today-at any
rate, quite a few who write letters, sign
petitions, pass resolutions, or make speeches
somewhere or other-have as their theme: You must negotiate. They have a beautiful
antithesis here. You either negotiate or you
become involved in military operations.
You cannot do both. I have been accused of
over-simplification. About that one, all I can
say is: 0 sancta simplicitas You either
say: " We stand for negotiation", and do
nothing more about it, or you say: " We
want to negotiate but if the condition of
getting to the point of negotiation is to have
some fighting, then the fighting must be
engaged in". Yet these people keep on
writing letters, putting on rather anaemic
looking demonstrations outside Parliament
House and so on. They forget that negotiations
for peace can be usefully engaged in
only by the parties to the conflict.
Honorable members do not suppose, do
they, that two or three countries which have
nothing whatever to do with it are going to
have pleasant little negotiations and say:
" Now we have settled the argument."?
Therefore, the willingness of Hanoi-I use
Hanoi to describe the North Vietnameseto
negotiate is essential. Could anybody with
his five wits, or even with four, deny that
the willingness of Hanoi to negotiate is
essential? If Hanoi is not willing, no negotiation
can occur.
On 10th March of this year, the Commander-
in-Chief of North Vietnam, a very
considerable functionary, after demanding
unconditional withdrawal of American
forces-Hanoi was always putting it up as
a condition for negotiation-said the following
words which I emphasise--
The problem of the peaceful reunification of
Vietnam is the affair of the Vietnamese people.
So far, if I may say so, so good. He then
went on-
It will be settled by the Vietnam Fatherland Front
and the South Vietnamese Liberation Front.
This is brilliant. It would be settled by the
people, meaning the Communists-the
parent Communist organisation and the
son Communist organisation in South Vietnam.
This deserves to go down in history as
a classic of impudence, a classic of the
denial of justice-the kind of democratic
justice to which I would call the attention
of my friends on the opposite benches.
Mr. Michael Stewart, not a member of
my party, but a distinguished Labour
Foreign Minister in Great Britain, has no
ambiguities in his mind on this matter. He 
made a speech on 1st April, and I think it is
worthwhile to recall what he said. His
comment was-
The House will notice in that statement-
He referred to the one that I have just
mentionednot only that North Vietnam is not thinking in
terms of conference and negotiation at all but that
the affairs of Vietnam are subsequently to be
settled exclusively by Communist organisations and
that by these principles-
These are Mr. Stewart's words--
no non-Communist in Vietnam would have any
chance of taking part in framing the future of his
country. This view, of course, is confirmed by North
Vietnam itself. When approached by the 17
unaligned countries, several of whom to my
direct knowledge as a result of conferences
are heavily disposed in favour of North
Vietnam, : because they wanted to seek
peace, the reply that . they received from
iNorth Vietnam-I would hate to call it a
dusty answer but it was certainly a dirty
answer-was that the internal affairs of
South Vietnam must be settled by the South
Vietnamese people themselves, in accordance
with the programme of the South
Vietnam National Liberation Front, without
any foreign interference.
I only need remind the House, because
I want to put this fairly comprehensively,
, that the ' National Liberation Front is a
popular Communist technique nowadays. A
National Liberation Front was established in
Thailand. In 1960, by order from Hanoi,
the National Liberation Front, which is
now a subordinate part of the central office
operating from Hanoi was established in
South Vietnam. Yet, in spite of having
received letters-not too many, but somen
spite of having read from occasion to
-, occasion, not too closely, some of the statements
made by various people, some of
them academic and some of them no
doubt intelligent, and in spite of having
cast my eye over these matters I have not,
from first to last, been able to discover any
pressure being put by any of these people
on Hanoi. All the pressure has been put on
the defending -countries like the United
States and ourselves whose great desire is
to achieve a just peace, protecting the
rights of all the people of South Vietnam
to self determination without external or
internal armed threat and, we would hope,
under some form of international guarantee. ' By a singtlar -feat of -mental . gymnastics
some , vocal people -in our own country have
worked -out some astonishing propositions.
I have noted these because I ' have ' been on
the ' receiving end of one or two rather
abusive remarks by people whose works I
had otherwise rather enjoyed. They put up
propositions along these lines: " If you believe
that Communist armed aggression in
and. against South Vietnam should be resisted
in the common interest, including our own,
by arms, then you. are the enemy of peace
All honorable members have heard it stated
that to us-or is it to peace" is
a dirty word. The basis of the statement is
that if you believe in the things that I have
just mentioned you are the enemy of peace.
But you have your choice. You have your
way of escape. If you abandon South Vietnam
and do your best to persuade other
nations, and, in particular the United States,
to do likewise, in the result you leave all of
South East Asia to its fate and then, believe
it or not, you are the friend of peace. This
is the new -series of propositions which a
lot of people, some of whom are well meaning,
! have been advancing. Clearly such
people are prepared to secure peace by
surrender or flight. In other words, they
want peace at any price.
Suppose the people and the Government
of Australia adopted these views. What
would . be . involved? l want to traverse this
with some care because I think that our
people have a right to understand exactly
what is involved. I repeat-what would be
involved? In the first place, we would need
to repudiate our obligations under
S. E. A. T. O. and A. N. Z. U. S. since each of
these pacts involves mutuality of obligations.
We have not heard much for some time
about S. E. A. T. O. . and A. N. Z. U. S. It used
to be rather a kind of parlour game in this
House to argue about S. E. A. T. O. and
A. N. Z. U. S. and what they mean. I hope
honorable members will forgive me if I
remind them and place on record consecutively
what they mean. In 1954 we
passed an Act of Parliament to ratify the
South East Asia Collective Defence Treaty.
The preamble to the Act was challenged
by the then Leader of the Opposition but
the challenge was not carried to a vote.
The challenge was that we had selected
Communism and had not extended the provisions
of the Bill to cover other forms of 
activity. In any case, the preamble was carried
unanimously by both parties in this
House with no division being sought The
preamble is in these terms-
Whereas the independence and integrity of the
countries and territories of South East Asia and
the South West Pacific are threatened by the
aggressive policies of international Communism:
And whereas those Communist policies have
already shown themselves in Korea, Indo-China
and elsewhere by armed aggression, by armed
insurrection assisted from without and otherwise:
And whereas those Communist policies represent
a common danger to the security of Australia
and of the world generally and are a violation
of the principles and purposes of the Charter of
the United Nations
I have read sufficient of the preamble to
the Bill which was passed by this House
although, as I have indicated, it was
criticised by the then Leader of the Opposition
because it should have included a reference
to Fascism as well as to Communism.
There it is, now part of an Act of this
Parliament. Now let me turn to the Treaty.
I do not think any honorable member dared
to vote against the Treaty to which not only
Australia but also New Zealand, Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States, Pakistan, the : Philippines, Thailand
and France were parties. The preamble to
the Treaty is as follows-
Intending to declare publicly and formally their
-sense of unity, so that any potential aggressor will
appreciate that the Parties stand together in the
area. Article II of the Treaty, a very important
article, states-
In order more effectively to achieve the objectives
of this Treaty, the Partie:;, separately and jointly-
Let the House mark those words " separately
and jointly
by means of continuous and effective self-help
and mutual aid will maintain and develop their
individual and collective capacity to resist armed
attack and to prevent and counter subversive
activities directed from without against their territorial
integrity and politioal stability.
Could there have been in anticipation a
better description of what is going on in
South Vietnam and what, as I will show,
the Leader of the Opposition admits is going
on in South Vietnam? I come now to
Article IV of the Treaty. It reads-
Each Party recognises that aggression by means
of armed attack in the treaty area against any of
the Parties or against ar. y State or territory which
the Parties by unanimous agreement may hereafter
designate-South Vietnam was unanimously so designatedwould
endanger its own peace and safety, and
agrees that it-
Meaning each partywill
in that event act to meet the common danger
in accordance with its constitutional processes.
We, like the United States, have regarded
that Treaty as imposing upon us separate as
well as joint responsibilities. That is what
the Treaty provided expressly and clearly.
Later in the Article, of course-and I say
this only to complete the story-it was provided
that no action on the territory of any
such designated State-South Vietnam, to
wit-shall be taken except at the invitation
or with the consent of the Government concerned.
In the case of South Vietnam, of
course, this condition has been fulfilled.
So much for S. E. A. T. O. What is our
position under which was
ratified by an Act of this Parliament in
1952? The treaty itself states in Article IV-"
Each party recognises that an armed attack in
the Pacific area on any of the parties would be
dangerous to its own peace and safety and
declares that it would act to meet the common
danger in accordance with its constitutional processes. 19)
Then there is a very interesting article from
our point of view, Article V, which says-
For the purpose of Article IV an armed attack
on any of the parties is deemed to include an
armed attack on the metropolitan territory of any
of the parties--
That is, on Australia proper, to bring it
right homeor
on the island territories under its jurisdiction
in the Pacific-
In our case, Papua and New Guinea, for
instanceor on its armed forces, public vessels or aircraft
in the Pacific.
As the Pacific clearly means the Pacific
area, an attack on troops, American troops,
Australian troops, New Zealand troops, is
of the highest significance.
I say no more about that answer to the
question of what would be involved. I come'
now to the other answers to the question:
What would be involved if we did what we
are sometimes told we should do? The
second result would be that we would be
adopting a policy of isolation and neutrality.
There is no middle course here, just the
adoption of a policy of isolation and
neutrality, with, as a consequence, the
abandonment of any right to expect any 
other nation to aid us in our own defence.
If it is good enough for us to be isolated
or neutral then it is good enough for the
other man, so far as we are concerned, to
be isolated or neutral. It would also involve
the further adoption-and let us face up
to this although it is -a hard choice or a hard
proposition-of a national policy in Australia
of unarmed pacificism or a defence
policy involving a . provi: iion adequate to
secure. our , country,, by our own efforts
against attack by any enemy, however
powerful and however armed.
One has only to state these matters-at
the risk of oversimplification as opposed to
overcomplication-to see that each of these
courses is unthinkable. Each of them would
be tantamount to national siUicide, and we
must therefore face the facts. The facts are
that we must honour our international
obligation, we must refuse to desert our
friends and we must pursue defence policies
: 9) esigned to enable us to make effective contributions
to the common defence against
Communist aggression. This policy, if it
needs explanation, is the one pursued by
my Government.
Of course we would all wish to see a
._ enuine peace conferenc: e, but what has
happened? At the risk of wearying the
House I just want to elaborate what my
colleague stated in admirably summary form
this afternoon. The document tabled by the
Minister for External Affairs ( Mr. Hasluck),
and which I hope will be read by all honorable
members, sets out the efforts that have
been made towards a peaceful settlement.
I say at the very beginning that the Conspicuous
feature of these efforts is that none
of them was made by Peking or Hanoi. Let
this be remembered by every person who
:, ilgoes to some meeting or teach-in or some
' sit-in, as one honorable member described
it-and wants to be gulled by a lot of
theoreticians. None of these efforts was
made by Hanoi or Peking.
When the United States in August 1964
took to the Security Council-and we hear
a lot about the United Nations and why
we should be approaching that organisation
-the Tonkin Gulf incident, Hanoi refused
to attend. The people in Hanoi said that
they had not started the trouble, and in
any event they refused to attend. They said
categorically-and they have stuck to it
ever since-that the matter of Vietnam was not within the competence of the Security
Council. Yet there are some honorable
members who bamboozle themselves into
believing that all you have to do is to take
the matter to the United Nations. Hanoi
had no truck with such ideas, contending
that the Vietnam matter was not within the
competence of the Security Council.
When the greatly respected Secretary-
General of the United Nations, U Thant,
wanted to visit Peking and Hanoi-and he
could not be represented as the humble
obedient servant of the Western bloc-in
April of this year, there was a contemptuous
rejection of any United Nations intervention.
Further approaches were made by the
United States, which also sought to promote
action by the Security Council. Peking
rejected such action in advance. It did not
wait for the action to be taken, but rejected
it in advance. It is very interesting to recall
that the United Kingdom proposed to the
Soviet Union that both countries, having
provided co-chairmen of the 1954 Geneva
Conference-a conference which some
honorable members have been saying should
be resumed-should invite the parties to get
busy and state their views. The Soviet reply
was a condemnation of the United States
and a demand for the withdrawal of the
United States forces from Vietnam, a
demand which I have not yet discovered has
been made by the Opposition, although I
will have something to say about that before
I conclude. Then the greatly respected Patrick
Gordon Walker, whom many of us know,
was sent out by the present British Government,
which is not of my political complexion,
to see whether he might bring the
chance of a conference with him. Both
Peking and Hanoi declined to receive him.
They would have nothing to do with him,
a man of the highest character and with the
most high minded desire to achieve peace if
possible. In April of this year ' President
Johnson said in a famous speech that he was
ready for unconditional discussion. Peking
and Hanoi made a reply in their exquisite
jargon, saying that this was a swindle pure
and simple. In May the Canadian representative
on the International Control
Commission, which some people have been
saying should be brought into function,
wanted to talk with the Peking and Hanoi
Governments. He was rebuffed. 
Then at the Commonwealth Prime Ministers'
Conference-and I will say more about
that in a little while-a Commonwealth
mission was proposed and supported. . It -has
not succeeded in making any contact with
any of the Communist countries at all. Then
Mr. Harold Davis, a junior Minister, well
known to be very friendly towards . North
Vietnam and quite receivable, went off to
North Vietnam, having obtained a visa
through the kind instrumentality of some
North Vietnamese journalists. He went to
Hanoi. I have read the report that he made.
He was received quite affably by the people
who were not in charge, but he literally
was not allowed -to see any Minister or any
person in authority in. North Vietnam.
I have already referred ' to the attempt
made by the 17 non-aligned nations, some
of them far from unfriendly towards North
Vietnam and, perhaps, far from friendly
towards the United States. They met the
singular fate, which must have come as a
shock to some of them, of being described
by the Communist authorities as ' the Trojan
-horse of American imperialism. Well, I
have -heard so many , peeches against imperialism
by some of the people who have
now become described as the Trojan horse
that this shocks me; but it further exhibits
the fact that we are dealing with people in
the north who will insult their friends in
other parts of Asia or in Africa so long as
it enables them to maintain their campaign
to overrun, to tyrannis,' and . to destroy.
The President of India-I do not think
anybody would have suggested he was a
war-monger, unlike me--
Mr. James.-How true.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-You always
prefer the people of countries other than
your own, therefore I am bound to say that
you will agree he is not a war-monger, because
he is not an Australian. But the President
of India made an approach and
Peking's reply was that this was preposterous
in the extreme. ' When an unexpected
combination got together, India and Yugoslavia-
they are not identical politically,
Tito practicing his own form of detached
Communism-they were both rewarded for
their pains by being described by the people
whom the Opposition thinks it is simple to
get a conference with as the errand boys
of America. Now Sir, all -these events must surely convince
all Australians, who have not been
completely taken in by Communist propaganda,
of three things; first, that all peaceful
approaches to the aggressors are doomed
to failure while the aggressors think they
are ' winning or will win by force of arms;
secondly, that invoking the United Nations
in . this rather febrile way is at present quite
futile; and thirdly, that talk about -the
Geneva Accords or the International ' Control
Commission will be non-productive.
Now Sir, all -that, or most of it, describes
what has gone on elsewhere. But at this
last . Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference
we had something to say and . do
about this matter and I think I ought ' to
put it before the House and the people.
The Prime Minister of Great Britain, at
the very commencement of our meeting,
produced a plan for the setting up of a
mission consisting of Prime Ministers to
make contact on behalf of the Commor
wealth with the parties principally concernea,
with the problem of Vietnam and to ascertain
-whether some basis could be found for
a conference. Just let me remphasise this
point: The mission was not to negotiate. It
would have found negotiation difficult be
cause it contained within itself an immense
variety -of views, some being not dissimilar
from my own and some being not like my
own. They were a mixture. Therefore, the
whole , point was that the mission was to
see whether a basis for conference could
be found. That was an honorable task. The
mission was to go and talk to these people
and, without committing itself to any particular
view as . to the merits, see whether
there was some'basis for a conference.
The Prime Minister of Great Britain took
advantage of a talk that he and I were
having a day or two before to explain
his idea to me. He did that because, no
doubt, I happen to be, nowadays, the senior
Prime Minister. I considered the matter
overnight and, having reflected on it, I
told him that I would strongly support the
proposal. In the result, with some opposition,
but not much, the plan was adopted. The
mission was made up of the Prime Ministers
of Great ' Britain, of Nigeria, and -of Trinidad
and Tobago, and the President of
Ghana. Those men represented a variety
of views. The Prime Minister of Nigeria,
Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, is a very distinguished,
and in my opinion, a very wise 
man. The Prime Minister of Trinidad and
Tobago,, Dr.. Williams, is known, no doubt,
to quite a few of my colleagues, and the
President of Ghana is Dr. Nkrumah. As
the agreed final communique said-
We reviewed the various efforts which had been
made to achieve a peaceful s. olution.
This statement was made on behalf of
all of us-21 Prime Ministers, several of
whom had feelings disposed in favour of
North Vietnam. We had reviewed the
various efforts which had been made to
achieve a peaceful solution and I just
emphasise once more that it is worthy of
note that not one of those efforts ihad been
made either by Peking or Hanoi. It is not
surprising, therefore, that the Commonwealth's
mission has ncot succeeded in
making contact with either of these governments.
Yet, Sir, the statement of guidance
worked out by our conference exhibited a
easonableness which no nation with any
_. al desire for peace could have refused to
examine. I do not want to trench too much on the
time of the House and therefore I shall not
_ read all these passages, but I will take the
&gt; portunity, Sir, with the permission of
, i'e House, to table the communique because
the. document. does contain the guide lines
which were worked out for this mission
-if the mission ever. got to. first base. While
the. aggressors are-conteraptuously rejecting
all peaceful propositions and pressing
on, with their evil activities, there is an
element in Australia which is, whether it
realises it. or not, conducting propaganda
directed. to, the desertion of South Vietnam
by the Americans and by the rest of us, the
grave weakening of South Vietnam's
/--efence, the abandonment of Thailand and
talaysia, victory for Peking and Hanoi and
the dramatic encouragement of Communist
influence and control even nearer to Australian
shores. The propaganda is directed
to these. ends whether people realise it or
I ask the Australian people who fully
realise the dangers involved for our own
country to understand the conscious or unconscious
objectives of muich of the current
agitation for the withdrawal of Australian
troops and therefore, presumably of
American troops, since to urge the withdrawal
of Australian troops and the retention
of American: troops would be a shocking incident in Australia's history. If that
agitation succeeded and South Vietnam were
abandoned, North Vietnam and its Communist
terrorists, the Vietcong, would of
course be vastly encouraged and aided; the
last lingering hope of peace negotiations
except on the basis of surrender to military
conquest would disappear; S. E. A. T. O. would
have failed, since the obligations under it
would, have been repudiated and other South
Asian countries would be left to fend for
themselves against overwhelming odds, and
the defence position of Australia would be
immeasurably weakened.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-We have still got you.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Yes, but you
almost cancel me out. Two other matters,
Sir, must be remembered. First of all, if
it is wrong for Australia to take an active
part in the defence of South Vietnam against
aggression, I wonder how it can be right
for us to take an active part in the defence
of Malaysia. against aggression. Is there
some lack of virtue in Indonesian aggressors
which does not apply to the Communist
aggressors? Where do the present agitators
stand on that matter? Perhaps they will say
that there is no aggression against South
Vietnam. All I can say-in a homely phrase
-is that they can tell that to the American
Marines. In the second place, victory for Communism
in South East Asia would not only
spell disaster and degradation to the millions
of people in that area who desire to be left
alone to live in peace and, with the aid of
more fortunate countries, develop their resources
and raise their own living standards;
it would,, in world terms, represent an
alteration in the world balance of power in
favour of the Communist powers and it
would so increase the risks of world war.
Sir, this needs great emphasis: As the
democracies have learned, retreat and
appeasement do not produce a true or lasting
peace. They give aid and comfort to
the aggressors. They hasten the day when
the aggressor feels able to strike on the
grand scale successfully. They encourage
future wars. They -do grievous harm to that
cause-the cause of peace-which their
advocates delude themselves into believing
that they are supporting. On any reasoned
view of this grim problem it is of course
not possible ' to attack the presence of Australian
forces without attacking the presence 
of the United States and of other non-Vietnamese
forces. But does the Australian
Labour Party attack the United States presence
and actions? This is interesting to me.
It is very difficult to keep up with the Labour
Party because it is-as you might sayhere
today and gone tomorrow on these
matters of policy and, indeed, on all other
matters. But at least, I hope that occasionally
one must be able to read something
that the Labour Party says, and think: This
is it. The honorable member for Bendigo ( Mr.
Beaton) is interjecting. Listen to this; it will
do you the world of good. This may not
have reached you in the fastnesses of
Bendigo. A Labour Party information release
was issued on 18th February 1965. I
have the one I got. Optimistically it says,
on the last page: " Additional copies of this
statement may be obtained from the Australian
Labour Party's Federal Secretariat
on request". If the honorable member has
not had one I will pay the postage to have
it sent to him. I just want to quote what
this Labour Party, now so ambiguous, now
so defeatist, now so unreal, had to say only
in February of this year. I cannot read all
of the document, but it professes to be the
complete text of the resolution unanimously
adopted by the Federal Parliamentary
Labour Party Executive at its meeting in
Sydney on Thursday, ,' 8th February 1965;
and the Federal Parliamentary Labour
Party's Executive had before it the unanimous
recommendation of the Foreign
Affairs Committee of the Parliamentary
Party. When you have unanimity piled on
unanimity ' I suppose one may hope:
Roughly, this is what they believe The
first thing that I want to refer to is this
statement-In its statement to thio Security Council on
February 7th, reporting * he air strikes against
military installations in the south of North Vietnam,
America insisted th: at its object in South
Vietnam, while resisting a: ggression, is to achieve
a peaceful settlement maintained by the presence
of international peacekeeping machinery and that
it would not allow the situation to be changed by
terror and violence.
This statementsaid
this unanimous body-
-of American purposes is unexceptionable and
the case for the American action of recent days,
as based on the aim of shortening the war and
achieving a negotiated settlement, which would
establish and maintain the rights of the South
Vietnamese people, deserves sympathetic Australian
understanding. Nothing could be better. Later in the
course of the same document the same
people, unanimously, I suppose, unless
unanimity had faded away halfway through
the page, say this-and let everybody
remember this, because I think that really
if a lot of this is true we are almost on a
bi-partisan policy-
The demand of the Soviet Government for the
immediate departure of all American and other
foreign forces from South Vietnam would be in
the interests neither of the people of South Vietnam
nor the people of Australia. Its immediate
consequence must be a Communist takeover of
South Vietnam, snuffing out the hope of freedom
and the democratic independence of that country
and extending the area of Communist control
closer to this country.
I say to honorable members opposite: This
is not a lot of reactionary Tories speaking.
This is your crowd speaking-at least, last
February. The document continues-
The presence of those forces is necessary an-4-x
justified as a holding operation provided that
efforts are bent towards the objects set out b)&gt;
the American Government in its message to the
Security Council. In other words, the presence
of these forces is justified as a temporary means
to an end and not an end in itself.
The object must be, at a proper time and in
circumstances enabling the people of South Vie
nam a free choice, to allow them to decide b.,
their own votes on their own government and
to ensure the physical independence of that government.
Sir, this is, I think, remarkable and worthy
of applause. I will undertake to say that it
is in the teeth of the views that will be
heard from one or two honorable members
sitting opposite, if there is any importance
to be placed on consistency. The Leader
of the Opposition who, I know, believes all
that himself-twisted and distorted by
recent events, but in his heait, of course.
he believes those th'ings to be true-earlie-'
this year when we had a debate said two
things that are very accurate and memorable.
He said-
That there has long been and still is aggression
from the north and subversion inspired from the
north, I do not for one moment deny.
( Later on he said-
The object of the Vietcong in the war-this
guerrilla war-is to avoid, as far as possible, direct
entanglement with massed troops in order that
by infiltration, subversion and terrorism, they may
control villages, hamlets, outposts and small communities
wherever these are most vulnerable.
These are brilliant and descriptive words.
I do not know how they disappeared from
the Labour Party's vocabulary, because in 
the current debate my: honorable friend
the Leader . of the Opposition, under the
most terrible pressures: undoubtedly: and
obviously, instead of.. repeating these.. statements,
or anything like them, said of my
Government that we. proposed . to send. conscripts
to fight in a foreign land-that sounds
exactly like the, United States of: America
because we' are . defending . certain Vietnamese,
from'. certain other' Vietnamese. . O
what a fall was.-there,' my countrymen,
from . the robust statement -that ' here, was
aggression , from . the North and subversion
in the South, fomenled from : the. North;
to this'watery statement that, after'all, all
we'are doing is to defand some Vietnamese
from other Vietnamese. K
Then he made the most remrkable statement
I have listened to foi years. He said
that we are driving North Vietnam right
into the arms of China because we are
resisting the power of China. Of all the
Spusillanimous statements ever made in the
House, it must be the all time high. I do not
believe he thought of it. I do not believe
-he meant it. No man who said what he said
before could possibly produce such utter
Snonsense. The moral is: Do not resist China
and then you will not drive North Vietnam
into their arms; and do not resist North
Vietnam because it will save you a lot of
trouble, and who are the South Vietnamese
anyway? I suppose this astonishing proposi-
, tion would apply also to the United States
of America. That would be a reasonable
inference. On the basis that we want to
, leave it all to the United States, it would
be a reasonable inference. But the Leader of
the Opposition, coming back from this
excursion into fancy, goes on to say in this
very speech-
S The British presence in Asia is essential to
India, Malaysia, and Au; tralia, just as the United
States presence in this area is essential to the
security of the area.
Where do they stand? What is the policy or
position of this Party?
Before I conclude, I want to say a word
about the position of the United States. I
am satisfied-and I was confirmed in this
in my talks in Washington at one time or
another-that the American approach to
this problem is in reality just the same as
ours. No sane per; on--I emphasise the
word " sane"-could say that American
forces are being used in Vietnam for the
preservation of interests peculiar to
10143/ 65,-2 America. -Does any honorable member
oppositesay that? Speak up. Now is your
chance. Well, you do not say it. So far
we' are in agreement. I repeat: No sane
person could say that American forces are
being used in Vietnam for the preservation
of interests peculiar-to -America; for the
protection 6f American trade, or in pursuance
of some'other sinister' imperialist plot
to take over a'South East Asian' country.
Clearly,' the Ainericans arethere' to defend
a world order, the defence of which is the
prime purpose of the creation of the United
Nations,. and imposes duties upon every
member nation.
In Washington, on the 10th of this
month,' Mr. ' Dean Rusk, the distinguished
Secretary of State, was being interviewed.
He was asked what the commitment was to
South Vietnam. I will not read out in full
what he said. But he began by saying-
We have a very simple commitment to South
Vietnam. The first point he mentioned was-
It derives out of the South East Asia Treaty-
It is exactly the same view, honorable
members will observe, as I have indicated
tonight about the separate as well as joint
responsibilities. Mr. Dean Rusk mentioned
other matters. He went on to say-
Now, there is no need to parse these commitments
in great detail. The fact is that we know
we have a commitment-
This is the United States-
The South Vietnamese know we have a commitment.
The communist world knows we have a
commitment. Mr. Rusk continued-
Now, this means that the integrity of the
American commitment is at the heart of this problem.
I believe that the integrity of the American
commitment is the principal structure of peace
throughout the world.
But, Sir, true as that is, such defence cannot
be left to the United States alone. Let
me remind honorable members that the
American people, living at peace in a vast
and thickly populated country geographically
remote from South East Asia
would probably resent the notion that the
United States of America is the world's
policeman, and that countries like our own
can leave it to the Americans. The free
world has become so accumstomed to massive
aid going out from the United States
of America to. a score of countries that it 
may sometimes be tempted to regard it as
commonplace and inevitable. But it is
neither. The United States has had its own
long periods of isolationism, twice shattered
in this century by world wars. It. is to the
immeasurable advantage of world peacepeace
without surrender-that ever since the
Second World War, the United States has
not only been the greatest world power but
also has handsomely accepted the responsibilities
which flow from great power.
The real enemies of world peace are those
who ignore or reject this central truth of
modern history and promnote hatred or
distrust of America at every opportunity.
Sir, there are some such in Australia, who
talk of peace as if the mere wish for. it is
sufficient, and -then attack its active protectors
as if they were the enemies of the very element which many of them are
shedding their blood and expending their
resources to defend.
This does not mean that Governments
like our own, which understand and
appreciate the American policy and action,
are -mere puppets moved by strings under
American control. We occupy a respectable
place in American thinking. We are, and
they so regard us, an adult community
with notable achievements and a great
future. We are quite capable of offering
our views, critical or otherwise, to Washington,
and we do it every week. But we make
no -apologies to our own people for niever
losing sight of the basic truths ' to which I
have referred, or allowing to be clouded the
common elements which lead us, as in
Vietnam, to common action. Km .9
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA. 



Nbast bm * io t
a* prm of tw ef wla.
TU m" s&amp; too1 0o M~ IWIi
* I 11i43 13 ym AM II" ll
mmmm 39
umm B J( 83041
Lo~ P. M. hA ~ S u~ t I(~ U'i 



FOR PRESS TOT FOR r UBLICTIOIJ Dœ FORE 1.00 1, OUATURDA-Y 21ST AUGUST 1965
P. i~ i. 62/ 1965
VIIIL BLU.; I: R iAbTI'AJli 3TTIE tJN IOTHR
~ 3TAT~ hBviYENT TFRIMI 2aTLTIYR TRT. 101K, bIR ROBEQRT ~ NIS
T. 9 1.9 Q J 9
The Prime Minister ) nnounced in Q nberra toy that the
followin: S staite; Aent had been issuod from Clbrence,, Htouse, London~-
queen 7Mizabeth The -Queen &gt; ohrhas accepted invitations
from the Governments of Austr.? lin and " epland to visit those
countries durine, and A,, ri1 next year.
-i'een Elizabeth will trqvel to Australia by air in the
latter r~ art of -Li'arcl-and, ifter attending the Zourth Adelaide
Festival-of irts, of which Her Oajest-y. is Patron, will spend
two or three weeks in South Australia, Jie stern Austrralia and
the Australian Capital Territory.
-lit the end of hier time in Australia, Queen '-lizabeth will
join the r~ oynl Yatch ;' Britannia--, in which Her M~ ajesty will be
ed for -visit of about three weeks to Nlew Zealand, at the
end of which Queen Elizabebth w7ill return by air to England."
The Pri:-e .:, inistar , r, ie. lvc omeO the announcement of
the visit to Australi b'; r ler MVajest., The Queen co t 11e r. He
recalled how deeply disa -pointed i.' er ~ Iajesty had been when her
proposed visit in 1964 had to be cancelled and said that hie w 7s
delighte9 at theo prospect of '.' ueen : liz-abeth once a3. k; ain seein6
somnethaing of ustrali-:. and of the Australian people.
Sir ; kobert said th-t he vas particularly u leas that
Tier A~ ajestV would be . ible to a9 * tend the L-ourth Adelaide Foes; Iival
of Arts9 which was indeed the prime ' purpose of the visit.
Ther; Prime 1inister sts ted that wrhile precise dates for the
visit had yot to be deci'-' ed, it would not be possible for 2 uoen
' Mi7zabeth to be in AdIelaide for the official opening of the i: estivael.
Her MTTajesty, hor~ kever, 1wouldl be in A" delaide for the g' rea--ter part of
the second week of the 1" estival. The visit to Australia would then
extend into e:: rl~ r Apr-ril , hen F-er Liajesty would leave in the Royal
Yatch for New Zealand. 



THE THIRD COMMONWEALTH AND EMPIRE LAWJ CONFE] RENCE
24TH AUGUST. 1965
Speech by th~ e PriLme Minister? the Rt. Hon. Sir Rober~ t Menzies
My Lords, Your Excellencies and Ladies and Gentlemen
I think my task this morning is to declare this
Conference open, but as I was once a lawyer, now a politician,
it is obviously expected that I should make a speech with
enough brevity to save the day for you.
I want to make two confessions at the outset.
The first will be preceded by a statement. You see their
lordships and their honours gathered here. They don't always
appear in robes of that kind and when I walked in this
morning, Mr. Kerr said to me, " All the judges have been to
church" in a rather accusing way I thought,, ( Laughter) because
I had been flying down from Canberra and they had been to
church to which I made a reply which I want to repeat. I
mentioned it to one or two of the judges outside and I had
very little appreciation. I said, " Under those circumstances,
I would have expected them to be in the odour of sanctity,
but all I can smell is mothballs." ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, as you have pointed out, this is not a
political conference. We are here as lawyers and I am delighted
to find myself in the company of so many lawyers because I
confess to-you that the law was my first love and remains my
last. I have always regarded politics as a somewhat untimely
interruption in my enjoAnt of law.
So this isn't a political conference as you have said.
It is a gathering of lawyers, and I venture to say it is a very
timely event, particularly in this confused period of modern
history where the rule of law and the institutions of the law
are both under challenge. I begin by saying that because I
think we ought to face up to that fact that there is a challenge
to the law, a challenge to the institutions of the law. And
I hope, Sir? that whatever vastly important matters of detail
may be considered at this conference that the great principles
will not be entirely forgotten.
Now I suppose most of us lawyers were brought up on
A. V. Dicey and we know a little, in words, about his two great
principles of the sovereignty of Parliament and the rule of
law. Well, his principle of the sovereignty of Parliament I
don't need to take very much time about because it is by no means
of universal application. He was writing about Great Britain
with no written Constitution and evolved position for the
institution of government and he was able to -say, with
substantial accuracy, thal Parliament was all-powerful, was
sovereign. This is not, of course wholly true in Australia.
We have a written Constitution. that's an advantage that every
lawyer here will appreciate. ( Laughter) And under that written
constitution, you have what might be called roughly a division
of sovereignty between the Commonwealth and the States, and even
then, as we all know, it is by no means complete, because as the
Constitution now stands, there are certain thin sthat can't be
done either by the Comnonealthar the States, The immortal Section
92 of the Constitution has taken care of that, to give only one
example. ov. / 2 
-2
Therefore, Sir, chie principle of the sovereignty of
Parliament is not one that we can become eloquent about in afterdinner
speeches when we are seeking to state what the elements are
in common in the Commonwealth because that is not one of them.
And I am not complaining about that. There are very many newlyindependent
countries in the world who don't, as yet, or there are
some who don't as yet have a Parliament in our sense, or for that
matter of course, recognise its sovereignty. Parliament and the
authority of Parliament and the pirty system and the conflicts
which precede the choice of a Parliament and the proceedings of
Parliament, these are all rather peculiar to some countries
including our own in Australia but not of universal validiiy,
because whatever the sovereigniy of' Parliament does mean in any
country, if it can be used as an expression at all it must
connote the authority of Parliament over the executive by its
power to dismiss or to reject.
W'ell, Sir, put that on one side because I don't want
to dwJll on it. It is no longer a matter of common existence,
it is no longer a common factor in all Commonwealth countries
though I hope some day it will be.
What about the rule of law. I turn to that because
to me and I am sure to you the rule of law is the vital
element in a hiigh civilisation, and we as lawyers, I venture to
say, are bound in conscience to battle to establish it and to
maintain it. The rule of law has many aspects familiar to
lawyers. They may not be too familiar to those who are not.
But there are two aspects of the matter to which I, for one,
attach immense importance. One is that there sh-ould be punishment
or restraint of anybody only After ordinary proceedings
before the ordinary courts, so that we all know that wie are not
going to be punished for something, we are not going to be put
under physical restraint in relation to some matter unless we
have gone or been taken before the courts, the ordinary courts,
and there have applied to us the law which applies to all other
people. This is to be contrasted with arbitrary power. There
are still symptoms of it in the world preventive detention by
the executive. This is, of course, the very antithesis of the
rule of law. The second aspect of it is involved in the first,
that because of the rule of law no man is above the law everybody
in the country from the most highly-placed dowm to the
most insignificant, if you care to put it that way they are both
under the law, ñ iot one of them above it; subject Zo the
ordinary law and the ordinary tribunals.
Now, Sir, that is so important-it is a matter to
which much attention still has to be direded in many countries
of the world, but it is of prime importance and you notice that
involved in it is the position of the courts and of the people.
I just want to say this to you that the courts, the courts of
law in this country, in any other country represented at this
conference, must be authoritative and strong, and I just want to
remind all barristers who are here that an authoritative and
strong court requires a strong judge but it also requires strong
advocacy. This is sometimes forgotten. In my own time, I
have been some terrible performances of advocacey, apparently a / 3 
-3
subconsciously based on the idea that the judge will have to
decide it anyhow and that's his business. A weak barrister,
an ill-prepared one or that utter curse, if I may say so,
who either can't distinguish between a strong argument and a
weak one or lacks the decision to select and concentrate, he
is a curse that one. WIe've all heard him before today. He
harms his client but he also harms the judge because the judge
has not been given the assistance that every judge must look
for when he knows that he has to determine an issue between the
parties. One other remark I would like to make to you because
I have been warned to be brief. Lawyers, if I may say so to all
of them, must avoid a narrow outlook. I don't mean to say chat
I am asking people not to concentrate on the work in hand
because I know that is the very essence of legal practice, but
they are not to achieve a narrow outlook. It is a good thing
to find time for thinking, for example, about the relations
between the law and life in a cnanging world. The reilations
between law and life, the law not being something desiccated
and detached, unrelated to the life of human beings constantly
to see it against a human background. And therefore, while
remaining concerned with the interpretation of the law and its
application the application of the law to the facts lawyers
really should find time and and mental energy to influence law
reform, for example, in substance as well as in procedure, and
this is to be achieved, partly by professional action, and under
some circumstances by political action.
I'll just add one word about political action. A
well-furnished lawyer is a gro3t asset in any Parliament and
if he be a well-furnished lawyer, he will be listened to in any
Parliament. If he can add to the techniques that he has
acquired in court and in the study, a wider warmth and variety
of human contacts in other words, gets the feeling of
politics and the sense of a Parliament, which is a peculiar
place but rather the same all over the world-you must get
the feel of it if he can do this that weli-furnished lawyer,
he can come to great prominence and influence and have his
opportunity from time to time to do something about the reform
of the law in the light of changing circumstances in a very
rapidly changing world.
Sir, in my own time, in my thirty years in Canberra
. it is hard to believe, looking at my boyish countenance that
thirty-one years ago I was Attorney-General of Australia, and
therefore I have had all that time since and in that time
there have been too few of the people that I have been
describing, too few well-furnished lawyers coming into
politics, not too many. It is a cheap cynicism that I always
try to correct when I hear people saying, " Oh, there are too
many lawyers in politics". W4ell, I suppose it may depend on
how you define ' lawyer", but I started off by talking about
somebody, the desirable person, a well-furnished lawyer. All
I can say is that my own Parliament would be much better off
if we had more than we have and it would be a disaster if we
had less. Now, that little homily I don't lik-a making
speeches before lunch and I daresay you don't like listening
to them ( Laughter) but there is no escape this time because
here I am, and when I have heard a few more speeches that will
be of very great interest to me, I must set about getting back
to Canberra in time to be cross-examnined at half-past two at
Question Time, and so I declare this Conference open. 



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER,
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES, M. P.,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, THURSDAY 26TH AUGUST, 1965.
THE DROUGHT
As Honourable Members will know the Government has for some
time been giving attention to the drought situation in Central Australia
and parts of Eastern Australia. We have had representations from the
Premiers of New South Wales and Queensland, including proposals that
the Commonwealth provide special financial assistance towards certain
schemes of drought relief being undertaken by the States. There have
also been representations from various interested organisations and
individuals. The Government has given consideration to these matters
and I should like to inform the House in general terms of the action
that has already been taken in the Commonwealth sphere and to indicate
some further steps the Government proposes to take.
SIn this statement I am referring primarily to the drought
in New South Wales and Queensland, and not to the drought that has
persisted for a number of years in Central Australia. Although some
of the measures to which I shall be referring are applicable equally
to the two States and to the Northern Territory, the Commonwealth's
position with regard to drought in the Territory is a special one
arising from its direct responsibility for Northern Territory matters.
My colleague the Minister for ferritories will be making a separate
statement dealing with the question of the drought in the Northern
Territory, Naturally, in our approach to the whole matter we have had
well in mind the consequences of the drought for the nation and,
more particularly, the plight of those who are suffering from the
drought in a direct and personal way.
The drought has had serious and widespread effects and some
of these will continue. However, provided the drought does not
extend into the coming season, the indications are that it should
not have a seriously adverse effect on the overall economy in terms
of loss of total rural production and export proceeds from primary
products. Fortunately, the drought has already broken in certain areas, 
2
particularly the dairying areas along the coast but even in those
areas the aftermath of the drought will have severe consequences
for individual farmers. A serious position remains in inland
sheep and wheat and cattle areas of northern New South Wales and
southern Queensland despite some partial relief rains. The position
could further deteriorate in those areas if the drought continues
during the coming spring and summer with further heavy losses for
the individual primary producers concerned.
The provision of assistance for drought-affected primary
producers is, under the constitutional division of responsibilities,
essentially a matter for the State governments concerned. The
State Governments of New South Wales and Queensland have introduced
various special measures of assistance such as the provision of
special loans at concessional rates of interest and freight
concessions on the carriage of fodder and livestock, and have asked
the Commonwealth to participate in the financing of these measures.
Proposals for Commonwealth participation in drought assistance
schemes for the benefit of individual primary producers have also
been put before us by a number of organisations.
The provision of assistance such as this is properly a
State responsibility and the States have the administrative machinery
to handle it. After careful consideration, we have decided that it
would not be appropriate for the Commonwealth to participate directly
in the financing of such measures nor do we think it would be a
proper function for the Commonwealth to participate in making loans
to individuals or providing other forms of direct financial
assistance, to those who may be having difficulty, for reasons such
as drought, in financing their business activities.
At the same time, we are very conscious of the strains
that special drought measures might put on the finances of the two
States. When the new financial assistance arrangements for the next
five years were evolved at our meeting last June with the Premiers, 3 
3
it was accepted that the arrangements would stand unless there was
a major change in the financial position of a State through
circumstances beyond its control. If, as a result of action related
to the drought, the States of New South Wales and Queensland find it
necessary to meet abnormally large calls on their budgets that are
established to be beyond their financial capacities, we will be
prepared to consider assisting them by means of general purpose
assistance grants. I am advising the two Premiers in these terms.
There are two matters which do lie within the Commonwealth's
particular sphere of responsibility and which have a bearing on the
position of those suffering from the drought. I refer to taxation
and the question of access to trading bank finances. In our
consideration of both these matters we have been concerned to do
whatever we reasonably can to help primary producers affected by
the drought, in relation to both their needs for carrying on until
the drought breaks and the problems they will encounter in
rehabilitating their properties, especially by way of re-stocking,
to get them back into shape for the resumption of normal production
operations after the drought breaks.
In the consideration of taxation measures, we have found
that the present provisions of the income tax law, and the
administration of that law by the Commissioner of Taxation, already
go a long way towards meeting the taxation problems of those affected
by the drought. It needs to be borne in mind that, by and large,
taxation concessions are neither direct nor immediate in their
effects on tax-payers' incomes and that being related to income,
their benefit is greatest to those primary producers with large
incomes, paying high rates of tax, and least to producers with small
incomes, paying low rates of tax. There is thus limited scope for
taxation concessions as an appropriate means of helping droughtaffected
primary producers.
With regard to profits arising from forced sales of livestock
because of the drought, a matter which has been the subject of
4 
4
numerous representations, the law already gives the primary producer
the right to elect to have those profits spread over five years,
over the period during which in more normal circumstances they
might be expected to arise. A producer who makes such an election
would be liable to tax on only 1/ 5th of his additional profits in
the year in which such profits arise. Subsequently the profits so
spread must be applied wholly or principally to purchase replacement
livestock. Expenditures on replacements being themselves deductible,
the amount of abnormal profits carried over into the second and
succeeding years need not, depending on re-stocking rates, involve
any addition to a primary producer's tax liability in those years.
In addition, of course, if a primary producer considers that the
provisional tax notified in his assessment is too high, he may seek
adjustment of that tax on the basis of his estimate of his current
year's taxable income.
The cost of purchasing fodder used to feed livestock, which
has also been the subject of several requests, is already deductible
in the year of acquisition, so that primary producers who are forced
to buy-in additional fodder to maintain their stock may deduct as
normal practice, the whole of the purchase price. Similarly, the
cost of producing or purchasing a reasonable quantity of fodder for
stockpiling against emergencies is deductible for income tax purposes.
Concern had been expressed in several quarters at the
possible inability of some drought-affected producers to meet their
tax liabilities by the due date. The Commissioner of Taxation, who
is responsible for the administration of the income tax law, has
discretion under the law to grant extension of time for the payment
of tax, and has assured the Government that he applies this discretion
sympathetically when considering individual applications by primary
producers in financial difficulties because of the drought.
A particular problem that has arisen concerns the position
of primary producers who, because of the drought, have shorn their
flocks twice within the 1964-65 income year. As the law now stands,
woolgrowers so placed are required to account for the proceeds and
expenses of two wool clips in their 1964-65 income tax returns; there
5 
is no provision in the law whereby proceeds of the second clip,
net of direct expenses, can be transferred to the 1965-66 income year.
To meet the situation, the Government has decided to
introduce an amendment of the law so as to permit primary producers
concerned to elect to reduce their 1964-65 income by the amount of
the net proceeds of the second clip and to carry that amount forward
into the 1965-66 income year.
I turn now to the question of access to trading bank
finance. The Reserve Bank has kept itself closely informed of
developments in the drought situation, particularly with regard to
the demands of primary producers affected by the drought for finance
from the banking system.
Preferential treatment is extended to the rural
industries under the traditional policies of both the Reserve Bank
and the trading banks, and the trading banks have assured the
Reserve Bank that the demands for bank finance arising from the
present drought are being dealt with sympathetically. As the
implications of the drought became clearer, the Reserve Bank informed
banks that in providing necessary finance for purposes arising
from the drought, additional lending might be undertaken outside
the general limitation on new lending commitments.
The trading banks have been asked to continue to keep the
Reserve Bank informed of the extent of demands for drought finance
upon them. The Reserve Bank is closely watching the situation,
including the trading banks' continuing ability to provide
additional loan finance to drought-affected clients.
We recognise of course that the measures of drought relief
which the States and ourselves have introduced or contemplate do
not deal with the long term problem of drought mitigation measures.
The unfortunate consequences of the present drought have
served to stimulate an awareness of the ravages that droughts in
this country can cause, from the standpoint of both individual 6 
6
primary producers and the nation as a whole, and there is general
acceptance of the need for further action to mitigate the effects of
droughts that will, inevitably and unhappily, continue to occur from
time to time in the future. Already, following discussions in the
Australian Agricultural Council, the the Bureau of
Meteorology and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics are undertaking
investigations into drought mitigation. We further intend to put
to study the question of the role the Commonwealth and its agencies
might play, within the sphere of Commonwealth responsibility, in
the devising and execution of measures to mitigate the effects of
future droughts. 



THE UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
" The Universities Some Queries"~
The Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies, M. P.
Prime Minister of Australia
THE INAUGURAL WALLACE WURTH
MEMORIAL LECTURE
28th August, 1964 
I
A It .4
Photograph by courtesy Sydney Morning Herald'
x~
ix' 
The Chancellor, the Hon. Mr. Justice J. S. J. Clancy, C. M. G.
Prime Minister, members of the University, ladies and gentlemen-
This evening is an historic occasion in the life of this University.
We are to hear the inaugural Wallace Wurth Memorial
Lecture. This was established by the Council of the University
to commemorate our first Chancellor, the late Wallace Charles
Wurth, in recognition of his great work, not only for this University
but for he community. We are privileged this evening
that the Right Honourable Sir Robert Menzies, Prime Minister
of Australia, has consented to deliver this lecture. We had
always hoped that this would be, so we waited, and we are
very grateful that tonight Sir Robert is with us on this very
important occasion. I now invite you, Sir Robert, to deliver the
Wallace Wurth Memorial Lecture.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies, M. P.
Wallace Wuth was a civil servant. I am occasionally told
that I use this expression wrongly, and that I should refer to
people like him as " public servants", working under what in
Australia are called the Public Service Acts.
However, I believe that there are many people who are public
servants who are not under the Public Service Act at all, and I
therefore have fallen into the habit of calling people civil servants
when I intend to refer to those who are in the direct
administrative :; ervice of government.
Because he was a civil servant, Wallace Wurth was a member
of a class of people who constitute a recurrent theme of criticism,
usually by those who are not well-informed.
I have heard civil servants referred to with monotonous regularity
as " bureaucrats", as " clock watchers", as " red tape merchants",
as repcetitive and costly " tea drinkers".
My experience shows that such criticisms come most loudly
from those with the least information. When I cast my eye
around the upper brackets of the Commonwealth Civil Service 
and realise the devotion and talent and experience and objectivity
which they bring to their work, I could laugh to hear
them dismissed with a sneer. There are, in fact, few people who
work harder and who think more assiduously. They are in a
very real sense among the custodians of continuity and sanity in
government. It is now many years since I first heard a friend of mine say,
with a certain touch of irony, that " the Civil Service produces
a level of efficiency below which no sensible government can
fall". This is, of course, not to say that politicians, and in particular
Ministers, should become the mere spokesmen of their departmental
officers. This would be all wrong. Indeed, it would be
seen to be wrong by their senior officers themselves. It is the
duty of those civil servants who are in the position of advising
Ministers and of administering policies subsequently created to
give the most objective advice and the most intelligent service
that they can. When they have done that, they have discharged
their task.
It is for governments to determine policy. It is then for the
Civil Service to give effect to those policies whether they
assume legislative or administrative form, and to do so without
fear, favour or affection.
For myself, I have never wanted to know the Party political
alignment of any officer of mine. Indeed, I would resent it if he
told me. For the truth is that whatever Party is in power, it has
exactly the same right to expect honest, disinterested, and competent
work from the Civil Service as any other Party should
expect if it came into office.
These general remarks are by no means irrelevant to the late
Wallace Wurth. He was, as his record showed, a man of most
versatile talents, of rich character and personality, and great
achievement. There was, indeed, something elusive and yet
compelling about him.
For ter. years, until his death, he attended Loan Councils and
Premiers' Conferences at Canberra, as Chairman of the New
South Wales Public Service Board. From my place at the top
of the table, my eye would frequently catch the sight of Wallace 
Wurth sitting caldmly on the front Treasury bench-as to the
manner born--hearing all, but, so far as I could judge, steeped
in silence. At fir:; t I used to wonder vaguely what he was doing
at the conference as a member of the New South Wales team.
After all, I had known a few Chairmen of Public Service
Boards in the Commonwealth but had seldom found it necessary
or appropriate to take up with them such matters, financial
or otherwise, as come to be argued when the State Premiers
march on Canberra.
The Chairman of a Public Service Board has great responsibilities,
but they do not commonly fall into the arena of the
political cut and thrust of a Premiers' Conference.
What then, I used to say to myself subconsciously, was Wurth
doing in this gallley? And then the answer dawned on me all
too slowly. Wall. ace Wurth was not for this purpose, and, except
in name, Chairman of the New South Wales Public Service
Board in the restricted or orthodox sense at all. He was the
friend, the consultant, the universal provider, the wise and
upright judge of issues. He was in a sense a muted noise off
stage. He was, to vary the metaphor, armed yet disarming, the
eminence grise of the New South Wales Government. In short,
he was present, not as Chairman of the Public Service Board,
but in a wider capacity. He was, of course, as his whole record
shows, a superb administrator, and I at no time doubted that he
managed the New South Wales Public Service very well. But
his essential contribution came through his pervasive influence
on general policy and action, an influence made possible and
perhaps inevitable by his luminous intelligence, his great force
of character and his unbiased integrity.
In my long experience of public life and affairs, Wallace
Wurth was, in his own right and in his own fashion, unique.
Bearing all these facts in mind, it was a happy stroke when he
was made Chancellor of this new University. For a good Chancellor,
if I may say so, should be a wise and experienced man
with enough kniowledge of academic people to understand their
problems, but also to be able on proper occasions to treat them
lightheartedly. He should, in these days when governments
have the major responsibility for universities in Australia, know 
something about governments and how they think, something
of the qualities and something of the oddities of politicians,
and, at the same time, enjoy wide respect from people, many
of whom have never been in a university at all, but who represent
some of the great currents of knowledge and experience
which animate modern social and industrial life.
The significance of Wallace Wurth in relation to the University
of New South Wales could perhaps best be expressed if
I say that one of the functions of a university is to produce
individuals who can develop and preserve their individuality
while still playing in the team. This, after all, should be one of
the great purposes of a university; not uniformity, but developed
individuality.
When I was invited to deliver the Wallace Wurth Memorial
Lecture, .1 had a vagrant thought, built upon some previous
experiencs, that I would be allowed to select any topic and take
the opportunity of saying what I thought about it. This has
happened on a number of occasions and it was not unimportant
to me, because I do as a rule one of these lectures a year, and
sometime:;, through inadvertence on my part, two. I like doing
them, for the very good reason that, in public affairs we can
accustom ourselves all too readily to somewhat general thought
and speech and succumb to the endemic disease of politics,
which is a dislike of precision. I have, therefore, found it a
very good thing for me to have to sit down over a period of
many weeks, do some research, analyse some ideas, and work
them into a degree of clarity of which I would hope not to be
ashamed after they were delivered.
Full of these ideas, I said to my secretary " Find out whether I
am at large in the choice of a topic." The answer came back
with all the inevitability that one expects from a great scientist
like Professor Baxter, " We would like the Prime Minister to
speak about some topic connected with the universities."
Well, Mr. Chancellor, I have for some reason or another, or
perhaps for no reason, been the recipient of, I think, i8 honorary
degrees around the world. That has meant i8 speeches
about universities. I have made quite a number of such speeches
in the Parliament; I have delivered others at the opening of 
buildings or schools in various Australian universities. I, therefore,
said to myself, with some feeling of despair, that, as no
doubt some of my political opponents would say, I was an
exhausted volcano. What was there with the faintest degree of
novelty that I could say about the universities? Under these
circumstances I decided on heroic measures. I would put some
queries and perhaps answer them.
I settled on I: wo queries; in each case because I thought it
related to something important about which comparatively
little is said, but about each of which there may be considerable
misconceptions. So, having said something, all too little, about the late Wallace
Wurth, I vwill proceed to deal with my two queries.
The first relates to the new axiom or dogma that university
education ought to be regarded as a right and not as a privilege;
in other words that it should be available to all persons, male or
female, who pass what I will broadly call the entrance examination.
Now in my younger days, if I may venture to go back so
long in history, this was neither axiom nor dogma. Scholarships
were few and had to be battled for in a highly competitive
field. A university education was not a right, nor indeed was it
the perquisite of the sons and daughters of the rich. In my own
time as an undlergraduate, great sacrifices were made by parents,
including my own, to give their children the opportunity
for a higher educational attainment. But times have changed,
and, for reasons to which I will refer a little later, for the better.
Could I start by referring to the celebrated Robbins Report
on higher education in Great Britain? In paragraph 31 of that
report the committee said-
" Throughout our Report we have assumed as an axiom that
courses of higher education should be available for all those who
are qualified by ability and attainment to pursue them and who
wish to do so. What type of education they should get and in what
kind of institution are questions we consider later on; and the
criterion by which capacity is to be judged is clearly a question on
which there may be a variety of opinions. But, on the general
principle as we have stated it, we hope there will be little dispute." 
This statement has been referred to with approval by our
own Universities Commission, and by quite a few educational
publications in Australia. Yet, of course, it is not completely
definitive. You will have noted the phrase " those who are
qualified by ability and attainment to pursue them", and you
will also have noted that " the criterion by which capacity is to
be judged is clearly a question on which there may be a variety
of opinion;".
Whether this means that the simple test, to apply it to Australian
conditions, is the passing of the Matriculation Examination,
I do not profess to know. For myself, I would like to
believe that the real point is that finance should not be the
limiting factor where the intellectual capacity and the personal
ambition are adequately high.
On this matter I have had my own mind improved, and no
doubt most of you would agree that that is a desirable state of
affairs, by my perusal, by courtesy of Professor Connell, of a
recent study made by the Department of Education in the
University of Sydney, under the title of " The University and
the Comrr. unity". I am much indebted to this publication and
would like to quote one most interesting passage from it. This
is of great historic interest I think.
" Tertiary education in the past has been thought of largely
as an education of an elite or specially talented segment of the
community. The falsity of this position is now becoming more
apparent every day. The more talented and productive the
elite, the more it becomes necessary to have it built upon a
highly educated community. This is the only way to ensure the
continuance of first rate education for the best brains in the
community. There are three good reasons for this. First, the
talented perform best, generally speaking, in a climate of sympathetic
understanding among people who have some reasonable
idea of what they are doing, and take an intelligent interest
in their success. Secondly, the higher education of the talented
is an expensive business, and it will receive adequate financial
support only from public monies. These will be forthcoming
only if there is a sufficient body of soundly educated people who 
can see the value of such an education. And, thirdly, by increasing
the number of highly educated men and women in the
community, you not only ensure stimulation and support for
the specially talented, you also increase the pool of individuals
who aspire to further education, and from whom large numbers
of specially talented may be drawn for a higher education.
These argument; suggest that if we are to educate even our
gifted successfully, we must provide opportunity for as wide a
segment of the community as possible to proceed into some
form of higher education, and at the same time raise the general
level of educational achievement throughout the whole community."
I am sorry to inflict so long a citation upon you, but
this seems to be of singular quality and relevancy to what I am
saying. Accepting these views, I would like to say that they not only
present a statement of desirable rights, but they present an
enormous challenge. When I attended, earlier this year, the
University of Birmingham to receive a degree there at the hands
of my old friend, Lord Avon, I said a little about this problem
in my speech of acknowledgement. The Vice-Chancellor of
Birmingham later gave me a copy of his report to his University
for 1963. In this he referred to the implications of the initial
proposition in the Robbins Report.
In the course of his report the Vice-Chancellor said, " The
universities' task of sustaining quality is more important in the
long run than numbers." He also went on to say that " Another
consequence of the new philosophy will have to be watched.
The attitudes of :; tudents who come to the universities, claiming
their places as of right, will, or as I would have said ' may', be
different from those of students coming to enjoy and use a hard
won privilege."
He had other things to say which seemed to me to be of great
importance. But: speaking now for myself, and accepting the
new philosophy as an ideal to be aimed at, I do want to point
out a few practical considerations which cannot be ignored in
the enthusiasm of a new vision.
Far too many people in our country, when they urge the
creation of a new university, seem to think of it in terms of 
financial provision by governments, and the bricks and mortar
of practical construction. Yet the fact is that the value of a university
depends primarily upon the standard of its research and
its teaching. In short, the greatest problem about the expansion
of universities, or the creation of a new one, is that of securing
a highly qualified staff. Any man who has any share of responsibility
for the general national balance and prosperity cannot
fail to be conscious of such problems as the pressure of numbers
on financial resources, the pressure of numbers and demand oei
physical resources, because these things form part of the economic
problems of the nation. They have to be considered. They
can produce some limitation upon the financial provision by
governments. But, in the ultimate, the capacity to establish new
universities or to expand old ones is primarily to be judged by
reference to the maintenance of the quality of research and
teaching and the value of the degrees to be awarded.
Gresham's Law, if I may say so, applies to universities and
their degrees just as much as it did and does to money. In short,
we have occurring under our eyes a tremendous explosion in
the numbers of those who seek tertiary education. Our task is
to see that they get it without lowering the standards.
The la:; t thing that I want to do is to encumber you with
statistics, but I would ask you to carry in mind just a few
figures which I derived from the last report of the Australian
Universities Commission.
In 1960, which is, after all, not long ago, the number of
students at Australian universities was ( and I will quote figures
to the nc: arest thousand) 53,000. By 1963 this had grown to
69, oo000. The prediction of the Commission ( and it is not likely
to be over the mark) is that by I966 the figure will be 95,000.
( I96o-53, ooo, 1966-95, ooo).
These figures represent an enormous increase in what I will
call demand for tertiary education. They must be accompanied
by the observation that graduation rates, either in total or in
minimum time, were, over the period from 1951 to 1956, deplorably
low. The figures seem to be improving, but they are
still not as good as they should be. This is, of course, important
because the amount of money spent and the amount of teaching 
energy put forward in the training of students is wasted to the
extent that the result is not achieved. Any community like ours,
which accepts large financial burdens for universities, cannot
afford this kind of waste.
The reasons for what I have called wastage are, I think, clear
enough. We have not yet reached a completely adequate level
of training in ithe secondary schools, and, therefore, too many
matriculating students go to university with a considerable risk
of failure. This has deeply impressed me ever since Sir Keith
Murray, now Lord Murray I am happy to observe, presented
the original report. It explains why my own Government has
initiated schemes for secondary school scholarships designed to
give extra time in secondary studies, which is very important,
and for science teaching facilities in the secondary schools so
that on the science side students may, if they decide to go on to
the university, go on much better prepared. Again, most universities
have felt inadequately staffed, that is in terms of numbers I
hasten to say, and that the staff-student ratios were unsatisfactory.
What I have said means that I believe that before we
become too rhapsodical about the increase in numbers and the
rights of people to have university training, we should face up
to the problem that the greatest task, and in a sense the most
difficult one, is to find the necessary trained and competent
staff. There was a time when quite a number of professors and
lecturers came from overseas. That was true in my own time.
That time has come to an end. We must,, as never before, generate
in our own universities our own future staff.
This is a problem by no means overlooked by our own
Universities Commission. It must not be overlooked by governments.
I certainly don't overlook it myself. Unless we can, by
one means or another, encourage and produce an increasing
percentage of university students who aim at higher degrees
and research work, then we will do a gross disservice to university
education by concentrating our minds exclusively on numbers
and on money.
I would sum up my own views about which perhaps I've said 
too much, on this matter by stating the new rule in my own
fashion. I believe that we should aim at a state of affairs in
which all young men and women capable of, and likely to benefit
from, a university education are not denied their opportunity
for want of means. But I believe that this opportunity will
find them pursuing false lights unless they can go through a
period of training and inspiration which can come to them
only through the work of teachers of the highest order.
My second query-and this is, I think, rather a bold one; still
one mu:; t be bold occasionally-relates to " academic freedom".
For various well-known reasons, there has been, during the
last few years in Australia, considerable discussion about the
nature and extent of the academic freedom to be enjoyed by
academic people.
I want to say something about the problem tonight, for two
reasons. The first is that I think that I am at liberty to express an
objective view, for, although I have had, fortunately, much to
do with university developments in Australia over the last
decade, I have at all times been careful to maintain my own
belief in the autonomy of universities and in the utter undesirability
of governmental executive direction to the universities as
to what they are to study and teach. It is, I think, well to remember
that in Australia the universities are in a substantial
sense government universities, relying to a major extent upon
monies provided by governments. Under these circumstances,
it might be feared that the governments which find the money
might wish to call the tune, and might interfere with those
university activities which it is the function of the university to
promote. As I think it will be agreed that I have at no time
sought to interfere with university autonomy, I may feel justified
in offering some views about academic freedom.
My :; econd reason is that I think that a good deal of what has
been said in the press and otherwise about academic freedom
has been over-emotional; it has, I fear, promoted more heat
than light. It is, therefore, I think, a valuable exercise to pose
the question " What is academic freedom?" and to endeavour to
answer it. I 
The first element in academic freedom is the liberty of
thought. This has never been better defined than by Charles
Morgan in his remarkable book, and my favourite book,
" Liberties of the Mind". I quote his words-
" I mean by it the mind's freedom from any external pressure
designed to drug, intimidate or otherwise reduce its full exercise
of natural capacity."
I would also like to quote with warm approval the words of
the report of the Murray Committee on Australian Universities
-it is as well to recall these words:
" In the middle of the twentieth century universities are very
much in the public eye and in most countries they receive a
good deal of attention, and also very substantial financial support,
from governments. In most parts of the free world they
are accorded a high degree of autonomy and self-determination
on the ground that the particular services which they render,
both to their own country and to mankind in general, cannot
be rendered without such freedom. Even in time of war and
national danger, the nations of the West have sought to honour,
so far as they humanly could, the right and duty of the universities
to pursue new knowledge without fear or favour and to
educate in a liberal spirit and with integrity; and even in times
of economic depression they have shown increasing signs of
seeking to maintain the life and work of universities in full
vigour." The integrity of the scholar would be under attack if he were
told what he wa: to think about and how he was to think about
it. It is of the most vital importance for human progress in all
fields of knowledge that the highest encouragement should be
given to untrammelled research, to the vigorous pursuit of
truth, however unorthodox it may seem. It is for this reason
that in Australia we have established the autonomy of universities,
and have, so far as I know, and I hope I am right, consistently
refrained from interfering in their work with what I
will call political executive directions.
If no limits can sensibly be put to the search for new truths
or the better understanding and expression of old ones, it follows
that the scholar must work in an atmosphere of freedom 
and with a free mind. True, in a democracy, Parliament, acting
within its constitutional jurisdiction may, under some circumstances,
pass legislation which limits the rights of expression.
Such circumstances may arise in time of war or other special
times where national security may require, under an appropriate
law, some limitations upon freedom of expression or of
individual activity. But I know of no law in a modern civilised
country which has made it an offence to think. There is, of
course, in s; ome philosophies in the world, an attack made upon
the mind in order to constrain it into habits of thought which
are agreeable to the rulers. There are philosophies in the world
which aim at reducing the power and significance of human
volition in order to pave the way for what has been called a
mechanistic conception of life; in which people are to be pawns
in the game of economic and material conflict. But I think we
may say that in Australia we have never accepted these philosophies
and that we still retain our passion for freedom and for
the development, not only of the individual, but of every faculty
that he may possess for investigation and discovery.
Now I said just now that some discussion has appeared to me
to be over-emotional. I have, indeed, if I may say so prudently
in this assembly, detected some disposition on the part of some
academics to claim a freedom which puts them outside the substance
and procedures of the ordinary law. Now, quite frankly,
this is a claim that cannot and must not be sustained. Freedom
is one thing. Privilege is another, and privilege cannot be
claimed unless the law recognises it. There are, indeed, some
privileges recognised by the law. For example, the privilege,
under some circumstances, of communications between patient
and doctor and between the priest and a confessing member of
his communion. But these, I repeat, are within the law.
But, putting such matters on one side, freedom is to be seen
as a faculty enjoyed by all citizens, not because they are
academic or because they conduct a newspaper, but because they
are citizens. The freedom of the press, for example, like yours
or mine, is a freedom within the law. It is subject to all the legal
rules relatinlg to defamation or sedition or violation of the criminal
codes. A rich private citizen achieves no new or special 
freedom when he purchases a newspaper and controls its policy
and utterances. Similarly, a barrister practising his profession at
the Bar and enjoying the normal freedom of mankind and the
special legal privilege which attaches to what he says in court,
does not acquire a new body of either freedom or privilege if he
becomes a Professor of Law at a university. It is, I think, and I
speak subject of course to your correction, Mr. Chancellor, well
to remember some of these basic truths.
The whole matter has been somewhat confused for some
Australian minds, I venture to think, by the great masses of litigation
and debate which have occurred in the United States, the
reasons for which are, as I will point out later, largely peculiar
to the United States itself. But before I come to that let me consider
what the position is under our own legal system and that
of England. I will give one example which always ought to be
remembered; t.. e famous trial of Thomas Paine, the author of
" The Rights of Man". Now this was a very peculiar trial because
the defendant was not present, and a stranger trial still
because a hand-picked jury had been specially bribed to produce
a verdict of guilty. A very satisfactory state of affairs from the
point of view of the prosecution.
But in that trial although he was absent, and although the
result was pre-determined, he was defended by Thomas
Erskine. This, I hasten to say, was before Erskine succumbed to
those rather sordid ambitions which led him to the House of
Lords; before he had entered into that process of deterioration
in which he ro:; e in favour but fell in grace. But his speech in
defence of Thomas Paine remains a classic. He did not attack
the law, for that would have been futile. He did not claim that
Paine, as a thinker and writer, had some special immunity from
the law. On the contrary, he said this:-and these are memorable
words with which a great number of you will be very
familiar: " If I were to ask you, Gentlemen of the Jury, what is the
choicest fruit that grows upon the tree of English liberty, you
would answer SECURITY UNDER THE LAW. If I were to ask the
whole people of England the return they look for at the hands
of the Governraent, for the burdens under which they bend to 
support it, I should still be answered sEcURInTY UNDER THE LAW".
I am not sure that a modern jury would make that answer but
still that was a magnificent statement.
The whole basis of this famous passage was that Paine's freedom
to write was consistent with, and therefore protected by,
the law; not that it was superior to the law.
I will make one more citation. It is from a play, but it expresses
with great accuracy the spirit of the law. My former
colleague, and our recent Ambassador to the United States, Sir
Howard Beale was good enough to direct my attention to it.
The play is Robert Bolt's play about Sir Thomas More, " A Man
for All Seasons".
More, as you all remember, was the Lord Chancellor, and, in
those days particularly, the Lord Chancellor was more than the
head of the judiciary, he was a man of immense and, at that
time, in some respects, arbitrary power. In the play, his wife
Alice is protesting to him because he will make no move to
arrest a man named Rich, who, although pretending to be a
friend, she thinks and believes is preparing to change sides and
become a dangerous enemy. She is joined in this argument by
William Roper and so the dialogue proceeds-
ALICE: While you talk [ she is talking to her father] he's gone!
Mor: And go he should if he was the Devil himself until he
broke the law!
ROPER: So now you'd give the Devil benefit of law!
MoRE: Yes, what would you do? Cut a great road through the
law to get after the Devil?
ROPER: I'd cut down every law in England to do that!
MORE: Oh? And when the last law was down, and the Devil
turned round on you-where would you hide, Roper, the
laws all being flat? This country's planted thick with laws
from coast to coast-man's laws, not God's-and if you
cut them down-and you're just the man to do it-d'you
really think you could stand upright in the winds that
would blow then?
To continue, I would venture to say something more on this
matter that a professor or lecturer at a university is an employee 
of the university acting through its governing body, and that,
as an employee he is subject to the normal rules relating to
master and servant [ I am not talking about some special contract
made with somebody outside] to dismissal without
notice if his employer can prove good cause, and to all the risks
of not being re-appointed if his original appointment has been
for a specific term. To deny this proposition would be to say
that he is taken out of the usual Common Law relating to
master and servant and put into a category which is either above
the law or which is subject to no law. This is not a tenable
proposition. I hasten to add of course that any university, which
treated a professor or lecturer as if he was just a man hired to
study as directed and to teach in accordance with rules laid
down by other people, would be an extremely strange university;
it would have failed to understand the immense importance
of true academic freedom.
There is, of course, great scope for discussion of the rules of
practice that may properly be applied in a university; rules of
practice which may warrant consultation and exchange of views
on the facts between the lecturer and the governing body before
some action affecting the lecturer is taken.
These are matters which fall within the principles of natural
justice, which are not inconsistent with the law, and of course
may freely tend to the improvement of academic morale. But
it still remains true that academic freedom is freedom within
the law, subject to the law, and that if recourse is made to the
law, the ordinary rules of law will apply. For all these reasons I
am convinced that it is a disservice to academic freedom, a freedom
to which I attach the most tremendous importance, to seek
to promote it into a doctrine of privilege outside the law; a
privilege which sets the academic free from obedience to the
ordinary legal rules which govern the lives of all the rest of us.
It is perhaps because these things are pretty well understood
in countries familiar with the rule of law and not so familiar
with special constitutional provisions, such as those which
appear in two of the amendments to the American Constitution,
that, so far as I can discover, and I do not speak at first-
hand, there have been no notable instances in the United Kingdom
of interference with academic freedom.
I recently read an article by Lord Chorley in a compendium
on academic freedom, published by the School of Law at Duke
University. He says that academic freedom is taken for granted
in the United Kingdom. He, of course, concedes that there have
been other pressures or dangers of pressures, religious or political,
in the course of history. But, on balance, he thinks it is
safe to say that academic freedom is enjoyed as fully in English
universitie3 as anywhere else in the world. He points out, as
indeed I endeavoured to point out a little earlier in other words,
that " in the modern age there can be no doubt that the main
enemy to academic freedom has been the powerful State".
I turn now briefly to the United States of America where
academic freedom has been, in contra-distinction to the state of
affairs in Great Britain and Australia, much discussed in the
courts and particularly in the Supreme Court-the highest tribunal.
To understand how such a matter can fall for judicial
decision, ii. is necessary to look at two provisions of the American
Constitution. It will be recalled that the Constitution of the
United States was amended very early in the piece. The first
Congress, when it met in 1789, submitted to the States ten
amendments to clarify certain individual and State rights not
named in the Constitution. These amendments were ratified.
The ten original amendments are always referred to in the
United States as " The Bill of Rights". I will just quote two of
the Article: s-
Article provided that [ and I am omitting irrelevant words
for this purpose] " Congress shall make no law abridging
freedom of speech or of the press that's Congress.
Article made a general provision, that is, not one directed
at Congre; s only, but of wider application, which was that " no
person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without
due proce; s of law".
Many years later, in i868, the i4th amendment came into
operation. It was stated in more comprehensive terms and 
affected both the Congress and the legislatures of the States.
It is well to have this in mind because a great deal of what goes
on in the United States in the field of public argument has
relation to thi-integration, civil rights and so on. It said:
" All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject
to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States
and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall make or
enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities
of citizens of the United States, nor shall any State deprive
any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of
law, nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal
protection of the laws."
It will be seen that these celebrated Constitutional provisions,
commonly referred to in America as " the due process" provisions,
have brought into the arena of judicial determination
matters which in another Constitutional structure would not
reach the Courts at all.
I do not propose to engage in a close examination of the
decisions of the American Courts, but I think there are a few
things which can be said with advantage.
In a fairly recent case, Mr. Justice Harlan, whose name is
greatly respected among Australian as well as American lawyers,
summed the matter up and explained the reason for
judicial proceedings in a single paragraph. He said: " When
academic teaching-freedom and its corollary, learning-freedom,
so essential to the well-being of the nation, are claimed, this
Court will always be on the alert against intrusion by Congress
into this constitutionally protected domain."
After a considerable review of the decisions of the American
Courts, I have come to the conclusion that they have been astute
to protect the universities against any violation of the freedoms
guaranteed by the American Constitution. The protection has
not been given to a privilege claimed outside the law. It has
been given to a freedom guaranteed by the constitutional or
basic law of the nation. As one American writer has said-" In
the United States freedom is not an academic privilege; it is
a right constitutionally guaranteed to all residents." 
In 1952, that very great judicial lawyer, Mr. Justice Frankfurter,
put the whole problem in a single paragraph.
" It is the special task of teachers to foster those habits of openmindedness
and critical inquiry which alone make for responsible
citizens, who, in turn, make possible an enlightened and
effective public opinion. Teachers must fulfil their function
by precept and practice, by the very atmosphere which they
generate; they must be exemplars of open-mindedness and free
inquiry. They cannot carry out their noble task if the conditions
for the practice of a responsible and critical mind are denied
to them. They must have the freedom of responsible inquiry,
by thought and action, into the meaning of social and economic
ideas, into the checkered history of social and economic dogma.
They must be free to sift evanescent doctrine, qualified by time
and circumstances, from that restless, enduring process of extending
the bounds of understanding and wisdom, to assure
which the freedoms of thought, of speech, of inquiry, of worship
are guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States
against infraction by national or state government.
" The finctions of educational institutions in our national life,
and the conditions under which alone they can adequately
perform them, are at the basis of these limitations [ which I
repeat were limitations of law] upon State and national power."
Here vwe have stated with clarity the whole reason for academic
freedom and the reason why, in the case of the United
States, special constitutional provisions, basic legal provisions,
were established to protect it. But the point that I want to
emphasise, though I become guilty of tedious repetition, though
it ought to be trite enough, is that in America itself, with these
special constitutional provisions, the guaranteed freedoms belong
to the community as a whole, and are not in some particular
or exclusive way sectional privileges outside the law. It is one
of the glories of a civilised democracy that we enjoy our freedoms
in common; that we are born with those freedoms, and
that they can be limited or taken away only by the principles
of the common law or by constitutionally competent statutory
provisions made by Parliament. In the absence of specific legal
provisions, no man may claim a greater freedom than another. 
Yet, and I come back to it, the freedom of the enquiring mind
in a university is of vital importance, not only for contemporary
society, but for a developing future. For this reason it is important
that acadenmic people should not set their claims too high, so
that they appear to be claiming, as perhaps some of them do,
privileges unrecognised by the law. But they certainly should,
in their univer: ity community life, insist, within the law, upon
the maintenance of the freedom of their minds; and should at
all times resist: unauthorised political interference with their
work, or administrative procedures within the university itself
which could frustrate them in the kind of work they are in
a university to do.
Interestingly enough, and this is an almost irrelevant interjection
to myself, there has been a good deal of debate in the
United States about the position of a practising Communist in
a university. Some responsible and liberal-minded people have
queried the employment of practising Communists in a university,
for the intelligible reason that the whole philosophy of
Communism and the whole discipline of the Party are opposed
to that compl: te freedom of thought and objectivity of mind
which it is one of the functions of a university to maintain. I
will not try to pursue that argument to its conclusion, because,
as in all these contentious matters, the boundary line is very
hard to define.
One other matter that has engaged a good deal of attention
in the United States is the problem of the tenure of members
of university staffs. There can be no doubt that professors or
lecturers appointed at will could be much more liable to executive
interference or pressure than those who are appointed for
a substantial term. Even those appointed for a term of years
may find themselves complaining that a failure to renew their
appointment at the end of their term has been due to some
objection to their exercise of their academic freedom. These
are, of course, very important matters. I; for one, would offer
my own view that an academic appointed after due consideration
should not feel himself to be at the risk of arbitrary treatment
if his enquiries lead him to conclusions which are, in some
quarters, unpopular. But it still remains true that, whether the 
staff member has a fixed short or long term or no term at all,
the rules which control the right of the university to dismiss
him are the same as the rules that apply in any contract of employment,
and that, if he is dismissed without notice, the onus
will be, as in any other case, on his employer, the university, to
justify in law the action that has been taken.
To sum. up, you will see from what I have said that when we
speak of academic freedom, we are not speaking of a privilege
given to academic people and denied to ordinary men and
women. It merely happens that, as universities are increasingly
in what I will call the limelight of current history, there will at
all times be two temptations. One will be a temptation on the
part of partisans, including partisans outside the university, to
seek to control the universities in what they think and what
they say, irrespective of the law. The other will be a temptation,
occasionally encouraged in circumstances of emotion or heat,
for university people to claim that those rules which apply to
ordinary men and women in the eye of the law, do not apply
to them. I would prefer to think of academic freedom as a
precious ; and shining example of that kind of freedom which
all thinking men and women in our community want for
themselves, and will not abandon without a struggle.
The Vice-Chancellor, Professor J. P. Baxter, O. B. E.
The Chancellor, members of the University, distinguished
guests-For us, this is a solemn occasion. We remember tonight the
first Chancellor of the University who led it through its early,
difficult and formative years and set it on the road to its present
success. We remember, with love and gratitude
Wallace Charles Wurth.
For us this is a great occasion, for our first Wallace Wurth
Memorial Lecture has been given by Australia's greatest leader,
our Prim,: Minister, the Right Honourable Sir Robert Menzies. 
During his long period of office, Sir Robert's influence has
permeated every aspect of Australian life and progress, but nowhere,
I believe, have his actions cast ahead of them a greater
promise of benefits to come than his decision in 1956 to come
to the rescue of the Australian Universities which were then
facing complete collapse in the tide of mounting enrolments
and inadequate resources.
The Murray report, promptly implemented by the Prime
Minister, the Universities Commission, with its triennial grants,
have put us on the road to recovery and though we seldom
admit it in public, we are doing pretty well.
We are I believe creating an investment for the future, an
investment in young people's minds and abilities which will
mean more for Australia in the next fifty years, and beyond,
than anything else we could do.
We owe it largely to one man, the man who saw our needs,
realised the importance of our problems and who took the
action required to solve them.
But the Prime Minister has done much more than that. He
has shown a profound understanding of and sympathy for all
those things which are important in Universities, and the help
he has given has never been tinged with a desire to restrict true
freedom or genuine scholarship.
He has made it clear that he expects our standards of service
to be as high as his own.
When the history of our Universities comes to be written
Sir Robert's role during these years will stand clearly out, and
even in his own immense personal record of service to Australia
this will be an enduring chapter.
To you, Sir Robert, for the many things you have done for
the Universities, for the leadership and encouragement you
have given us, for your constructive and wholly delightful
address tonight, and for your presence here, with Dame Pattie,
on this occasion when we remember our first Chancellor, we
tender our sincere thanks. 



65/ 12? 0
FOR PRESS P. M. No.-6 56~
KNIGHTHOOD FOP, THE LATE L. C. R0i3SON
Stnemej-yJp t 1.1Ho obA
The Queen has been graciously pleased to
approve that the honour of Knighthood should be conferred
upon the late Mr. Leonard Charles ilobson, C0.
in the New Year Honours List, 1965, for his services
in the field of education in Australia.
Mr. Riobson died on the 5th December, 1964+.
Her Majesty has approved that Mrs. Robson be granted the
style title place and precedence to ., hich she would
have teen entitled had her husband survived to receive
the honour of Knighthood.
CANBERRA,
31st August, 1965. BA CKGROUND
Leonard Charles Robson was in early life a
distinguished student and Rhodes Scholar for New South
Wales. He served with the First A. I. F. and won the
Military Cross, The service for which he would be most remembered
was that which he gave to the independent schools of
Australia in a variety of ways for more than 40O years. He
was one of the outstanding headmasters in recent times in
Australia, his period of leadership at Shore ( Church of
Eingland Grammar School, North Sydney) extending from 1923
to 1958. He was awarded a C. B. E. in 1955. He was one of
the moving spirits in the formation of the Headxnasterst
Conference. His years of formal retirement saw no slackening
in his work for the independent schools. It was largely
because of his initiative and enterprise that the Industrial
Fund for the Advancement of Scientific Education in Schools
was established; The Fund's income is contributed by
industry and commerce and has been used to help a considerable
number of Conference schools. When the Commonwealth
initiated its own scheme in 1964 for science grants to
schools, Mr. Robson became the first Chairman of the
Advisory Committee on Standards for Science Facilities in
independent Secondary Schools which the Government set up
to aid it in the administration of the new scheme,
Mr. itobson's services to education included, at
the same time, his i'ork as a member of three boards the
Soldiers' Children Education Board, the Board of Secondary
School Studies and a contribution for which the Commonwealth
was particularly grateful, the Commonwealth Scholarships
Board. 



FOR PRESS: No. 64+/ 1965
COMMUNICATIONS WITH MR. LEE KEJAN YEW
Statement by the Prime Minister? the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
The last thing that I would want to do would be to
comment upon statements made by my colleague, Mr. Lee Kuan Yew,
of' which I have had some reports.
I want to make it quite clear that Mr, Lee has my
warm good wishes and those of my Government and that we all hope
that Singapore will have a successful future. I have already told
him this. It is quite true that when Mr. Lee was in Australia
I had long and useful discussions with him, as did the members
of my Cabinet. It is also true that later on he wrote to me
and that I wrote to him, but these communications, as he agrees,
were personal and 19 of course, cannot disclose their contents.
After hearing from him and considering what he
had to say, I was by no means inactive. I communicated with the
Prime Minister of Malaysia; my Minister for External Affairs
saw him; and ther(_ i-no doubt that our views, which were always
helpful were well known to him as they were to Mr. Lee.
Naturally I am not prepared to disclose the contents of these
communica ~ ons. I think that the important thing to remember in
all these matters is that, while Australia does not determine
the future of Malaysia or the position of its constituent
States, we are profoundly interested in the future well-being
of this part of the world. We hope and believe that Malaysia
and Singapore will be able to work out joint defensive arrangements
of a satisfactory kind. Indeed, with good will on both
sides, we are sure that this result can be achieved.
After the separation of Singapore from Malaysia,
I sent to Mr. Lee a warm expression of our goodwill of our
recognition, of our hopes for the future. Those views still
stand. CA NBERA,
31st Augst, 1965. 



65/ 118
FOR PRESS P. M. No 6 6/ 61
N'/ J HOOU'i FOR LORD CtSEY
Statement b the Prme Minister i obertenzies
Her iiajesty The Queen has been pleased to
appoint the Governor-General Designate, Baron Cesey, to
be a Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of
Saint Michael and Saint George.
This is a signal honour for Lord Casey. I am
delighted that Her hajesty should have so honoured a
very distinguished Austrañ ian on the eve of his becoming
Governor-General of the Commonwealth.
CANBJR3iA, 6th September, 1965.
Baqckground Lord Casey's other honours and decorations are
Privy Councillor
Member of the Order of Companions of
Honour
Distinguished Service Order
Iilitary Cross
Knight of the Most Venerable Order of
the Hospital of Saint John of Jerusalem. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 67/ 196
HOSTILITIES BETWEEN INDIA AND PAKISTAN
Statement by the Prime Ministers Sir Robert Meazies
The Australian Government is deeply distressed
by the armed hostilities between India and Pakistan7
hostilities which appear to be widening and growing in
intensity. All Australians deplore the loss of life and
destruction of property of two great nations for whom we in
Australia have an affectionate feeling and profound goodwill.
It would be a great tragedy if great damage should be done to
what has been achieved in recent years in their economic
development and. social progress.
We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, U Thant, aci. ng with the backing of
the Security , Jouncil, to do all that he can to try to end
this state of affairs. He has the full support of the
Australian Government in his important task.
I have sent individual messages to the Prime
Minister of India and the President of Pakistan setting out
our views along these lines and urging that they do everything
within their power to make the efforts of the Secretary-
General fruitful.
CANERRA, 8th September, 1965. 


&nbsp;P. M. No. 69/ 1965
The Commonwealth Government will be represented&nbsp;at the following functions during Air Force Commemoration &nbsp;Week,&nbsp;12th to 19th September, 1965
Brisbane&nbsp;
Sunday, 12th September

St. John's Anglican Cathedral &nbsp;- Senator Dame&nbsp;Annabelle Rankin, D. B. E.
St. Stephen's Roman Catholic Cathedral &nbsp;- Mr. K. M. K.Cairns, M. P.
St. Andrew's Presbyterian Church &nbsp;- The Hon. C. E.&nbsp;Barnes, Minister of State for Territories.
Albert Street Methodist Church - Mr. F. J. Killen, M. P.
City Tabernacle Baptist Church - &nbsp;Mr. E. N. Drury, M. P.

&nbsp;Wednesday, 15th September 

Wreath-laying ceremony&nbsp;at the Shrine of Remembrance Air Vice-Marshal&nbsp;I. D. McLachlan, C.B.E , D.F. C.

Canberra
Wednesday, 15 th September


Wreath-laying ceremony at the Stone of Remembrance,&nbsp;Australian War Memorial The Hon. Peter Howson,Minister of State for Air.


&nbsp;
Sydney 
Wednesday, 15 th September

Wreath-laying ceremony at the Cenotaph The Hon.&nbsp;W. McMahon, Minister of State for Labour and&nbsp;National Service.

&nbsp;
Melbourne 
Sunday. 12th September 

St. Paul's Anglican&nbsp;Cathedral The Hon. H. F. Opperman, M. P.,&nbsp;Minister of State for Immigration.

Wednesday, 15th September 

Wreath-laying ceremony&nbsp;at the Shrine of Remembrance Mr. E. M. C. Fox, M. P.

Thursday, 16th September 

Official dinner at the&nbsp;Air Forces Memorial Centre The Hon. B. M. Snedden,&nbsp;Attorney-General.

Sunday. 19th September 

St. Patrick's Roman&nbsp;Catholic Cathedral Senator Ivy Wedgwood.

&nbsp;
Hobart 
Wednesday, 15th September 

Wreath-laying ceremony&nbsp;at the Cenotaph Air Commodore D. W. Kingwell, D. S. O.

&nbsp;
Adelaide 
Wednesday, 15th September 

Wreath-laying ceremony&nbsp;at the South Australian National War Memorial&nbsp;Air Vice-Marshal E. Hey, C. B. E.

CANBERRA10 September, 1965.


&nbsp;P. M. No. 68/1965
The Prime Minister announced today that the&nbsp;Uommonwealth Government proposes to establish a National Art&nbsp;Gallery in Canberra.
As a first step, a Committee of Inquiry has&nbsp;been set up with the following terms of reference:-
" To report on the proposal for a National Art&nbsp;Gallery withi particular reference to the functions&nbsp;of such a gallery; and the method of control, the&nbsp;accommodation and the staff to carry out these&nbsp;functions." 
The Prime Minister said that Sir Daryl. Lindsay,&nbsp;Chairman of the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board would be&nbsp;Chairman of the Committee. The members would be the othe rmenbers of the present Art Advisory Board ( Mr. R. Campbell,&nbsp;O. B. E. of Adelaide, Mr. W. A. Dargie, O. B. E. of Melbourne,&nbsp;Mr, Russell Drysdale and Mr. Douglas Pratt, OBE &nbsp;both of&nbsp;Sydney) and four others Mr. H. Baston, Vice-Chancellor&nbsp;of the University of Adelaide, Professor J. Burke, OBE,&nbsp;Professor of Fine Arts at the University of Melbourne, Mr.&nbsp;Tristan Buesst of Melbourne and Mr. J. 0. Fairfax of Sydney.
Sir Robert Menzies said he was grateful to&nbsp;all these people for agreeing to assist the Government in&nbsp;this important task. They would have the assistance of&nbsp;senior representatives of the Prime Minister's Department&nbsp;and the National Capital Development Commission.
The Prime Minister went on to say that it was&nbsp;hoped that the Committee would begin its inquiry shortly,&nbsp;and complete it within about six months.
CANBERRA10 September, 1965.



FOR PRESS P. 11. No. 70/ 196
FORMER NAVAL CHIEF TO SUPERVISE AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION
IN CANADIAN EXHIBITION
Statement by te Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Vice-Admiral Sir Hastings Harrington, C. B. E,
DS. O. has been appointed as Commissioner-General to represent
Australia in connection with the International Exhibition
El' 67 to be held in Montreal, Canada, betieen April and
October, 1967 as part of the Canadian Government's celebration
of the centenary of Canadian Confederation.
Sir Hastings, who recently retired as Chief of
the Naval Staff will be in charge of the special arrangements
to be made for Australia's participation in the exhibition.
The principal feature of this participation will be an
Australian pavilion. Expo. 67 has been approved as a First Category
Exhibition by the International Bureau of Exhibitions. It
takes as its theme " Man and His World" and will portray human
aqcomplishments in various fields.
As part of the arrangements it is now making, the
Australian Government proposes to appoint a representative
committee which will be able to furnish expert advice and
suggestions to the Commissioner-General on the nature of the
Australian pavilion and other Australian participation. The
Commissioner-General will also draw upon the resources of
Commonwealth Departments and authorities and will be assisted
by a small specialist staff. He will be in consultation with
Government and other bodies as planning proceeds.
The office of the Commissioner-General will be
attached to the Prime Minister's Department and will, for
the time being, be located at Red Cross House, Hobart Place,
Canberra City.
CANBERRA September, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. i4. No. 711 965
VISIT BY THE PRIME MINISTER OF THAILAND
Statement y the Prime Ministe SirRobe rt Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies,
said in Canberra today that Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn,
Prime Minister of Thailand, had accepted the Government's
invitation to visit Australia as a guest. He would be
accompanied by his wife.
The visit would take place from 28th
October until 6th or 7th November. Consultations about
the programme of engagements were now taking place and
details would be announced later.
Sir Robert Menzies, in welcoming the Field
Marshal's acceptance, recalled the visit by the King and
Queen of Thailand in 1962, and said that this would be the
first visit by a Head of Government from Thailand. It
would further strengthen the cordial relations existing
between the two countries.
CANBERRA September, 1965. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
M. P.,
ON
DAUSTRALIAN ECONOMY
Ministerial Statement
[ From the " Parliamentary Debates," 21st September 1965]
Sir ROBERT MENZ[ ES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister).-I present the following
paper-Economic Inquiry-Report of Committee
( Volumes I and 11 and Index).
I am not proposing to move that the paper
be printed because, as honorable members
will understand from a glance at the bulk
of the report-a bulk that is not at all out
of place-a number of minor corrections
and alterations of form have come up on
" vision for incorporation. These, of course,
being dealt with. None of them involve
substance. They will not affect the reading of
the report by honorable members. But it
does seem to me that when the paper comes
-~ form part of the Parliamentary Paper
ies it is desirable that it should be in
cs final corrected form. Therefore, I intend,
if the House will agree, to present the report
later in its final form in substitution for
what I present today. Ont that occasion I
will move that the paper be printed. Even
then, I would value some discussion at that
time with the Chairman of the Printing
Committee because some arrangements are
in hand for publishing this in book form,
as he will understand. I have arranged for
the report in the form in which I have presented
it to be circulated to honorable members.
Now I ask for leave to make a
statement in connection with the report.
Mr. SPEAKER.-There being no objection,
leave is granted.
Sir ROBERT MENZIE! 3.-On 1 3th February
1963, 1 announced the appointment
of a Committee of Economic Inquiry, consisting
of Dr. J. Vernon--now Sir James
11886/ 65 Vernon-Professor Sir John Crawford, Professor
P. H. Karmel of Adelaide, Mr. D. G.
Molesworth * and Mr. K. B. Myer. These
are all men of distinction in economic and
business affairs; they have devoted immense
effort and much time to their labours, and
have produced a report of great significance.
Some suggestions made by the Committee
are not acceptable to us, but this does not
qualify our deep appreciation of the Committee's
work.
In reading the report, honorable members
will have in mind the terms of reference.
They are set out on page 1 of the report,
and I therefore do not need to refer to
them in extenso. They sought an inquiry into
and a report upon many questions of fact
and of tendencies having in mind that the
objectives of the Government's economic
policy are a high rate of economic and
population growth with full employment,
increasing productivity, rising standards of
living, external viability, and stability of
costs and prices".
We were asked by the Chairman, before
the terms of reference were finally settled,
to add a clause that would enable the Committee
to suggest steps which appear to
be necessary or desirable to conform with
and further the objectives of the Government's
economic policy This, for reasons
which will appear later in this statement,
the Government refused to do. But it did
add to the terms of reference the final
clause-The Committee will report the conclusions
reached by it as to the bearing which all or any
of the matters so ascertained have upon the
achievement of the economic policy objectives
above stated. 
I mention these matters at the outset, because
it is necessary to have them in mind
when considering some aspects of the report.
For the truth is that, in addition to an
exhaustive and most valuable examination
of the facts involved in the terms of
reference, the Committee has in fact, in
many instances, offered its opinions or suggestions
on matters of policy. We have no
feeling of resentment about this. Indeed,
we should perhaps have realised from the
beginning that a group of -talented men
charged with this task would wish, having
made their statistical and other investigations,
to examine the bearing of the results
upon the general economy and thus to offer
opinions or suggestions. But it will at once
be seen, Sir, that the report, because of
the facts concerning the terms of reference
which I have just related, must be read
and evaluated subject to two reservations.
The first is that, in a free and self
governing country, policies will be political.
Under the party system, opposing political
parties will, not infrequently, have opposing
policies. In no case is a political policy
the product of purely expert opinion on
technical matters. It must cover a wide area
of localities and circumstances. It must
be flexible enough to meet the problems of
international and domestic change. It is
commonly pursued and applied in the light
of much accumulated experience and
political judgment.
Secondly, it follows that, when it deals
with statistical or technical or objectively
economic matters, this report is entitled to
and will be studied with profound respect.
My own Government will derive great
value and assistance from it. But where
the report makes what will doubtless be
regarded as advices on political policies,
such advices must be regarded, in the wellknown
legal phrase, as obiter dicta, and
not as possessing Iome binding authority.
No government, from whatever side of the
House it may come, and indeed no parliament,
can abdicate its own authority and
responsibility for national policy. It will
welcome the assistance of experts, but its
tasks will take it far beyond the limits of
economic expertise. Political policy in a
democratic community does not depend
upon purely economic considerations. I will
come back to this when I have something to
say about the various proposals made by
the Committee for the establishment of advisory bodies in various fields. But at this
stage it might perhaps be useful to offer a
general view. That general view may be
illustrated by a particular example in
relatively recently Commonwealth history.
In the early 1940' s, proposals were submitted
to the Australian Agricultural
Council which, as honorable members
know is a ministerial body, for the establishment
of an institute of agricultural
economics, with wider functions and powerthan
the present Bureau of Agricultmu
Economics, and with complete freedom
independently to carry out and publish the
results of research into a whole range of
matters affecting primary industries. These
proposals were rejected, as my friend ti
honorable member for Lalor ( Mr. Pollar
will recall, for reasons which were admirably
summed up by the present permanent
head of the Department of Primary Industry
when he made his presidential address
to the annual conference of the Australian
Agricultural Economics Society in Sydney
in February 1963. I quote his words-
Governments were asked to finance an organisation
removed from political control which could
report on the matters of policy but let the chips
fall where they may. It is not hard to imagine
Governments shying away from the concept of a
body which was committed to publish all its reports
and advice on policy but whose findin
could be used in evidence against Governmen,
which did not adopt them. On matters of fact
there could be little argument, political or otherwise,
against immediate publication; on matters of
policy it could quite often happen that the published
report of the independent authority pre--
sented only half the story. To be realist;
Governments----We are speaking about Governments from
both sides of the Househave
political convictions which might not
always be in line with the philosophy espoused by
the Institute. What the protagonists of this scheme
were really supporting was a system where policy
should be guided only by expert advice when
policy is often a compound of a number of
factors, only one of which can necessarily be
expert advice.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-Now the Prime
Minister is getting ready to throw out the
report. Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-So far I have
proceeded, I venture to say from the ocular
demonstration, with the great approval of
those on the other side of the chamber who
have had experience in these matters.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-We will see whether
we agree with it. 
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-The honorable
member never agree; with his leaders.
I do not care a hoot whether he disagrees
with me. He is looking forward to a govern
ment of economists, and will profess to be
one. It will, of course, at once appear to
honorable members that, if the only problems
in dealing with economic policy in a
nation were purely technical, Parliament,
,' T1( ich is not technical, and a Cabinet which
-:) not technical might as well hand over to
a group of technicians. In such a case
democracy would have cceased and a technocracy
would have begun. In this matter,
of course, my views are in common with
,2%, ose of the real leaders on the other side
, c the chamber. We hope and believe that
these observations, which it is necessary to
make, will not be misunderstood or resented
by the Committee which has served us all so
well. When honorable members look at the
magnitude of the volumes which I place
before them, they will at once realise that
to invite Parliament to discuss the report
too soon would be to ignore the importance
and complexity of the re: port and to ask
Parliament to summarise and absorb in a
days matters of such moment as to
-pquire prolonged examination. Since the
Government received this report, members
of the Cabinet have devoted to it weeks of
study and Cabinet itself days of discussion,
and even now I would say that we are not
a position on many of the matters
ii. tamined by the Committee to offer definitive
views or, in some cases, useful comments.
At one stage we thought we might try to
produce a precis or sumrrary of the report
in order to help not only honorable members
but the public generally to appreciate
the matters involved.
Mr. Webb.-When is the Prime Minister
going to put on the black cap?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Does the
honorable gentleman not want to hear about
this? A precis for him would need to be
childishly simple. This is notorious. Every
time he opens his mouth he proves it.
Mr. Bryant.-Where is the report, anyhow?
Sir ROBERT MENZIE;.-It is here, Sir. Mr. SPEAKER.-The honorable member
for Wills will restrain himself.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Let the honorable
member have a copy of the report. He
says: Where is the report? I have tabled
it. Mr. Hayden.-The Prime Minister does
not understand the report.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-I could never
aspire to the honorable member's profound
intelligence. I admit myself his humble
inferior, but at least I have devoted weeks
to studying this report. He has devoted
weeks to thinking only of silly interjections.
We have decided that to try to produce a
precis of the report would not be practicable.
Any summary which was brief enough
to be read would be open to the criticism
that some matters dealt with by the Committee
had not been included. Any summary
which strove to avoid this criticism would
tend to become so long that it would become
too long and not adequately readable.
What we must, I think, face up to is that
this report, the result of most valuable and
painstaking and conscientious examination,
has a magnitude both in scope and detail
never approached by. any former inquiry.
It would not achieve its purpose if any of
us yielded to the temptation to take individual
observations out of context. It is
therefore, we think, important that, the report
having been tabled-I am sure that
the Leader of the Opposition will agree with
this-Parliament should have a full opportunity
of reading it and considering it before
any debate on its contents occurs. It
would be doing less than justice to the Committee
and its report if we were precipitately
to engage in argumenfs which did not
arise from a full opportunity for consideration
and judgment.
However, in tabling the report after a
period of time in which the Government
has had a chance of examining and considering
it, I will make some observations
which may be helpful. I do not, of course,
propose on behalf of the Government to
make any dogmatic remarks. But I will take
two examples which will serve to illustrate
the differences which exist between a purely
economic approach and the necessarily
wider and more complicated approach of
the political policy maker. One is migration.
On this, the Committee has suggested that 
the net immigration target should not be
raised above 100,000 a year, at least until
the late 1960' s.
We, while respecting the reasons submitted
by the Committee, are bound to take
into account a variety of factors. The contribution
made by migrants to the development
of Australian resources depends upon
more than overall numbers. The higher the
percentage of wage-earners-and particularly
of the types or skills that we need
-the less important will it be to restrict
overall numbers. Migrants of the type we
want are not equally available from year
to year. Circumstances in what I will call
the " supplying" nations will vary from
year to year, and so will the emigration
attitudes of the Governments of those
nations. Add to this that the building up of
our population by migration has enormous
significance for the growth and security of
Australia and for that business confidence
which promotes investment and expansion,
and it will be clear tl. at the Government
cannot accept an artificial ceiling on migration
for a term of year3. We will therefore
continue our present policy of securing as
large a flow of migrarts as Australia can
usefully absorb, and of deciding the target
number each year.
My second example has to do with the
problem of economic growth. I had something
to say on this in my policy speech
before our last election. I said-
We will press on with growth in no timid or fainthearted
way. We believe, and confidently expect
that over the next five years, given good government,
growth should at lea: e; quta l a total increase
of 25 per cent. in the gross national product, in
terms of constant prices.
What I stated there was a belief that,
given certain fundamental conditions our
economy, drawing upon its known resources,
energies and capabilities and obeying
its ordinary initiatives, was equal to adding
a full quarter to the " real" national
product over a five year period.
The Committee, however, goes a good
deal further than this. Its approach in fact
is basically different. It appears to set up
a certain rate of growth, measured statistically,
as something very like a ruling purpose
for economic policy-although, to be
sure, it recognises that the achievement of
this growth rate should not be pursued to
the detriment of all other objectives. It
suggests that a growth rate of 5 per cent. per year is possible but difficult; a good part
of the report thereafter is devoted to the
question of how the difficulties might be
overcome. In the process, a thesis appears
to be developed that this 5 per cent. growth
rate will be achieved only if there is a conscious
diversion of resources from some areas
of activity to others. Amongst these preferred
areas of activity, manufacturing
industry is given high place.
But this view of things leads on to
considerations of the very first consequenc'
By what means is this diversion of resources
to be accomplished? Indeed, as a matter of
basic policy and interest, are we disposed
to engage in a large scale diversion of
resources-in defiance, as it were, of tl
distribution that would occur if the norm.
demands of the community and the corresponding
initiatives of producers were to
be given free play? After all, we are a
private enterprise economy. In such an
economy, the demands set up by the people
who are the buyers are the normal stimulant
for increased industrial investment and
activity. What the Committee appears to
have had in mind is that those demands
should, where necessary, be re-directed.
Now, in individual cases we would not care
to deny this. We have ourselves, in pur
suance of our own economic policies, take
action now and then to reduce the demand
for some particular commodities in order
to meet some inflationary position; and no
doubt any government would continue to do
so. But to essay a widespread re-directio'"(
of'resources within the economy to achieJ)
some pre-ordained statistical result is a very
different matter.
It seems to us that the Committee has,
particularly in the light of its so-called projections
in Appendix N-to which I will
later make some reference-predicated
a degree of planning and direction of the
economy which in our opinion would not be
either appropriate or acceptable in Australia.
I can illustrate this by saying something
about its proposals on the use of taxation
for the purpose of diverting resources to
selected purposes. The Government is a
protectionist" government and has a firm
belief, well justified in the light of events,
in the significance and future of manufacturing
industry. I do not need to elaborate that.
But when the Committee develops its
theories we must sound a note of warning. 
For example, it proposes that toencourage
manufacturing industry, there should be programmes
involving various incentives and
more generous depreciation allowances.
Now all of these, no doubt, have merits
which deserve proper consideration. We
have, in fact, had some of them under
scrutiny. But, setting aside the possible-or, some
might say, the probable-long term benefits,
lheir immediate result would be to diminish
revenues. And particularlynow when
e burden of defence expenditure is not
only large but growing anC. at a time when
employment is not only full but in some
occupations over-full, this would confront
11he Government with a choice between
, f1icit budgeting-at a time when inflationary
pressures are high-and increasing other
taxes. The Committee, though no doubt it
realised these matters, alo proposes that
the Government should increase its taxation
anyhow more than its expenditure in order
that by this means-that is. surplus budgeting-
saving for public authority expenditure
should increase.
Along with this it suggests that there
should be various tax concessions for business.
This leads to the clear inference that,
there must in its view be increased taxes
r a variety of purposes, these should fall
tlargely upon personal incomes or upon consumer
goods. It seems to us, however, that
if there were to be a series of increases in
personal taxation, this could very well reduce
,.-Ivings and thereby reduc'e investible capital,
well as demand. Quite conceivably, therefore,
it could defeat the purpose which the
Committee appears to have in mind, which
is to increase investment in industrial
enterprise. I emphasise that we are not offering dogmatic
views. On the contrary, we will continue
to give the deepest consideration to
what has been put before us by so powerful
a Committee. But we dowant to take this
early opportunity of saying to the House
that taxation policies are affected by many
considerations. Some of them are economic;
some of them, particularly at the present
time, are international; some of them are
domestic. No government can, in pursuit of
a general theory, abdicate its responsibility
for a taxation policy which may well vary
from year to year according to circumstances
of inflation or stability or recession
or, as we now know, f~ om a large and growing diversion of resources to the defence
of the country, the preservation of its
future, and the giving of appropriate aid
to other countries, particularly those which
are facing the acute problems of new independence
and a search for economic
autonomy. I now turn to the views expressed by the
Committee on investment from overseas.
The general approach of the Government
to such investment was stated by me, on
behalf of the Cabinet, in the policy speech
of 1963, as follows-
Investment from overseas countries has taken
an important place in our economy. Over the last
fifteen years it has amounted to over œ 1,500 million.
This investment has produced great advantages,
but under some circumstances produces problems
which need to be handled with care and understanding.
As, from a national Australian point of
view, we would wish to see new capital from
overseas employed for the great purpose of developing
new industries or extending existing ones with
all the benefit of overseas skills and experience,
we will always have a particularly warm welcome
for new capital designed to these ends.
We also believe that fears and misunderstandings
are least where there is an Australian participation
in shareholding and management, and most
when there is no more than a mere change of
ownership without more. There is, we believe, a
growing recognition of this in the minds of intending
investors.
I quoted that because it is sometimes forgotten
that that was the view of the Cabinet,
as expressed by me in 1963. Nobody would
quarrel with it today.
The terms of reference to the Committee
invited a factual assessment of the significance
of overseas investment in the Australian
economy. The Committee has gone
beyond this. It has offered a view that it
would be in the best interests of Australia if,
for some years ahead, new capital from
overseas could be limited to the level of
recent years, that is. about œ 150 million
per annum. It has proposed selective
controls on overseas investment and suggests
a consultative body to advise the Reserve
Bank on the administration of such controls.
We express no opinion on these suggestions
at present. We have been making
the necessary preparations for a full
Cabinet review of the problem, the practical
difficulties of which, I hope, we all
recognise. We will, when all Ministers
have been able to participate in it, make a
considered statement of policy on these
matters. But, so that no prejudgments one 
way or the other may arise from the
Committee's report, I should issue a warning
note. The Committee itself says that
overseas investment has been " a powerful
force assisting the growth of the economy
That is right. It acknowledges that increases
in population, productivity and employment
in the postwar period would have been hard
to sustain without it.
Mr. Jones.-What does the Minister for
Trade and Industry say about it?
Sir ROBERT MEN ZIES.-He agrees
with every word I am &amp; aying, if that is of
any interest to the honorable member.
Mr. Jones.-He mentioned selling a bit
of the farm every year.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-The honorable
member will never read the report. He
will live on a few slogans. So I continue
with this considered statement about the
report. So far, I would think we were all
on common ground.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-Hear, hear!
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-Oh, the boy
is at it again. The report goes on to raise
two major questions, the answers to which
are of great importanca to all of us on
both sides of the House. The first is: Will
the cost of servicing overseas investments
become unduly onerous in our balance of
payments? Dr. J. F. Cairns.-That is the end of the
common ground, is it not?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-How does the
honorable member know? Listen to him. He
is the only fellow who understands these
things. The second major question is: Is
there a danger of having too great a proportion
of the ownership of enterprises in
Australia in foreign hands? We need not
worry about this. These are two decidedly
important questions. That is why I said,
although the honorable member was so busy
talking that he did not hear, that the
answers to these are of great importance to
all of us on both sides of the House. It is
not my purpose, in this statement, to give
definitive answers to these questions. The
Government will certainly continue to face them, and will seek to arrive at balanced
judgments. As to the first question, the
Committee says that the costs cannot so far
be said to have represented a serious
balance of payments problem. But it is
apprehensive about the future.
Mr. Reynolds.-I bet it is.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-May I repeat,
for the benefit of one or two honorable
members opposite, that the Committee sa
that the costs so far cannot be said to ha" v.
represented a serious balance of payments
problem, but it is apprehensive about the
future. It has made a statistical projection,
commencing with the year 1959-60-because
most of -these projections begin
that year-which leads it to the conclusion
that, by 1974-75, the servicing of overseas
investment will become a severe burden on
the balance of payments. We do not brush
this problem aside. It will be considered and
dealt with. But in the meantime one comment
must be made, so that a proper perspective
may be achieved. It can be calculated
that had the assumptions used by the
Committee, as from 1959-60, the beginning
year, been borne out-their assumptions,
that is, in respect of earnings on capital
invested here and profits retained in AiV&gt;*
tralia-and given the actual capital inflort/
that has taken place, the amount of income
payable abroad, on their projection, in the
past five years would have been of the order
of œ 860 million. But, in fact, we know from
statistics already published that -the amour
of income actually payable has been abou,
œ 250 million less than this. As honorable
members will see, the point of this comment
is, not that we ignore -the problem or its
possible magnitude, but that, as the Committee
in its report said, very wisely,
" attempts to forecast in quantitative terms
the behaviour of the economy 10 or
years ahead are extremely hazardous, can
prove positively misleading, and are almost
certain to be inaccurate"'. There is one, so
far, in which the inaccuracy is œ 250 million.
The answer to the second question, that
relating to the foreign ownership of Australian
enterprises, is also one not to be
hastily arrived at. As I indicated on behalf
of the Government in the policy speech of
1963, we much prefer what might be called
developmental investment to takeovers of
existing enterprises involving a mere change 
of ownership. But again, the Committee's
report, based upon its statistical projections,
must be read with some reserve. Thus, the
Committee, starting its calculations with
1959-60, with a figure of 25 per cent. of
foreign ownership of Australian companies,
calculated that by 1964-65 the percentage
would have risen to 34 per cent. But in
fact, because the circumstiinces do change,
an estimate for 1964-65 based on the
Committee's own assumpticon makes the pro-
-' jtion less than 24 per cent. In other words,
/ has fallen since 1959-60. None of this is,
of course, to say that projections ought not
to be attempted as aids to thought and
exposition. What I have said is by way of
warning-for the reasons stated by the
) mmittee itself-against regarding statis-
,, cal prophecies as having some binding or
even highly persuasive authority. The circumstances
change from time to time, both
internationally and domestically, and it is
the task of statesmanship to deal with them
as they arise, and, of course, to anticipate
them if possible.
Nothing I have said subtracts from the
central truth, on which the Committee and
the Government are at one, that capital
inflow, in the long term, is not to be
-regarded as. the solvent of balance of pay-
' Knts difficulties. As a Government, we
pay constant and positive attention to
increasing our exports and to the trend and
nature of our imports, so that, while we
welcome the arrival of that really productive
-\ apital which a developing country needs,
should not become so dependent upon
it for our overseas balances as to threaten
our own national control over our national
development and resources. I said earlier
that I would make some reference to some
of the Committee's particular recommendations
for the appointment of special
independent commissions or councils. It
will be sufficient for my purpose to mention
two of the most significant, because one
cannot cover the whole of this ground. The
Committee has suggested the setting up of a
Special Projects Commission with the power
to investigate proposals for major developmental
projects, to advise -governments on
them, and to publish its findings. True, the
Committee perceived that there were, and
are, difficulties in arranging for projects
involving the agencies of more than
one government. This fact has substantially
affected our own method!; of dealing with such problems over many years. But the
Committee believes that these difficultiesmight
be largely overcome if an independent
Special Projects Commission were created
with power to investigate proposals for major
development projects. The Commission would
need a skilled staff to carry out cost-benefit
analyses, which we consider a necessary basic
step in project planning. The Commission should
investigate projects at the request of the Commonwealth
or State Governments, or on its own
initiative. Finally, and most important, the Commission
should be required to report to the Commonwealth
Parliament on its activities each year,
giving detailq of investigations requested, those
completed, and the stage reached with those
uncompleted. Now I point out that the Commonwealth
Government has available to it some
extremely expert advisers already, such as
the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization, the Bureau of
Mineral Resources, the Snowy Mountains
Authority, and other bodies forming part
of or serviced by the Department of
National Development. The point of distinction
is that these agencies, in relation
to any special project, advise the Government
and enable it to conduct informed
discussions with the relevant State or States,
which also have experts of great ability and
experience. The Special Projects Commission suggested
by the Committee is an entirely
different thing. It is to investigate projects
at the request of the Commonwealth or
State Governments or on its own initiative.
It is to report to the Commonwealth Parliament
so that its views will be publicly
known and may come to achieve a degree
of authority. To the extent that this result
came about, both Commonwealth and State
Governments, whatever their party complexions,
would find themselves subject to
pressure, and even coercion into the adoption
of policies or projects which, between
them, they might not select at all. Add to
this that all projects involve the expenditure
of public funds, some of them on the
grand scale. I do not believe that any
government, responsible for its own budget
and conscious of the impact of its own
budget upon economic policy generally,
would be content to transfer authority in
these fields to an independent body acting
on its own initiative and with no responsibilities
to the government of the day. 
I may tell the House, if it needs to be
informed, that my own Government, at an
earlier time, gave the closest thought to
suggestions that have been made for some
kind of development commission and rejected
the idea, substantially for the reasons
that I have just menticoned. I find it difficult
to imagine that another government
drawn from the present Opposition would
take any different view.
The Committee has also suggested the
formation of an " Advisory Council on
Economic Growth", with a wide charter
and powers, which " would be of material
assistance to the government and to the
community in general in the making of
economic decisions These words clearly
contemplate-as indeed does the nature of
the suggested Advisory Council-that the
views of the Council would be published
from time to time and that those views
would be designed to advise the Government
in relation to the making of what must
be, though of course related to economics,
high decisions of political policy. We
unhesitatingly reject this idea.
Mr. Reynolds.-Is tue Prime Minister
accepting any of this report?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-When the
honorable member has read the report he
will be able to answer that question. He is
all right. He is a great education authority.
He should get busy reacing the report.
Mr. L. R. Johnson.--The Prime Minister
is politely rubbishing this report.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-My politeness
might well be imitated by the honorable
member. In the Australian democratic
system of government based upon the consent
of a free community, no government
can hand over to bodies outside the government
the choice of objeczives and the means
of attaining them in important fields of
policy, particularly when such bodies
would, through the power of publication,
come to exercise what have described, I
hope not extravagantly, as a coercive influence
upon governments. There is a very
great difference between the appointment of
a special committee, like the one whose report
is now before us, and the giving of
publicity to its views, because such an
appointment is purely ad hoc; it is set up,
as was the Brigden Committee many years ago, to give us all the benefit of a close
and primarily factual review of the
economy as a whole. To have such a body
continued in one form or another as a standing
body of what would come to be regarded
as authoritative advice would have the
dangers I have described. Political policies
cannot be based upon pure economics and,
for the sake of the adequate handling of
international problems, of defence, and of
social and industrial justice and progress,
we hope they never will.
The Committee's terms of reference included
an inquiry into the availability of
credit. Its chapter on this subject concludes
with a paragraph proposing a full-scale
study of the credit system. I should say
word about this. As honorable membe. j
will understand, inquiries into the monetary
and banking system of a country are major
matters. They involve investigations of a
long and closely detailed kind, not only
within the main elements of the banking
system and other financial institutions, but
also among those interested in, or affected
by, money and banking, which means, of
course, virtually the whole community.
Such inquiries, fascinating though they are
to many, should be initiated only when there
are very strong reasons for doing so.
Dr. J. F. Cairns.-Are they not?
Sir ROBERT MENZIES.-No. A glance
back at history here and elsewhere would
show that they have arisen only in particular--
situations calling for far-reaching investigL
tions. We are not in any such situation now.
Indeed, if there is one broad conclusion to
be drawn from the review which the Committee
has made, it is that on the whole
our monetary system has functioned pretty
well. Furthermore, we would have the greatest
reluctance in proposing an inquiry which
could or might be taken to portend further
major changes in the banking structure. For
a period of 15 years beginning with the
banking legislation of 1945, there was great
turmoil and contention and much parliamentary
debate in that area. Our 1959
legislation, which separated the Corporation
banks from the Reserve Bank, appears to
have proved its own merit, not least by
achieving a settlement of large issues. We
would not wish to raise doubts as to the 
continuity of the existing legislative arrangements.
The Committee has raade various proposals
which affect tariff policy. So far as the
Tariff Board is concerned, it is clear that
certain of the proposals are far-reaching and
probably contentious, going beyond an
evaluation of actual protection and bearing
on protection policy. Perhaps I might, with
advantage, because I do not want to answer
all those questions, state again what I said
here in the House when I announced our
decision to institute the inquiry. I said
then-The Government wishes to make it clear that it
has the firmest intention of preserving the full
independence of the Tariff Board as an advisory
body established by Parliament, its system of open
. and public inquiry and it. h; ig h public standing
and prestige. These things are of the very essence
of the Tariff Board system which has, over many
years, served Australia well and has won admiration
and respect overseas.
The Tariff Board is, to repeat, an advisory
body. It is not a policy-making body-although
its recommendations necessarily have a considerable
influence on policy-and it is not an executive
body. Its principal and best-known function
is to consider, on reference from the Government,
applications for protection by way of tariffs
or bounties or, alternatively, proposals for the
reduction of such protection. It also has power on
its own initiative to review existing duties, to con-
': C2l-duct inquiries on certain matters and to report
su to Parliament.
But tariff policy as such is the responsibility of
the Government. Only Parliament can enact
tariffs; only the Government proposes tariff legislation
to Parliament.
The Committee's observations on protection
S and the Tariff Board should and will be
if/ examined against the principles which I
have just stated.
I conclude by expressing the hope that
it will not be thought that, because we
have found it necessary to single out some
important matters for special commentand
in some cases for Government decision-
we are intending to qualify the value of this report as a whole. On the
contrary, and to take only a few examples,
the report will prove, and is proving, of
great value to us in the consideration of
such matters as research and development,
decentralisation, the application of research
to primary production, rural credit, the
form of the tariff, and the role and functioning
of the Tariff Board. In all of these
a great deal of work is being done, and
will be all -the better done in the light
of the Committee's report. We acknowledge
the value of the Committee's observations
on export promotion, in which field
we have been and are greatly assisted by
the confidential and therefore frank advice
given to us for some years by the Export
Development Council.
There are many other matters covered
by the report. They are all being put in
study by the relevant Ministers and, where
necessary, by the Cabinet, and can be dealt
with as they arise in debate. I will not
overload an already long statement by trying
to mention them all. The whole report
is such that we would not wish honorable
members, or the the public generally, to
pay attention to special parts of current
interest, while neglecting the whole.
I therefore conclude by repeating that
although, as it seemed to us to be necessary,
I have indicated some queries and perhaps
some criticisms, we are convinced that
every part of the report will deserve the
closest study. It will provide all interested
persons, whether technical or not, with a
compilation of economic information
unequalled in my time in this Parliament.
It is a fortunate country which can enlist
in its voluntary service men of such experience
and distinction as those who constituted
this Committee.
I present the following paper-
Economic Inquiry-Report of Committe-
Ministerial Statement, 21st September 1965.
BY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA.
11886/ 65.-2 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 72/ 161
AVAILABILITY OF VERNON REPORT
The Report of the Committee of Economic
Enquiry is being published as a book for public sale.
The books should be ready early next year.
In the meantime, only a limited number of
copies of the Report, in multilith form, will be
available to meet urgent needs. Requests for the
multilith version should be directed to the Prime
Minister's Department, Canberra.
CANBERRA,
21st September, 1965. 



REPORT FROM COMMl~ ITTEE ON PRIVILEGES MOTION BY PRIME
MINISTER IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ON
23RD SEPTEMBER, 19755
" lThat the House agrees with. the Committee that
the advertisement in question involved a breach of
Parliamentary Privilege.
That in the opinion of the House the said
advertisement was also defamatory of the Honourable the
Leader of the Opposition, in that it falsely represented
him as using his parliamentary position to advertise a
commercial product. That while the House accepts the Committee's
finding that the advertisement was published without malice,
and recognises that most of those concerned with its
publication have made suitable apologies, it is of opinion
that it should record its censure of the advertisement and
its reprimand to those concerned in its publication,
namely Mr. Robert Lindsay Abbott, Managing Director
British Motor Corporation ( Australia) Pty. Ltd,
Mr. Peter Fairfax Smyth, Chairman of Directors,
Arthur Smyth Sons Pty. Ltd.
Mr. Keith Rupert Murdoch, Managing Director,
News Limited, " The Australian".
Mr. David Noel Bowman, Managing Editor, " The
Canberra Times"
Mr. Edmund George Alfred Hallett, General Manager,
Newcastle Morning Herald and Miners' Advocate
Pty. Ltd.
Mr. Basil Alfred Williams, Managing Editor,
" The Advertiser".
Mr. Theodor Charles Bray, Editor-in-Chief,
" Courier Mail".
Sir John Francis ' Jilliams, Chairman and Managing
Director Herald and 1-Weekly Times Limited, " Sun
News-Picorial".
Mr. David Ramsay McNicoll Editor-in-Chief,
Australian Consolidated I ress, " Daily Telegraph".
' Mr. George Francis Davies, Chairman of Directors,
Davies Brothers Limited, " The Mercury".
That in the opinion of the House those newspapers
who published the advertisement should publish this
resolution in full." 



OPENING OF THE A. N. Z. BANK BUILDING,
PITT AND HUNTER STREETS, SYDNEY 24TH SEPTEMBER, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Sir, Mr. Premier and Ladies and Gentlemen
Something tells me I might have to get into the lift
again on the way out, so I will take time by the forelock I
declare this building open. ( Laughter) hAat happens thereafter
can't alter the fact that this building is now, believe it or not,
open. Some of you may know that I am a species of politician
and a politician becomes accustomed to the ups and downs of life.
Each time one gees down, one comes up a legitimate abition which
so far I have been able to achieve; but this afternoon, I thought
" This is the end of the road. ' e've -one down, we'll never come
up again." ( Lauhhter) A sobering reTlection. I am not at all
sure that Darvail didn't arrange it. ( Laughter)
I am glad to hear on highest authority that this is
the greatest city. I knew it must be because though I have
opened three or Tour buildings in Melbourne, I must have opened
a dozen or two here and you are so successful in Sydney, everything
runs so well that even though it is three o'clock in the
afternoon, I always see the same 400 busy businessmen attending
an. opening, with lively ambitions, I hope. However, I say no
more about that. I have risen superior to these parochial
arguments. ( Laughter) The finest city in Australia is Canberra
( Laughter) ( Applause) because these things must be estimated not
quantitatively but qualitatively, and so I repeat: Canberra.
And I will continue to say that until I leave. ( Laughter) And
when I leave, I will go to Melbourne.
Now, I was very interested to hear my friend, Mr.
Darvall say something about the banking structure because I thought
I would like to say a little about that myself. We have had
recently under consideration a proposal that was made by a very
powerful Committee that there should be an enquiry into credit and
the facilities of credit it's a very wide term and can cover
a very wide field. The Government doesn't agree with this and
for reasons which I stated the other night, and which are worth
repeating in substance, though not, I hope in words.
We had for years and years in Australia a great
argument going on about'the Commonwealth Bank, the trading
activities of the Commonwealth Bank and the fact that they were
controlled by the same people as controlled the very important
central banking functions. We were told, and I think with some
reason that t is rather impaired the element of co-operation that
ought to exist between the trading banks and the Reserve Bank or
Central Bank, and we know, don't we most of us can remember it,
that there were great arguments, and very heated arguments.
Every time you start an argument on one of these
matters, it's astonishing how many people come out from behind
the bushes with new theories and old theories. It doesn't matter
how old they are and how discredited thry are, they will be
produced, and so you can devote a year or two to having arguments
going on about a structure which in reality ladies and gentlemen,
has ver the last six years, at least worked extraordinarily well;
because it was in 1959 that we thought to bring this to a head. / 2 
2
We separated the Commonwealth Trading Bank operations from the
Reserve Bank, and put it under a separate corporation. I
venture to sa and what Mr. Darvall has said confirms me in
that belief, Lhat since then, with a growing experience of
mutual understanding and a feeling that the Reserve Bank and
the trading banks are not acting in rivalry but are subserving
a common purpose, in a different way, each time of course
inevitably, this system has, I believe been a very good thing
for banking, and therefore, for the entire business community
in Australia. And that being so, we would not want to see it
disturbed. ie have had a lot of experience even I have
had a lot of experience in political matters and how these
things go on I have seen more passions aroused over the banking
business than enough. At long last we reached a conclusion
and Parliament approved of it, which has, I believe, produced
a proper structure in which the many functions of the Reserve
Bank are understood they are respected, its authority is
respected, and at the same time, the banks themselves have been
able to carry on their business with some feeling of freedom
not always without some grievance; that's inevitable but on
the whole, with a sense of freedom and a sense that they could
go ahead and manage their own affairs within the general pattern
that any Reserve Bank must find itself responsible for.
Therefore, we decided, and I think auite rightly that we would
not disturb this pattern, at a time'when the machine is working
well, in order to have the whole of these issues reopened by an
investigation publicly conducted and therefore exposed to all
the advocacy from all sorts and conditions of people which any
enquiry inevitably attracts.
Therefore I was delighted to have my view
confirmed that the overall bankin-system in Australia is a good
one. It is, of course, susceptitle of improvement, but
improvement in detail, inprovement in application, not the sort
of improvement that people aim at by saying, " Let us drastically
alter the whole scheme". It is for that reason that we have
said that we don't propose to have a public enauiry of that kind,
and I thought it was an opportunity for telling you in the
simplest terms why. Now this Bank is an Anglo-Australian bank. We
are reminded of this by the distinguished presence of Lord
Bridgeman. An Anglo-Australian bank, a bank in which there are
shareholders, directors, various people in London in Great
Britain, and therefore a bank which can be exposed to criticism
by those of us who are narrow-minded enough to think that no good
can ccme out of any place but Australia. Now I believe that an
Anglo-Australian bank managed with skillard vision and intelligence
understandin, an Anglo-Australian bank has a special
opportunity, a special responsibility. Because as never before
in my political lifetime, and perhaps in your business lifetime,
never before have the problems of liquidity and of banking policy
generally become more and more international in their character
and the oroblem that is international reouires no narrow or
parochial view. It reouires a broad view. Just let me elaborate
that a morsel. We talk abut liquidity. Whenever we are discussing
the position of the banks, somebody will ask, ", hat is their
present liquidity ratio? How are things going? Are they short
of licuidity or have they too much?" This is the kind of
discussion that goes on inevitably between a reserve bank and a
trading bank, and all sorts of people of both sides have to do
something about it. But we are witnessing a state of affairs in / 3 
the world today in which a shortage of liquidity in one country is
no longer just the business of that country but can have a chain
reaction all round the world. Let us just take a simple example
Japan. Japan has problems of liquidity. Japan has been a
great attractor and user of imported capital. If it turned out that
the policies of the United States for example, were such that
Japan began to become illiquid, tAat Japan became short of new
funds, we would know about it because Japan happens to be one of
our biggest customers in the world, and people can't buy things
withouf having the money to pay for them. Thereforethe liouidity
problem of Japan affects Ausrlalia, just as the liquidity pr6blem
in Great Britain affects Australia or of the Unite States affects
us. We have seen it. We have seen all these things in a distant
way, and sometimes if we have the opportunity, at cose quarters.
I really believe that, vastly important as it is
for us to try to sulve our own internal financial problems, our own
economic problems, vastly important as it is to have our credit
structure operatin. 7 inside our own country so that business can
proceed with opt imism it is even more important for the trading
world, the six or eigAt great trading nations, of which-we are just
abcut one. They have a problem in common. Nobody can detach tne
problems of Great Britain as she confronts her balance of payments
tasks, nobody can detach those from the balance of payments problem
of the Unite States of American or of any other of the tradIng
nations and more and more we must think about these matters in
international terms. The trading nations of the world, particularly
in the next two or three years, have a tremendous task in front of
them and it's a task in common so to handle those problems of
finance as to free the channels of trade. I am not talking about
tariff levels but to free the channels of trade and to expand the
world's trade, because I am old-fashioned enough to believe that
the greatest guarantee of peace in the world is that nations should
trade peacefully plentifully and profitably with each other.
This is a tremendous foundation for understanding and therefore
for peace. Now, Sir that is all I want to say about it. I am
talking to my betters, I know, as so many of you have technical
knowledge of these problems to which I can't aspire, buft as the Head
of a Government I am well aware of them. I feel some responsibility
for them, and it occurred to me that they might well be referred to
today because here we have people from London, from Australia. A
grea organisation London/ Australia here is something that has all
he elements of an international understanding of what, as I have
emphasised, is in many ways an international problem.
And so I had great pleasure in saying " Yes" when I
was invited to come, apart altogether from the fact that as Mr.
Darvall is not my banker, I have always felt it difficult to say
c" onmoe" atno d hiemv. e n g( Lraeua-; ehrt epr) l easuIrte thtoe rerfeopreea t gawvhea t meI gsraeiadt atp letahes urbee gitnoning
that the building is now open. 



STATEMENT BY THlE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON.
IN THlE HOUSE OF R~ EPhiESENTAT IVES,
TUESDAY. 28TH SEPTEMBER 1 96'
WOOL RESERVE PRICE PLAN 1965
My attention has been directed to the terms of
a nation-wide broadcast to woolgrowers by Mr. 5.5. Nevile,
Chairman of the Australian Wool Board's Marketing Committee.
In this broadcast, the following statement
occurs " Finally, the Prime Minister has clearly revealed
the views concerning the reserve price arrangement of
his Government, and I quote ' Besides protecting the
individual grower, the Plan will help stabilise the
industry and the national economy. These objects will
be achieved without any of the elements of controlled
marketing by Government control associated with most
primary industry marketing arrangements, to which the
characteristically independent woolgrower objects.
The use of this quotation is grossly misleading4
How misleading ( to use no stronger word) will at once appear
when 1L tell the House that the words, attributed to me as if
they related to the Plan now under consideration by woolgrowers,
were part of a statement made on behalf of the Government no
less than fourteen years ago. At that time there was another
Reserve Price Plan, of an international character, negotiated
among and supported by the Australian, New Zealand, South
African, and British Governments. The British Government had
already agreed to contribute substantial capital to the f'und
necessary to establish it.
That scheme was designed to represent a
continuance of the Joint Organization reserve price arrangement
after the winding up of the J. 0.
In anticipation of that plan going into operation,
the Australian Government, with the concurrence of woolgrower
organizations imposed a levy of 7eoj on the gross proceeds or
wool sold in 1950-51. This yielded about œ C45M., which was
very near to the fœ 1+ 8M. which Australian woolgrowers were
expected to contribute for the capital of the Scheme.
My Government supported the Scheme, which had'
been negotiated internationally. My statement was made on
behalf of the Government. Today, fourteen years later, another scheme has
been propounded for wool-marketing in Australia. What my
Government has done is to agree with the representatives of
the industry that
The woolgrowers will make their own decision at
a referendum.
If the scheme is approved, the Government will
play its part according to the terms of the
prepared plan.
That the Government will not take sides in a
matter which it thinks proper for decision by
the woolgrowers themselves. 
2
Under these circumstances, to claim the Prime
Minister as a public partisan is to accuse him of
violating the principle which on behalf of his own
Government he has tried to make clear.
This I greatly resent. The facts I have
recited will justify that resentment to the full. 



AUSTRALIAN TEXTILE EXPOSITION BANQUET
HOTEL REX-AT-CANBERRA, CANBERRA. 29TH SEPTEMBER, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Sir Robert and Lady Webster and all the rest of you
I want to tell you in the first place that these pieces
of fabric, precariously woven are warmly received. That is the
huntin, tartan in what is called in Scotland the old vegetable dye,
( Laughter) which only goes to show that even Webster can be up to
date occasionally, Laughter) ( Applause)
And in the second place, I would like to tell you this.
I am about to open this Exposition and therefore all this is relevant,
you see. I said I must tell you that I was born a son of a father who
was even more violently protectionist than Bob Webster ( Laughter) and
I leave it to you to understand what that means. From my earliest
days, he used to look at me before I ever knew what protection and free
trade meant and say " Robert, understand" and, of course if I didn't
understand...... at any rate, as I have since demonstrated in
politics I pretended to understand. ( Laughter) But, really, when I
look back on the old man, I think he was a softie ( Laughter) compared
to you. And, therefore, here we are, my wife oh, well her
late father, whom s.-me of you knew, he was on the Council of the Chamber
of Manufactures. He was the kind of man who could talk to Anderson
( Laughter) on eoual terms ( Lau hter), and here am I, the son f my
old man. Therefore we perhaps" have, by derivation, Sir, the right
to be here. ( Applause) But I am bound to say, and I think honesty recuires
this, that although I have known and admired Sir Robert Webster for
many years and have sometimes been at the biting end of his tongue,
until toni-ht I had never understood the function of psychologists in
industry ( taughter). But toni-ht I have been sitting next to his
charming wife who has, for the first time in my life, explained what
psychologists do ( Laughter) and what their function is in irdustry,
because I learned a bit of psychology myself once.
I w! ant you to understand that although having gone
into other fields, I am no longer an intellectual, I was once.
( Lughter) I always remember the late Boyce Gibson, father of the
present Professor, beginning a series of lectures to us when I was an
undergraduate, by saying and he had a little tongue-tied way of
speaking a charming man, he was a marvellous man but he said, " MIan
is an anthropoid with welatively large cewebwal Aemispheres."
( Laughter) I have never forgotten that. ( Laughter) And every time
my highly literate opponents say to me somethin rude I say to myself,
" It's all right Menzies. You are an anthropoid, with relatively
large cerebral Aemispheres." ( Laughter) What it means, I wouldn't be
dogmatic about that. ( Laughter) But I like it.
Now, it is a very good thing that in this great
Exposition that the man in charge should be Sir Robert Webster because,
really, we have our bit of fun, we have arguments about this and that,
but iT ever there was a man in the commercial and industrial history
of Australia who stood for what we could do in Australia and how we
could do it, it's Bob Webster. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause) Now, it is
revealing no secret to you who never iead the newspapers that I am, on
my last birthday, 70, and therefore I am not only entitled to a pension
but I am, you know what the boys at Parliament House say, not a bad
old chap. ( Laughter) And so 1 am -n old chap, and in my lifetime
born in the bush, born in a little country town, going to school in / 2 
2
Ballerat, going to school in Melbourne I have seen without
always being conscious of it, the history of the textile industry
of Australia never quite conscious, but when I was a small boy,
you might here and there encounter a woollen mill, that was it.
Then later on when I was a schoolboy and growing up a little,
there were clothing factories and a few woollen mills. In my
own time I want all of you who are younger, much younger than I
am, to think about this because this will give you an excitement
in your mind about this marvellous country of ours. Here am I,
the little boy at school, and there is a woollen mill somewhere
in Ballarat. Here am I the little boy at school who goes to
see the first moving picture show on the Ballarat East oval. Here
am I, a little boy, who in his little bush village in the country
sees the first motor vehicle ever to come into the country.
You know, you are all so kind to me that you don't realise how
venerable I am ( Laughter) Not worthy of veneration, but venerable,
because in my own lifetime I have seen the beginning and the
development and the growth of most of the great things that we now
take for granted, don't we, in our lives, from motor cars to
aircraft, television, before that broadcasting.
Broadcasting. Do you mind me telling you that when
by some strange chance I became Prime Minister of this country
only twentysix years ago ( Laughter) in 1939, I went to do a
little broadcast and I came back to the Lodge and there was my
wife, faithful as always. And the dear girl, she was sitting ' here
and wondering, you see, and then broadcasting was on, and I was
doing a broadcast and I turned to her and I said because I rather
approved of what this chap was say in, I said, " Wio is that?"
And she said, " That's you" ( Laughter' That was the first time I
had ever heard myself. I didn t believe it then and I still don't
believe it, when I hear it.
But this is a mere scrappy way of saying that we,
half of us here tonight, have lived in a period in which there
have been the most tremendous developments, and so I go back to
what I began by saying...... We began with a woollen mill or two,
and then we had cotton arnd then we had man-made fibres. We started
off with growing, with manufacturing, with prccessing, with weaving,
with fabric, with clothing, with dyeing, with printing. It's little
wonder that Sir Robert has tonight told us that here is a massive
industry in Australia which empoys 74,000. It's little wonder
this has become one of the very great industries in Australia.
And of course, this has involved all sorts of things primary
proauction. We are not to think about the woolgrower, the cottongrower
whoever-it-may-be grower in Australia as if he were quite
separate. He is part of the great textile industry. We are not
to think of manufacturing efficiency as if it related only to that
phase of the work that is to be done it is a very important phase
but is part of the phase. We are not to think of promotion that's
a blessed word " promotion". It's wonderful, you admire people
who do it. Anyhow, we are not to think of promotion, of encouraging
people to buy as if this were completely detached from everything
else, because in reality, the man who grcws the fibre, whether it
is wool or cotton, the man who manufactures the fibre, whether this
is nylon or whatever it may be, the man who assembles it into some
form, the man who designs it, puts it into form and sells it, these
are all people who are involved in the great textile industry.
( Hear, hear) This is really perhaps te most significant though
obvious thing that I want to say to you.
Now I know, Sir, that in modern times where people
are all engaged in politics where they all know why they are
right and why the other fellow is wrong, I am nld enough to belong / 3 
to a generation in which I think on the whole I am right but
that perhaps I might be wrong. This argues a degree sf wisdom
that will come strangely to some of you. ( Laughter) But it's
true. It's true. There is nothing all black or all white. A
few years ago, I was a little wnrried because although I wear
wool rather more than the average human being ( Laughter), I
never was quite able to persuade myself that you had to wear a
woollen handkerchief or a woollen tie or a woollen shirt
otherwise you were a traitor to your country. I still don't
believe it. The truth is that as every married man here tonight
knows, the secret of happiness in life is a good marriage.
( Hear, hear) ( Applause) And therefore I have always believed
that in the long iun wool, man-made fibres, all these things
w ould be married tooether to the greater enjoyment of mankind.
( Applause) I think that any man who is engaged in the production
of man-made fibres to use this revolting expression ( Laughter)
any man who is engaged in that production who 3aid " I hate
wool" would be a fol. He would. And any man who is enaged
in the production and processin. of wool who said, " I can't bear
the thought of man-made fibres he would be a fcol, because in
the long run, it is marriage that will solve this problem.
This is so true. You l? ok back over the whole history of mankir,'
over the whole history of our race, do you suppose that witiout
some intermarriage we would have amounted to very much? Do
you suppose that if the Anglo-Saxons had said, " Anglo-Saxons we
are, and out with the rest of them," we would have been the
magnificent people that we are? ( Laughter) Do you think of what
would have happened if the Anglo-Saxons had ignred the demands
of the Scots ILaughter) ( Applause) The truth is and I say
this quite seriously that in the long run, the future of
fibres, the natural fibres of wool, the man-made fibres will
depend very largely on how far they both realise that if they
act together, there is a bigger'and brighter future for both of
them. THear, hear) And it is because I believe that I haven't
consulted the Department you know.... I haven't discussed
that ( Laughter) I know, I am always making some indiscreet
remarks. I believe this, partly because I believe that the future
of wool is vital to Australia and partly because I believe that
the future of wool is involved in this kind of marriage that I
have been talking about. Now, that is all I want to say on that
point. By the time I have been reported on this matter, I won't
now what it was I said. ( Laughter)
I just want to say a few words on another aspect of
this matter. It's a very great mistake, Sir, for your industry
or for the wool industry or for any other industry to think that
it will sell its products by the Divine Grace of the Almighty.
It won't. It has to sell them, and to sell any commodity in the
world today, you must pay enormous attention to design, to
quality, to presentation to design. This, Sir, I venture to
say, is a matter to which we have devoted rather too little
attention in Australia. A little bit inclined, aren't we, to
say " Oh, well, you know, it's wool, it's good, it's fine
quality, it's go all the things in the wrrld. WVhether it looks
a little unpleasant, that doesn't matter." Design, design is the
whole background of salesmanship, just as my wife occasionally
reminds me that a capacity to produce the goods behind the
presentation is equally important. Something, I hope, we will
not forget, 3 
4
The other day I .; as looking at the J; ornal of the
Royal Society of Arts, oT which for some reason understandable
only to the Almighty, I im a Fellow ( Laughter) and every now and
then the Royal Society has a symposium of people who discuss
certain topics. The other day the had a great symposium on
design with Prince Philip in the chair, and when I picked this
out of my mail basket and glanced through it, I reminded myself
of a time when I oh many years ago before the time of half of
you I was in England on a Parliamentary Association visit.
You know how onerous that can be.
We went to Kidderminster, and I -as Attorney-General
of Australia at that time so I was in charge. The Mnager of
the Kidderminster carpet factory we were visiting, he did't
know who we were and I am bound to say in his favour he couldn't
have cared less. ( Lauohter) And we went along to a larze display
room oh many times the size of this. We saw some lovely carpets
and then not quite so lovely carpets anu then some good carpets
but not quite so lovely, and when we got to the far end, we came
across a floor full of carpets of the most horrible description.
You will all understand me when I say ; hcdv were all orange . nd
black flecks, you know. They were errible. And in my n
innocence this was many years aFo ( Laughter) I said, " But,
Sir would anybody buy such revolting carpets as these? And he
looked at me and said, deadpan, " Oh no, we make these for the
Australian market". And I am bound to tell you that I thoui t
he was having me on you see, until the next time I went to
provincial town in Victoria I won't name it and had tu stay
overnight and there was the very carpet on the floor. Well,
it was no doubt having this kind of thing in mind that the Royal
Society of Arts decided to have a discussion about design and I
don't apologise for mentioning design because design in the textile
trade will sell more than any individual salesman. ( Hear, hear)
It is a fundamental error to think that most people
have bad taste. Some have bad taste but in the long run, you must
cater for people who have taste. When we do this constantly, then
I see no limit to the textile trade in Australia, but at this
Conference, they had a series of people..... I read this only
yesterday, that s why I have it so much in with Prince
Philip in the chair and they gave a few medals to people.
Do we give medals, Gordon, to people for ood design? Well we
ought To. ( Laughter) M-ake a note of tha Mr. C. rmody. hen
each man who received a medal had to make a speech. A more
revolting exercise you can't imagine. But one of them who
received the medal was the managing director of a world famous
whiskey and gin firm.
iow, I say nothing to all our wives who don't understand
about whiskey and gin ( Laughter) but it wasn't easy, was it, to
associate in one's mind the idea of selling whiskey and gin and
what-have-you with design. And et, of course, this man was
able to establish quite clearly that they had paid a great deal
of attention to the problem of how they presented their goods to
the world, and I made a note of one thing that he said. Might
I read it to you, bearing in mind that this is a man who was the
managing director of a firm that sells spirits but is equally
applicable to every man here tonight who is in the textile trade.
He was talking about the head of a business and he said, will
happily plough revenue into technical research, into capital
reserves, into the shareholders' pockets, into splendid staff
welfare schemes, but into the appearance, taste, function and
elegance of the article on which this part of his commodity empire
is to be founded, still I fear, all too rarely." Something in
that, isn't there.
L 
5
I am an immeasurable believer in the textile industry
in Australia. I don't have to be converted by my fricnd, Sir
Robert, but I think that in the long runt the permanence of any
industry will largely depend on how far it compels the taste and
judgment of the people o the country, and in textiles above all
things, there must be superb quality or there must , e a mere
wretched dependence on what some government may do or cn what some
tariff board may dn.
And this is tremendously important because as yqu
have been reminded-here is an industry that employs in the direct
sense 74,00 people in our country. In other words supports
in a full sense a quarter of a million, an industry whLc has done
more for decentralisation than any other that we know an
industry which emplos more female labour than any othe---dustry
we know of. This inaustry, viewing it broadly, has ti-us
claims on Australia. It can't sunport them merely by s
" You mus+ help us". It can support them best by saying, .: ill
help you. We will help the country because we are preparea to
say that we will let everybody understand that what we do has
great design and great qualiuy and w: ili be bought on its merits."
Do you see what I mean? I hope you do because great
believer as I ar. and faithful as I am to the memory of my father
who would have murdered me if he thought I k:-ere not a protectionist,
as indeed I am, but in the long run the whole purpose of
tariff, the whole purpose of protection is to give you a
class opprrtunity of seizing the market; but whether ycu ncid
the market, having seized it, will be up to you.
Sir it seems an cdd thing to do at a dinner party,
but I declare this Exposition open. 



FOR PRESS: P. 11 741965
COMMO1VEALTH GRAFTS COMHI I SION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Sir Leslie Melville, K. B. E. and Mr. H. J.
Goodes, will become members of the Commonwealth
Grants Commission for a period of three years to
* September, 1968. They will replace Sir Alexander Reid, C. M. G.,
and Professor ", ilfred Prest.
Sir Leslie Melville's appointment is from
1st October, 1965 and Mr. Goodes' term of appointment will
begin on 6th November, following his retirement from his
present position as Director-General of Social Services.
The retirements of Professor Prest and Sir
* Alexander will terminate long and valuable associations with
the affairs of the Grants Commission. Both members have
served four terms with the Commission and both have made
considerable contributions to its work. In no small way,
they have assisted in maintaining the high confidence which
the Commission enjoys with Commonwealth and State authorities
alike. The Government is pleased that Sir Leslie
Melville and Mr. Goodes have agreed to accept invitations
to fill the vacancies left by the retirements.
CANBERRA, September, 1965.
( Biographical notes on Sir Leslie Melville and Mr. Goodes
are attached) 
2:.
Biographical Notes
Sir Leslie Melville Sir Leslie Melville, is 65 years of
age. He has had a distinguished academic career and has
occupied many high positions in Government service. He was
Public Actuary of South Australia, 1924-1928; Professor of
Economics in the University of Adelaide 1929-1951; Economic
Adviser to the Comironwealth Bank, 1931-1950; Member of
Advisory Committee on Financial and Economic Policy, Department
of the Treasury, 1939; Executive Director representing
Australia and South Africa, International Monetary Fund and
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
1950-1953; Assistant Governor Commonwealth Bank, 1950-1955;
Member of Reserve Bank Board 1959-1963 Vice-Chancellor,
Australian National University 1955-1960; and Ciairman
of Tariff Board, 1960-1965. From 1965 until recently, he
occupied a senior position with the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development. Shortly after returning to
Australia he was reappointed as a member of the Reserve Bank
Board.
Mr. H. J. Goodes Mr. H. J. Goodes will reach 65 later this
year and will retire from his present position of Directoreneral
of Social Services. Before joining the Commonwealth
Public Service, Mr. Goodes lives in 4estern Australia where
he occupied senior positions in the State Public Service.
He was an Assistant Secretary in the Commonwealth Treasury
from 1942 to 1957, First Assistant Secretary, 1957-58, and
Co-ordinator-General of Works 1954-1958. In 1958 he was
appointed to the position of Director-General of Social
Services. In addition, he has served on boards of a number
of statutory bodies, i. e. Executive of the Council
of the Australian National University and the Commonwealth
Scholarship Board. 



SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTER, THE RT. HON. SIR
ROBERT MENZIES, IN THE
HOUSE'OF REPRESENTATIVES
1ST OCTOBER, 1965.
STEVEDORING INDUSTRY BILL
19-5
Mr. Speaker, I hope that I will be allowed to pay a
short tribute of admiration to the Leader of the Opposition,
Mr. Calwell, for the technical quality of the speech he has just
delivered. How any man at half past nine in the morning could
produce such a torrent of adjectives and old political jokes is
beyond me. I think it is a wonderful performance but through
it all I thouoht that I detected a slight note of hostility to
my colleague the Minister for Labour and National Service, Mr.
McMahon, and therefore perhaps I should begin by correcting the
SLeader of the Opposition on that point.
This Bill, the Stevedoring Industry Bill is the product
) f very considerable close study in the Cabinet. It is not one
man's frolic. It is a Bill Produced by this Government and
supported by this Government,' and indeed, by honourable members
who sit behind it. In the second place, I think it is only
proper to add that the second reading speech delivered by my
colleaoue, the Minister for Labour and National Service, was a
masterly presentation not only of the narrative behind this
Bill but of the quality of its provisions, and every word that
he had to say about it certainly has my support and I believe
has the support of every honourable member on this side of the
House. Now, there is a very curious thing about this debate.
Last night the spokesman for the Opposition devoted his time,
very properly, because it is a large matter, not to attacking the
trans er of the right of recruitment to the Stevedoring Industry
Authority and away from the Waterside Workers Federation I
could not detect that he said anything about that point that
seems to go by silence, and he also said nothing about the rights
of appeal or disciplinary procedures that I could detect; but
ne came down as the Leader of the Opposition did this morning,
entirely to Part III of the Bill. If anybody is to make any
inference from this the inference is clear that the Labour Party
in this House is taking its real exception to the derogistration
proposals but is not propared ta argue against the merits of the
other and major provisions of this egislation. Indeed, one can
nnderstand why. I will come to that point in a moment.
All the Labour Party does in this House, having
concentrated its fire, a great deal of heat, and some abuse en
Part III of the Bill is to come along with the old proposition
that there ought to be nationalisation and until there is,
nothing good will occur. There will never by industrial peace
until there is nationalisation, it says.
This is a new kind of unity ticket because that is
exactly what the Communist Docker said to the Commonwealth
Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, practically in these
words. My colleague the Minister quoted what had been sai' by
Docker. The Minister said that Docker told the Commission that
if the Waterside Workers Federation / 2 
2.
" would determn~ ine j-vract to secure its
claims; and that even if all its industrial claims
were granted frequent disputes could be expected
until the inAustry was nationalised."
As I understand it Docker now has the backing of the Leader of the
Opposition for that proposition. This is indeed, as I have just
said, a new sort of unity ticket.
Now, Sir, how hollow this argument about nationalisation
being the panacea is, obviously, to anybody with any experJrV,.
of industrial problems, even as a spectator over a term of years.
When did nationalisation of an industry eliminate strikes? We have
seen them in Australia time after time, strikes in nationalised
undertakin s. We have seen strikes in ships run by the Government
Line, the ustralian National Line; and strikes in Sydney and
Newcastle transpoit services. We had transport strikes in Victoria
several times in the post-war period. There have been hold-ups
in the New South Wales and Victorian power stations, troubles in
our Post Office, and from time to time in Defence establishments.
These are all nationalised. The experience in Australia is precisely the same as
the experience in Great Britain because its experience has proved
tlat'nationalisation does not stop strikes. Great Britain has had
transport problems in nationalised industries time after time.
So, Sir, let nobody run away with the idea that by nationalising
an industry you usher in a period of industrial peace.
Now Sir, the real issues in the Bill are plain
enough, although the Oppositicn has sought to avoid several of
them. Should the Waterside Workers Federation retain its monopoly
right of recruitment? Just let us remember indeed everybody
does that under the existing legislation this Federation has a
position of privilege, descried just now by the Leader of the
Opposition as a unique position. It has the sole right to recruit
or nominate I do not care what word is used the selection of
the person to be presented in the first instance is made by the
SFederation. It has the richt of recruitment. I do not know of
any other trade union that Has this right. There may be one
somewhere, but this one stands out,
Should the Federation retain this right? That is
S the real and central question. There has been no serious attempt,
in the face of the facts put before the House by the Minister,
to say that the Federation should retain this right. It has yet
to be said by the Opposition, if it is ever going to be said at all,
that it wants the present state of privilege for the Federation to
continue. Of course, on the merits as distinct from the question
of debate between the two sides of the House, wel, " by their fruits
ye shall know them". The Federation has had an industrial privilege.
The privilege carries with it, surely, an industrial responsibility
in an industry which is of great importance to the whole of the
Australian economy, domestically and internationally. I will just
take 3ne or two figures. They have been mentioned, but I recall
the attention of the House to them.
My colleague, whose fi-oures have not been seriously
challenged, I think, drew attention to the grave fall in the average
net gan. rates of work per hour. This is not something that can be
lavuged off by saying that it has to do with machinery or with port
equipment. This is the gang work per hour. You would expect it,
in the course of time to be increasing, but as his figures show,
there has been a stead decline. Was this unconscious? Was this
unplanned, or was this'desired by the Communists who are the real
directors of the Federation? 
Mr. Curtin Get-off that. ( Interjection)
SIR ROBERT MENZIES They are the real directors of the
Federation. The honourable member would hardly deny that. All
the facts that have been put before us provo it.
Then, Sir take work stoppages. I want to emphasise
these figures. Over the last ten years to June, 1965, in all
in4ustry taking the whole mass of industrial occupation in
Australia workers lost on the average less than two hours a
year because of industrial disputes. This is a remarkable record.
t demonstrates that amang other things, if we look at the whole
of industry we find that tHe trade unions have been honouring the
law have been availing themselves of the normal industrial rights
that they have, and have been able to go to the Conciliation
Commissisners or to the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration
Commission itself freely and effectively. However, in the case of
the Waterside Workers Federation, the union that has these
tremendous and unique nrivileges, the loss has been 55 hours a
year. That has been the loss as a result of industrial stoppages,
not rain. Sir, these facts demonstrate absolutely and conclusively
that the trade unions generally are recognisin the industrial
laws. They are not under attack in this legislation. Indeed, it
is part of this exercise that we should draw a contrast between
the general body of unions and these people with this sorry record
who have enjoyed a privileged position. In other words, we are
considering a special case which is not to be confused with somp
wild, whirling words about an attack on, or hostility towards the
trade union movement. To suggest that we ar-attacking ths trade
union movement is, of course, utter nonsense. We have made a
selection and have demonstrated the reasons for making that
selection. Those very reasons and the fact that we make a
selection is the best evidence that trade unionism on the whole
is perfectly safe. It has justified that position.
When cne mentions the Communists, there is always a cry to
the effect that some Red-baiting is going on. Does not everybody
know that on the waterfront some of the peculiarities that have
led to the results that I have been mentionin. are consciously
fomented by Communist officials? Would anybody care to deny that?
Is it not clear that the worst record is to be found in the two
ports in which Communism is most active at the official level
Sydney and Melbourne? The facts speak for themselves. This
appears to be similar to what goes on in Great Britain. Some
reference has been made to the Devlin report.
The big transport workers union in England is the T. and
G. the Transport and General Workers Union. It is one of the
biggest unions in the whole of Great Britain. According to the
DevIin report " The T. and G. is one of these unions which does not
allow members of the Communist Party to hold any official
position. Their experience is that the Communist official
TTill subordinate the interests of the union to the party
line."
Later on the report had something tD say about a man called
curiously enouh, Dash, who was an acknowled-ed Communist, being
the leader of The Communist element, and who'had set up a liaison
committee, bless you, in order to further his activities. The
Devlin report continued / 4 
9 4-
" There may be some in these unofficial organisations
who are traitnrs in thought if not in deed. There
may be others for whom tre docks , re only a convenient
battlefield on which to wage class war; and others
with a genuine concern for the welfare zf the industry
but whose belief in some particular remedy for
example, nationalisation is so fanatical that they
would rather pull the whole industry down than
compromise or tempoise."
They are not my words; they are the words of the very distinguished
Commission that was presided over by Lord Devlin, who has neerbeen
accused of being a reactionary. I shall continue the quotation
" There may be others who find any industrial agitation
a satisfactory way of life, bringing personal influence
and prestige and whose concern it is to make sure that
there is always something to agitate about. All such
men, whatever their motives, are wreckers."
That is a pretty pungent statement. The whole clash, the whole
conflict and this, I think, is all that I need say is between
the Communist attitude on the waterfront, the Communist desire to
disrupt, the Communist pride in having a record loss of manhours
, n the waterfront, the Communist satisfacticn in holding up the
industries of the country and increasing the costs of industries
the conflict is between that and the Government of the country which,
after all, is the elected Government of a free people. Who is
to be in control of peace? Who is to be able, where necessary, to
take steps to forward peace and continuity of wbrk in this vital
industry, the Communist wreckers or the Government of the country?
Therefore, I conclude by saying that the Communist
Docker to whom I have made a reference before the advocate of
the Federation summed up the whole positicn with singular
lucidity. I have never denied the Communist leaders' talent.
However misguided, they have great talent, and this is beautifully
expressed. He says
" There is no future in the Arbitration Commission so
far as wages are concerned. Anyone who suggests we
should arbitrate is either a fool or is misleading the
workers."
I repeat, this is the advocate for the Waterside Workers Federation.
This is not some fellow going on a frolic of his own. This is
their advocate, the man who represents them before the Commission.
So I repeat what he says
" There is no future in the Arbitration Ccmmission se
far as wares are concerned. Anyone who sugaests we
should arbitrate is either a fool or is misleading the
workers. We are fighting the Government on these
matters."
That is the way he puts it. Very well. There is an official
challenge on behalf of the Waterside Workers Federation. There is
something, the authenticity of which cannot be denied, and as a
challenge'we accept it, and we shall defeat it. 



FOR PRI] SS No. 297
STATEMEFT BY THE PI -L MINISTER AND
ACTING TR-. SUTRECR
IPTRKAUTIONAL MONI2TA. RY FUND
INCR-ASE TV AUSTRALIAN QUOTA
The Prime Minister and ' Icting Treasurer said
today that Australia had formally consented to an increase
of % 0100 million in its quota in the International Monetary
Fund and had now taken steps to make the necessary subscription.
The increase in Australia's quota from
8400 million to $ 500 million was approved by Parliament
in May this year and is part of a general increase of
per cent in the quotas of all member-countries of the
Fund. To secure this higlher quota, Australia needs
to make a corresponding su'. scription to the Fund of
$ 100 million of which $ 25 million is payable in gold and
the remainder in Australian currency. The gold subscription
of 825 million ( L~ A1l. 2 million) was paid to the Fund on
Wednesday, 29th September. The Australian currency portion
takes the form of a non-negotiable note whaich enables the
Fund, in certain circumstances, to use Australian currency
in its transactions. The gold payment to the Fund involves a corresponding
fall in Australia's holdings of gold and foreign exchange.
On the other hand, the enlarged quota will increase Australia's
drawing rights in the Fund ( our second-line reserves) from
$ 525 million to $ 650 million. The increase in the quota
will become effective when members having not less than
two-thirds of the total quotas in the Fund have consented
formally to their quota increases. This requirement is
expected to be fulfilled in the near future.
The Prime Minister added that one-third of the
gold required for this transaction had been provided from 
-2
the Reserve Bank's gold holdings and that the Reserve Bank
had utilised portion of its sterling and dollar holdings to
purchase the remairning two-thirds in equal proportions from
the United Kingdom and the United States. In deciding to
adopt this course, the Government had been influenced by
the fact that Australia's gold holdings were relatively modest
and that the Fu~ nd is prepared to make arrangements to mitigate
the effects on the two reserve currency countries of sales of
gold which they might make to other countries for purposes
of the general quota increases.
Canberra, A. C. T.
October, 1965. 


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 75/ 1965LORD W1ARDEN OF THE CINQ~ UE PORTSStatement by the-Prime Minister, Sir Robert M. emi, iesI was deli,-hted to accept this appointment whichI feel is as much a tribute to Australia as it is to me personally.The selection of an Australian for a position so steeped inBritish tradition and history is a real demonstration of thefamily bonds of the British Commonwealth. I am most consciousof-the honour that has been done to me and it is a particularprivilege to assume the appointment in the footsteps of Sir WinstonChurchill. I can assure the citizens of the Cinque Ports thatI : ill at all times do my best to uphold the finest traditions ofthis post. The appointment nowadays is purely honorary andno longer involves any judicial or administrative duties.However, I understand that the citizens of the Cinque Ports dolike their Lord 61._ rden to visit them from time to time and I willendeavour to resume the practice of the Lord Warden residing'inthe area for at least a week each year. I hope to be able tomanage this while in Britain for the other matters that will nodoubt take me there from time to time.As for the official installation at Dover Caistle,no plans have yet been made for this. However, I hope theinstallation might be able to take place whlen affairs next takeme to Britain.CANBERRA, 7th October, 1965GENERAL BACKGROUND: The following is an extract from " Heritage ofKent", Autumn 1943, describing the functions of the LordWarden v . e I
2." At the head of the Cinque. Ports stands the LordWarden. The holder, in former days, held a dual position,as a Minister of the Crown through whom the Royalcommands to the Barons of the Ports were conveyed, andalso as the representative of the Confederation, pledgedto maintain all the franchises, liberties, customs andusages of the Five Ports." The appointment includes the offices of Constableof Dover Castle, and Admiral of the Cinque Ports, andcarries with it the right of residence at Walmer Castle,of flying a distinctive flag, and of precedence next toRoyalty in any of the Cinque Ports or their Liberties.At sea, the Lord W-irden is entitled to a salute of 19guns and to hoist the standard of the Cinque Ports withinthe limits of his Admiralty." For the purpose of his formal installation in office,the Lord Wrden still exercises his right of summoningthe Ports to Dover Castle and of presiding at theirancient Court of Shepway. On such occasions he wears thefull dress uniform of his office specially designed toindicate his high naval and military rank, and has bornebefore him, instead of a mace, the silver oar of hisAdmiralty jurisdiction." The Cinoue Ports are an association of maritimetowns in the South-East'of England exercising a jurisdictiondating from about the time of the Norian concuests. Fiveprincipal ports constituting the body are Hasting s, Romney, Hythe,Dover and Sandwich. It is interesting to note that the office of theLord Warden includes the right to " Wreck", i. e. flotsam, jetsam,lagan, tc., found within the limits of jurisdiction of theCinque Ports. There are some excepted areas within the jurisdictionwhere the rights of certain Lords of LManors ( about twentyin all) have been admitted by the Crown in respect of unclaimedwreck washed ashore. The Office also includes the right to *" FishesRoyal" within the same limits, but these are probably more of aliability than an asset in that they usually have to be buried,and the cost of the burial is a charge to be borne by the LordWarden. On balance, the proceeds of the wreck, etc. more thancover the cost of burials but the amounts, in normal times, aresmall, averaging about œ 12 a year.* Fishes Rcyal are whales, porpoises sturgeon, and the like, andwere granted to the Lord Warden in 1707.


65/ 129PRESS, RADIO AND TELEVISION CONFERENCEIVEN BY THE PRIME MINISTER SIR ROBERT MENZIEST PARLIAMENT HOUSE CANBERRA, ON THURSDAY7TH OCTOBER 1965 AT 3.50 P. M. ON THE OCCASIONOF THE ANNOUNCEMENT OF HIS APPOINTMENT ASLORD WARDEN OF THE CINQUE PORTSPRIME MINISTER Sorry I didn't hear the 19 gums.Well, no doubt you will have some uestions but Ithink I oughtto begin by mentioning two points that I gather are being dealtwith in other places. Somebody appears to have imagined thatbecause I have been given this purely honorary title and officethat I am goini off to live in Great'Britain You can forgetabout it. I live in Australia and I hope I'll die here. So allthat kind of rumour has no foundation at all. In the second place,I hope nobody will think I am going to career around Australianwaters as an admiral because I am not. This, as you probablyknow, having looked at it now. is a very ancient style and title.Lord Wairden of the Cinque Ports used to have considerable actualjurisdiction both legal and otherwise. He has none now. Hisprincipal duty is. if he can, to go down about once a year for aweek or so. is first duty is to attend his installation and afterthat the people in the ports like to think that he will be downthere once a year. Well, I normally fetch up in Great Britainonce a year so that is no great inconvenience. He has the right,I believe to reside at Walmer Cstle but as it is uninhabitable,it is a theoretical right rather than anything else. Though,Mr. Wilson when he raised this matter with me in London did indicatethat they were investigating the possibility of making some part ofit h. bitable, putting in a flat or something of that Kind so thatit might be used officially. Well, that's on the knees of the gods.It's fascinating to know that the Lord Warden has the right toSflotsam, jetsam and lagan.QUESTIONER What is " lagan", Sir?P. M. Lagan is wreckage which lies on the sea floor.Q. Oh, I thought it might be mermaids. ( Laughter)P. M. No, unhappily mermaids are not included in " Fishes Royal"I am entitlea to Fishes Royal. Queer entitlement whales,porpoises and so on. All it means is if a whale gets itself washedup bn the beach at Dover the Lord Warden has the supreme privilegeof paying for its removal.Q. When is the installation, Sir?P. M. Oh, that isn't fixed. That will be the next time I am inEngland, whenever that happens to be.Q. The style of the uniform, if any?P. M. They tell me there is a uniform. I don't Mypredecessor, Winston Churchill, he was interested in the uniform butI don't think he went down for his weekly visit very much. He wasmore conspicuous by his absence. But, yes, in terms of uniform theW. rden is a species of admiral, which I imagine is the most nauticalthing about him. But it is really a very great personal honour.I feel it in that sense. Lord Willingdon, Lord Reading andWinston Churchill being the three predecessors.Q. Would it suggest that it is a prelude to a peerage?PM. Not the slightest chance. / 2
-2-Q. Have you made any decisiQn on when you'll retire?Oh, come off it. Do you expect me to make a decisionthis week? I've been expecting one for three months, Sir.Well I'm not even thinking about that. I'll deal withthat at what I think is the right time. Yes or No.You did suggest Sir, when you returned from abroadearlier in the rear that you were in fact thinking of it.Are you still t inking of it?PM.: Oh yes, of course and I will continue to think of it.Wouldn't you at my age think of it?When do you think you will be in England again, Sir?P. M. -Vell, I don't know. I don't know.Q. In reference to your age, Sir do you feel the dutiesof the job are growing such that tAey are testing youphysically? You mean my presentQ. Ai Prime Minister.P. M. gell, it'z3 not easy. But. look, this problem let'sbe quite plain about it. This is a matter that I will haveto decide one way or the other at the right time, and thattime hasn't arisen and as far as I can see, it won't arise forsome time to come.Q. Sir, getting back to the position of Lord Warden, arethere any privileges that go with this position?P. M. Yes I have the right to flotsam jetsam and lagan and Idaresay that what I'll fave to do is to live hoping"would be the wrcng word because it would be inhumanfor some decent luxury liner to be cist ashore out of whichI might get a few perquisites. There are no privileges.You have the privilege of spending a good deal of money.Q. Do you fly a special flag, Sir, over the castle?P. M. Yes, there is a flag, I believe.Q. Will y~ u use it in Australia?P. M. Oh, I wouldn't think so. None of this has any operationin Australia.Q. Doesn't affect precedence in Australia?P. M. Oh dear no. Oh no.Q. Do you know what the uniform is like, Sir?P. M. I am told that it is based on the uniform of an admiral.Q. A modern or an ancient one?P. M. Oh I haven't a clue. I was under the great impressionat the 6oronation time that Winston had on this uniform underthe gown of the Garter. That's mere speculation. He enjoyeddressing up. I hate it. / 3
-3-Are you able to tell us, Sir, anything of the method ofselecting the Lord Warden?Well, I gather that what happens is this. It's a Royalappointment but the Government 01 the day tenders advice onthe matter. Mr. Wilson spoke to me about this towards theend of the last Prime Ministers' Conference and wanted to knowwhether I would permit him to put my name forward. Well, Isaid it needed a bit of thouaht. I didn't quite know what itinvolved, what travel it might commit me to in the future andwhat expenditure that's not unimportant. And so we hadcorrespondence afterwards and finally I said " yes". I hadalways said this was a very great honour. I wrote to himfinally and said, yes, I would agree to his putting my nameforward and he did then. I had reason to believe hat he haddiscussed it with The Queen before and so the announcement wasmade. You don't suggest Sir that Mr. Wvilson was trying tohelp the Australian Latour tarty?P. M I -, Would hate to put it on so low a level as that. Mr.Wilson is a very practical man. I don't think he wouldcommit himself o an impracticable course.Q. Sir Robert, have you any idea why a Labour Prime Ministershould su,: est you for the office?-hat's this?Have you any idea why a Labour Prime Minister shouldsuggest you for This office?P. M. No. All I can assume in my :) wn favour is that he thoughtI was an appropriate person. It wasn't proposed to me asPrime Minister because, after all, one is no a Prime Ministerforever, and this appointment runs for life.Do you see any political significance at all in the factthat he nominated you for it, Sir?P. M. I don't. No.Q. Does this carry any special precedence, Sir at CommonwealthPrime Ministers' Conferences?P. M. Oh no. I gather from some of the papers they sent methat I Aave special precedence in the Cinque Ports area. IfThe Queen is there, I outrank other people. I think that mustbe great fin, but the question won't arise.Is this installation likely to be this year, Sir?Ycu mean in 1965?Yes.P. M. Oh, no. It will be next year some time.Q. Sir do you think Mr. Wilscn may have considered you asuitable person for this honour because of a possible imminentretirement? I credit Y. Vilson with a great deal of intelligenceand therefore he would never entertain so absurd an idea.You boys will chivvy me out of office if you have your way,won't you, but I will make up my own mind in my own time,thank you. / 4
-4-Q. Sir Robert, have you any ideas of what city you willretire to when you do Tinally make the decision.I anticipate Melbourne yes. That's my own, so tospeak, home town and there I'll go, I hope.There's a rumour that you have in fact made apprachesabout buying a house in Melbourne.P. M. Yes, that's quite tre I can confirm that. I havebeen doing it for the last fifteen years. Once a year my wifeand I sa~ y, " Well, it would be rather nice to have a home ofour own in our home tywn" and we think of it. You arequite right, so I can t deny that rumour,Q. Would you have actually been looking at any propertiesin Melbourne in reoent months?Every year I have looked at one or two so far withcutresult, but if you should hear of a good one, I'll begrateful.Q. It might be easier to build a new Prime Minister'sLodge here, Sir, as you have been here that lvng.P. M. Oh, I hope not, I hope not. I wouldn't want to be herewhen the new Prime Minister's lodge was finished. That's aStime off. That doesn't mean next week.Q. Don't you think in view of the fact that you have beenPrime Minister for so long. occupied the Lodge for so longyoa would be the appropriate one to make the decision to builda new Lodge, thereby saving your successor embarrassment?P. M. There are proposals about a new Lodge which I know theNational Capital Cbmmission has had in mind because in someways this is not the perfect answer, the present house. Thecontribution that I will make to that will be to give them thebenefit of my advice and so will my wife, as to what oughtto be done in a new rime Minister's house. In other wordswhat deficiencies there are in this one, how they might beimproved or removed in another. But that's a mere matter of6cnsultation. I will always be willing to do that, but I don'tanticipate living in any oher Prime Minister's Lodge myselfthan the one I now precariously occupy.Q. Sir Robert do you intend to Co to England before thenormal time as AustralianPrime Minister in the winter?P. M. I hope not. Indeed I hope not.Q. There will be no special trip for this?Oh no. No. I have had a few winter trips there and I amnot enamoured of them.This suggested retirement before say, May next year, it'sjust not on?PM. I'm sayin-nothin-about that. I have already said thatI will decide hat mater in my own time. Why are you in sucha hurry to get rid of me? o
Q. Je are seeking amplification of statements issued in yourname. What statement is this?The statement to the effect that normal dutics will takeyou to the U. K.P. M. Well what's mystericus about that?Q. Well would'hormal duties" be as Australia's PrimeMinister, Sir?I didn't say so. I might with reasonable expectationof life hope to be still alive when I am no longer PrimeMinister, and if still alive, then I may have some dutiesor I may impose them myself, which will take me to England.All I am saying is that I would anticipate being able to gothere once a year. This is not a job ex officio you know.This is not an appointment as Prime Minister. TAis is anappcintment under my omri name.Q. Sir Robert, do you hope to be the Prime Minister whenyou accept the new honour formally?P. M. In other words, you want me to make a statement about amatter that I said I am not making a statement about. Youare trying in vain. You must restrain your eagerness inspite of your newspaper.Q. On a different subject, Sir, can you give us yourreactions or whatever analysis you have made of what couldbe the effect of recent happenings in Indonesia on Australia?P. M. Oh, no, look the conference was not called forthat purpose. I am discussing all that with Mr. Hasluckbecause I think that we ought to, if we can, if the positionhas cleared enough, to have a statement made on that onTuesday in the House, but at present, of course, it is allvery obscure. By that time, perhaps, it will be sufficientlyclarified to say something useful.Q. Sir, you told us two conferences ago you didn't knowwhether you were going to lead the Government at the nextelection. Do you now know whether you will or not?P. M. ' eren't you here when I answered these questions earlier?Q. I was here two conferences ago.P. M. Yes I thought you mi htn't have been here today.Don't tare me for a fool. Y9u can't trick me into makingsome statement about a matter on which I have already statedouite clearly that I will deal . ith that in my own time, notin yours. Come on, any more intelligent questions?We'll try, Sir again. Can you tell us if this newappointment could allow you to go to Prime Ministers'Conferences in any other capacity than Prime Minister?Uill it have any Uommonweath significance? e / 6
-6P. M. This appointment has no bearing upon what happens ata Prime Ministers' Conference. This is a purely local matterof great historic interest and continuity. It happens now forthe first time to a man outside Great Britain. I$ has nobearing whatever on anything that happens at Prime Ministers'Conferences or otherwise.Q. Sir Robert, if you don't wish to discuss Indonesia atthis press conference, will you be holding one soon when wecan diScuss it?I don't know. I am going to clarify my own mind with mycolleague on what goes on in Tndonesia firsXtw ith a view ifwe can get some clarification adequate clarification, tosaying something to Parliament aoout it.Sir Robert, would you let us go from the Five Ports tothe Australian waterfront?P. M. No. No, I won't.Q. Sir there was another announcement in London today fromRhodesia House that IVir. Ian Smith has sent a message toPA.: Gentlemen, I am afraid there has been a misapprehension.I thought this conference was about this little honorificaffair of mine, not a general conference.Q. Ie thought it might be a lead-in, Sir.P. M. Did you? No, I'm saying nothing about Rhodesia.I'm just hoping. I'm saying nothing,Q. Sir the ceremony of installation. Does it involve theBritish Prime Minister?I couldn't tell you. I don't know.Q. Does this take place at one of the Five Ports?P. M. I think it usually occurs at Dover. They have a bi!function of some kind and when that happens you are initTatedand when it's over you take off the uniform and hang it up.I think I must buy one and put it in the Parliament House.Mr. Hurst, President of the Press Gallery Sir Robert, just beforeyou go, 3r, on baf of the Press Gallery, in spite of thequestions, we would like to congratulate you on this honour.P. M. Thank you very much. Thank you.I I I



The Australian College of General Practitioners
Annals of General practice. V. 10( 2) June 1965
JUNE, 1965 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
ACADEMIC SESSION, OF THE AUSTRALIAN COLLEGE
OF GENERAL PRACTITIONERS, AT WILSON HALL,
UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
ADMISSION OF SIR ROBERT MENZIES AS AN HONORARY
FELLOW OF THE COLLEGE 9th October, 1964.
Speech by the Prime Minister, the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies
Your Excellency and Sir:
This show3 how wrong one may be, because I came here tonight
saying to myself, ' His Excellency the Governor will make a speech and
I'll be able to pick up a crumb or two, and then my old friend, Sir
Victor Coppleson, he will speak'. Not he, silent as the tomb, and
therefore all that is left for me to do is to say thank you very much,
Sir. I appreciate this honour, and in a strange, odd fashion, you
know, I have rather earned it. Would you mind if I developed that
theory a little?
As you know, in the course of a life of a man like me, one
acquires certain things by merit and other things by favour. I managed
to get a degree or two in this university by working for them
and in later years I have been given a series of unearned honours
which give me the most immense satisfaction. For example, I am a
surgeon. Never let anybody entrust himself to my scalpel, but I am
still a surgeon. Whenever my general practitioner looks at me, or even
my expert specialist consultant who is going to make a speech tonight,
I like to remind them that I am a surgeon and I am also a physician,
and also, you don't think I am boasting-this is a simple narrative of
fact-I am a gynaecologist and obstetrician, though whether as a
patient or a practitioner has never been made quite clear. I seem to
remember that I am an architect, but not responsible for everything you
see. I am a builder, I am an scientist. This is a boasting record, but
I mention it to you firstly to say I didn't earn any of them and, secondly 
ANNALS OF GENERAL PRACTICE
to make you understand after all these events that I am now so
superbly qualified to become a general practitioner.
Now, Sir, I have been lucky enough in my life not to encounter
professionally the medical profession too much. I used to have a bit
of fun in a clean way at the bar in my time, cross-examining doctors,
who are very easy to cross-examine, much easier than when you are
their patient, and I haven't been their patient all that much, but I
have lived long enough to have the most tremendous regard for what
goes on in the medical world and I have lived long enough to have
a particular regard for the work done by the general practitioner,
because the general practitioner, as His Excellency said, he is the family
doctor, he is the man you know, he is the man who knows you, knows
the family, who can speak intimately and yet with authority and he is
the rman who, over a long period of time, has been the first diagnostician
when he comes to handle something in the family or in the family
circle. I find it hard to believe, Mr. Chancellor, when I look back on my
time here and on your time here when we who were students of the
law certainly understood that we were much more intelligent than
the medical students, I find it hard to believe how many of these
scamps who were medical students in my time have now become the
most trusted family advisers. And they have, and that proves, of
cour:; e, that it is a jolly good thing to get it out of your system at some
time or another, because I venture to say that there are more
millions of people in Australia who owe a debt to the family doctor
than there are any corresponding number who owe a debt to any other
particular group in the community.
I have been exercised, as I know you have in this College, exercised
about what is going to happen in the future, because in my own
lifetime, which goes back before the turn of the century, all sorts of
astonishing things have happened in the medical world. I have no
doubt that at the time when I was born, the true function of a physician
was to keep his patient quiet and allow nature to take its course.
I have no doubt that not long before I was born and before all the
subtleties of anaesthesia were being got to be understood, surgery was
a chancy thing; in fact, it is only in the memory of some men still
living that antiseptic surgery gave place to aseptic surgery.
It is really an astonishing thing for somebody like me to realise
that in his own lifetime the greatest discoveries affecting mankind
have not been in the field of destruction as some people think, but in
the field of preserving life as more people ought to think. Because
of all these things, the work of the biochemists, the work of the
microbiologists, the extraordinary developments of drugs and techniques
in the specialised fields, it must become increasingly difficult
for a general practitioner whose day begins at any hour of the early
hours of the morning and whose day ends at about the same time.
It must be difficult for him to feel that his tremendous job of dealing 
JUNE, 1965
with people in the broad and dealing with people in the particular
has to be performed against a background of knowledge with which
he must feel, occasionally, he is losing touch.
Now this is a problem I think that I, as an outsider, understand,
Do we want general practitioners merely for an instrument for passing
patients on to great specialised experts? I hope not. Or do we want
the trusted family doctor, skilled in understanding, skilled in diagnosis,
to preserve his position by keeping up, in the broad and in the particular,
his knowledge of the new developments in medicine, so there
is not an unbridgeable gulf between what he knows he understands
and what he knows is understood by the most refined specialists in
the medical and surgical world? If I were a family practitioner this is
what I would want to feel. Yes, of course, there are great specialised
experts who know more than I do in their particular field; they ought
to, because I have to cover, at the beginning at least, all fields. But
I do want to believe that every year I know more and more about the
new discoveries, that I am every year becoming competent to understand
these latest developments and to know what it is that my highly
qualified specialist will be talking about.
This is tremendously true. We are not having a great gulf between
the specialist and the general practitioner, because if we do, the
general practitioner will begin to feel more and more that he merely
begins something and that the skill, the expertise, must belong to
other people. If I were a specialist in some branch of medicine, I
would want to know that general practitioners every year knew more
and more about the kind of thing that I was concerned with, and
I am sure that the general practitioners would want that too.
That means, as I understand it, the reason that this College.
has been established-I heard about this before it was established.
My own family doctor used to address me very earnestly on. this sub-.
ject when he had me at what you understand to be a disadvantage,
and even from the beginning, I can see quite clearly that a College
of General Practitioners, which is going to include within its scope
educational work, refresher courses, lectures and practice in matters
which are new, is going to do something even more tremendous for
the whole body of medical knowledge and of practice, and so Sir,
surgeon though I may be, I think this is one of the great moments of
my life. I have been a general practitioner in other fields for a long
time. It is a very great honour to become a general practitioner
in the field of medicine. 
ANNALS OF GENERAL PRACTICE
A SURVEY OF ACUTE RESPIRATORY ILLNESS
by ALAN H. B. CHANCELLOR, Metrylands, N. S. W.
Acute inflammations of the respiratory passages are very common
ailments in the general population. The cause of these disorders is
uncerlin and although surveys have been conducted on many groups
there has been little study made of such unselected patients as voluntarily
consult a general practitioner. An attempt has therefore been
made to isolate viruses and bacteria from all patients seeking treatment
for symptoms of up to seven days duration, referable to the respiratory
system. The Institute of Clinical Pathology and Medical Research at Lidcombe
N. S. W. has co-operated willingly in doing this laboratory work.
Patients were studied during two periods, from 4th November,
1963 to 20th December, 1963 and from 2nd May, 1964 to 4th
August, 1964. The study was carried out by one member of a group
of seven general practitioners and the patients were the only ones
to exercise a choice of which doctor they would see, apart from
ccout of hours" periods. Type of Disorder
( f the 218 patients studied, 2 were suffering from bronchitis
and 19 had a wheeze without any other evidence of bronchitis. The
remainder had upper respiratory signs only.
Age distribution
The age distribution of the studied group and the observer's
patients in general ( calculated from the ages of 2147 different patients
seeking treatment between November 1963 and June 1964) is shown
in Table I. Table 1.
Age distribution of patients. Shown as of total of each group.
Age in years 0-9 10-19 ' 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70
Studie:; Group 50 14.6 11 7.8 8.7 3.2 3.7 1
General Patients 21 15 11 13 16 11 17 6
Collections
Samples were taken in the consulting rooms or in the patients'
homes. A swab for bacteriological examination was placed in either
a glas; s tube or a plastic envelope and then a throat gargle was obtained
and returned to a McCartney bottle. These two samples were placed
immediately in a refrigerator or into a vacuum flask with ice and stored
thus until delivered to the laboratory. Patients who were unable to
garglie had a second swab taken which was then broken off into a tube
of transport fluid and shaken before being placed on ice. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No, 76/ 1965
NATIONAL IRT GALLERY COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
Statement by tha Prime Minister, Sir Robert Mnnzies
The Prime Minister today made a further statement
about the Cmmittee inauiring into the establishment of a
National Art Gallery in Canberra whose appointment he recently
announced. He said that as promise, two sonior Public
cervants had now been depated to assist the Commihtee: they
were Mr. J. W. Overall, the National C. antal
Dwelu pent Commissioner and Mr. A. L. Moore, Assistant
Secretary, Prime Minister's Department.
The Prime Minister said the Committee had begun
its investigation and was prepared to receive sunestionAr
from oeryons cr organisations interested in the develoDment
of a hational art gallery in Cunberra. In the first ihstance
these -uestions should be made in writing t-the Secretgry,
Nationalfrt Gallery Committee of Inquir Prove Minister
Department Ganberra. It was desirable Tat i.-c. isions so;' uld
reach the hccretary not later than the Oth of hcvember,
CANBERRA Octoter, 1965.
BACKGROUND NOTE The terms of reference of the Committee are
" To report on the proposal for a Nutional
Art Gallery with particular reference to the fUnctions
of such a galler and the method of control, the
anccmmodation ani the staff to carry out these
functions." The members of the Committee are
Sir Dr 1 Lindsay Chairman
Mr. R. ampbell, of Adelaide
Mr. W. A. Dargie, O. B. E. of Melbourne
Mr. Russell Drysdale; and
Mr. Douglas Pratt, O. B. E. buth of Sydney,
all the above being members of the Commonwealth Ar..
Advisory Board, and four others
Mr. H. Basten, Vice-Chancellor of the Univorsimy;
of Adelaide
Professor J. Burke, O. BE., Professor of Fine krts at the
Unr.. versity of M. tl cuzne
Mr. Tristan Buesst of Melbourne
Mr. J. O. Fairfax of Sydney. 



FOURTEENTH ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN,
ASSOCIATION OF NATIONAL ADVERTISERS HELD AT
CANBERRA, A. C. T. 11TH OCTOBER, 1965
Mr. Chairman, LIdies and Gentlemen
I '. ill pursue a very satisfactory practice
that I ii.. ve established over the years and declare this
conference open.
Hivin, said that, I suppose I ought to explain one
or two things.' The first is that I Jeoerve no credit whatever,
no particular virtue is involved in coming here this morning.
I c. uoe under orders. I received my orders from a good friend
of mine, Sir Frnk P. icker, who reminded me at the time he made
the demand that he published a certain number of journals.
I'll refrain from mentioning them; you know them and, as no
politician ever knows where the next good deed will come from,
I c. 7iL. e. I h,. ve been fascinated by this advertising business
for a long time but I've never fuite understood it. The
Ch'iirman said that I am a good publio relations man' I mt to
assure you that I the despair of everybody who sets himself
up as a public relations consultant. I non't profess to be good
at that kind of thing though it' 2 worked out reasonably well
over the last few years.
But I certainly do need some instruction on this
matter of the advertising that I see most frequently promoted
by some of you, and which I see here on the commercial television
station. I '. rant to tell you at once that this fascinates me;
it really does. I'LI sitting there on the few occasions when
I can look at the T. V. I'ra terribly interested in the fate of
the hero, perhaps of Mr. Simon Templar and just as the villain
walks through the door points the pistol and says, : Stand
back Templar," tue next voice says, " How'd you like to have
your washing down in the main street": It i6 only as a result
of long experience and a certain amount, no doubt, of native
genius, that I've been able to discover where the film proper
ends and the advertisement begins: Just as similarly, when
the heroine in the glamourous mode of twenty years ago is
reaching the point, the whole demeanour of the play suddenly
changes and you see her down on her knees scrubbing the floor
and somebody saying something about immonia.
Now, I don't profess to understand these things, but
I think you have added to the gaiety of the nation by advertising
on television. I sat down one night and thought, " Now, really,
some of this annoys me." I am an ordinary customer so to
speak. Then I realised that of course that is the art of
advertising. You remember things that irritate you much
longer than you remember things that please you. But if you're
irritated and say, " Oh, I'm fed up with this detergent;' next
time -ou go in to buy a detergent, it is the one you buy:
Th.. t I believe is the whole principle of advertising.
Now all that is by way of preamble; the truth of the
matter is and ycu have made it quite clear in your own
constitution and your own documents the truth is that
advertising has become a vital element in the whole of private
enterprise and commercial operation and, indeed, as we've / 2 
d m -22-
been reminded, in Government activities, there could be no
business I suppose worth speaking about except a very elementary
one, if the manufacturer, or the wholesaler, had to rely
entirely on individuals going around showing samples of his
goods. If ie is to be in touch with the consumers, if he's
o' develop the large sales that are demanded by the desire
for a large production and a successful enterprise, then
advertising must be the means.
Therefore, advertising which brings the consumer
into touch with the seller is, I believe, a vital element in
commerce, and because it is a vital element in commerce, it
requires one more attribute. In the long run no commodity
is going to maintain its sales indefinite y unless it has
quality and regularity of supply but above all things, a
standard of quality that people have come to expect. This is
a very very important thing in commerce, and if you are to have
a maintenance of quality in the stuff that is sold the goods
that are sold, the services that are sold, then it's equally
clear that advertising must have quality. Otherwise advertising
would be in conflict with the commodity or service that is
being soldi Quality in advertising is just as important as
ouality in that hlch is being provided by the seller. Now I
think hat is clear enough and it is all the more clear when we
remember as all of you do, as I do, that this country adheres
to a system of free enterprise and will not tolerate the idea
that comDetitive enterprise will bring about a lowering of
standards for the sake of quick sales, but depends in the long
run on the raising of standards, certainly on their maintenance,
and therefore on the perpetuation and growth of sales to
advertising of auality. I don't mean advertising that's
directed to highbrows because highbrows are a very small proportion
of the community, but advertising which has its appeal to
ordinary men and women and does not strike them as being either
absurd or untrue. However, I know that this association of yours has
for many years advocated these very ideas. I'm not stating
anything Tresh. I am for a few minutes preaching to the
converted. Now the establishment of these standards, the
maintenance of quality seems to me, as it seems to you, to
depend a great deal on corporate experience and corporate
judgment. That is why you have formed an Association. I
daresay that any one of you representing substantial concerns
would have felt quite competent to work out his omw advertising
plans, to engage his own advertising men, go about the various
things that are done. But a ouarter of a century ago or
thereabouts, you decided that there was much to be gained by
having corporate judgment, the development of a common standard
and so you got together and if I may say so, Sir, with enormous
success. Your success is best demonstrated by the wonderful
conference this morning, added to which I am told as the day is
fine, you're going to conduct a series of little talks while
perambulating in the sun. This is very gosd. The old Latin
tag you remember, " salvatore ambulante". You'll become the
peripatetic school of philosophers this morning, and this is
good. This will lead to intimacy of discussion and it will all
end up with a corporate mind and corporate judgment. / 3 
-3-
The last thing I want to tell you about this great
topic I don't profess to understand very perfectly is this.
There have been some heard say that there is too much repetition
in advertising. Now, I might have belonged to that school of
thought myself bein one vho likes to have a matter explained
to him once and not fifteen times, but for a very early
experience I had before I'd gone into Parliament before waves
ha closed over me and I was taking a little preliminary
splash' It was at some kind of a political affair which might
have been on a Constitutional Referendum or something like that.
I went to the Prahran Town Hall. I had not really made a
political speech before, and I made a speech, I was accompanied
by an old uncle of mine who had been in Parliament.
It was at the Prahran Town Hall and in spite of the
inherent improbabilities in the Prahran Tovn Hall for me, this
was a good meeting. After I came out I was rather pleased
with myself and thought, " Now I've explained that matter to them
and it is crystal clear." I came out and I got into my uncle's
car and I said hopefully, " Well, Uncle, how did that go?" He
said, " It was terrible.
My face fell no doubt. Then he said " Look, as
an address to the High Court, it couldn't have been faulted.
It was clear, you didn't ever repeat yourself, you assumed that
your audience was a hih-powered audience which would understand
every word, every syllbale. As a High Court performance m
boy, it was admirable I don't doubt, But as an address to the
people it was hopeless. Now let me tell you this," he said.
You are a bit afraid of repeating yourself. Do understand
that in communicating with the people, persuading people
this is as true of your business as it is of mine in
communicating with the people it is essential that you leave
them at the end with a very clear notion of your central theme.
They must go away with that in their minds. They are not to
go away saying, ' e's a clever speaker'. That means nothing.
They are to go away saying, ' That was a good point he made."
If you are to do this then you must not just state
your main point once. You must approach it from the North, the
South, the E-. st and the West, always bringing yourself to a
conclusion in which is the centre of your argument, So, if
you are going to be good at this kind of thing you must four
imes approach the central proposition you want to establish,
not with of course the same words in a different way, but always
concluding with the thing rou want them to take away with them.
The more I think of that the more I realise that very very wise
remark of uncle is not entirely unrelated to the principles
of advertisin-and making an impact on the public mind. Although
you are the advertisers rather than the advertised, you are of
course profaundly interested in the success of the advertising
that goes on in your name.
Now I'm sorry to have inflicted on you the wandering
views of an amateur but in a sense, jou're all amateurs too,
because I'll lay ndds that when you aecide with your agents to
put on an advertising campaign of same kind, you are, on the
whole, happy when it comes out right.
I just want to say to all of you that I hope it will
always come out right. I'm delighted to be here to open this
conference. 



( 5/ 133
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 88/ 1965
DROUGHT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
I received a deputation today representing the
Australian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council, The Graziers'
Association of New South W; alesand tho N. S. W. Country Party
to discuss the drought situation. My colleagues, the
Treasurer, Mr. Holt, and the Minister for Primary Industry,
Mr. Adermann, joined me in these discussions.
The deputation gave us details of the current
drought situation, particularly in Northern New South Wales
and Queensland. I informed them of the steps my Government has
already taken and gave an assurance that it would give
careful consideration to the views they put forward.
The Australian '-. 4oolgrowers' and Graziers' Council
was represented by its President, Mr. T. B. C. Walker, and
Executive Officer, Mr. P. Nicholas, while the Graziers'
Association of New 3outh ' Wales was represented by its
Chairman, Mr. B. A. Wright; representing the New South
Wales Country Party was its Chairman, Mr. R. Hurt.
Also attending the meeting were two Liberal and
two Country Party members, Messrs. J. M. Fraser, H. J. Bate,
I. A. Allan and J. A. Pettit.
CANBERRA, lOth November, 1965.
i( 


In the course of my statement on 26th August, I indicated that the provision of assistance to drought-affected primary producers in New South Wales and Queensland was properly the responsibility of the two State Governments and that we had decided after careful consideration that it would not be appropriate for the Commonwealth to participate directly in the financing of measures for the provision of such assistance. I emphasise the word "directly". I went on to say, however, that we were very conscious of the strains that special drought measures might put on the finances of the two States and that, if as a result of the drought the States of New South Wales and Queensland found it necessary to meet abnormally large calls on their budgets that were established to be beyond their financial capacities, we would be prepared to consider assisting them by means of general purpose assistance grants.
Knowing of the interest of honorable members in the subject, I believe it is timely for me to inform the House of the present position concerning the provision of assistance to the budgets of the two States. The Premiers of New South Wales and Queensland have since replied to the letters that I addressed to them. Both referred to the effect of drought measures on their States' budgetary situation and expressed appreciation of our willingness to consider the provision of general purpose assistance grants. The Premier of New South Wales indicated that his State's position would become clear as the financial year progressed and that he would be in touch with me again when the situation warranted it. The Premier of Queensland outlined the possible consequences of the drought on his State's finances and went on to suggest that the whole position be reviewed towards the end of the financial year when the actual effects of the drought would be more precisely known. I think it is proper to point this out because it indicates that we are working in co-operation with the State Governments.
I consider the two State Governments have taken the right course in proposing, in effect, that it would be premature at this stage for any precise determination to be attempted of the amount which it would be appropriate for the Commonwealth to provide by way of general purpose assistance grants in 1965-66. Only a quarter of the financial year has passed, and happenings over the remainder of the year - not least the future course of the drought over the areas where drought conditions unfortunately still persists - could have a large bearing on the need for, and the extent of, Commonwealth assistance for the budgets of the two States. Later in the financial year, we shall be prepared to consider, fully and sympathetically, the situation of the two States in the light of the facts as they turn out to be with a view to taking action before the close of the year. All the present indications point to the likelihood that we will find it appropriate to provide some measure of assistance to the two States in conformity with the principles enunciated in my statement of 26th August.
I might add that the two State Governments will have access as necessary to treasury bill finance, at an interest rate of one per cent, per annum, to meet their temporary needs during the financial year. Deferment until later in the year of a decision on the question of general purpose assistance grants by the Commonwealth should not, therefore, present the States with any serious cash problems between now and then arising from the need to meet the cost of drought relief measures.
&nbsp;
&nbsp;
&nbsp;


This morning I informed Mr. Monk, the President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, that the Government agreed with his proposal for a Conference whose objective would be the long term improvement of conditions in the stevedoring industry. The participants in the Conference should be the &nbsp;Waterside Workers Federation, the Employers of Waterfront Labour the Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority and the Department of Labour and National Service.
The Conference will decide its own agenda and the procedures to be followed. However, the general charter for the Conference will be to deal with those matters relating to the W. W. F. which were raised by the Employers and the W. W. F. during the conferences between them which broke down in M: iy and also the matters raised by the Federation on 30th July. Matters dealt with by the recent legislation political problems such as nationalisation of the industry, and the modernisation of the ports will be excluded from the Conference consideration.
I also advised Mr. Monk that Mr. Woodward should chair the Conference. Mr. Woodward has already accumulated a great deal of information and experience about the industry which will stand him in good stead as Chairman. As Chairman his role will be to attempt to secure agreement over the widest area.
If the Conference succeeds the purpose of the Woodward Inquiry will be achieved over a large area of its terms of reference. If it Tails the areas of disagreement will be revealed and Mr. Woodward could then let the Government have his own views on these matters.
As well, there were some matters covered by Mr. Woodward's Terms of Reference which to beyond the charter of the Conference. I have made it clear to Mr Monk that the Government expects Mr. Woodward to give first priority to the business of the Conference.
I also pointed out to Mr. Monk that it was essential, during the Conference there should be no port or national stoppages except as authorised by the Award and that disputes arising over on-the-job issues should be dealt with on all occasions by established procedures; for example, by the Industrial Relations Committees provided for by the 1965 National Conferences and Boards of Reference.
The Department of Labour and National Service and A. S. I. A. will at an early date discuss with the V. W. F. and the Employers of Waterfront Labour the arrangements which will apply to the procedures for the recruitment of waterside workers by the Authority.
CANBERRA,13 October, 1965.


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 77/ 1965The Prime Minister today welcomed the statement made&nbsp;in London on behalf of Commonwealth Governments, announcing &nbsp;the&nbsp;appointments of Mr. Amishadai Larson Adu of Ghana and Mr. Tillak&nbsp;Eranga Gooneratne of Ceylon to positions of Deputy Secretary-General&nbsp;in the Commonwealth Secretariat.
The Commonwealth Secretariat was established at the&nbsp;meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London last June.
The appointment of Mr. Arnold Si; ith of CanadaasSecretary-General of the Commonwealth Secretariat was thenannounced and Mr. Smith has since taken up duty at MarlboroughHouse in London the headquarters of the Secretariat. It wasenvisaged that Governments would make appointments to the twopositions of Deputy Secretary-General provided on the Secretariat.The position to which Mr. Adu is appointed will havegeneral responsibility for international relations and administration.
Mr. Gooneratne will deal with economic matters.Mr. Adu is a former Secretary to Cabinet in Ghanaand former Head of the Ghana Civil Service. He is currentlyRegional Representative of the United Nations Technical AssistanceBoard and Director of Special Fund Programmes for East Africa.Mr. Gooneratne has served in a number of capacitiesin Ceylon's Civil Service dealing mainly with economic affairs.He is at present Deputy Secretary to the Treasury in Cuylcn.Sir Robert Menzies said both Mr. Adu and Mr.Gooneratne were known as experienced officers, well qualifiedfor the positions they would occupy in the Commonwealth Secretariat.Both would have Australia's full support in their work.
CANBERRA,13th October, 1965.


EMBARGO NOT FOR RELEASE BEFORE-9 P. M. ( EST) IFOR PRESS P. M. Nn. 79/ 1965COMMONWEALTH PUBLIC SERVICE ANNUAL LEAVEStatement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The Government has decided not to grant an increase&nbsp;from three to four weeks in the standard of annuaI leave for&nbsp;cfficers and employees in the Commonwealth Public Service and&nbsp;Commonwealth instrumentalities. The request for four weeks' annual leave was made&nbsp;to the Government by the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the&nbsp;High Council of Commonwealth Public Service Organisations and the&nbsp;Australian Council of Salaried and Professional Associations.
The claims by the unions also sought commensurate adjustments&nbsp;to all who already receive in excess of three weeks annual&nbsp;leave", for example, shift workers who already receive four weeks'&nbsp;annual leave. The Cabinet closely examined the full and carefully&nbsp;documented case presented to me on Friday 1st October, 1965.
In its view the case for an extra week's leave was not substantiated.
In making comparisons between the Cimmonwealth and States,&nbsp;and the Commonwealth and other countries, all the facts must be&nbsp;taken into consideration. As an example, although, as pointed out&nbsp;by the deputation, the pub] ic services in a number of overseas&nbsp;countri3s provide for ahditional annual leave based on age, status&nbsp;or lergth of service, they do not provide for the substantial&nbsp;furlough, or lon-service leave, entitlements which are available&nbsp;in the Commonwealth Service and also in other public services in&nbsp;Australia. If an extra week's leave for the total staff in&nbsp;Commonwealth employment were granted, an additional 5,800 workerswould be needed. This would increase the annual wage and salarybill of the Commonwealth by about œ 9M. For example in theP. M. G.' s Department alone, an extra week's leave would require anadditional 1,650 employees estimated to cost œ 2.35M. a year.Export inspection services in the Department of Primary Industryare another example the Deoartment would have to increase itsdemands on the already very limited community resources ofveterinarians and qualified meat and dairy inspectors. Similardifficulties would arise in other areas of Commonwealth employment,for example Repatriation services, defence oroduction factories,airlines, etc. An increase in annual leave to Commonwealthemployees almost certainly would have repercussions throughoutthe community. It , uould undoubtedly be of great significance notonly to State and local governments but also to private employers.The granting of the additional leave must have theeffect of increasing the amount of overtime worked at a time whenovertime is already excessive and additional demands for labourmust increase the pressure on wages and prices as competitionfor labour becomesmnre intense.
In order to Ifset the 1ls of ne week's work bythe 5.4 million civilian employees ( excluding II. S. W. Governmentworkers who already have four weeks' leave), it would be necessaryto recruit some 75,000 additional workers. This would be well Aikhimpossible as there are very few untapped resources of labour athe moment. At the end of August 56690 people were registerdfor employment with the Commonwealth Employment Service and zhbrewere 47,600 unfilled vacancies.CANBERRA, 14th October, 1965.


65/ 131EMBARGO NOT FOR PUBLIC DISSEMINATION BEFORE 6 P. M.FOR PRESS P. M. No. 80/ 1965VISIT BY HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH THE QUEEN MOTHERStatement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies.Her Mvjesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother hasacceDted an itinerary for her visit to Australia next year.The primary purpose of the visit is to attend the FourthAdelaide esival of Arts.The itinerary is as followsTuesday, 22nd MarchMonday, 28th M-irchSaturday, 2nd April Arrive at AdelaideLeave Adelide for PerthLeave Perth for CanberraIn the couse of the Ci. mberra programme,Her Majesty will make a brief visit to theSnowy Scheme.Thursday, 7th AprilArrive at Melbourne to goon board the Royal Yachtand leave later for NewZealand.A programme of engagements in draft form is nowbeing prepared for Queen Elizabeth's visit. An uannouncementof these details will be made after the proposals have beenaccepted by Her Majesty.CANBERRA, October, 1965.BACKGROUND NOTE The air journey from London to Adelaidewill be by Quntas Boeing 707 aircraft.



FOR PRESS VISIT FROM PRESIDENT OF MADAGASCAR
Statement by-the Prime Minister. Sir Robert Menzies
President Tsiranana of Kidagascar has accepted
an invitation from the Commonwealth Government to come to
Australia. The visit, the first to Australia by an African
Head of State, will take place from the 9th to 12th of next
month. ( November) Iwarmly wloethis vstby the Huad of
State of a neighbouring country across the Indian Ocean. This
personal contact will further develop the friendly relations
existing between the two countries.
The President will be accompanied by Madam
Tsiranana and members of their personal staff.
CANBERRA, 17th October, 1965. 
a 1 0 VISIT TO AUSTRALIA
OF
PRESIDENT TSIRANANA
OF
THE REPUBLIC OF MAL1AGASY ( MADAGASCAR)
B ROA DITI N ER AR Y
NOVEMBER: Tuesday, 9th11 .30 a. mn.
12.15 P. m.
6.45
7.15
Wednesday, 10th
Thursday, 11th
Friday, 12th p. M.
p. M.
8.40 P. M.
12.50 P. m.
2.10 p. m.
10. 30 a. m.
11.45 12.25 a i.
p~ m. Arrive at Perth from
Mauritius by Qantas
Flight QF 622
Leave Perth by Qantas
Flight QF 622
Arrive at Melbourne
Depart for Canberra by
R. A. A. F. Aigoweft
Arrive Canberra
Canberra
Depart Canberra by
R. A. A. F. Aircraft
Arrive Sydney
Depart Sydney by Qantas
Flight QF 759
Arrive Brisbane
Depart Brisbane by Q~ antas
Flight QF 759 for Mvanila. 



HOSKINS FAMILY IEMORIAL SERVICE AT HOSKINS
ME~ MORIAL CHURCH,-LITHGOW. NSW. 17TH OCTOBER, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
It's a very great honour to be here and to be
asked to speak on such a notable family occasion. I'm a very
old -friend, I'm happy to.. ay, of several of the distinguished
members of the family. I was warned by one of them that on
this occasion I should not embarrass the family by talking
about it. Having met scores of members of the family, having
been across the road compassed about bj a great cloud of
witnesses all of whom appeared to be Hoskins, I dare not omit
to speak about them. Ineed, that is what I am here for.
Andbifg a Presbyterian, Sir, I like a text,
and my text, though ithasn't found entrance to the Authorised
Version and still remains in the Apocrypha, it is a great one,
a suitable one " Let us now praise famous men and our fathers
7hich begat us." There can be no more splendid invocation
than that, because we are praising today, with our memories and
with our prayers, notable people, people who were creators
in this country, people who lhave not merely lived and passed
on but who have left this country in their debt. W~ e are
celebrating an uncommon family and therefore uncommon
individuals. Now Sir, the-. history of the Hoskins family in
Australia, runing back now over 112 years if I mistake not
is a very remarkable sne. I was fascinated to discover when
I was informed of some of the details that at one stage the
founder of this shall I call it a dynasty in Australia
worked in Ballarat. This at least gives me some faint contact,
in terms of place, if not in terms of quality, because I was
at school in Ballarat and my parents were born in Ballarat, and
so the family lines have merged to that extent.
But the story of this family, Sir, is a matter
for pride for the family and it is a matter of gratitude for
the country. Having saiA that, I would like to add that it
gives all of us something to ponder.
,' ae all know, don't we, that this has been described
as the age of the common man. I want to say something to you
about that. I remember during this last war making a speech
in London in which I used the phrase the common man. I
used it I thought in a very appropriate way on that occasion
because I was referring to the behaviour of the people in
Great Britain under the bombs, under attack, and I said it was
an age in which the common man had become a king. But I had
letters from people, 9uite a few, protesting against the use of
the word " common as if it involved some condescension., Perhaps
I had better explain to you at once, it doesn't. The word
" common" is one of those words in our language which has an
almost infinite vaietlo f meanings. You may say, " That's a
very common fellow." You don't mean something pleasant. You
may say that the Elder Pitt was the great commoner. Not
offensive on the contrary. You may say that a Royal personage
has married a commoner. There are enormous varieties or meanings
to be found. But it has been said and said in some senses with
ees / 2 
-2-
profound truth that this is the age of the common man. It's a
great truth so long as we understand what it means. I want
to give you two reasons for saying it's true, before I make a
certain gloss upon it.
The first is that true democracy, that which we
all in our own ways try to practice in Australia, true democracy
seeks to achieve not ustice to a few or something for the
talented but justice for all men, for all women, and regards
the good life of the individual as the ultimate aim of government.
This is worth remembering.
Politics is not a matter of loaves and fishes
entirely. Loaves and fishes may come into our economic life,
but the essence of it is that in our ways whatever our party
beliefs may be, we must all the time be struggling for the good
life for the individual because that will be he ultimate test
of the value of whatever contribution we make to our country.
And in the second place in all times of crisis ( we can say
this with pride), in all times of crisis for the nation iT is
the spirit of the ordinary man and the ordinary woman that has
provided the foundation of survival and success.
I had the great honour, as you know? of enjoying
the close personal friendship of Vinston Churchill, and like
you, I shall never forget how his w'qrds rang out and gave
encouragement and hope and confidence to his people and to
people all round the world, and yet he was the first to know
and to concede that he wasn't creating something in the
individual; he was evoking from the individual something that
was there. This courage and determination came from ordinary
men and women and he made their deepest feelings vocal. It was
he who led out something which is part of the genius of the
common man the common individual, the ordinary person in a
community like ours.
Now Sir, having said that let me look at the
other side of the picture. I rather think it would be a calamity
if our applause of the age of the common man for the reasons
thati have just been stating induced us to yield to the
temptation to resent or reject the uncommon man. This is a
great danger. One sees occasionally a symptom of it the
little flashes of jealousy, of hatred, of malice. This is too
easy a strong temptation; it's easy enough to yield to it,
and therefore, to look at the uncommon man as if he ran counter
to the pattern of life that I have just been saying something
about. My reason for saying that we must not yield to that
temptation is that in all history it has been well established
that it is, after all, the uncommon man who initiates ideas,
who provides leadership, who has honourable and powerful
ambitions who supplies the driving force who has a capacity
for industry beyond the minimum of obligation, who has sufficient
courage to efy disaster and not to be misled by temporary
success. This is somebfinition, I think, of the uncommon
man and it is appropriate to refer to him because the founder
of this notable family was an uncommon man. He answered to all
of these things that I have been t lking about.
And that adds up, Sir, to this, that the ordinary
man must have a proper pride, should never be over-anxious to
submerge himself or to be misled, but at the same time, he
must a Iways have a belief a true belief, a true appreciation
in and of the quality of the uncommon man. Eow of course the
uncommon man, Sir, the uncommon man may turn out to be a tyrant,
a dictator, and therefore a destroyer if he forgets that the * o 
-53-
spirit and happiness of the common man is his chief concern and
that his ambition must be for the people and not for himself.
will Let me apply those ideas by one or two examples that
wilreadily come to your own mind. Hitler, of course, was the
latest in this century he was an uncommon man, who turned
out to be a destroyer so that he had to be destroyed.
Napoleon, who overshaAowed Europe, who overshadowed the then
known world in the height of his military successes, his military
genius, he was an uncommon man. Nobody would doubt if for a
moment. But what did he achieve? Measure what he did against
its defect for the common man, its value for the common man, the
ordinary man. I remember standing once in Paris looking
through the i. krc de Carousel right up the Place Ae la Concorde
to the Akrc de Triom phe at tUe other end and this beautiful
arch is covered with the boastful recorA. of Napoleon's victories,
his conquests of this piece of land or that piece of land.
INothin remains except the marble the victories forgotten, the
victories fruitless, the conquered lands once more free. Here
is a boasting piece of marble the uncommon man, who in all
those respects failed in his duty to the common man,
On the other hand, we ma~ think of people I don't
need to name very many of them Shaftesbury, in England the
founder of factories legislation, the true beg inner of all the
humane industrial legisqation that has come to us since this
so-called remote aristocrat the uncommon man, a tremendous
benefactor of ordinary people. Lincoln, in Amnericai the great
industrial creators in our own country, because don t forgyet
that there are two kinds of people wno come to great w7ealth and
position in the country. There are those who make money because
they are good at making money. There are those who make money
or power or influence because they have created something and
maintained something for the benefit of other people. Anid the
fact that they have some benefit from it is no more to say than
to say that tIe labourer is worthy of his hire. The greaT
names -I won t make invidious distinctions, but I could at the
slightest thought mention five or six great names in industrial,
manufacturing, mining history in Australia who are the names
who would be the names of people who were uncommon men and wAo
have laid common men under heavy tribute.
I was looking the other day, once more Sir in the
Gospel according to Matthew at the parable of the talents.
There is one word in it which deserves emphasis because you
remember that when those who had five talents, two talents, went
away ad put them to work, did something with them, and came
back having doubled them the word that was spoken was,"'. ell
done thou good and faith{' ul servant". True, true, they were
the servants of the master who had given them the talents, but
they were also servants because nobody could have done what they
did without serving some good public or private end. The
uncommon man. Whenever we are fortunate to encounter him he
is the servant of the country and the servant of his people, and
there is every reminder of that as we stand or sit in this place
on this most notable occasion.
I wonder, Sir, if I might conclude my remarks by
saying that many years ago, I read for the first time and that
was a great event Robert Louis Stevenson's " Child's Garden
of Verses". There may be people here who have become so gown-up
that they think they hnave outgrown them. I ho e not. I hope
not because Robert louis Stevenson will himself never grow old
in the minds of people, and his " Child's Garden of Verses"
remains a joy forever. Remember the poem about the river and
e 9 ./ 4 
-4
the children putting their little boats into the river and
floating them away, and exciting childish pleasure? And
then it goes on " Away down the river
A hundred miles or more
Other little children
Shall bring our boats ashore"
This verse has stuck in my mind. It has, in my own case,
continued to have a profound effect on my own mind
" Other little children will bring our boats to shore.....
Other little children will benefit or suffer, according to
our virtue or our vice; every time we do something that is
at all significant, we are launching a little boat on the
river of life, and other little children will bring it to
shore. Let us never forget about that.
Nman could be a great pioneer and constructor as
the founder of this family was if he had thouight only of
today. He must, from time to time, have looked forward and
have said, " Yes, if I can do this, then we can do so-and-so,
then we'll do something else," looking to the future,
conscious of the fact, as we all must be, that we are not
here today and gone tomorrow but that we have our little
mark to make for good or evil n h akdos' u u
too quickl. That's why I t~ nk that that is a geat poem,
a wonderful poem deserves to live with us, as I indeed I
hope I mayr say it has lived with me.
And so here today in the presence of so many members
of this family, this famous family, recalling the achievements
of this family, I would like to think that we, like themselves,
will look for-ward with thankfulness for what has been done
and with a profound hope that when our boats come to shore,
they vill be found by happy children in a happy world all
the better because we launched our boat. 



.^ o
FOR PRESS PIvM. No. 82/ 1965
PRINCE OF WALES TO ATTEND AUSTRALIAN SCHOOL
St-itement by the Priwe Minister, Sir Rooert Menzies
It has been announced in London today that The Queen
and the Duke nf Edinburgh have agreed that Prince Charles should
spend a term at Geelong Church of Ernland Gr-immar Schiool,
beginning on the 1st of February next year.
I am confident that I speak for all Au-; tralians when
I say how delighted I that, fnr the first time, a Prince of
W: iles is to go to school in Australia.
This is a very tangible demonstration of the close
ties between Australia and the Royal Family. The idea of the
young Prince ' f WVles living and studying here in his formative
years is, I . m sure, a prospect that will give widespread satisfaction.
It is an imaginative and practical step. Getting to
know Australia through young Australians should prnve of
inestimable value for a Prince whnse future duties will require
a comprehensive knowledge of the countries and peoples of the
Commonwealth. The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh raised this
question with me while I was in Britain earlier this year and,
needless to say, I was very pleased when they asked me to initiate
arrangements with the Headmaster of Geelong Grammar, Mr. T. R.
G-rnett. Mr. Gurett is at present visiting Englund, and recently
met The Queen and the Duke to discuss the details.
CANBERRA, 18th October, 1965. 



RHODESIA 7 w
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Manzie -ree
Rhodesian situation today in reply t-a question in e -ouse of
Representatives from Mr. Nicholls ( Bonython, For your
information, the text of the question and answer follows:-
Queation: " I ask the Prime Minister a question. A week has
elapsed since the right honourable gentleman was asked a
question about Rhodesia. In that time, the Prime Ministers
: f Britain and Rhodesia are reported to have referred to the
role that the right honourable gentleman might play in
settling the differences between those countries. Will the
Prime Minister state the Government's attitude on this matter
which not only can affect the peace of Rhodesia and the major
African States but the standing in the world of the entire
British Cmmonwealth?"
Answer: " The h. nourable member may take it that this is a preblem
that we have approached with a proper realisation of its very
grave importance. " Some days ago, the Prime Minister of Great Britain,
his discussions in London having failed to produce an agreement,
rang me and promoted to me an idea that there might be a
Cmmnwealth mission to Rhodesia which, if it were to be
useful, should include, say, two f the African leaders one
from Asia and myself. This presented me with a very Aifficult
problem. Mr. Nilson followed up his call that night with a
cable repeating his request.
" I di not need to tell the honour-ble member that this
presented me with some political difficulties, but I gave the
matter a lot of thought. I concluded that I ought nt to
stand in the way if the sending of a Commonwealth mission
because slight though the hspe might be, there might be same
hope of arriving at a composition. So, after great and
anxious thought, I sdd that I would be willing to go. I
showed to the Leider of the Opposition for his information my
cable and my reasons.
" In the result, as we now know, the Prime Minister Lf
Rhodesia has rejected the missivn idea. He has said that he
does not want a mission and that he will not receive it.
This means that the whole position goes back into a state of
deadlock. It loaks as though one cannot be positive
however this deadlcck is to be resolved by the Gcvernment
df Southern Rhodesia declaring its independence unilaterally
in nther words, illegally. Th~ t may not be the situation but
at the present momen,, this seems to be the case.
" Mossages have been exchanged, I gather between Mr.
Wilson and Mr. S. iith. I h:-ve n t seen the text of thtse
messages. I have had no further ccmmunications. Even at the
last moment we all hope that better counsels will prevail and,
to say nothing else, that there may be some process of delay
in which heat can go down and in which people can accommodate
themselves to new ideas.
" I do not think there are many people, even among
African leaders, who have strong views en this matter, who
would demand an instantaneous creation of adult suffrage in
Rhodesia. I think most people looking at the situation hope
to see steady progress a phasing in of the ultimate majority
rights of the native people. / 2 
2
" That has been my own view. It-s a vd avocated in
London and which indeed I pressed to Mr, Smithin a long letter to
him when he was in London for these discussions. This view
appears to be imacceptable to the Government of Rhodesia and it
looks as if we will ave some extremely difficult problems
presented to us. Of course, none of us would fail to understand
something of the position of the European settlers, if I may so
call them, chiefly the British settlers, in Southern Rhodesia.
They have made an enormous contribution to the country. They
have rights which everybody would want to protect. 3o the matter
is not utterly simple.
" What will be done in the event of a unilateral declaration
of inaependence will be decided, in the first place, I have no
doubt, by the Government of Great Britain, which is the colonial
power an which by common agreement amongst all of us, has the
responsibility or dealing with the Government of Rhodesia.
This is a matter between the two of them. In due course, we will
learn what the Government of Great Britain proposes and we will,
as a Government have to give earnest thought to what we will
present to the Parliament as the policy of the Government. That
is as far as I , ant to go at present; but one thing is certain:
If there is a unilateral declaration of independence, there can
be Lo diplomatic reconition by the Australian Government cf a
government so formed.
CANBERRA, 21st October, 1965. 



MENZIES FOREST IN ISRAEL GALA CONCERT
CANBERRA THEATRE, CANBERRA 23RD OCTOBER, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Sir, Your Excellencies and Ladies and Gentlemen
I don't need to tell you that this is a remarkable
honour for both my wife and myself, the kind of thing we would
have never thought of, once, the kind of thing that we shall
never forget now that it has happened.
The evening has been, as you haven't failed to
notice, rather cunningly arranged. For the first half of the
programme we were taken to Heaven by iir. Kentner, and then you
descend to earth and you listen to three gentlemen three men,
anyhow ( Laughter) two of whom are politicians four men,
one of whom is an ambassador who, of-course, by definition is
a respectable man, and the other my old friend, Mr. Ungar.
But be of good cheer, when the speeches are over, you will be
taken back to Heaven by Mr. Kentner. ( Laughter, applause)
I must say that I love the idea of the forest.
It is a very happy association between Israel and Australia
because a forest has beauty, it has usefulnessi it has endurance,
and above all things, it expresses a spirit of continuity which
to me is the most important thing in the world. A forest.
You know, it is a curious coincidence that my
old friend, 3aron Snider, who has been a friend of mine for
many years in spite of the fact which now appears he used to
listen to me at political meetings it is a very happy coincidence
that he should have quotedoIalter Scott because, strangely
enough, I propose to quote him twice tonight.
The first thing I want to quote is a tag that all
of ys~ u will remember from your schooldays from " The Heart of
Mid-Lothian" " Jock, when ye hae naethin' else to do ye may
be aye stickin' ma tree. It ' 11 be growin', Jock, while youtre
slee'pin'". I read that I learned that when I was a child, and
I have never forgotten it.
And it happens, Sir, that people with my name
have another interest in forests, because the people of my
clan I don't claim that there are not a few bar sinisters in
( drowned by laughter) I am willing to accept that out
oThand. But the heads of the clan, in the great days of the
Mingies clan because that is the right way to pronounce it
they were great foresters. They planted forests all over the
Lenzies country, right up to the ald Caledonian forest. One
of them introduced he larch into Scotland, and by very good
judgment when in Coronation year I went up to Scotland to what
was once the country of my clan, alas no longer, because they
fell into litigation and waed it on lawyers ( Laughter) but
I went up to open a power station on the Gaur just near the
Road to the Isles on the fringes of the old Caledonian forest
and the souvenir they presented me with was so appropriate two
or three seedlings from the old Caledonian forest and one of
them at least grows amain in the Lodge gardens today. And when
I get around to it I must have a little notice put alongside it
so that those who live there in the future will see that the
element of continuity survives. This is from one of the old
forests of one of the old -tountries of the world. / 2 
2
And therefore the idea of the forest is something
that strikes deeply into the heart and mind of both my wife
and myself as it will into the hearts and minds of my family.
The Jewish Xational Fund which has been referred
to, and with which there may be some here who are not familiar,
has been operating, I think I am right in saying, for over
sixty years sixy-two years and in that time it has raised
vast sums of money for the express purpose of taking a country
the old Palestine arid, eroued by wind and weather, not very
fertile full of history but not full of water they have set
out to 6uild it, almost physically to build it.
I remember at the very beginning of 1941 being in
Palestine because even at that time, as some of the older of
you may recall, I was Prime Minister ( Laughter, applause).
In fact I was reminded as I came in tonight by a very celebrated
newspaperman in Canberra that though he still cross-examines
me, the first time he ever did was in Palestine at the beginning
of 1941. And I was fascinated by what I saw even though so much
more has been done since by hard work by imagination, by the
completely constructive ideal of a national rebuilding. And
therefore, when in due course Israel was established as the
independent home of the Jewish people, this was something that
didn't just start, as we might say, from scratch, but worked on
a basis which had for a number of years been steadily created
by the Jewish National Fund.
Now that establishment of Israel as an independent
State was swiftly acknowledged, of course, and s pported by
Australia, but it had a worId significance, a world significance
that we do well to reoall. And here I come for the second time
to ;, alter Scott, because this is one of the little verses that
you find in " Ivanhoe" " When Israel of the Lord beloved
Out of the land of bondage came,
Her father's God befo&gt; her moved
An awful Guide in smoke and flame."
of the house of bondage..." for the second conspicuous
time in history, end the earlier time was long long centuries
ago for the second conspicuous time, the Jewish people, oh
many many scores of millions of them came up out of the house
of bondage. They didn't all go to Israel. They couldn't all
go to Israel. But the establishment of Israel as an independent
tate wis a gesture not only on the part of those who creatod
it, but on t e part of the world, that there had come up out of
the house of bondage the disabilities and persecutions of
centuries that culminated in Hitler's Germany, and are not quite
extinct I regret to say, elsewhere those aisabilities and
ersecutions were in a symbolic way, brought to an end, and
pence the State of Israel.
The civilised world, I. like to think, saw in the
establishment of that State that State in which this great
forest will grov, not only the providing of an independent home
for many Jewish people but also a shining symbol of delivery from
bondage, of relief from persecution, and I believe, I am sure it
is true, a shining symbol of world repentance, long delayed but
never too late. But havin, said that Sir and w-ithout desiring
to keep you here too long I would like to say something agout
the 70,000 Jews in Australia about them to them. AHd not
just as 70000 Jews in Australia but as 76,000 Jews of Australia,
because this is really the burthen of my song. / 3 


MONTREAL WORLD EXHIBITION AUSTRALIAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The Government has appointed an Advisory Committee to
help develop plans for Australia's part in the World Exhibition
to be held in Montreal in 1967.
The twelve-man committee comprises prominent Australians,
representing a wide cross-section of our community, ranging from
industry and commerce to science and the arts. This committee,
under the chairmanship of Sir Frederick White, Chairman of the
will act as an advisory panel to Sir Hastings Harrington,
whose appointment as Australian Commissioner-General for the
Exhibition was announced last month ( September).
Serving on the Committee with Sir Frederick White will
be:-Mr. R. R. Campbell, OB. Eo, National Gallery, Adelaide.
Judge Adrian H. Curlewis, District Court,
Sydney.
Mr. Warwick D. Fairfax, Chairman, John Fairfax Limited,
( Sydney Morning Herald) Sydney.
Sir William Hudson, Commissioner, Snowy
Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority, Cooma.
Professor J. A. La Nauze, Professor of History,
University of Melbourne.
Sir Maurice Mawby, Conzinc Riotinto of
Australia Limited, Melbourne.
Mr. J. W. Overall, Commissioner,
National Capital Development Commission, Canberra.
Mr. I. H. Seppelt, B. Seppelt sons, Adelaide.
Mr. A. M. Simpson, Simpson Pope Holdings Ltd., Adelaide.
Mr. K. Slessor, OB. E., Daily Telegraph, Sydney.
Mr. H. J. Souter, A. C. ToU., Carlton, Victoria.
Planning is now under way for Australia's contribution to
the Exhibition. I am confident that Australia will acquit herself
well at Montreal, particularly in view of the calibre of the men
who have agreed to serve on the Advisory Committee. 
2
The Montreal Exhibition will be the centrepiece of
celebrations to mark the centenary of Canadian Confederation.
It is fitting that Australia should join with Canada in the marking
of this occasion. The Exhibition will be educational, scientific and
cultural in character, taking as its central theme, " Man and His
World". This is the first such exhibition held in North America
and will be one of the largest of its kind staged anywhere in the
world. Some sixty nations will be participating as well as the
Government of Canada, the Canadian Provinces, major Canadian
instrumentalities and industries and certain international bodies.
The Exhibition is expected to attract 30M to 50M visitors
during the six months from April to October, 1967.
Prime Minister's Department,
Canberra. 
[Exact date unconfirmed]    



65/ 137
FOR PRESS PM. No. 54/ 1965
VISIT BY CROJ PRINCE OF LAOS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The Crown Prince of Laos, His Royal Highness,
Prince Vong Savang, will make a twelve day visit to
Australia next month.
The Government warmly welcomes this visit, which
reflects the friendship existinZ between our two countries.
The Crown Prince, who will arrive on the 19th
of Dovember, will visit the mainland States, C:. nberra and
the 3nowy Mountains. He will be accompanied by his Minister
for Public Ho-ñ lth and other senior officials.
I hope that the Crown Prince and his party will
enjoy their stay in Australia. Their visit will end on
the 1st of December.
CAN B RRA,
27th October, 1965. 


OPENING OF THE ROYAL INSURANCE BUILDING,MELBOURNE. 29TH OCTOBER, 1965Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert MenziesSir and Ladies and Gentlemen,I notice at least one Presbyterian Minister heretoday, and he at least will understand me when I say that thisis a work of superero) ation. The building has been open fortwelve months. ILaughler) I have every reason to suppose itwas open when I was over the road making rude remarks aboutit a year ago. And so with that fashion for accuracy thatcharacterises a politician, I retrospectively declare it open.Now having done it both ways, you understand,Jock wherever Jock is that it is now open, and as he wouldadd for business. ( Laughter) ( Applause)I would like to thank Raynes Dickson very much forhis references to the Cinque Ports, known to one garageroprietor in Canberra, so the legend runs, as Sinapore,because he announced with great joy that morning, nave youheard the news that Sir Robert has been made the Lord Wardenof Singapore?" I hope that the actual position will be alittle less precarious than that one.You were mentioning the fact that it was held bySir Winston Churchill, and before him by Lord Reading and LordWillingdon. Thisis a quaint in some ways, but movinglyhistoric post and when you refer to Sir Winston Churchill,may I * us mae one reference to him. It has nothing to dowi h the Royal and nothing to do with opening the buildingand therefore, of course, it is appropriate.I remember durin the war sitting with him onenight after dinner, and in te amiability that overtook usafter dinner very probably, I said, " Of course you realise,don't you, that by the time you have been dead an eventwqhich I hope will be long postponed by the time you've beendead for ten years, there will be very clever young men atOxford or Cambridge or somewhere else who will be writingbooks about you, explaining that you were never right.' Andhis face fell a little at This. I said " This is true.. Thisis all experience. They will explain that you were alwayswrong. But take comfort-twenty years after that date, theywill all be forgotten and ou will still be on the top ofthe hill." And I noticed The other day that somebody has nowproduced a book, whether it will carry out my prophecy or notI don't know. ( except that he appears to have been a . elshmanexplaining tAat the o] lman was always wrong. aell, thankHeaven he wasn't.. Otherwise we wouldn't be here, which perhapsis the complete answer to what the young gentleman is writing.But, however, that is by the way.You have been reminded that this building is onthe site of a block of land sold for œ 46 which I hasten tosay is before the time of my Government. They were pre-Menziespounds ( Laughter) but still, they were not many, were they46 back in 1537. Extraordinary thing you know. Vue arealways in the habit, aren't we, as we look back in thinkingthat the perspectives of history looking backwards are enormous,that things that happened one hundred years ago happened a / 2
2long, long time ago, beyond the possible memory of man. Andyet! can remember walki n along the Ballarat streets with agrandfather who was born 0wo ears before this block was sold,and I have grandchildren who T hope will remember me, if theyare not ashamed of me, for many years to come? and between mymemory and theirs and my immedia e ancestor, is a spread oftwo centuries. History is not all that long, but it is asplendid thing this historic company because it is I say thatwith confidence because as a small boy in the bush it was theonly insuring body that I ever heard of. There it was, theRoyal. So it must have stretched its tentacles a long way tocome into my remote corner of the woods, you see, and this isan historic company, or an historic group of companies, and hereis an historic site.It's a pity in a sense that you had to pull downScot's Hotel, though mark you, I don't blame you entirely.It had its defects, tut I want to go on record as reminding theScots here and I see quite a few, and the Sassenachs of whomI seer I regret to say even more I think I should remind youthat it was on this site and in tAe kitchen which originallywas down below that the finest haggis in the world was made.Magnificent haggis piped in magnificently and eloquentlyaddressed by the president, whose name I will conceal for thispurpose. This is an historic spot.But why are we here in such a tremendous developmentof real ya great company in Ithe insurance field? WelleIwillanswer that question very briefly and then have done. fl wereall brought up, taught at school to learn something about theindustrial revolution, the introduction of steam, the creationof factories for the first time this tremendou-developmentwhich, in effect begnn in Great Britain and made Britainthrough the nineteenth century the greatest industrial nationin the world. And similarly, the tremendous development ofshipping which followed on The introduction of steel, withGreat Britain as the greatest mercantile marine power in theworld and these are istoric and striking things. It's truethat the emphasis has changed from time to time, but these arestriking and historic. It perhaps may much more easily beforgotten that the industrial revolution, this enormous stimulationof world trade, of world business couldn't have occurredbut for the contemporary advance in banking and insurance.This is very well worth remembering and inparticular, speaking of insurance, insurance with the greatprinciple of the distribution of risks so that they becameindivi aually bearable through the process of insurance andre-insurance and so on. I think the insurance world can affordto be proud of the fact that it has just as much to do with themodern development of world trade as any other single factorand this is worth recalling because we have some reason to beproud of the fact that in both of these spheres our ancestorsplayed a great part and hive therefore le t a great inheritance.I say that because when I was a younger man, Iwas a barrister, a very respectable one and I had the usualfate of learned counsel, I !. as given a few briefs for theplaintiff oh blessed day when you are appearing for theolaintiff and if the defendant was well khown to be insured,he plaintiff won. Of course this was strictly impartial onthe part of the jury, but still word does get around. And Ifouna myself winning cases for the plaintiff and gettingsubstantial verdicts. Then the solicitors for the insurance / 3
companies had a look around and said, " This young fellow Menziesmust be quite good," and so they briefed me. I wasn't objectingn one sense because the solicitors were more powerful andthe fees somewhat greater. After that, I didn t ever win acase. ( Laughter) And basically, you see, the reason for itis that in spite of this tremendous service that it does to thecommunity, unrecognised, unseen in many cases, the insurancecompany has difficulty in maintaining even the modest ratingof popularity in the allup poll.And I see some bankers here. They needn't smiletoo quickly because their rating is no higher. ( Laughter)Here we are in a strange paradoxical world in which the verypeople down in the street who are quite prepared to be prejudicedagainst the insurer or against the banker, and express it on asuitable occasion if they happen to be on a jury are the verypeople who when they have a problem of either kind, repairinstantly to the banker, to the insurer and have their businessattended to. This is one of the paradoxes of our nationalcharacter. .' hat was it that was said by Oscar .; ilde " Allmen kill the thing they love." ' Hell, I wouldn't say they lovedyou, and I don't go so far as to say they would kill you, butthere is a human disposition to be extremely critical of thepeople who really represent our first port of call in a storm.And therefore ladies and gentlemen, I feel it tobe a great pleasure not only to be here under pressure of anold and valued friend in Jock Duguid, but also because on thishistoric site, I like to have the opportunity of recalling someof the historic elements in that great story, as yet quiteunfinished, of our race and of our undertakings all round theworld. So Sir, I wish you the best of good fortune.I'm very delighted indeed that your two principals from overseasare here. I met them in Canberra the otner day. I liked themso much that observing that the time was six o clock, I think,and knowing the attitude of the Chief General Manager at sixo'clock in the afternoon, I took them in and gave them a weedram ( Laughter) and I am delighted to remember the wee dram andto welcome them and to see them here again.Sir, there is a Standing Order in Parliamentagainst tedious repetition seldom observed I may say, buttiere it is. I will engge in tedious repetition. For thethird time, I declare this building open.


AUSTRALIAN TEXTILE EXPOSITION BANQUETHOTEL REX-AT-CANBERRA, CANBERRA. 29TI SEPTEIBER, 1965Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert MenziesSir Robert and Lady Webster and all the rest of youI want to tell you in the first place that these piecesof fabric, precariously woven are warmly received. That is thehuntin tartan in what is called in Scotland the old vegetable dye,( Laughter) which only goes to show that even Webster can be up todate occasionally, tLaughter) ( Applause)And in the second place, I would like to tell you this.I am about to open this Exposition and therefore all this is relevant,you see. I said I must tell you that I was born a son of a father whowas even more violently protectionist than Bob Webster ( Laughter) andI leave it to you to understand what that means. From my earliestdays, he used to look at me before I ever knew what protection and freetrade meant and say " Robert, understand" and, of course if I didn'tunderstand...... at any rate, as I have since demonstrated inpolitics I pretended to understand. ( Laughter) But, really, when Ilook back on the old man, I think he was a softie ( Laughter) comparedto you. And, therefore, here we are, my oh, well herlate father, whom some of you knew, he was on the Council of the Chamberof Manufactures. He was the kind of man who could talk to Anderson( Laughter) on eoual terms ( Lau hter), and here am I, the son rf myold man. Therefore we perhaps have, by derivation, Sir, the rightto be here. ( Applause) But I am bound to say, and I think honesty recuiresthis, that although I have known and admired Sir Robert Webster formany years and have sometimes been at the biting end of his tongue,until tonight I had never understood the function of psychologists inindustry ( taughter). But toni-ht I have been sitting next to hischarming wife who has, for the Tirst time in my life, explained whatpsychologists do ( Laughter) and what their function is in irdustry,because I learned a bit of psychology myself once.I want you to understand that although having goneinto other fields, I am no longer an intellectual, I was once.( Liughter) I always remember the late Boyce Gibson, father of thepresent Professor, beginning a series of lectures to us when I was anundergraduate, by saying and he had a little tongue-tied way ofspeaking a charmin man, he was a marvellous man but he said, " Manis an anthropoid. witr welatively large cewebwal hemispheres."( Laughter) 1 have never forgotten that. ( Laughter) And every timemy highly literate opponents say to me somethini rude I say to myself," It's all right Menzies. You are an anthropoid, with relativelylarge cerebral hemispheres." ( Laughter) What it means, I wouldn't bedogmatic about that. ( Laughter) But I like it.Now, it is a very good thing that in this greatExposition that the man in charge should be Sir Robert Webster because,really, we have our bit of fun, we have arguments about this and that,but iT ever there was a man in the commercial and industrial historyof Australia who stood for what we could do in Australia and how wecould do it, it's Bob Webster. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause) Now, it isrevealing no secret to you who never zead the newspapers that I am, enmy last birthday, 70, and therefore I am not only entitled to a pensionbut I am, you know what the boys at Parliament House say, not a badold chap. Laughter) And so 1 am in old chap, and in my lifetimeborn in the bush, born in a little country town, going to school in / 2
-2-Ballsrat, going to school in Melbourne I have seen withoutalways beinn conscious of it, the history of the textile industryof Australia never quite conscious, but when I was a small boy,you might here and there encounter a woollen mill, that was it.Then later on when I was a schoolboy and growing up a little,there were clothin factories and a few woollen mills. In myown time I want all of you who are younger, much younger than Iam, to think about this because this will give you an excitementin your mind about this marvellous country of ours. Here am I,the little boy at school, and there is a woollen mill somewherein Ballarat. Here am I the little boy at school who goes tosee the first moving picture show on the Ballarat East oval. Heream I, a little boy, who in his little bush village in the countrysees the first motor vehicle ever to come into the country.You know, you are all so kind to me that you don't realise howvenerable am ( Laughter) Not worthy of veneration, but venerable,because in my own lifetime I have seen the beginning and thedevelopment and the growth of most of the great things that we nowtake for granted, don't we, in our lives, from motor cars toaircraft, television, before that broadcasting.Broadcasting. Do you mind me telling you that whenby some strange chance I became Prime Minister of this countryonly twentysix years ago ( Laughter) in 1959, I went to do alittle broadcast and I came back to the Lodge and there was mywife, faithful as always. And the dear girl. she was sitting thereand wondering, you see, and then broadcasting was on, and I wasdoing a broadcast and I turned to her and I said because I ratherapproved of what this chap was sayinr., I said, " Who is that?"And she said, " That's you ( aughter; That was the first time Ihad ever heard myself. I didn t believe it then and I still don'tbelieve it, when I hear it.But this is a mere scrappy way of saying that we,half of us here tonight, have lived in a period in which therehave been the most tremendous develoments, and so I go back towhat I began by saying...... e began with a woollen mill or two,and then we had cotton and then we had man-made fibres. We startedoff with growin, with manufacturing, with prccessing, with weaving,with fabric, with clothing, with dyeing, with printing. It's littlewonder that Sir Robert has tonight toll us that here is a massiveindustry in Australia which employs 74,000. It's little wonderthis has become one of the very great industries in Australia.And of course, this has involved all sorts of things primaryproduction. We are not to think about the woolgrower, the cottongrowerwhoever-it-may-be grower in Australia as if he were quiteseparate. He is part of the great textile industry. We are notto think of manufacturing efficiency as if it related only to thatphase of the work that is to be done it is a very important phase,but is part of the phase. We are not to think of promotion that sa blessed word " promotion". It's wonderful, you adire peoplewho do it. Anyhow, we are not to think of promotion, of encouragingpeople to buy as if this were completely detached from everythingelse, because in reality, the man who -rows the fibre, whether itis wool or cotton, the man who manufactures the fibre, whether thisis nylon or whatever it may be, the man who assembles it into someform, the man who designs it, puts it into form and sells it, theseare all people who are involved in the great textile industry.( Hear, hear) This is really perhaps te most significant thoughobvious thing that I want to say to you.Now I know, Sir, that in modern times where peopleare all engaged in politics where they all know why they areright and why the other fellow is wrong, I am nld enough to belong
-3-to a generation in which I think on the whole I am right butthat perhaps I might be wrong. This argues a degree sf wisdomthat will come strangely to some of you. ( Laughter) But it'strue. It's true. There is nothing all black nr all white. Afew years ago, I was a little worried because although I wearwool rather more than the average human being ( Laughter), Inever was quite able to persuade myself that you had to wear awoollen handkerchief or a woollen tie or a woollen shirtotherwise you were a traitor to your country. I still don'tbelieve it. The truth is that as every married man here tonightknows, the secret of happiness in life is a good marriage.( Hear, hear) ( Applause) And therefore I have always believedthat in the long lun wool, man-made fibres, all these thingswould be married together to the greater enjoyment of mankind.( Applaase) I think that any man who is engaged in the productionof man-made fibres to use this revolting expression ( Laughter)any man who is engaged in that production who said " I hatewool" would be a fool. He wouldo And any man who is engagedin the production and processing of wool who said, " I can't bearthe thought of man-made fibres he would be a fool, because inthe long run, it is marriage tAat will solve this problem.This is so true. You look back over the whole history of mankind,over the whole history of our race, do you suppose that win. outsome intermarriage we would have amounted to very much? Doyou sup pse that if the Anglo-Saxons had said, " Anglo-Saxons weare, an out with the rest of them," we would have been themagnificent people that we are? ( Laughter) Do you think of whatwould have happened if the Anglo-Saxons had ignored the demandsof the Scots ( Laughter) ( Applause) The truth is and I saythis quite seriously that in the long run, the future offibres, the natural fibres of wool, the man-made fibres willdepend very largely on how far they both realise that if theyact together, there is a bigger and brighter future for both ofthem. Hear, hear) And it is because I believe that I haven'tconsulted the Department you know... I haven't discussedthat ( Laughter) I know, I am always making some indiscreetremarks. I believe this, partly because I believe that the futureof wool is vital to Australia an partly because I believe thatthe future of wool is involved in this kind of marriage that Ihave been talking about. Now, that is all I want to say on thatpoint. By the time I have been reported on this matter, I won'tknow what it was I said. ( Laughter)I just want to say a few words on another aspect ofthis matter. It's a very great mistake, Sir, for your industryor for the wool industry or for any other industry to think thatit will sell its products by the Divine Grace of the AlmightyIt won't. It has to sell them, and to sell any commodity in theworld today, you must pay enormous attention to design, toquality, to presentation to design. This, Sir, I venture tosay, is a matter to which we have devoted rather too littleattention in Australia. A little bit inclined, aren't we, tosay " Oh, well, you know, it's wool, it's good, it's finequaity, it's got all the things in the wrld. Whether it looksa little unpleasant, that doesn't matter." Design, design is thewhole background of salesmanship, just as my wife occasionallyreminds me that a capacity to produce the goods behind thepresentation is equally important. Something, I hope, we willnot forget, / 4
-4-The other day I ias looking at the J urnal of theRoyal Society of Arts, of which for some reason understandableonly to the Almighty I -s a Fellow ( Laughter) and every now andthen the Royal Society has a symposium of people who discusscertain topics. The other day the; had a great sympcsium ondesign with Prince Philip in the chair, and when I picked thisout of my mail basket and glanced through it, I reminded myselfof a time when I oh many years ago before the time of half ofyou I was in England on a Parliamentary Association visit.You know how onerous that can be.We went to Kidderminster, and I -: as Attorney-Generalof Australia at that time so I was in charge. The IMnaVer ofthe Kidderminster carpet factory we were visiting, he din'tknow who we were and I am bound to say in his favour he couldn'thave cared less. ( Lauohter) And we went along to a large displayroom oh many times the size of this. We saw some lovely carpetsand then not quite so lovely carpets anu then some good carpetsbut not quite so lovely, and when we got to the far end, we cameacross a floor full of carpets o' the most horrible description.You will all understand me when I say t. hjy were all orange -ndblack flecks you know. They were errible. And in my t-. eninnocence this was many years ao ( Laughter) I said, But,Sir would anybody buy such revolting carpets as these? And nelooked at me and said, deadpan, " Oh no, we make these for theAustralian market". And I am bound to tell you that I thou. phe was having me on you see, until the next time I went to c.provincial town in Victoria I won't name it and had to st-. yovernight and there was the very carpet on the floor. Well,it was no doubt having this kind of thing in mind that the RoyalSociety of Arts decided to have a discussion about design and Idon't apologise for mentioning design because design in the textiletrade will sell more than any individual salesman. ( Hear, hear)It is a fundamental error to think that most peoplehave bad taste. Some have bad taste but in the long run, you mustcater for people who have taste. When we do this constantly, thenI see no limit to the textile trade in Australia, but at thisConference, they had a series of people...... I read this onlyyesterday, that s why I have it so much in with PrincePhilip in the chair and they gave a few medals to people.Do we dive medals, Gordon, to people for good design? Well weought to. ( Laughter) Make a note of that, Mr. Cirmody. theneach man who received a medal had to make a speech. A morerevolting exercise you can't imagine. But one of them whoreceived the medal was the managing director of a world famouswhiskey and gin firm.ow, I say nothing to all our wives who don't understandabout whiskey and gin ( Laughter) but it wasn't easy, was it, toassociate in one's mind the idea of selling whiskey and gin andwhat-have-you with design. And yet of course, this man wasable to establish quite clearly that they had paid a great dealof attention to the problem of how they presented their goods tothe world, and I made a note of one thing that he said. MightI read it to you, bearing in mind that this is a man who was themanaging director of a firm that sells spirits but is equallyapplicable to every man here tonight who is in the textile trade.He was talking about the head of a business and he said, " Ho willhappily ploagh revenue into technical research, into capitalreserves, into the shareholders' pockets, into splendid staffwelfare schemes, but into the appearance, taste, function andeleoance of the article on which this part of his commodity empireis to be founded, still I fear, all too rarely." Something inthat, isn't there.
I am an immeasurable believer in the textile industryin Australia, I don't have to be converted by my friend, SirRobert, but I think that in the long run, the permanence of anyindustry will largely depend on how far it compels the taste andjudgment of the people of the country, and in textile. above allthings, there must be superb quality or there must a merewretched dependence on what some government may do or cn what sometariff board may do.And this is tremendously important because as youhave been reminded-here is an industry that employs in the directsense 74, in a full sense a quarter of a million, an industry whAc---as donemore for decentralisation than any other that we know anindustry which emplo s more female labour than any othe . ustrywe know of. This inaustry, viewing it broadly, has sclaims on Australia. It can't support them merely by s" You mus+ help us". It can support them best by saying, ., illhelp you. Fe will help the country because we are preparea tosay that we will let everybody understand that what we do hasgreat design and great qualily and w: ill be bought on its merits."Do you see what I mean? I hope you do because greatbeliever as I ad. and faithful as I am to the memory of my fatherwho would have murdered me if he thourht I ., ere not a protectionist,as indeed I am, but in the long run the whole purpose oftariff, the whole purpose of protection is to give you aclass opportunity of seizing the market; but whether you hcidthe market, having seized it, will be up to you.Sir it seems an cdd thing to do at a dinner party,but I declare tnis Exposition open.


AUSTRALIAN-AMERICAN ASSOCIATIONANNIVERSARY DINNER HELD AT MELBOURNE 29TH OCTOBER. 1965Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert MenziesSir and Ladies and GentlemenMay I first of all enter a caveat about this word" Oration". Now having like some of you leairned a little Latinand less Greek which puts us on the same footing as ShakespeareI know about the Oratio Recta and the Oratio Obliqua have anyof you forgotten that? I hope so, because that will give me aspourraitoiuosn reputIa dtino'nt foprr oploesaer nitnog om ake Buatn oIr adtoino'nt; likIe jutshti s wawnotr dtotalk to you a little about one or two things, but before I talkto you about one or two things, may I just mention something aboutone or two people.First of all, I would like to say that it gives me greatsatisfaction to sit here comfortably and listen to Weslev Incemaking a speech, because he and I were at school together.You would never believe it of course, because, really, Wesley's acultivated fellow and I'm a politician, but we were at schooltcgether, and he's been a friend of mine ever since which doeshim infinite credit. And therefore Wesley, I was delighted tobe able to hear you speaking tonight so admirably, if you'llallow me to say so.And then of course Floyd Blair, a reticent character,is here from the United States. No some of you may haveforgotten that Floyd Blair is a merchant banker. Now this isa very mysterious occupation. And he arrived in Australia whatwas it Floyd? about a year ago, and had a press interview.You Imow the passion that Americans have for press interviews,and so Floyd had one. And he encountered a cross-examiner whofor the first time in his experience or mine wanted to knowsomething. And the cross-examiner said ' Ae. t is a merchantbanker, Mr. Blair?" And he said, " Oh, that's quite simple.You see there's a fellow over here who has money to invest, andthere's a fellow over here would like some money to be investedby somebody, and so we bring them together and as the monecrosses the board, we take a little out of it for our own dividend."Now I must say Floyd, that was the first time I ever understoodmerchant banking to perfection. But having said that, which maybe deroagatory for all I know though I don't intend it to be.I want To tell all of my fellow Australians here, that if there'sone man who has been the moving spirit of the American AustralianAssociation in New York, it's Floyd Blair. He's a wonderful manand a great friend, and I am, as I'm sure you are, delighted tohave him here tonight.Then there's one more preliminary observation that Imight like to make and that is that you had a message from Lordand Lady Casey. It's a marvellous event in Australian history thatthey should now be at Government House. We're all delighted aboutthis. And the news of the appointment of Lord Casey to be Governor-General must have given particular pleasure, I think, in Washington,because he was our first diplomatic representative in the UnitedStates. I don't believe that anybody ever did more I doubt ifanybody did as much to interpret Australia to the United Statesas he did. And therefore, now that he sits in the highest positionthat is available in this country, as Governor-General of Australia,I like to feel that he will continue to be a symbol of the associationbetween our two countries. / 2
-2-And of course Lady Casey irrespective of him she's beenthe President of the iomen's Section you mustn't hold me u ona technical point on this matter. But she has been, and withimmense success. So that this association here in the UnitedStates and this conjunction of the planets in the minds of a manlike myself, have their embodiment today at Government House atCanberra. I just want to mention that because I'm sure you wouldall want to send your greetings to them, and your thanks to them.As for the Cinque Ports, well, I'd like to tell you in caseyou haven't heard it, inough I've done my best to promulgate theidea. The other morning when the radio announced thisTppointment,a man rushed out of his filling station at Canberra to a happypasser-by who wanted five gallons of petrol and said, " Have youheard the news? " No, what news?", said the fellow very drily.All that he knew was that he wanted five gallons at an extravagantprice he thought. And the garage-keeper said, " But Sir Roberthas been made Lord Warden of Singapore." Now I " ould like to makeit quite clear that this is confidential. I wouldn't want mydistinguished colleague, Mr. Lee of Singapore, to know about hisbecause it might involve me mightn't it in some obligations butthere it is, so treat me witn respect I'm the Lord Warden ofSingapore. And the other preliminary remark I thought I'd like to maketo you was this, that years ago eight or nine years ago havingmade a powerful speech at the Pilgrims, this most celebrated societyin London, I was invited to be the guest of honour of the Pilgrimsin New York at the Waldorf-Astoria. Six hundred men and women, ifnot all Daughters and Sons of the Revolution, at least all impeccableand I know I was the guest of honour, because it said so on themenu. And being the guest of honour, I thought well I must as Ihave tonight, give a little thought to what Im to say andprepared a pretty powerful lucubration, you see. Well, before allthis happened...... you know, in the United States of America ifI may say so, Floyd, you are devoted to gadgets, and one of thegadgets this night was a sort of lectern, which rose or fell andit had buttons cn it marked " up" or " down". And in my colonialinnocence, I thought " up" meant up with the noise, and ' Rown' meantdown with the noise but it turned out no. It was up with the wholejolly machine. And I almost had my neck broken, you see, two orthree times when I pressed the wrong button.But anyhow there were some powerful speeches made as therealways are in the United States of America. Nobody will ever saythat the United States of America failed for want of being vocal,and so two or three people made speeches. One or two of them Ithought were quite acceptable, and then up got a distinguishedMinister as we would call him he was one of the secretaries ofone of the departments and he made a powerful speech about me forten minutes. So flattering that I knew instantly that he didn'tknow me, but I was none the less pleased on that account and havingdone this, and I was beginning to purr and thinking, well, nowthis where I get up and hope to press the right button, he put hishand up like that, and one of his speech writers they have thoseanimals, you know, Floyd in your country he came along with atyped script, and for half an hour, I listened to a learneddiscussion on automation.Well, I'm of course many things, and possess a great varietyof talents no doubt, but I'm not automatic. But this was half anhour on automation, and at the end of this time, all the men outof the Sons of the Revolution were down like this. Some of themhad their heads right down on the table, others were half way andthe women, with that diabolical faculty with which God Almighty hasendowed women, were sitting up, bolt upright, with their eyes open
3-and sound asleep. Oh yes, this is a form of feminine geniusand all I know is that when at twenty to eleven what's the timelow? when at twenty to eleven, I, the guest of honour I repeat,so described on the bill of lading got up to speaki the men werein that comatose state that I've described, the women like thisand for the first ten minutes I had to put on a music hall turnin order to wake them up. ' ell, after all, that's what I'vebeen doing for the last five minutes.Now having said all those things for what they are worthI would like tonight, without being quite as long as John suggested,I would like to say something because this is the twenty-fifthanniversary, and we're living in a state of affairs in the worldin which the relations between the United States and Australia, andindeed between the United States and the entire free world, havenever been more important and have never been more urgent.And so, I would like to offer a few views on them.I don't know whether you realise that today is October 29th.Well, from October 15th to November 15th was duclared by theCommunist Party at Hanoi in North Viet Nam to be a specialpropaganda month, and it was to be described as the Hate AmericaMonth. Now this is not fiction, this is it the Hate AmericaMonth, from October 15th to November 15th. And in the result,Sir, identical demonstrations have been put on in most of thecapitals of the world, including great cities in Australia, basedon this slogan Hate America; Down With America. What's AmericaDoing In Viet Nam? What's America Doing Intervening in the Affairsof the World? Hate America. You know this is a horrible,horrible slogan. It's a reat pity that it receives so muchfree publicity all round the world the Hate America Monthwhereasany people who are sensible, who are sensible of individualliberty, who are sensible of the tremendous issues that divide theworld, could well be excused if they had a Thank America Month,not a Hate America Month.We are in this time constantly hearing pleas that we shouldnegotiate for peace in Viet Nam and that we should persuade theUnited States to give up bombing in Viet Nam. Now I've heard this,you've heard this; there are so many people, decent people,misguided people, including soae clerical people who join in thiscry You must make peace in Viet Nam. And it's about time wesorted outselves out and decided how you make peace in Viet Nam.About time we sorted our ideas out and discovered for ourselves,and, I hope, for other people, why it is that the United Stateswhich five years ago would have hesitated a long time before puttinga single ground force on to the Asian Continent, now has 200,000fighting there. hy has this happened? Is this because theUnited States has some axe to grind?This just makes me ill when I hear people who ought to knowbetter accusing the United States of America of pursuing someselfish interest. What selfish interest? Do they want to makeSouth Viet Nam a colony, Really ladies and gentlemen, who wantsa new colony today? Of course it isn't because they want a colony.Is it because they have overwhelming commercial interests? Ofcourse they haven t. It just happens, and I'll come back to thisbefore I finish that the United States of America today hasaccepted and acted upon policies which, I believe set an exampleto the modern world in unselfishness and responsibility.Now perhaps it's not a bad idea on these matters to tryto settle our minds on a few first principles. Would you mind ifI mentioned one or two? I don't want to be too tedious on a happynight like this. But in a civilised world, every nation is
-4-entitled, in the immortal words of the American Declaration ofIndependence, to life liberty and the pursuit of happiness.This wasn't something that Thomas Jefferson wrote just for theAmerican colonists. This was something that was written as itturns out, for the entire world. We're all entitled to life,liberty and the pursuit of happiness. These are very simplethings. They are not aggressive things, they are homely things.They are the kind of things that in our own families we allunderstand life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Andwhat's happened is that above all people, theadministration of theUnited States of America have said, if not in terms at least byimplication, that this is true for the people of South Viet Nam,just as it was true for the people of Virginia and Ca'rolina life,liberty and the pursuit of happiness.And that being so, our second great principle is that eachnation has the right, the right to defend itself against aggressionand to call on its friends to help it. Does anybody quarrel withthat? So far I've not heard that anybody does. Buc when anynation our own nation, Austr-iia hs to decide its answer tothat call for help then it has to answer itself a few questions,and I thought about this a great deal before I did,Some of you may recall the Jefferson Lecture at Monticelloa couple of years back. Do you mind if I engage in the poorexercise of quoting one paragraph of what I said on that occasion?I said: " The freedom or man ( this was a good topic in the home ofThomas Jefferson), the freedom of man is not a local perquisite,and it can't be defended in isolation." Now that remains true.It isn't a local perquisite. It's not good enough, it would neverhave been good enough for the United States to say " Well, as longas we preserve our freedom, t doesn't matter about the rest."It would never be good enough for us in Australia to say " As longas we defend our freedom and preserv iithat's good enough." Becausefreedom is one of the great human things in the world, and it can'tbe defended in isolation.Now all these principles have been recognised both by theUnited States and by Australia. And it Is because of their belief,their belief and our belief in these principles, that we haveAustralian forces, small enough in all conscience, operating inSouth Viet Nam, and the United States has vast forces operatingthere. And yet the presence of both of those forces is today inour own country, and in many other countries under attack.The Hate America Week has been reproduced in Australia.' ho are the people who attack it? Will I understand when theCommunists attack it? Because the Communists in this issue in theworld are the aggressors and nobody seriously disputes it. Nobody.On either side of Parliament at Canberra, nobody disputes it,nobody denies it. But the Communists of course believe, particularlythose who are allied with Peking, that the withdrawal ofAmerican forces would mean the collapse of successful resistance,and therefore would mean Chinese Communism trium~ imt in South EastAsia. This is not oversimplifying it. This is so profoundlytrue. It's perfectly understood in Washington. It is not perfectlyunderstood by some of the critics and agitators in Australia.If the United States walked out of South Viet Nam and wewalked out with them not that we are a major factor what doyou suppose would happen? How lng would South Viet Nam last?How long would it take to have Chinese Communism triumphant on thevery edges of the Sunda Straits? This is the great issue of ourtime and we in Australia are indeed fortunate that we should havehad in the United States of America a predominant view that acceptedthe responsibility for saying this must not happen. Because ifit does happen then we can give up exercising ourselves about who
is going to win the cup next Tuesday. we'll have to begin toexercise ourselves very fiercely about whether we are to be hereself-governing, free, at all. This is not an extravagant statement.This is an extremely sober and considered statement.Now as a matter of fact you'll be told by some people,including some who ought to know better, that what's going on inViet Nam is just a sort of civil war, there's a sruggle for freedom.And they are not incapable of telling you that this resembles thestruggle by the American Colonies themselves in the late years ofthe eighteerth century. This is a struggle for freedom. 7ell,fortunately the facts on that are very clear because the SouthViet Nam liberation Front, as it's called they've started one inViet Nam; I haven't yet heard that they've started one in Australia,but no doubt they will but the South Viet Nam Liberation Front wasestablished in 1960 by the North Viet Nam Communist Party. It istheir puppet. It is their instrument, and in order to make this quiteclear, the commander-in-chief in North Viet Nam as recently as Marchin this year said " The problem of the peaceful reunification ofViet Nam is the affair o the Vietnamese people". So far so gcod,on the face of it." It will be settled" he went on to say " by the Viet Nam' Fatherland Front' ( that's the major Communist Party) and the ' SouthViet Nam Liberation Front'". In other words, this will be settledby the Communists and no non-Communist need apply. This is perfectlyclear. This is not a strange exercise of my ojn. This has beenrepeated time after time by the Foreign Minister of Great Britainwhose party is not my party. This is not a party affair. Theother day he made a speech in Tokyo in which he reiterated the samething, Michael Stewart did that here is a crude demand by theCommunists of North Viet Nam that they shall be in charge of thefuture of South Viet Nam and therefore of course never forget itof the future of Thailand the future of Malaysia the future ofSingapore, the future of Indonesia and, and thenheret'hse bigquestaon, the future of Australia?And are we to be content to allow these dreadful things tohappen leaving them alone, being frightfully high minded, leavingthem alone until the day comes when at the very end of the line wefind ourselves defending ourselves on our own shores? Of coursewe shall do it, of course, but should we? Should we allow ourselvesto be beguiled by these people who want us to believe that this isjust a little civil conflict in South Viet Nam? I believe, Sir, Ibelieve most profoundly, that all of those who are agitating onthis matter in Australia are consciously or unconsciously, and I hopemost of them unconsciously, are trying to weaken the national will inAustralia by propagating doubts as to the justice of our actions, andof course, American action in South Viet Nam, for no other purpose,no other intelligible purpose than to weaken the resistance toaggression in this part of the world.Now Sir, I've spoken already rather longer than I intended to,but could I add two things? Every now and then somebody says to me.in a very well-meaning way " But why don't you favour negotiations?Why don' tyou favour peace?" And could say for mysel and for allof you " Of course we favour peace, just as the United States favourspeace. But who stands in the way of negotiations for peace? Whois it? I wish people would just read and reread the sober historyof events in the last two years. There must have been thirteen orfourteen or fifteen attempts made on our side of the world to securea negotiation. The United States, the United Nations, the PrimeMinisters' Conference,( the last one that I attended when we set upa mission to go), the seventeen unaligned nations; Tito in Yugoslavia1. a strange but fruitful alliance as I would have thought withIndia. Time after time, and every time Peking and Hanoi have said, / 6
-6-" Nonsense, ve won't talk," and they have usually rejected theseapproaches with contempt and with insult. This is the great thingto remember, that in the whole of this period of two or three yearswhen decent human beings in both our countries have just beensweating over this matter and hating the idea of a war that mightbe avoidable not one word has come from the aggressor to indicatethat he would even talk about it. You may understand, I'm sureyou do how I feel when people of eminence, here or there or there,write to me and say, " Why don't you negotiate?" The answer being,of course, I would negotiate, my Government would negotiate, theUnited States Administration would, the British Government would atthe dro of a handkerchief, if the other man said " I am . illing tonegotiate.' But of course he's not. He has made it quite clearthat as long as he think he is winning by violence and terror, hewon't talk. And that's why in plain simple English the United Statesof America is so profoundly right, and we in our smaller way are soprofoundly right in saying, " Very well, as he won't talk until heknows he can' win, it s our job to beat him."Now the last thing that I want to say to you ratherreproduces something I said in my own Parliament not long ago.I'm no servile follower of United States policy. I'm happy to saythat in my time I've been on such terms with all the AmericanAdministratiors that I could say what I thought even in terms ofdisagreement and have it listened to. h'-it the United States hasdone with Australia in these years is treat Australia as being anadult country with a point of view that is worth listening to.And therefore we've always been able to disagree on details thepress vies on details, but on the central things that determine thefuture of mankind, we ve been happy enough to find ourselves incomplete unison with them. This, I think, is of tremendousimportance. However, it will be all the more important to our own peopleif they will just remember one great central fact. It's one ofthe great facts of modern history. Not a matter of whetherAustralia likes the United States because it has a sort of cupboardlove for the United States. This is one of the great centralfacts of modern history. In this century the United States ofAmerica has had prolonged periods of isolationism, and it hasbeen jolted out of them twice by the terrors and horrors of war.And one of the great things of our time has been that ever sincethat happened for the second time in the second great war, theUnited States has without hesitation moved into a position ofsupreme power, carrying with it the aclmowledgment of supremeresponsibility. This is the most terrific thing in our modern time.If the United States had simply been the greatest power inthe world, the greatest arms power, the greatest nuclear power,the greatest industrial power, and it sat back and said ' Well,that s rather nice isn't it, we're the great power this wouldhave been a terrible thing. But ever since 1941, the United Stateshas cheerfully and sometimes under great criticism accepted theresponsibilities that go with great power. It pours out aid, itpours out assistance of every kind. It does it with suchgenerosity, a generosity of its own taxpayers, never let us forget.It does it with such generosity and so frequently, that a lot ofus are disposed to say, " Oh well, you can take this for granted.Ask America tbdo this, ask America to provide that.' Look, thisis not true. The American people are just like us in Australia.They don't like paying taxes unduly. Of course not but they havethrough all these years accepted the responsibility that goes withpower and the result is that in all these other parts of the worldwhat the United States has done and is doing deserves not miserable / 7
7carping criticism but an intelligent understanding. This issomething that fits into tne broad structure of the defence offreedom which, in the long run make no mistake, is our own defence.And therefore it is not difficult for th6 head of a Government inAustralia to find himself en rapport with the head of an administrationin the United States; not difficult at all for peoplelike myself to understand that Australian-American association,Anglo-american association is no longer a post-prandial bit ofenthusiasm, but something which is the very stuff of life forall of us and not only for us, but for other people.Now I'm sorry to have s oken for so lonr, and perhaps soseriously about ', his matter, but I just wanted to convey to youthe feeling of distaste I have when people want to promote a" Hate America Week", when people cash in on the easy temptationto throw stones at the rich relative. This is so easy, we allknow all about it. And yet it is on this association, this" marriage of minds", this " marriage of passions", this " marriageof understanding" that the future of all your children andgrandchildren will depend.



FOR PRESS: PM. No. 85/ 1965
PRIME MINITERl TO VISIT iESTERN AUSTRALIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies will make
a short visit to Perth this week to hold talks with the
Minister for Defence Senator Paltridge who is recuperating
from a recent operation.
The Prime Minister said today that he proposed
taking advantage of this week's Parliamentary recess to
call on his colleague and discuss some Defence matters.
No particular issues were involved but because of the
importance of Defence generally it would be valuable to
have an exchange of views with the responsible Minister.
Until the appointment last week of the Postmaster-
General, Mr. Hulme, as Acting Minister for D~ efence, the
Prime Minister had been handling Defence matters personally
during Senator Paltridge's illness.
The Prime Minister, accompanied by Dame Pattie
Menzies will fly to Perth from melbourne on Tuesday and
will return to Canberra the following day.
MELBOURNE, 31 st October, 1965. 


THE C. B. ALEXANDER PRESBYTERIAN AGRICULTURAL COLLEGEOFFICIAL OPENINGTOCAL, N. S. YJ. 6TH NOVEMBER. 1965Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Sell, Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen
This is a rather terrifying sort of an occasion&nbsp;because it says in the book of the words....." the Prime Minister&nbsp;shall deliver an address" and I must say that sounds rather&nbsp;formidable. But before I proceed to deliver an address, I&nbsp;would like to add a supplementary note about the presence of the&nbsp;Moderator-General. You have been quite rightly informed that we arethe only country in the worId that runs to the luxury of aModerator-General. The Head of the Church of Scotland is theModerator and thereby, Sir, hangs a tale. I tell it because Inotice you are down to preach a sermon later on, and this littlestory may improve you. Laughter)
One of the Moderators of the Church of Scotland,4vatt Anderson, whom a number of you will remember told methat he was preaching at Craithie church as part of his annualduty to the late King George VI in this little church nearBalmoral, and cn the wa across afterwards to have lunch, theKing was very complimenary. He said. " Moderator, that is thebest sermon 1 have heard for years and years" and the Moderator,somewhat pleased with this Royal approval said, " Vell, thankyou Sir, thank you very much. " Yes," said King George VI,' I Aad the watch on you and it took twelve minutes onlyl( Laughter) Now, Sir, I don't iknow whether there is any moralin that, but I leave it toyou for what it is worth.Although I m bound to say that I am no greatbeliever in the brevity of sermons, I think it depends on thesermon, iyself. I remember one of the shortest sermons I listenedto in my life was delivered by the late celebrated and highlycontentious Larry Rentoul in Melbourne, and it took forty-fiveminutes forty-Tive minutes and even at my young age, Ienjoyed it. Now this, I think is a wonderful occasion. ' Jhathas been done here already just staggers me. The vision of thegreat benefactor who brought this about has been matched by thevision and imagination of those who designed this college whohave furnished it with buildings, who have laid down the lines forits future. Now this is a wonderful hall that we are in. Thebuildings themselves,( I have just Lad a quick glance at them, arecharming in design, and this is good because I am one of those whobelieves that when generation after generation of boys goes toa place of learning whether it is an agricultural college or auniversity or whatever it may be it is a good thing for themto have memories of beauty to take with them during their lives.This is one of the civilising things in life, to see beauty andto recollect beauty in years to come and that is why, Sir, I amso delighted with the way in which this great task has beenattacked and so far accomplished.
Now this is an agricultural college. In one of the&nbsp;notes that was sent to me, a rather useful phrase, I thought,&nbsp;occurred, and that was that the idea was to bridge the gap between&nbsp;knowledge and application and this is something I want to talkabout for a little while, just in a conversational fashion, not&nbsp;by way of an address. We have lived or many of us have lived through&nbsp;a remarkable period of development in Australian rural industries,&nbsp;starting from a time when you just took what nature appeared to&nbsp;provide and made the most of it, and if it was poor country, well&nbsp;it was poor country. I was born in a place called the Mallee&nbsp;at a time when the Melbourne headlines regularly said, " Is the&nbsp;Mallee worth saving?" and it was understandable. It was a light&nbsp;sandy loam, had a very sketchy rainfall, sometimes a complete&nbsp;black-out in a drought sometimed 12, 14 inches of rain, and I&nbsp;can remember as a boy the first agricultural scientist coming&nbsp;up into the district and going out on to a property and having&nbsp;a ring of farmers around him and explaining to them about a strange&nbsp;thing called superphosphate. They had never heard of superphosphates, and I'm there&nbsp;like a small you know, ears pricked up listening to allthis. And he explained that on that soil in that sort ofclimate, in that kind of rainfall he thou ght they would all dobetter by going in for rotation of crops which was itself rathera novelty in those days, and also using a dressing of superphosphatewhich he put down at one hundredweight to the acre. Well,even from the rear view that I had of the farmers present, youcould tell that they weren't very much impressed by this." We've never used this stuff before"... " What does it cost?"( These were the days before the superphosphatesbounty.) ? Laughter) " What does it Andfinally all of them ignored the advice except three three ofthe best farmers in the area and even they were cautious enoughto say, " Well, we'll try hall a hundred weight" and when afterthe next harvest it turned out that the ha got three bushelsto the acre more than any of their neighbours, the first roundof the battle for superphosphates had been won. You see, ittakes time doesn't it? Because we are tremendously conservativeby instinct about these things.Now it is tremendously important, indeed it isvital, that all those old conservative ideas should disappear inthe case of the rural industries and for a very good reason.The international solvency of Australia, our balance of trade,our balance of payments, aepends primarily on the volume of ourexports, and the volume and value of our exports depends primarily,as to a vast percentage, on the products of the land whether incattle or sheep or cereals or watever the product may be. Wehave done rather well in the last few years, remarkably well,all things considered but we can't hope to avoid balance ofpayments troubles, and I don't want to become too technicalabout those, unless we can maintairn and steadily increase thevalue of our exports from this country. The solvency of massesof people who know nothing about the and will depend on it.And in the second place, as time goes on, as wehave long since reached a period of full employment, you havepressures on the economy you have pressures on resourcesabour is not easy to get, labour may have to be paid more becauseit is scarce all this is highly intelligible. It comes backto the man on the land who, for the most part takes the pricethat the world will give him but pays the cost that internalaffairs in Australia require him to meet, and his one hope ofmeeting these thin-s and of growing and prospering is to increasehis own skill, technically, in terms of management, steadily year/ 3
3by year. Australia needs above all people today, highlypteroapilnee dw hfoa rmtehrisn kapheo plea nwyhboo dayr ec ann otb e ofa tfhaartm erh aap py roiutp woerfea sort of fool's business, people who know the skills thatare required in animal husbandry, in cultivation, in whateverit may be, because these will be the guarantee in the futureof the steady improvement of the skil s of the techniquesneeded to meet these great problems, these two great problemsto which I have referred.The matter perhaps could be put in another way..1e have in Australia some of the most remarkable researchinstitutes in the world. The CSIRO is deservedly worldfamouL for the work that it does, and there is other workbeing done in various places, including the universitiespure science, applied science. Now all of this, of course, istremendously important, but for years now, quite a number ofus have been troubled about the Tact that there is too big aninterval between the result of the research work and itsap , lication on the farm. There has been a gap what is calledin another sense a deficiency of extension services, andthis is important because time counts. It's all very wellfor somebody in CSIRO to make a great discovery which in thefield of animal husbandry for example, could have greatresults and then find that it's a year or two years beforethat filters through to the man who is actually conductingthe operations on the spot, and when I enquire why, why dowe have this delay, all too frequently the answer is thatyou can't have an unskilled man interpreting the results ofresearch to a farmer. The interpreter himself must possessskill, he must know what he is talking about, and thewonderful thing to me is that in this place, when you getfully going, you will have 120 young men coming throughhere, acquiring skills which will make them the most effectiveinterpreters in the world of the results of scientificresearch and applied scientific research to the problems onthe spot of the man on the farm, so that you are helping ina very material way to supply a great national need.Now all that, you see, is on the text that youprovided me with the gap between knowledge and application,and it is because of the reasons that I have given by way ofelaborating that, that I regard it as a very great honour tocome here a great privilege to be here in the early days ofa place wAich will inevitably become not only great initself but famous over the country, and if I hadn't felt thatit was an honour I still would have had to come because mycolleague, Alan Pairhall told me to and if I may betray apolitical secret to you if you want our Ministers to workTor you, you occasionally have to work for them. So here Iam, and ef course in particular if I may say so, delightedto see my old friend, the Moderator Fred McKay. I alwaysremember with great interest that when my daughter was aboutto be married, we said to her: " Now is there anybody youwould like to bring in addition to the local Minister? Isthere anybody you would like to have at your wedding?"She said, " Yes I'd like Fred McKay" and down he came and hasa very honoured place in our house and in our minds.Now Sir, I don't think that I want to say any morethan that. I've run well over the twelve minutes that Imentioned in that exhilarating story of mine. I've told youe a / 4
4why I'm glad to be here and I've tried to tell you ina very few words why I think this is one of the mostimportant things that I would have looked at this yearof great present interest of great future importanceto the nation, and in particular, I hope and know, ofgreat importance to the individuals of whom at the momentwe see the first fifteen who will come through here, whowill be made good citizens as well as good farmersgood farmers as well as good students and good practicalpeople of a scientific bent. This is to the good ofAustralia and it will do me a world of gcod to be ableto remember it.I declare is this right? I'm never too sureabout this bit I declare this College open.o1 44



FEDERAL COUNCIL OF THE LIBERAL PARTY OF
AUSTRALIA, TWENTY-FIRST ANNIVERSARY
HOTEL CANBERRA, CANBERRA. 8TH NOVEMBER. 1 965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Sir, I think I ought not to begin to make a speech on
our anniversary, on our twenty-first birthday, without saying
something about my wife, ( hear hear)( applause) because not only
for twenty-one years, but for twenty-four, for twenty-seven, for
well whatever you say, dear she has been alongside of mO
and every time I have come back ana said, " Oh, no I can't stand
it an longer", she has said, " Well, give it anotAer got" and so,
Pat, wan to say to you on this great honorific occasion that
this dinner ought to be in your honour and not mine.
You know tonight I am going to exert the privilege
of an old man and be a little reminiscent. Do you mind hat?
I think a little reminiscence doesn't come amiss. I was looking
around this afternoon at the meeting of the Council and looking at
a young boy like Andrew Peacock and I sent around a special
emissary to say, " How old is Andrew?" and the answer came back
I hope coirectly he's 26. That means that when we had our meetings
in 1944 in Canberra and at Albury falsely called Owlbury by some
people that goes for West Australia but not for New South Wales;
that means that at that time, young Andrew was five years old,
if not actually mewling and puking, at any rate near enough
( Laughter) to give an air of verisimilitude to an otherwise bald
and unconvincing narrative. Five years old. Think of it.
Would you mind standing up Andrew? ( Applause) Almost in the
cradle when this began. I think this is fascinating; it's
marvellous, and I was reminded of it today when as a result of a
move to which I lent such venerable support as I have the Young
Liberals were here today speaking quite freely and voting quite
freely, I though, " Isn't this wonderful?" because, old man as I
am, I will never forget that it is the young men and young women
who represent the future of our party. THear, hear) ( Applause)
moment we have Shiandce ma1n9y44 , p reasbioduetn twsh ich II w wiillll nosta y bea wgoirvdi ngi no uat a
list of names but we have had many presidents, we Have had
State secretaries, we have had all sorts of marvellous people who
have worked for our party, and among them all I would like to
mention here and now Bob Willoughby. ( Applause) A tiresome fellow
who occasionally tells me where I get o or where I get on but
we will never sufficiently understand the people we have haA both
here and in the State Departments, the State Divisions people
like my friend John Carrick and McConnell and all the rest we
will never fully understand how vastly important they have been
to this party, lo this organisation and to the future of this side
of politics. Well having said that I want to tell you that back
in 1945 I hud a roblem. Might I tell you, being a reminiscent
old boyI as to what had happened? In 1941, I was believe it or
not Prime Minister and in 1941, believe it or not, I was made
to understand that it would be of advantage if I resigned from
being Prime Minister. So being the instant obedient of views,
I sald, " All right", and I did and so I went out and then for a
few weeks another government was in control and then at the end of
that time, in about August or September of 1941, we were beaten / 2 
-2-
by the Labor Party. That produced at once a problem. I'm sure
that all of you who have . ever gone through this painful experience
will understand it perfectly perhaps to be something different,
and so I had a meeting of my party.
We were then a rather, well, smallish majority and we had
a meeting and then not all my colleagues but some of them said to
me, " WelI, you know, we think you ought not to be the Leader of
the Opposition, though we were much the greatest party in Opposition.
And then I propounded a view for which I make no apology which was
that a party which is unwilling to lead is not worth leading. I
mention this tonight because I think it is something that may
perhaps in the future be thought of a little: A party that is
unwilling to lead is not worth leading. And so I resigned, and
from 1941 to 1945, I sat in the Opposition corner, just about where
Jim Cope sits today or words to that effect, do you see? This'
was very interesting. There I sat.
I wasn't on the Executive Committee when the next election
came round. I didn't know what was in the programme. I hadn't
been told. I hadn't been asked. And I mention this because there
are a few people who think that I was leading the Opposition at the
1945 election. I wasn't. I was over there in the corner. And
they had an election and of course being what I am, I went all round
Australia. I was counted out and had things chucked at me, but
I wasn't the leader of anything except myself, and so we were
beaten and having been beaten we came back. 1943. And that was
when tAe road back began.
Now I want to say this to all of you, all of you great,
strong Liberals that was when the road back began, because after
the 1943 election, some of my colleagues came to me and said,
" Would you care to be Leader of the prty?" and I said with my
usual humbleness, " All right". ( Laughter) " I don't mind, but
must be the Leader of the Opposition, which had been denied in
1941, and I must above all things have the right, the clear right,
to develop a new party to agglomerate the whole of our opposition
in Australia. My colleagues having had a severe battering in
the 1945 election, strangely enough said, " Yes, that's O. K.
We'll see to that. So it was agreed.
Now I don't know whether you all realise of course the
older among you realise this perfectly but I have been looking
around among the young to whom I attach all the importance in the
world for the future do you realise that after that election when
our side of politics had the biggest thrashing it ever had we had
fourteen different political organisations in Australia fourteen.
Bill Anderson who took a great part in this matter, he ran a thing
called the..... Services and Citizens was it Bill? Look, we had
fourteen different organisations over the whole of Australia andthe
great thing was to bring them together and have one because
unless we had one we were not only out in 1945, we were out
. crever. And so I sat back in my box, being then a very humble
Leader of the Opposition. These were the days when a Leader of
the Opposition drew a private member's pay and had an allowance of
œ 300 a year and lost and lost and lost year by year, and I had
the great good fortune to have with me P. woman who is here tonight
Eileen Lenihan and she had with her Miss Wilkinson whom some of
you know ( Applause). In my brash innocence, I said " All right.
Now I am going to have one party in this country" and we got to work.
I did what I am always pleased to credit myself with the brainwork,
you know. There were fourteen organisations " Well write to
them. They'll write to me." Oh, I had great assistance Bill 
-3-
Anderson, he conducted one of the most lively of these factional
groups. He was all on my side. And look, forgetting all names,
in 1944, in that rather revolting building you now wat I mean,
don't you Jock you know, that thing. Ayhow it was that building
that looks flat on the top. We had a meeting and we had a great
argument fourteen different organisations. This was really the
most incredible affair in the world, and the fourteen met. We had
great arguments. I even had a great argument with Tom Playford
where's Tom? Even had a great argument with Tom, but in the long
run, we agreed that instead of being fourteen, we ought to be one.
Now this was a remarkable achievement, and it happened.
And so we were agreed that we would have a meeting at
Albury, fondly called Owlbury by McBride. It's like Freeth who
always insists on Albany being called Owlbany. Anyhow, it was
Albury and we had another great conference, and being what I am,
I sat down and wrote out in my own unfair hand a constitution and
a platform. At this stage, young Bob Willoughby, he came to work.
He s a tiresome fellow, you know who has the signal dishonour of
devoting the whole of his adult life to the service of our party,
and he got to work on it too, Anyhow the constitution and the
platform, And of course they were both altered; in my recollection,
both to the worse, and before 1944 was out there was a new party,
the Liberal Party of Australia, which had begun to ring the bell
all around the world.
Now I wouldn't want you to believe that there were no
problems to be solved. There were great problems to be solved.
One of the very first was this that in my earlier days in politics
and in the earlier days of perhaps nobody else, an how mine we had
financial bodies which raise d the money, which tola the party
organisation what to do. In Melbourne the National Union; in
Sydney,( thank God it was under the control of a very wise and
great man, the late Sir Charles Lloyd Jones) the Consultative
Council. And the first thing that we had to determine in Albury
was whether we would continue to be a party organisation financed
by other people and therefore to that extent controlled by other
people, or whether we would raise our own mone, raise our own funds
and be in command of our own resources. And the first great
decision made by the Liberal Party of Australia was: We will
raise our own funds, we will control our own funds, and ever since
then, nobody has ever been able to say that we were doing what some
moneyed fellows wanted us to do. ( Applause)
And the second thing that happened was that we had to
determine whether the platform of the party and the policy of
the party should be under the control of the organisation. Now,
this was a very great issue, and I want you all to remember this
because as the first draftsman of the platform of the party, I had
a very clear idea that nothing should happen that commandea the
people who were in Parliament. In other words, by a sheer stroke
of luck I anticipated the idea that if the people in Parliament
were told what they were to say, then there would be the thirty-six
faceless men. And this, believe me is one of our great strokes
of fortune. Nobody has ever been able to say that about us " the
thirty-six faceless men" because we have from beginning to end said,
" The platform, the broad principles on which we live, of course we
announce them, of course we do, of course we publish them, but when
it comes to an election policy then we must pay regard to our
leaders, to the Parliamentary Members. We must not have them put
in the position of being tola what they are to say in amplification
of the platform, in pursuance of the platform, in the policy that
they pronounce. And therefore we very early established a system
in which a proper status was organised for the Australian Parliamentary
leaders and party instead of subordination. That's very
important. And this enabled us long afterwards to attack effectively
the thirty-six faceless men. / 4 
1?-
Now having said that,' may Ilgo back a little. You see,
1945, we lost, we were thrashed; 14 we created the new party;
1946 we had some victories, some, not many, and after the 1946
election, all round the club rooms in Sydney, Melbourne, even
Adelaide, they began to say, " Oh, you can never win with Menzies."
This is worth remembering You can never win with Menzies".
And they had all sorts of ideas qite prolific ideas, as to
who ought to do theljob, and notody could agree with anybody
else and so poor ol dMenzies he was still there for the 1949
elections. And in the 1949 elections, look we had the most enormous
gowth, we had the most marvellous entAusiasm reachin a pitch
retmaat rkhaabdl en eavnedr, yboeuenng apspetr oaocf hecda ndbiefdoartee. s and Wew e Aahadd , e ndleivsefleodp eda an
issue. I don tknow that we are entitled to all the credit for
the issue but we had developed one socialism, which up to that
time had teen a sort of academic idea you know, a sort of
debating society idea and which was then taken out of the realm
of academic debate tAank Heaven, by the Chi fley Government whi~ ch
had reduced it to terms in the Air services and in banking
airlines and bankin. And this enabled us in 1948/ 1949 to
concentrate the public attention on socialism as perhaps we could
never have concentrated it before, and so we won in spite of
Menzies. Then of course since then we have had victories in 1951
and 1954 and 1955 and 1958 and 1961 and 1965, in spite of the
old man. This, I think, is rather fascinating. But it is one
thing to say we have won seven consecutive elections. it is
quite another thing to say, " Why have we? What have we done?"
Now this is really the No. 1 question: " Why have we?"
and the only answer to that is to , say, " Well, what have we done?"
I know it is , commonplace to say " Oh , you know his opponents have
made errors." I don't doubt that. Ii'ye usually watched for them.
Suppose our opponents have made errors, what have we done in the
las sxteen years to justi fyging to the country and sayirg
" We want another term. N'ow this is the great question. IOU
can't live on the past. And so I have been saying to myself,
" Well, now, what have we done? What have we done in the laot
sixteen years to give us what I believe to be true an unrivalled
reputation all round the world." This is true * hat have we
done? Well, in international affairs, we started off with the
Colombo Plan. That was ours, you know. Never forget that.
The Colombo Plan, the plan under which Australia and twenty
countries have lent their aid to people in the Eastern world.
ANZIJS. I remember being taken apart by dear old Winston in 
London, because he said, " You know, you have forgotten us." And
I said, " No not at all. ANZUS Australia and New Zealand and
the United States. And if anybody who is concerned with the
history of our time who is not bemused by being an intellectual
will just think a little, he will realise that the ANZUS Pact
meant so much to us in Australia and to our security and to the
security of our children and our grandchildren this is out of
the world the ANZUS Pact, and the Americans understand it in
exactly tAe same way as we do.
And then there was another achievement of ours, the
SEATO Treaty the ø outh East Asian Treaty organization. Well,
now you know all sorts of people they are very clever, they
understand that this doesn't mean a thing. Doesn't it mean a
thing? You know, Dean Rusk himself being challenged as to why
the Americans were in South Viet Nam said, " The SEATO Treaty".
This is right. He is there, the United States is there our
eople are there, many other people are there because this reat
treaty was designed and consummated. It is a treaty against
communist aggression. So therefore SEATO is a wonderful thing.
Then apart from all these things, well, look, I would
weary you if I tried to explain to you how our trusteeship has
been performed. Defence. Some of you heard my colleague this
afternoon on the subject of defence. Defence. Would you have
supposed five years ago that Australia would be doing so much in
defence as it is now? No, not a bit. Defence has been one of
the great things, the development of resources. You know, it is
always easy for people to say, " Oh, well of course, you know,
you just want to leave things alone." * e don't want to leave
things alone. If I were to say to my colleague, my distinguished
Liberal colleague, David Fairbairn, " Tell us about development in
Australia; tell us about uranium tell us about bauxite, tell
us about all these things", the whab story would be so tremendous,
somebody would be bound to say, " Yes, but what is the Government
doing about it?" This is true.
If we were to talk about..... I look across there and I
see Oppy..... talk about Immigration. Immigration. This is the
most fabulous story in the world and this has been going year after
year. Somebody then is heard to say, " Well, of course ou couldn't
do these things without capital from overseas," to which I reply,
v" hy not?" Believe me, all these remarkable things that have
happened in Australia are happenin-because we have money and we
have manpower and they marry together. Now Immigration has
produced a great deal of the manpower and the money has been
produced time after time by investment from overseas. And for
people to say, " We don't want it. We don't want investment from
overseas"/ is almost as if they said " We don't want people from
overseas." Really, ladies and gentlemen, this whole problem,
this whole tremendous earth-shaking problem from our point of
view is one which requires the marriage of money, of peole, of
enterprise, and one of the great fortunes of your Government in
all these years has been to say something and do something about
the marriage of all these developments so that this marvellous
country of ours can proceed.
Now that is all I want to say except one thing. I
mentioned earlier one or two of my younger colleagues in this
conference. You knowi many years ago I was one of the founders
of the Young Nationalist Organisation in Australia and later on,
I saw this and did this and did this.
Look the future of this country doesn't belong to you
of my generation or to others of my generation. It belongs to
/ 6 
-6-
the young ones of this generation. ( Hear, hear) ( Applause)
It's not just funny for me to think of somebody as mentioned
earlier who was five years old when this movement began. This
is tremendously important. People like me I will be 71 next
December people like me are not to be regarded as eternally
in charge of an organisation or a reat movement. What is
needed is that all of us should understand that it is the young
who not only have the responsibility for the future but who must
have the authority for the future. Now this is tremendously
important, tremendously important.
Oh dear, if I could only sit down carefully and write
my benediction to my successors, I would indeed be happy, and
I want to say to all of the young who are here tonight: This
is your job. The future is not only within your power but
within your responsibility, and so far as we are concerned,
my wife and myself, we hope to live long enough to realise how
well you are doing your job and how much you are doing for
Australia. 



OPENING OF LIBERAL PARTY HEADQUARTERS,
CANBERRA 9TH NOVEMBER, 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
I would like to say " thank you" to. Phil McBride.
He didn't refer to himself of course, but if you knew Phil
McBride as clzsely as I have known him for many many years,
you would know that he is a very hard man to dodge and the
moment that he decided there ought to be a headquarters
building, it was as good as done. True, he recruited all
these other notable people to whom he has referred, but I know
Phil and I am quite satisfied that but for him, we might not
have achieved the result so soon. Always a difficult man to
contradict. On the many occasions when I have in a small
voice said " Yes, Phil Ientirely agree with you" the has
looked so taken aback that he has usually restate the
proposition ( Laughter) in case I had misunderstood it. He
has drive, and or course he carries with him a reasonable
amount of healthy South Australian bias. That's obvious from
everything we have been told this morning. In fact it
explains why Tom Playford is here this morning, practically
lroking over the estate. ( Laughter)
Now as we have been reminding ourselves in the
last twenty-four hours, this is a national party, a natioral
-arty that was made up originally out of a mass of fragments,
a solid unified national party. Now that itself is a great
achievement. And a national party is a party that has a
national policy, and over these years we'have been able to
provide the country with policies which, open to attack as
hey may be in point of detail, h.' ve in the broad achieved
great results for our country. So we had a national party with
a nationa_ policy and now we have what was lacking1 a true
national headquarters in the national city. This t think is
real landmark in the history of the party, a national
headquarters. You imagine it in the past our national secretariat,
our Federal secretariat has been scattered here and there, part
of it in Sydney, part of it here in Canberra. Now it assembles
here. It conducts its operat-. ons in research, study, in
public relations, in achieving effective close and natural
contact with the Parliamentary party. these things are of
tremendous importance and I want to say on behalf of my
Parliamentary colleagues that we attach importance to the
c:: istence of this buildin and the presence of the Secretariat
because we know that thisowill be a source of knowledge, a
source of wisdom on many thinj, and that the levels of achievement
in Parliament itself will thereby be raised. Now this is
very good. Long distance communications are one thing, and
failing all else they do. But the close daily contact so that
Members know what is going on in the mind of the Secretariat
and the Secretariat, importantly, knows what is going on in the
mind of the Ministers, this is, i think, a tremendously important
matter. Now, I am not a controversial fellow and therefore
I won't buy into an argument about the architecture. I think
it's delightful, but t en I am an old-fashioned reactionary
Tory whe* it comes to architecture, and perhaps on some other
matters for all I know. But it is a lovely building. It has
charm; it reflects, I think, great skill in its architecture
and magnificent achievement in its craftsmanship. The building.....
/ 2 
-2-
look around this room and you see the most astonishing craftsmanship
which some people had begun to think no longer existed in
a mass production period of time. So I like this building, and
I defy the so-callod modern architects who disagree. All I can
say about some of them is that if they had their way, they have
a ree hand in the great cities of the world over the nex fifty
years, nobody will Know what city he is in because they will all
look the same ( Laughter) and I like to believe in a little
character in a city. Fancy taking away the character of London,
for example, by putting up a series of glasshouses. It gives
me the horrors. And therefore when we were told that we were
to have a building that looked as this one does and didn't look
like a dairy ( Laughter), I was delighted and I still am.
Over there in the corner somewhere I think is, if not
a storied urn, at least an animated bust, I believe. All I can
say because I am not going to anticipate what Sir vVilliam
Anderson will be sayin about it all I can say about it is this
that to the extent that it resembles me it will be a sign and
a warning to those who come after me. ( Laughter) From that
point of view., it will turn out to be a very useful addition to
this room. I am very greatly honoured that this room should have
been named after me, very greatly honoured that I should have
the opportunity of opening the building. I concur in everything
that Sir Philip McBride said. I merely added a few words on
my own account because that seems to be the thing to do. History
will be made in this room. Year after year, decade after
decade, good history will be made in this room. It must be
good, otherwise the new generation will hAve failed to maintain
their vision and I don't believe that they will. Wo are a
pirty with an enormous d-stiny. That is a thing that has to be
remembered a creditabl history. Twenty-one but a great
destiny, a great responsibility, and the existence of this
building and the meeting of the people who will meet in this
building these things will make a contribution I am sure to
our country, our greatly loved country which will be quite
imperishable. Sir, I have great pleasure in declaring the building
open. 


ASSIUSATMAINACLE TTOE ~ IdNHDERP ENADE dN) T THSEC HOnUOLHST IEIRNI THTEE RAiHUISTTRRYA-LIANStatement by the Prime Minister, Sir RobertMenzies in the House of Representatives onNovember, 1965The Commonwealth has adopted a new policy to assistindependent schools in the Australian Capital Territory and inthe Northern Territory to finance the construction of primaryand secondary school buildings and associated facilities.For the last ten years, the Australian Governmenthas been helping this construction in the Australian CapitalTerritory by paying a subsidy up to the long term bond ratetowards mee ing the interest charges incurred by independentschools when they borrowed money for construction. This assistancewas first paid for construction of facilities in secondaryschools and, inre recently, has been paid for both primary andsecondary schools. In future the Government will continue to meet interestcharges on approved borrowings of capital, but will also repaythe amounts of capital borrowed for appDroved projects. Capitalrepayments will be made by equal annuai instalments over a periodof twenty years. The same assistance will be extended to schoolsin the Nrhern Territory with the exception of mission schoolswhich have special characteristics and for which special Commonwealthassistance exists already.The Government believes that this arrangement willassist independent schools in the two Territories both by removingthe necessity for such schools to repay capital themselves and byenabling them to borrow at reasonable rates of interest.The increased assistance will aptly both to approvedprojects constructed or begu over the next ten years and also toa group of projects now under construction or on the point ofstarting. For schools in the Australian Capital Territory andthe Northern Territory, the new form of assistance will replace,for the future, assistance now available to provide science teachinglaboratories and equipment.In each case where assistance is given, the AustralianGovernment will need to be satisfied that the propnsed facilitiesare needed and will require that details such as the standards ofconstruc tion, the area of land around the school, and the borrowingarrangements, be approved by it.The increased assistance will not apply to projectsalready built under the previous scheme.



FOR.. I av n fficia in aton etbtiftha
bracsstril, -thm I, rert it. I W hoped tiat
Other wid rvil awllwtl ekv
officia and nordstalw-d ifor= tm ilnwtM Y
of, a particular knd
As soon as thre. is uoisii -to bei, all'
aftde~ r csi ith* Minitr take an early opportzi~
Of saAn t In the' aoua Wsh ti ilbetmrv
net an kan". ak. i
11th Novaiber, Wv 


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 88/ 1965DROUGHTStatement by the Pri. me Minister, Sir Robert MenziesI received a deputation today representing theAustralian Woolgrowers' and Graziers' Council, The Graziers'Association of New South Ialesand tho N. S. W. Country Partyto discuss the drought situation. My colleagues, theTreasurer, Mr. Holt, and the Minister for Primary Industry,Mr. Adermann, joined me in these discussionsdThe deputation gave us details of the currentdrought situation, particularly in Northern New South Walesand Queensland. I informed them of the steps my Government hasalready taken and gave an assurance that it would givecareful consideration to the views they put forward.The Australian Jioolgrowers' and Graziers' Councilwas represented by its President, Mr. T. B. C. Walker, andExecutive Officer, Mr. P. Nicholas, while the Graziers'Association of New South Wales was represented by itsChairman, Mr. B. A. Vright; representing the New SouthWales Country Party was its Chairman, Mr. R. Hurt.Also attending the meeting were two Liberal andtwo Country Party members, Messrs. J. M. Fraser, H. J. Bate,I. A. Allan and V. A. Pettit.CANBERRA, ath November, 1965.


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIASPEECHI BYThe Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,M. P.,ONCONSTITUTION ALTERATION ( PARLIAMENT)BILL 1965ANDCONSTITUTION ALTERATION ( REPEAL OFSECTION 127) BILL 1965[ From the Parliamentary Debates I11th November 1965]CONSTITUTION ALTERATION( PARLIAMENT) BILL 1965.Bill presented by Sir Robert Menzies,and read a first time.Second Reading.Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-Prime Minister) [ 8.01.-I move--That the Bill be now read a second time.This is a Bil of immense importance butof not great complexity in itself. It isdesigned to break the nexus-a termwhich we have all come to understandcreatedby section 24 of the CommonwealthConstitution. Section 24 statesandI want -to state this matter with all14410/ 65 possible clearness because I think thatis vital to an understanding of it-The House of Representatives shall be composedof members directly chosen by the peopleof the Commonwealth, and the number of suchmembers shalt be, as nearly as practicable, twicethe number of the senators.The phrase as nearly as practicable, twicethe number of the senators is somethingthat has to be borne in mind in thewhole parliamentary and public considerationof this matter. I do not undertake tobe dogmatic as to what is meant by thephrase as nearly as practicable because,after all, if there are 60 senatorsit is quite practicable to have 120 membersof this House, yet we have 122 plus2 who do not have a general vote. But
it is quite clear that as nearly aspracticable imposes genuine limits, howeverthey may be defined, on the numberof people in this House.What are the facts? In 1949, followingthe increase in 1948 of the House ofRepresentatives from 74 to 121 memberswith full voting rights and of theSenate from 36 to 60 senators, eachmember of this House represented,on the average, 66,000 people. Today,such is the growth of -the population thateach member, on the average, representsnot 66,000 people but 94,000 people.Without a constitutional change, how farcan we increase the ' number of membersof this House, increasing the numbers todo justice and to give effective representationto the people of Australia, who havenow reached I1If million and who couldeasily become 15 million, 18 million ormillion in due course? Without aconstitutional change how far can we increasethe membership of this Housebytwo or three or four-because thewords of the Constitution are as nearlyas practicableI would not care -to commit myself to theproposition that we could increase thenumber of members of this House by morethan two or three or, in a handsome moment,four. I would not like to say that we cando better than that. We cannot discuss thisproblem, nor can our people discuss it, ina practical way without bearing in mindthe current and now well established methodof electing the Senate-a method whichmeans that in a vote for five senators, asat present, barring casual vacancies, oneside may get three and the other two, butthat in a vote for six senators all the chancesare that each political side will secure threesenators, however the political sides may bemade up. If that happened in every State wewould have a perpetually deadlocked Senatewith 30 senators on each side. An habituallydeadlocked Senate would mean that at anystage a government chosen at a generalelection for the House of Representatives-and this is how governments are chosenin our country-could be rendered impotent.This would not be good for parliamentarydemocracy and, therefore, would not ' begood for the people of Australia. The practicalproblem, therefore, is whether weshould continue the constitutional system under which the House of Representativesshould be limited in numbers to twice thenumbers of the Senate.Having said that-because that is the vitalquestion-I start with the Senate, whosefunctions, properly understood, I profoundlyrespect. At present there are 60 senators-10 from each State. Originally, before theincrease of the House of Representatives in1948, there were 36 senators, three retiringfrom each State each three years. At presentthere are 60 senators-lO from each State-and they are elected five at a time ineach State. So at each Senate election thereis a reasonable probability of one side or tfother having a majority of three to M-WShould the Senate be increased by onesenator per State-that is, to 66--eachSenate election under normal circumstanceswould require the choice of one half of 11Isenators, that is, of five and a half senatcftwhich, as our late lamented friend EucWwould have said, is absurd. The only practicalcourse under those circumstanceswould be to choose six at one election andfive at another. I invite honorable memberswho have implicated themselves in themathematics of elections to realise the confusionthat course could produce.Suppose that the Senate were increasedin numbers to 72. I mention this because atpresent you cannot increase the membershipof this House, whatever the population ofAustralia may be, without increasing tl~numbers in the Senate. Suppose we saWthat the other propositions to which I havereferred are not good and that we willincrease the numbers of the Senate to 72.That would mean 12 senators from eachState, six to be elected at each electioUnder the present system for Senate elaWtions-and nobody has been able to suggesta better system-the election of six senatorsfrom each State would almost guarantee inevery State the election of three Governmentsenators and three Opposition senators andso we would produce a deadlocked Senate,with every motion and every amendmentdefeated. I remind honorable members thatsection 23 of the Constitution states-Questions arising in the Senate shall be determinedby a majority of votes, and each senatorshall have one vote. The President shall in allcases be entitled to a vote; and when the votesare equal the question shall pass in the negative.I have always rather liked that phrasethequestion shall pass in the negative".
What it means is that the question will notbe passed at all but will be resolved in thenegative. That is the position in the Senate.A deadlocked Senate would not be any goodto a government in this House, elected bythe people, because nobody could pass aresolution and nobody could pass an amendment.Therefore, if there is to be a Senatein which a clear majority becomes possible,the numbers of the Senate would need tobe such under the existing Constitution thatan odd number would be elected every threeyears. Having mentioned the present oddnumber of 5, 1 must, therefore, go on tonext odd number of 7. If 7 were to bected every three years there would be aSenate of 84 members and under the Constitutionas it now stands, the House ofRepresentatives would have 168 members.* Mr. Cope-A member would not haveleopportunity to ask a question.Sir ROBERT MENZEiES.-I think thehonorable member would, because he alwaysasks such good questions. I wait forthem. But the point taken by the honorablemember is right. Nobody pretends for amoment that we want 168 members in theHouse of Representatives. Most people, realisingthe duties of members of theParliament and the enormous and growingpopulation that must be represented, wouldsay: We ought to have 130 or 135 or" atever it may be, but we do not want1W8." I want people to understand that,under the Constitution as it is now, if thisreferendum were defeated, we could notincrease the number of members in this,,,, ouse to fewer than 168 if at the same timeWwere to increase the membership of theenate to an extent that made that institutionworkable.This seems to me, and I think to all of us,to be quite clear. It follows from this that,as long as the present section 24 remains,the membership of this House must standstill or vary by perhaps only one or two,unless a massive increase is made in thenumbers in the Senate. Therefore, this Billhas one simple purpose, and I hope that thepeople of Australia will accept it as an expressionof the joint judgment, wisdom andopinion of this House. We propose anamendment to break the nexus. Shouldsomeone be a little anxious as to whether we will in an extravagant way want toincrease our numbers in some ballooningform, we propose two matters in thisamendment to afford protection. First, wewill protect State representation in theSenate. It was said to me at one stage thatperhaps in some States there might be afear that, with all this changing of the exist,ing rules, individual States would havefewer senators. We have sought to meetthis. We have provided in this amendmentthat all original States, which under theexisting Constitution are entitled to nofewer than 6 senators, will be entitled to nofewer than 10 senators. In other words, weprotect the existing State position in theSenate. Secondly, we believe-I know that myfriend, the Leader of the Opposition ( Mr.Calwell), will agree, because I haveread what he has had to say-thatthere must be a limit on the increaseof the membership of the Houseof Representatives. The Bill provides thatthe number of members of this House shallbe ascertained by dividing the number ofpeople of the States by such number as isfor the time being determined by theParliament, that number being not less than80,000. In other words, the quota forelectorates is to be not less than 80,000. Ipoint out for the information of honorablemembers that -if the Parliament decided thatthe quota should be 80,000, with today'spopulation the membership of this Housewould be 143. If the Parliament decidedthat the quota should be 85,000-it cannotbe less than 80,000 but it can be morethemembership of the House would be 135.I give these simple statistics to illustratethe real nature of the problem with whichwe must cope. I want to emphasise to theHouse and to the people of Australia thatthe defeat of these proposals would inevitablymean that any increase in the membershipof the House in future would beextravagant. We would have double thenumber of an increased Senate, as I haveindicated, or no increase at all. I am oneof the oldest inhabitants of this place. Iknow exactly what honorable membersopposite are about to say and I am notsure I do not agree with them. I lookaround the House and I see my old friend,the honorable member for Darling ( Mr.Clark), who is a contemporary of mine in
this place. Going back over this time, anybodywho knew anything about the businessof the Parliament would never disagreewith me for one moment when I say thatthe problems bein~ g looked at by honorablemembers today are three or four times moreweighty and more complex than they werewhen I first came into this House. I knowthis at first hand. I am not an idler; I haveworked all this time and I know what itmeans. I would think it dreadful if thepeople were to cast a vote that permittedthe members of this House to represent not50,000 or 60,000 but even more than the120,000 represented by my colleague, theAttorney-General ( Mr. Snedden), in Bruceand by the honorable member for Lalor( Mr. Pollard), whose presence there hasbeen so encouraging that the populationhas risen rapidly. But it is true that we havethese big electorates. If in ten years' timewe had a situation in which every memberof this House represented 120,000 electors,I would think that this was an outrage tothe effective democratic representation ofthe people. After all, we are the Parliamentof the nation. We disagree amongst ourselves.We may have all sorts of opinionsof each other. But we have the supremeduty to represent our people and to representthem effectively. To represent themeffectively, there must -be a proper proportionbetween the number of members of thisHouse and the number of electors in thenation as a whole.In moving the second reading of the Bill,I have not gone into any little side alleys,because my experience has been that theseproblems have to be seen at the centre.They must be seen with clarity if a changeis to be made in the Constitution.As for this one, I profoundly hope and Ideeply believe that when this is adequatelyexplained to the people of Australia theywill say Yes and they will change thisrule and thereby make a tremendous contributionto making this Parliament an effectiveagent of the popular will.Debate ( on motion by Mr. Caiwell)adjourned. CONSTITUTION ALTERATION( REPEAL OF SECTION 127) BILL 1965.Bill presented by Sir Robert Menzies, andread a first time. Second Reading.Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-Prime Minister) move-That the Bill be now read a second time.The purpose of this Bill is to alter theConstitution by repealing section 127. Thatsection provides that in reckoning the numbersoi the people of the Commonwealth,or of a State or other part of the Commonwealth,Aboriginal natives shall not becounted. The Government believes that thefirst opportunity should be taken to have itrepealed and proposes to submit the Bill toreferendum at the same time as -the referdum on altering the method of determiniWthe number of members of the House ofRepresentatives. The Joint Committee onConstitutional Review recommended repealin its report-that is the 1959 report-atparagraph 398.No doubt the principal reason for theinclusion of section 127 in the Constitutionin 1900 was the practical difficulties thatwould be encountered in satisfactorilyenumerating the Aboriginal population.There were no doubt real difficulties thenin ensuring that a census of Aboriginescould be effectively taken. In modern times,this is not so. Moreover, section 127 is notrelated to the qualification of Aboriginesas voters in Commonwealth elections. Section41 of the Constitution has a Iway_guaranteed an Aboriginal the right to vtat Commonwealth elections if he had*~Tight to vote at elections for the morenumerous House of the Parliament of aState. The Commonwealth Parliament itselfhas removed all disabilities in respectvoting at Commonwealth elections so 1as Aborigines are concerned. Consequently,Aborigines are now entitled to enrol andto vote and they should, in the view of theGovernment, be recognised as forming partof the population of their State for anypurpose. I think I should at this point make referenceto the Government's decision not toput forward any amendment of section51 ( xxvi.). I mention this because the DeputyLeader of the Opposition ( Mr. Whitlam)had a question on the notice paper aboutit and I am now, in effect, answering thatquestion. Section 51 ( xxvi.) provides thatthe Parliament may make laws for the peace,
order and good government of the Commonwealthwith respect to the people of anyrace, other than the Aboriginal race in anyState, for whom it is deemed necessary tomake special lawsSome people wish-and indeed the wishhas been made clear in a number of petitionspresented to this House-to associatewith the repeal of section 127 the removalof what has been called, curiously to mymind, the discriminatory provisions ofsection 51 ( xxvi.). They want-and I understandtheir view-to eliminate the words" other than the Aboriginal race in anyate on the ground that these wordsmount to discrimination against Aborigines.In truth, the contrary is the fact. The wordsare a protection against discrimination bythe Commonwealth Parliament in respecteMoifc hA borigines. The power granted is oneenables the Parliament to make specialMws, that is, discriminatory laws in relationto other races-special laws that wo * uldrelate to them and not to other people.The people of the Aboriginal race arespecifically excluded from this power. Therecan be in relation to them no valid lawswhich would treat them as people outsidethe normal scope of the law, as people whodo not enjoy benefits and sustain burdensin common with other citizens of Australia.What should be aimed at, in the view ofthe Government, is the integration of thes boriginal in the general community, nott state of affairs in which he would betreated as being of a race apart. The mereuse of the words Aboriginal race is notdiscriminatory. On the contrary, the usetoof mth e words indentifies the people protecteddiscrimination when it is rememberedhat section 51 ( xxvi) was drafted to meetthe conditions that existed at the end ofthe last century-for example, the possibilityof having to make a special law dealingwith kanaka labourers. The power has, infact, never been exercised. If the wordswere removed, as some people suggestandthere is quite an attractive argumentin favour of that-it would change dramaticallythe scope of the plenary power conferredon the Commonwealth. That mustbe borne in mind. If the Parliament had,as one of its heads of power, the powerto make special laws with respect to theAboriginal race, that power would verylikely extend to enable the Parliament to set up, for example, -a separate body of industrial,social, criminal and other laws relatingexclusively to Aborigines. It is difficultto see any limitations on the power to doany of these things, because the existingpower is a plenary power in the Constitution.Conferring such a new power could havemost undesirable results.The Joint Committee was quite clear inits recommendation that section 127 shouldbe repealed. In relation to the question thatI have just been discussing, namely, conferringa power on the Commonwealth tomake laws with respect to Aborigines, theCommittee, at the time it ceased its deliberationsin 1958-and I mention this asan historic fact-had, paragraph 397 of thereport states, given some consideration tothe very important question as to whetherthe Commonwealth Parliament should havean express power to make laws with respectto Aborigines, and representations fromvarious quarters advocated the adoption ofa recommendation to this effect. The Committeehad, however, not completed itsinquiries on all the issues involved and consequentlyno recommendation has beenmade. I have quoted this because I do notwant to have it said against anyone on theCommittee that he has committed himself.This is not true: This was left open. WhatI have said will show that the removal ofthe exclusion of the Aboriginal race fromthe scope of section 51 ( xxvi), that is, toinclude them within the power, is not thesimple matter it is often represented to be.The inclusion would, in the view of theGovernment, not be in the best interestsof the Aboriginal people.Returning to the Bill before the House, thematter can be simply put by saying thatsection 127 is completely out of harmonywith our national attitudes and with theelevation of the Aborigines into the ranksof citizenship which we all wish to see.To sum up, three possibilities have beenexamined: First, to omit from section 51( xxvi.), the words other than the Aboriginalrace in any State This would give theCommonwealth Parliament power, a plenarypower, to make laws, unlimited except hysuch general provisions as those of section92, with respect to Aborigines-for example,industrial laws, social services laws,health laws and so forth. Is this desirable?I t
I have endeavoured to point out that wedo not think it is. Should not our overallobjective be to treat the Aboriginal ason the same footing as all the rest, withsimilar duties and similar rights? Section51, placitum ( xxvi.), does not create discriminationin the case of the Aboriginal.It avoids it. The second proposal was torepeal ( xxvi.) altogether. Quite frankly,this has its attractions. The powerhas never been exercised. Yet, in themodern and complex world which changesaround us almost every week we mightconceivably wish to employ it. For example,we have great obligations in thecase of Nauru. We might, some day,under some circumstances, wish to passa special law with regard to Nauruansthepeople of the Nauruan race-in orderto help them to be re-established somewhereoutside their existing island. Wemight. Therefore, it would be unwise,perhaps, -to deprive ourselves of themachinery for dealing with a problem ofthat kind should that problem arise. Thethird proposal that has been made-and Isay this with great deference to some of my friends and supporters who havementioned it-is to add a new provisionrendering invalid laws regarding Aboriginesby, for example, invalidating any Commonwealthor State discrimination on thegrounds of race.Well Sir, all I can say, with livelymemories of what happened in the UnitedStates of America over their amendments-over what they called the " Bill ofRights", the crop of litigation, and thereduction -to terms of somewhat wide andrhetorical expressions-is that any provisionof that kind would produce a croof litigation. It would involve argumerof definition. It could readily invalidatelaws which, while designed to protect thespecial interests of Aborigines, could beheld technically to discriminate either foror against them. Sir, I repeat that t~best protection for Aborigines is to treothem, for all purposes, as Australiancitizens. Debate ( onadjourned. motion by Mr. Calwell) eqBY AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH OOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA



DTR IF HONOUR OF SIR CHARLES BIC TON
BCKBURN, RHACELLOR F2ERITU UIVERITY
Uip SYDR'.. JYDfm 12th NOVEMBER. 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister. Sir Robert Menzies
Chancellor and Ladies and Gentlemen
. Then I was born, Charles Bickerton Blackburn was between
twenty and twenty-one years old, and as I have a firm conviction
that all happiness will be mine if I can attend his 100th
birthday, I have a very great privilege tonight to be allowed to
speak about him.
But before I speak about him, could I tell you that my
memory has be titillated a little by some of the remarks that have
been made along the table, and to my left by the Vice-Chancellor
who like me suffers the fate of being in his own right, a
graduate of the University of Melbourne,
Reference was made tonight by you, Chancellor, to Robert
Strachan Wallace who was the Professor ol Lnglish in my time at
the Melbourne University, and so parochial are the people in
Sydney that when many years afterwards I was invited inadvertently
I can only assume to have lunch at a celebrated club in Sydney,
I arrived I shed my hat and coat and I walked into the smoking
room and there my host said " I would like to introduce you to
Sir Robert 4allace" and I stood off about three yards I'm sure
I've told this to some of you before today and looked at him and
said ' Hence in a season of calm weather
Though inland far we be,
Our Souls have sight of that immortal sea
1hich brought us hither
Can in a moment travel thither,
And see the Children sport upon the shore,
And hear the mighty waters rolling evermore.
That's Wordsworth lads, and good stuff." ( Laughter) After that,
of course, they realised that I wasn't unacquainted with him.
I hope Professor Mitchell will take a note of that.
And then when I heard the Chancellor tonight do us the
singular favour of doing a little Lucretius into English it is
not his customary practice I was reminded of a very great
classical scholar in my time at the University,( and I think Vice-
Uhancellor in yours) Professor Tucker. He was a great man, he
was a wonderful scholar and he had a nice dry wit as a classical
scholar should. One day we were sitting in the lecture room, one of
these terrace lecture rooms and he was addressing us, no doubt
on the subject of Latin and two or three of the fellows you'll
be surprised at this they probably turned out to be medical
students in the long run; they were not very interested in this
but they wanted to have a bit of fun, so one of them with that
excruciating form of wit which I believe is still current in the
undergraduate body, brought a dog in and sooled the dog down the
steps and the dog, not unwilling went down had a look around,
walked up on to the dais and stood there with shouts of undergraduate
laughter this was the wittiest event of the year. I
suppose it was expecting that Professor Tucker would be a little
incommoded by this. He just stopped in the middle of a sentence, / 2 
2
bent down, patted the dog on the head and said, " Well, puppy,
did you come in with the others?"
Now having got off these highly irrelevant reminiscences
of mine, may I tell you that I'm here and my wife is here
because we both suffer from an enormous admiration and a deep
affection for Sir Charles Bickerton Blackburn now to be known,
as I realise, as Chancellor Emeritus. Might i suggest, air,
that you should do something about Prime Ministers. ( Laughter)
( Applause) * ihen I have gone at long last to live in the street
in ' Melbourne which is now I believe called Haverlook Avenue
I think it would give you and myself great pleasure if people
would say, " That's where the Prime Minister Emeritus lives."
Of course, there is nothing half so insignificant as a Prime
Minister when he is a Prime Minister; nothing quite so
contemptible as a Prime Minister who is no longer a Prime
Minister, and I put in this little plea. You might do something
in the academic world Prime Minister Emeritus. Oh, this
attracts me, enormously.
Now, when I agreed to come down here, I found my mission
a little sketchy to~ a because certain things have happened
around the world whi require a great deal of painful thought;
I said to myself, " What is it about Sir Charles Bickerton
Blackburn that makes him a legendary figure, not only in this
university but in the whole of the Commonwealth of Australia.
iihat is i{ about him?" Well, of course, he is a great physician,
and that's a pretty good thing to be with very great respect
to you Chancellor that's a pretty good thing to be. The
older I get, the more respect 1 have for great physicians.
He' 8 a great educationist because for many years he has
been the hancellor of this reat and famous university. In
the whole of that time he didn't ever seem to me to flag or
fail in any way. He was everywhere, he did everything. I
couldn't get within half a mile of this place wiThout encountering
him. A great educationist. And the history of the
University oFcSydney has been enriched by the fact that he
has been Ohancellor and has held the standards high. Now this
is a very great thing to be, in addition to being a great
physician. He has been a great citizen, and that, if I may say so,
is rather more important than being either a great physician or
a great educationist. He's been a great citizen. I will
undertake to say that there are thousands and thousands of
people in Sydney who, when they thought about the university
also thought about Charles Bickerton Blackburn and this is
tremendously important because if your Chancellor is and this
is still the simple truth a great citizen then the people
take the university to their hearts and to their minds ana don't
regard it as something remote and apart,
And above all these things again, he is a great human
being alert, alive, warm-hearted and almost omnipresent.
I don't understand how he's been doing it for 91 years because
I'm sure he started in the cradle. I don't understand how he
does it but wherever you go, you meet him. There he is,
attending a party or two parties or three parties I don't
know how many parties we have in the Commonwealth now let's
say three or four anyhow he's attending and looking around
like that, you know, and still, if you will allow me to say so,
with a remarkably quick eye for a prettT girl. ( Laughter)
This argues, if it needs to be argued, that he's a great human
S. / 3 
-3-
being. Now these are the facets of his life and of his
character that present themselves to me.
All I want to do apart from that is to say, " hat have
been the secret springs of his career because you can never udge
any man from the outside, you can never Just look at ffho's qio,
you can never just look at something tha a ppears in a newspaper
or some essay that somebody has written. These will give you
the superficial aspects of a man but it is tremendously important
to get to understand what are the inner springs of his character
and his achievement and this takes us below the surface.
Well, in his case could I say that he has throughout
his life, his professional life, possessed enormous skill, and
skill is not something given to you by a Government. Skill is
not something created by a statute. Skill is not something
created by a system of scholarships or awards. Skill is always
the product of the marriage of a natural talent and a tremendous
devotion to work, a tremendous devotion to knowledge. This
doesn't happen by accident. It doesn't happen by decree. It
happens because the man has in himself that urge to know, that
urge to acquire skill, that willingness to scorn delights and to
live laborious days which ultimately produces in him the top
range of skill an this, if I may say so, has been one of the
inspiring elements in Sir Charles' own life.
And in the second place, being a great physician he
has had a great feeling for humanity, for human beings. ko
physician could be a , eat one who merely acquired skill and then
looked at people as ifthev were objects for study, as if they
represented numbers in a catalogue or even on a computer. e
must have true humanity. The proper study of mankind is man,
and for a great physician this is doubly true because every
human being who presents Aimself to him is his own individual
problem, and he must get inside the mind of the man the heart of
the man, the feeling of the man and by man I include woman.
This is true. There must be a deep instinct for humanity.
argues likeA ndth lte heCnh, a nciefl lcooru rEsem, e rietvuesr, y nwohwo haansd gtrheeant ssokmielblo, d ywho has
a eelin of true humanity and who has enduring usefulness. This
is something worth thinking about. I know most of us are not
in his class in this way; most of us know that as time goes on,
you begin to feel occasionally that you are out of touch with
the new generation, that you are in your ovn generation, that
perhaps these others coming along have thin  s you don't understand
and that you ought to try To understand. Bless my soul and
body, this man Has the spirit of enduring usefulness. He's
like Peter Pan, the boy who wouldn't grow up. How true this is.
I've never heard him make an old man's remark have you? I
have always thought that whatever he had to say was a contemporary
thing. He was a boy among boys. Ho was a young man among young
men. This is a tremendous thing, and all the more tremendous to
me ladies and gentlemen when I recall now something that I
dian't know at the time that when I was born for better or for
worse, he was already most of the way throu h1is medical course.
He was a man and I was an infant who would gave been mewling
and puking in the nurse's arms if the family had been able to
afford a nurse. Now the last thing that I want to say about him is that
he has this marvellous capacity for sustained enthusiasm. Now,
S. / 4 
enthusiasm in a highly respectable world becomes a little suspect.
" Oh, I wish you wouldn't say that"...." You sounded enthusiastic
about that" It is proper not to be too enthusiastic to be
reserved to be muted a little on these things. He has the
spirit of sustained enthusiasm, and it is to be contrasted with
the attitude of all too many people in our country who say. " Oh,
why should I be enthusiastic; Ill take what I can and I21h
walt to see what more is comin-to me." This is an attitude of
death death intellectually, death sociall, death politically,
to sa, " I'll take what they give me and I'h wait for the
rest. To have this divine attribute of enthusiasm, this is
so treme dously important and nowhere more importait than in a
university which is the oldest and most historic university in
this nation. This is tremendously important. Some of you
have heard me say in the past, my anxiety, in spite of all that
I have had the opportunity of doinp and it's been a little in
the university field, my anxiety has always been that we will
become too much on the receiving end, too willing to lower
standards, too willing to speak in terms of quantity instead of
in terms of quality. And the answer to that kind of feeling is
to look around and see this grand old man of Australian university
life and to know that he has an enthusiasm in him today, still
has a feeling of worlds to be conquered that could be a marvellous
example to people seventy years younger than himself.
Now, Sir, I didn't intend to speak as long as this,
but when you are speaking about a topic of this kind, it's not
easy or convenient or desirable to be over-brief. But all I
have said Sir, Sir Charles Bickerton Blackburn, all I have been
sayingo is designed to convey to you not only for myself but for
everybody here tonight and I thihk for a million or two millions
or four millions or five millions of people in Australia something
of what we feel about you how thankful we are that you have
been among us, how delighted we are to know that for the next
ten years you will still be among us, because I repeat what I
said at the beg inning that my one remaining ambition is to attend
your 100th birthday party.
Sir and Ladies and Gentlemen, let us drink the health
of this great man. Sir Charles. 



STATES GRANTS ( RESEARCH) BILL 1965
SECOND READING SPEECH BY THE PRIME MINISTE~ R, THE RIGHT HONPURABLE
SIR ROBERT MENZIES, Q_,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, 12TH NOVEMBER, 1965
The purpose of this Bill is to establish machinery which
will enable grants to be made to the States for the benefit of
individual research projects of particular merit. Under the
authority of this measure the responsible Minister will have power
to approve Commonwealth grants to selected research workers in the
States, within the limits of the amounts of money appropriated by
the Parliament from time to time.
The Australian Government believes that in order to obtain
the best possible use of the funds which it, and where appropriate
the State Governments also, will provide for scientific research,
grants should be made for the direct benefit of selected research
activities which are-judged most likely to make a significant
contribution to the advancement of science and of scientific
knowledge in Australia. These special research grants will be
available to research workers in the universities and other
institutions, but not to those employed by government authorities.
However, the adoption of this method does not mean that other forms
of research will no longer receive Government support. For instance,
the Australian Universities Commission will be fre~ e to provide for
the needs of research in the sense of the training of postgraduate
students within its general recommendations for the support of the
universities. To decide which research project should be supported is
clearly a difficult task and one requiring expert knowledge.
Therefore, we established the Australian Research Grants Committee
under the Chairmanship of Professor R. N. Robertson to receive
applications, assess their relative merits, and select the most
worthy projects. The Committee, which comprises distinguished
representatives of the major fields of learning, has considered a
large number of applications and has recommended research grants in
various branches of science and learning, including in the humanities
and the social sciences.
Within the limit of the total sum of œ 2million nominated
for it, the Committee has recommended grants during 1965 and the
whole of 1966 to a total value of œ 1,848,875 of which the
Commonwealth will pay œ 932,214, assuming that each State provides
half of the amounts recommended for research workers in the
universities in that State. The distribution of these grants among
research workers in the various States is set out in a table which,
with the concurrence of Honourable Members, I will have incorporated
in Hansard. My colleague the Minister in Charge of Commonwealth
Activities in Education and Research has released the details of the
Committee's recommendations and has ahnounced that the Australian
Government accepts these recommendations. A statement setting out
the details has been distributed to Honourable Members.
The sum of k2million which was nominated for the Australian
Research Grants Committee, is the balance of a sum of œ Smillion which
the Australian Universities Commission in its Second Report recommended
should be provided by the Commonwealth and the States for research in
State universities during the 1964-1966 triennium. By agreement the
Commonwealth and the States are providing the other œ 3million for
general research training purposes during the triennium. 
On this occasion almost all of the grants recommended are
for the benefit of research workers in State universities and the
Commonwealth stands ready to meet half the cost of such grants.
It is, of course, the prerogative of each State Government to decide
whether and, if so, to what extent, it will join with the Commonwealth
in matching the grants. While the States have known for some time
about this programme of support for special research projects and of
its financial implications, they could not know until the Australian
Research Grants Committee had framed its recommendations what the
financial commitment of each State would, in fact, be.
I am pleased to inform the House that the Governments of
five States have agreed to support the Committee's recommendations
in full. The Government of New South Wales is still considering its
position. This Bill gives general authority for the payment of special
research grants to research workers in the States who will be selected
under the procedures I have outlined. The Appropriation Bill ( No. 2)
1965/ 66 includes provision under Division No. 945.1 for the estimated
expenditure of œ 750,000 during the current financial year, on the
first series of special research grants.
I commend the Bill to the House. 
States Grants ( Research) Bill, 1965
AUSTRALIAN RESEARCH GRANTS COMMITTEE
Grants recommended for research workers in institutions in the States:
October, 1965
University of Sydney 352,362
University of New South Wales 190,988
University of New England 91,684
Newcastle University 28,825
Macquarie University 3,250
Total for New South Wales 667,109
University of Melbourne 266,303
Monash University 144,001
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute 15,003
Private project 550
Total for Victoria 425,857
University of Queensland 121,9518
Townsville University College 18,550
Total for Queensland 140,068
University of Adelaide 249,249
University of Adelaide at Bedford Park 47,810
Total for South Australia 297,059
University of Western Australia 189,833
University of Tasmania 101,949
1,821,875
Provision for Contingencies 27,000
1,848,875 



FOR PRMSS P. 1., 11o. 90/ 1965
VISIT BY ARGJUTINE MINISTER
Statement by the Prime Minister, 3ir Robert Menzies
The Minister for Agriculture and Livestock
in the Argentine Government, Mr. , dalter Kugler, will
visit Australia next month.
He will be a guest of the Australian
Government for two weeks, beginning on Saturday, the
4th of December. In Canberra, he will spend three days meeting
appropriate Ministers, and will then leave for a tour
of ew South ' ales Queensland and Victoria. Mr.
Kugler will have discussions with Commonvealth and
3tate ) epartments and with authorities responsible for
the production and marketing of a wide range of rural
commodities. He will also visit a number of country
properties to inspect Australian farming techniques.
My uovernment warmly welcomes the visit,
which should have mutually beneficial results.
C AB ERRA, November, 1965. 



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH BY
The Rt. Hon. SIR ROBERT MENZIES,
ON
RHODESIA
Ministerial Statement
[ From the Parliamentary Debates," 16th November, 1965]
0 Sir ROBERT MENZIES ( Kooyong-
Prime Minister).-by leave-Mr. Speaker, I
propose to make a statement to the House.
When I have finished it, I will table some
relevant documents on Rhodesia. Those
dcments contain a verbatim account of
the communications between Mr. Ian Smith
and the Prime Minister of Great Britain. I
am happy to say that there will ' be enough
copies of the documents for every honorable
member to have a copy for his own consideration.
At the conclusion of my statement,
which will not be very long, I will
move that the House take note, not only of
the paper, hut also of the papers that I will
table so that all will be available for
discussion in due course.
Recent events in Rhodesia, and the reactions
to those events in other countries,
hrave presented to all of us acutely
difficult problems. It is therefore desirable
that I should, on behalf of the
Government, set out for the benefit
of honorable members what we believe to
be the facts and what views we take on the
various suggested remedies. First I should
point out that as Great Britain is for this
purpose the colonial power, only the Parliament
of Great Britain could grant independ-
14540/ 65 ence to Rhodesia. The Unilateral Declaration
of Independence by the Rhodesian
Government was therefore illegal. The
Declaration having been made, and the Governor
having dismissed Mr. Smith and his
government, a position arose in which the
only lawful government in Rhodesia is now
the Government of the United Kingdom.
The executive authority is at present in
the hands of the Governor, subject to any
legislative or administrative steps taken by
Great Britain. We accept the view that it
now becomes necessary for the Governor
of Rhodesia to call, if he can, a new government
into existence. If he cannot do so, the
responsibility for the government of
Rhodesia will rest with Great Britain. It is
important, I think, to remember these basic
facts. Rhodesia is not now without a government
at all. That is, it is not in a state
of anarchy, but is subject to the direct
authority and control of Great Britain. Let
me emphasise this. The objective of any
action now to be taken must surely be to
assist the United Kingdom to bring into being
a constitutional government, and to end
the illegal situation in Rhodesia. The sooner
this can be done, the better. If it cannot
be done, or if it is not done with reasonable 
promptness, the risks of violence, bloodshed,
and extreme action, to which I will
refer later, will grow, bringing grief and
suffering to millions of human beings.
The Rhodesian problem has twice been
discussed at Prime Ministers' Conferences.
On each occasion, it was unanimously-I
repeat, unanimously-accepted that the
authority and responsibility for leading
Rhodesia to independence must continue to
rest with Britain. Though this seems at present
to be under some challenge in the
United Nations Assembly, it still remains
the central truth in the controversy. In the
discharge of its responsibilities, the Government
of the United Kingdom went to
great pains to conduct discussions with the
then Prime Minister and Government of
Rhodesia. I will narrate, as objectively as
possible, what the British Government did.
It indicated very plainly that it was not
contemplating force; that it wished to establish
a basis for ultimate independence which
would be fair to all the people of Rhodesia.
It did not take the extreme view, now being
advocated by some, that the Constitution
of Rhodesia should immediately be altered
so as to provide for an immediate African
majority. It realised that the people were
not yet ready for this, and that to act precipitately
might conceivably create what
might be called a " Congo situation", of
unhappy memory.
The Government of the United Kingdom
indicated five principles as providing the
basis upon which independence could be
granted. These principles were-
1. The principle and intention of unimpeded
progress to majority rule,
already enshrined in the 1961 Constitution
of Rhodesia, would have to
be maintained and guaranteed.
2. There would also have to be guarantees
against retrogressive amendment
of the Constitution.
3. There would have to be immediate
improvement in the political status
of the African population.
4. There would have to be progress towards
ending racial discrimination.
The British Government would need
to be satisfied that any basis proposed
for independence was acceptable
to the people of Rhodesia as a
whole. As principles, these appear, as Mr. Harold
Wilson has said in the House of Commonf
to have been accepted by Mr. Smith. ThRW
real difficulties arose as to their application.
The five principles, as I took an opportunity
of telling Mr. Wilson, were and are completely
in line with our own thinking. Having
regard to what has happened, I thi
I should now tell the House that Isent*
message to Mr. Smith just as he was entering
upon his discussions in London. I said I
had a natural understanding of the problems
confronting the European settlers in
Rhodesia, a country which has enjoyed its
own substantially but technically incomplete
form of self-government for many years,
and in which the contribution of the European
settlers to the economic vigour of the
country has been most substantial. I repeated
my own view, which I have on
several occasions expressed, sometimes quilf
forcibly, I hope, in Prime Ministers' CoW
ferences, that two extreme views that had
been put forward were not practicable.
The first extreme view was that either
immediately or within a few months thee
should be adult suffrage with, in cons
quence, an African majority. If this view
were to prevail then, as I said to my friend
Mr. Smith, I could see all the elements of
bad, because inexperienced, government,
and possible economic disaster. The other
extreme view was that the achievement of
an African majority should be indefinitely
resisted. This view, as I have repeatedly
said, and, as I said to Mr. Smith, was, in
the prevailing international political climate,
quite impracticable.
I pointed out to Mr. Smith, as I have
done in * Prime Ministers' Conferences, that
in my opinion the matter was one of timetable,
a matter of phasing in more and
more African voters until after some
reasonable period of time they found
themselves in a majority. By phasing in
I mean such measures as adjustments to
the B roll and perhaps the creation of a
blocking third in the local Parliament. After
all, the 1961 Rhodesian Constitution and
the discussions attending it seemed to me,
as I pointed out to Mr. Smith and as I
have pointed out in Prime Ministers' Conferences,
to contemplate that ultimately
the African voters would prevail. I told Mr. 
Smith that the working out of such a time-
Stable should provide a good basis for agreement.
I told him that should agreement
fail to emerge and should there then be a
unilateral declaration of independence, the
results, not all of which were foreseeable,
could be painful and difficult. I told him,
SasI have since told this House, that Commonwealth
countries would not recognise
an independent nationhood so achieved.
It should be clearly understood that a
similar line was followed with much
patience and reasonableness by the British
Government. Mr. Wilson himself, in his
speech to the House of Commons, put it in
this way-
Although successive British Governments-
I emphasise " successive British Governments";
the Home Government and the
SWilson Government have followed identical
policies in this respectare
deeply and irrevocably committed to guaranteed
and unimpeded progress to majority rule, the
British Government, who alone through the British
Parliament have the legal power to grant indeendence,
do not believe that in the present and
ragic and divided conditions of Rhodesia, a
majority can or should come today, or tomorrow.
A period of time is needed, time to remove the
fears and suspicions between race and race, time
to show that the Constitution of Rhodesia with
whatever amendments may later be made can be
worked and is going to be worked and that the
rule of law equally with the maintenance of
essential hrman rights will be paramount and the
time required-
This, I think, is a very wise statementcannot
be measured by clock or calendar but
only by achievement.
In spite of all these efforts, this illegal
declaration of independence has now been
made with the constitutional consequences
to which I have referred. What has happened
since? The British Government has done two
things. First it has, through the Governor,
S dismissed the Smith Government. It has prohibited
exports of arms to Rhodesia. It has
imposed certain exchange restrictions. It has
denied Rhodesia access to the London capital
market and has terminated Commonwealth
preferences. Some of these clearly have more relevance
to the particular position of the United Kingdom
than they would have to the position of
Australia. But the British Government has
also imposed a ban on the import of tobacco
and sugar into the United Kingdom, these two items constituting more than one-third
of the total Rhodesian exports. It will be
observed that the imposition of these sanctions
by Great Britain has been made with
what I would call constructive moderation.
As I understand it, it is not aimed -at ruining
the total economy of Rhodesia, for that
would be to punish indiscriminately, but to
provide a means of persuading the European
minority and its leaders to realise -the gravity
of the situation, to have second thoughts,
and to approach the lawful Government
with an expression of willingness to negotiate
to finality on the basis of the five principles.
The second action taken by the British
Government was to bring the matter before
the notice of the Security Council. Now this
may at first sight seem to be inconsistent
with the sound basic proposition that this is
a matter between Great Britain and Rhodesia.
But I have no doubt that the British
Government felt that it was better for it to
take the matter to the Security Council, to
outline the steps taken by it, and endeavour
to secure international support for its actions,
than for the matter to go to the United
Nations under the auspices of other people
who might demand courses of action which
did not recognise either the particular
authority and responsibility of Great Britain
in this matter or the present constitutional
position of Rhodesia. Recent events seem
to have justified this view on the part of the
British Government, though they have at
the same time presented us all with problems
of the utmost gravity.
I turn now to considering our own attitude.
We have, as I have previously pointed
out, refused to recognise what is now an
illegal administration. We have also in this
House rejected any notion of the use of
armed force which would be repugnant to
the people of Australia, but would also inevitably
produce more ruin and disaster than
any of us would be prepared to contemplate.
We will not either physically or financially
contribute to the use of force. Measures of
enforcement-if I may use that phraseneed
a good deal of thought. Are they to
punish, or to persuade, or even to compel?
We reject the idea of punishment, for it
would be undiscriminating and, therefore unjust.
The madhinery of persuasion deserves
more thought. This -great problem is essen-
' tially a matter to be solved by negotiation,
in the light of the principles that have been 
stated, and with the object of securing a
peaceful and ultimately a democratic future
for Rhodesia.
The demands currently being made at the
United Nations for violent repression require
critical examination. Suppose the United
Nations directs or proposes military sanctions.
What will be the object of this exercise?
If it is to defeat the European Rhodesians
in the field and kill a number of
them, what problem will be solved? If
adopted -it would represent a violent course
in which the innocent would suffer with the
guilty, and would embitter racial relationships
in the whole African continent for
generations to come. If the object is not
to be punishment but persuasion, what is it
that the Rhodesians wilt -need to concede
in the face of force? What new Constitution
or form of Government will be demanded?
it is, alas, quite clear that if the United
Nations authorised armed force, the clamour
would be for an immediate adult suffrage,
the immediate application of which would'
quite plainly have at -the best hazardous,
and at the worst disastrous results. What is
needed in Rhodesia is a reasonable timetable,
accompanied by a special educational campaign,
-to which all of us might well contribute
somnething, to fit -the African voters tor
their ultiimat~ e authority.
What I have said emphasises the nature
of the deep differences which the debates in
the United Nations have already disclosed,
differences which are fraught with great
danger and on which we are bound to express
our own views with some frankness.
The first difference, and I here repeat
myself, concerns the position of Great
Britain as the colonial power whose legislative
authority has been illegally defied by
the Smith administration. That problem is
one primarily for Great Britain and Rhodesia.
What Great Britain is seeking at the
United Nations, as we understand it, is
general international support for her own
measures of an economic kind. This does
not satisfy what may be called the direct
action or armed force views of many
nations, particularly of some in the Afro-
Asian group. They demand armed force,
and are attacking Great Britain for not
employing it. If these nations had their way,
the United Nations would no doubt be
called upon to establish what might be somewhat ironically called a peace-keeping
force. I say ironically, because them
peace to be restored or kept would haveMW
been broken by the action of these nations
themselves. I have already put and answered the
question as to the objective of armed force
which, it would appear, would be not onlo
to punish but to create a new Constitution
and system of government on a basis which
we would not want to see established overnight,
or prematurely. My colleagues and I
have had very great reservations about even
economic sanctions.
Mr. Uren.-I thought you would have.
Sir ROBERT MENZIES,-I am delighted
to hear that the honorable member has been
thinking. I will repeat the statement, having
regard to this brilliant interjection. My colleagues
and I have had very great reserva
tions about even economic sanctions. lie
we accept for ourselves some economic
measure or measures, it will not be because
we think them intrinsically equitable. They
may bear most heavily upon the Africans
themselves-which is something wort
thinking about-and if strongly resisted bo
the Rhodesians themselves imposing sanctions
against, for example, Zambia, formerly
Northern Rhodesia, that great copper
producing country might well be ruined.
But making allowances for these views, we
have come to the conclusion, particularly
having regard to the way in which Great
Britain is being attacked for employing
peaceful means, that we would regard
economic measures as the lesser of two
evils. The greater evil would be the use of
force with all its bloodshed and misery.
This would be aggravated if the forces were
directed by racial hatreds or gave rise to
political consequences of which advantage
could be taken by other and more hostile
nations. It might well be, and this would
appear to be the judgment of the British
Government, that the losses arising from
the kind of economic measures they have
announced will be sufficiently serious, while
not involving utter disaster, to induce most
Rhodesians to have second thoughts, and to
come back through constitutional means to
the negotiating table. We hope that this
will occur, and will occur before too much
damage has been inflicted on people who
have, as I have pointed out, been the greatest
contributors to the prosperity of Rhodesia. 
SWe will not export arms or military equipment
to Rhodesia. We do not import sugar
from Rhodesia, with which we have a fairly
modest trade. But we do import tobacco.
On this we will follow what has been done
by Britain, and put a ban on the import of
Rhodesian tobacco; this, of course, will not
pply to tobacco in transit. Tariff preferences
to Rhodesia will be suspended. We will cooperate
with the Government of Britain in
two other financial respects: First, we will
amend the definition of the sterling area in
the Banking ( Foreign Exchange) Regulations,
so as to exclude Rhodesia, or make
such other amendment as is appropriate to
exclude Rhodesia from the treatment
accorded to sterling area countries, and,
secondly, we will take such action as is
open to us to prevent evasion of the British
0exchange control measures. We do not have any diplomatic mission
in Rhodesia. We have a trade representative,
whose appointment in Rhodesia will terminate.
Above all things, we hope that none
of these measures will be of long duration.
It would be a sad commentary on the unwisdom
of mankind, if through the obstinate
pursuit of an illegal course, this prosperous
country should be reduced economically to
ruin, to the lasting unhappiness of all of
its people, voters or non-voters, white or
black. I present the following papers-
Rhodesia-Ministerial Statement, 16th November
1965.
Documents on Rhodesia, 27th October 1964-
Ilth November 1965-
and move-
That the House take note of the papers.
Debate ( on motion by Mr. Calwell)
adjourned.
8Y AUTHORITY: A. J. ARTHUR, COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT PRINTER, CANBERRA
14540/ 65-2 



UNIVERSITIES ( FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE) BILL 1965
Second Reading Speech by the Prime Minister,
the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Menzies, M. P.
House of Representatives 18th November, 1965
This is the third occasion on which the Government has
proposed amendments to the Universities ( Financial Assistance)
Act in order to provide additional funds for State universities
during the 1964-1966 triennium. With this Bill we are recommending
Commonwealth grants for capital works at medical teaching
hospitals of œ 1,555,850 and further grants of œ 184,900 for the
recurrent costs of those hospitals which are directly attributable
to the instruction of undergraduate students in teaching hospitals.
This sum of œ 1,740,750 will raise the total amount of Commonwealth
financial assistance to State universities during the present
triennium to approximately œ 73million. In addition the Commonwealth
will find œ 24million for the Australian National Univ~ ersity.
The Government provided grants for certain capital
projects at medical teaching hospitals during the 1961-1963
triennium. Earlier this year the second report of the Universities
Commission's Committee on the Teaching Costs of Medical Hospitals
became available. It recommended further capital grants and, in
addition, assistance with some elements of the recurrent costs of
medical teaching hospitals.
I remind Honourable Members that the Government's
decisions on that report were announced on 5th August last during
the Parliamentary recess. The report itself was tabled in both
Houses on 24th August.
The Government did not accept all the recommendations
of the Committee, but did agree to support, pound for pound, such
of the capital projects recommended by the Committee for various
medical teaching hospitals as the States thought could be completed,
or nearly completed, by 31st December, 1966, the end of the
present triennium. We also agreed to support from 1st July, 1965,
on the usual œ 1 to œ 1.85 basis, certain items of the recurrent
costs of teaching hospitals which are directly attributable to the
clinical teaching of undergraduate medical students. The items
with which we will assist are:-
* The cost of the administration concerned solely with
the planning, organization and supervision of teaching
programmes within the hospital.
* Maintenance and service costs of the areas and of
activities used by clinical students and university
staff.
* The costs of providing books and periodicals for
undergraduate students in teaching hospital libraries.
Particulars of the grants to individual universities
with teaching hospitals are set out in the schedules to the Bill.
As the Bill provides only for those capital projects
which the States have indicated can be completed or nearly
completed by 31st December, 1966, there are several variations
from the amounts recommended in the Report of the Committee on
Teaching Costs of Medical Hospitals. I would emphasise that
these variations have been made on the basis of information
received from each State after each had been told of the 
4 2.
Commonwealth's willingness to support the whole of' the programme
recommended by the Committee subject to each State's views on
what it would be practicable to construct in the time available.
I have little doubt that subject to changes because of revised
priorities, the teaching hospital projects now deleted will find
places in the 1967-1969 programme. This, however, is a matter
for decisions which will be taken on the recommendations yet to
be made by the Universities Commission for the 1967-1969 triennium.
So far as the recurrent grants are concerned, owr share
of the cost of the items accepted for grant purposes will be a
maximum of œ 184,900 for the period 1st July, 1965, to 31st
December, 1966, of which up to œ, 123,000 will be required during
this financial year 1965/ 66. The allocation of this sum among the
States concerned is set out in the Sixth Schedule.
But I wish to emphasise that the amounts for recurrent
grants listed in that Schedule are, in each case, maximum amounts
so far as the Commonwealth is concerned and are payable only on
certification by the States to the satisfaction of the Minister
that the amounts claimed have been legitimately incurred in
respect of the three elements of cost approved by the Commonwealth
and are within the limits of the sums set out in Table 7 of the
Committee's report for those elements of cost. These amounts are
provided on the basis of estimates by the Committee only and I
emphasise that the Commonwealth Minister will need to be satisfied
that the amounts claimed in respect of the various elements of
recurrent expenditure are reasonable. The amounts set down in
the Schedule are not to be regarded as an automatic entitlement.
Honourable Members will note the Repatriation General
Hospital, Concord, among the capital works in the Fifth Schedule
to the Bill. Provision has been made for Concord also in the
recurrent expenses of the University of Sydney in the Sixth
Schedule. For many years Concord has served as a teaching hospital
for the University of Sydney and the Commonwealth has met all the
costs incurred. However, under the new arrangements universities
will accept responsibility for certain capital and recurrent costs
directly attributable to teaching, and it is appropriate therefore
that the Commonwealth and State Governments shall share
responsibility for those costs at Concord just as they will for
State teaching hospitals.
This Bill also provides for a minor amendment to the main
Act to allow the University of Melbourne to attract a Commonwealth
capital grant of œ 15,000 for an animal breeding unit which it
wishes to build at Werribee instead of Mt. flerrimut where it was
originally intended to be and which is the location given to it
in the Principal Act. The change has been approved by the
Universities Commission. Funds are not affected.
I commend the Bill to the House. 



65/ 134
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 91/ 1965
FURTHER DROUGHT RELIEF FOR NEVI SOUTH WALES
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The Premier of New South Wales, Mr. Askin
informed me yesterday that because of the failure of the
harvest in the northern areas of the State, it was urgently
necessary to transport wheat to those areas for use in the
manufacture of stock feed.
I sent Mr. Askin a telegram today to let
him know that the cost to his Government of freighting
this wheat will be accepted by the Commonwealth Government
as a drought relief measure for the purposes of the general
assistance grant to be made by the Commonwealth ' to New South
Wales to support the State's budgetary position.
CANBERRA, 18th November, 1965 



OPERING OF THE MILLS CROSS RADIO TELESCOPE
HOSKI ! STO'N, N. S. W. 19TH NOVEMBER. 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Chancellor, Mr. Ambassador, Vise-Chancellor, Ladies and
Gentlemen I think I ought to begin by congratulating the
Vice-Chancellor on the astonishing fact that although he was
taught Latin in the same place as myself, he has since
acquired, in the reading of it, an Italian accent. ( Laughter)
Another thing I would like to say to you; it has
been coming into my mind steadily while all these people who
have preceded me have stolen the thunder. It was said of the
late Sir Edmnmd Barton, the first Prime Minister of Australia
and later on a distinguished Justice of the High Court of
Australia that he usually said, when the Chief Justice had
spoken: " I concur'and this was held to be a reat proof of
idleness on his part. It wasn't. He very frequently wrote
a judgment himself of some significance but having heard it
delivered in substance by the Chief Justice, he had enough wit
to say, " I concur." And I am jolly well tempted to follow his
example. I could easily wind this up adequately by saying,
" I concur; I declare the Cross open but I won't go quite so
far as that, but the thing kept beating into my mind.
It was said by you, Sir, although you know far more
about scientific matters than I do, that you didn't understand
what it was about. Jell I could help you on that. This is
perfectly simple. It's rather a long-winded way of listening
in to what's going on upstairs, you see. As I understand it,
that's the whole secret of this matter that when you want to
listen in to what is going on above and you want to probe the
recesses of one of the galaxies, particularly Professor Bok's
favourite galaxy, all you do is to go along and get somebody
like Professor 1ills and say " This is what I want to do. Fix
it up." Hey presto, here it is. That is a summarised account
of this enterprise. But I, like you Sir, will never understand
it. I think when politicians start to make it their business
to understand the last subtleties of physical science, that will
bt the end of good politics and the beginning of an awful lot of
bad scientists in office. ( Laughter)
But the outstanding feature today, apart from these
very important matters Mr. Foley has described so admirably, the
great thing today is that this is a splendid example of co-operation
in the field of science between the greatest and most
powerful country in the world and one of the smallest in relative
terms in the world. Getting near: 200M in the United 6tates,
11M. in Australia, but I have more than once taken comfort from
the fact I referred to it on one or two occasions in the
United States, Mr. Ambassador that when that great man and
species of genius, Thomas Jefferson, first became President of
the United States, the population of the United States was 5M.
one-half of the number which we now have in Australia and yet,
quality being more important than quantity, on the basis of
that relatively small population, we've seen the most tremendous
developments in modern history, and therefore in Australia we are
not going to be too downcast by the fact that the population is
only 11. It is increasing very satisfactorily. . iear e not
going to be downcast about it because there are two things that / 2 
2
count. One is quality and this ou must have yourselves
and develop yourselves, and the oher is a spirit of co-operation
with all other people in the same field so that knowledge
becomes shared. These two factors are both illustrated today.
After all, Mr. Ambassador your great country and
mine have a certain parallelism in teLir history. On a
recent occasion a year or two ago I made what was supposed
to be a powerful speech at wonticeilo, celebrating Thomas
Jefferson and I took occasion to remind all those Rresent
that the Declaration of Independence in the United 6tates
created two new countries one was yours and one was mine.
This was literally true, because as The result of the
Declaration of Independence, the export of convicted persons
from England to the United States what is now the United
States came to an end, and they had to be sent somewhere,
and with unerring skill, they selected Sydney. ( Laughter,
applause). So that's how it all began.
I have also had occasion to remind the people of
Great Britain when I have spoken there that they don' need
to be too superior about the fact that some convicted persons
were sent to Australia and some convicted persons sent to the
United States because the statistical records show conclusively
that the majority of people convicted over that period remained
in England. ( Laughter)
And so, Sir, our two nations began their story by
a similar cause, in the technical sense, quite early in the
piece and at the same time. But think of what we have in
common with the United States. A lot of people are always
looking for some rather improper motive. The imputation of
motive is one of the commonest of human failings. And we
are told that we, of course, are friendly with the United States
because they are great and powerful and they will defend us.
Well they are great and they are powerful, and I think they
will defend us, but this is the lowest possible level on which
to put our association. The truth is that we are friends because we have
ideas in common, we have traditions in common, we have the
same instincts, cultivated instincts in common, we both
believe in the same kind of world and are determined to make
our own contribution to making it a better one. These are
great foundations for friendship, and here today we have the
perfect example of how this works out. This.... I almost said
King's Cross.... I don't want to steal that from Professor
MAessel. He seems to me to have got everything else. But
this eat instrument of science is itself, as we have been
remined, a product of association between Cornell University
so famous in this field and the University of Sydney, the olTest
university in Australia, a university, the founders of which,
125 years ago, would have been stag ered to think that thin s
of this kind could happen as a result of activities in whic õ
their university was taking a part.
Now Sir I don't want to talk to you any longer.
You haven't failed to notice there are a lot of flies. This
is not proof that we are in New South ', ales. It rather suggests
that we are in Canberra where we specialise on flies. I remember
one time during Mr. Lyons' Government we were all taken out on
to the lawn in front of Parliament House and photographed,
movie camera, to be put on the movies on 3aturday night.
And Mr. Lyons kept introducing us one at a time. 19. Hughes, a a / 3 
3
the late Mr. Hughes was among us, and we were all photographed
doing this.... ( Laughter) The scientists hadn't got busy at
that time producing maladorous things that ruin your clothes and
are supposed to keep the flies away. were all standing there,
doing this, you see, and on the way back to the House, little
Billy Hughes took me by the arm and looked up at me he had
to hysically, at any rate and I said, " That ought to look
rather impressive, do you think, on Saturday night?" " Oh,"
he said don't be funny. Then they look at that, they'll nudge
each other and they'll say, ' Bill we've been had.'"
Sir, it's a great occasion. I won't prolong
your troubles. I'm very honoured to be here, very delighted
o be allowed to come on to strange territory for this purpose.
I wish the whole enterprise well; I acknowledge the tremendous
support that has been given by the LIuclear Foundation. We have
heard a little about it from Mr. Foley who is among its most
active people but this has been a splendid example of co-operation
between the business world, not notably scientific in its
own right any more than we are as politicians, but between the
business world, the scientific world, the university world.
This kind of association of this type must go on and on in
Australia until every university is not only a source of the
receipt of funds but is creating a community of its own and
making itself part of the overall community of the country.
This, I think, will argue the best reilts and the brightest
future. Sir, retrospectively I say: I concur. I declare
the Cross open. 



EMBARGO NOT TO BE RiIEEASED BEFORE 10 PM ( EST) 26/ 11/ 65
FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 92/ 1965
NE14 ARRA1NGE1MZ: NTS FOR QUJEE14 MOTHER' S DEPA RTURE
Statement by the Prime Minister. Sir Robert Menzies
Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, is to
leave Australia by air instead of in the Royal Yacht
" Britannia" at the end of her visit in Mliarch/ April next
year. It had been intended that Her Majesty should
embark in " Britannia" in Melbourne to sail to New Zealand.
Now that plans for the tour have been advanced, it has
become apparent that it will not be practicable for
" Britannia" to go to Melbourne.
Consequently, the Queen Mother will leave
Canberra on board a Qantas Boeing 707 on the 7th April.
She will fly to Nandi in Fiji where she will join the
Royal Yacht. After a brief visit to Suva, Her Majesty
will sail for New Zealand in " Britannia".
CANBERRA, 26th November, 1965. 



OPENING OF TI-E SCOTTISH AMICABLE LIIE ASSURANCE CO.
MELBOURN'E 29TH NOVEMBER
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies/$ O
WB~ ERflA
Sir and Gentlemen: LIW
I was very interested to be reminded thw
your directors, Lord Dilsiand and the Earl of Elgin arñ ht
of the Thistle. I think they were both present when I was
somewhat incautiously installed in that Order.
I remember another thing about that event and
that was that the previous evening att Holyrood, The Queen said
to me, " How am I to pronounce your name, tomorrow, because I
summon you up Menzies or Mingles?" And I said, "' Ma'am, in
this place, Mingles." 1 ( Laughter) And so I was duly installed
as Robert Gordon Mingles and if anybody takes exception to that,
I cantt help it because they will persist, Sir, in Australia
in calling me Menzies. I was trying to remember this morning whether I hnd
given any of you my reminiscences on that point. There was a
vast patriotic dinner in London, one of those things at which
800 people are present and speeches are made, frequently very
tedious speeches, and naturally in that category, I was one of
the speakers, and they always have a red-conted gentleman in
dharge who, though I suspect very strongly that he comes from
East London somewhere, speaks with the most polished accents of
the Home Counties. " Pray silence for " and then running on
right through your description, you see. He came up to me one
evening, having annoiinced me a few times before and said in a
hoarse voice, very Scottish voice, " Excuse me, Sir, but am I to
announce ye as Menzies or by your pr-r-roper name. ( Laughter)
Now, Sir, I am of course delighted to a-ssist in any
way at a Scottish invasion of Australia, because I know that it
is all to the good. In fact, Hugh and I were in other company
on Saturday night and were told that 150,000 people of Scottish
birth are in Australia not enough you may say but quality
counts more than quantity, except at election time. ( Laughter)
But my embarrassment doesn't arise from having to
say something good about the Scots, about the Scottish Amicable;
it arises from the fact that inadvertently, time after time, I
have been persuaded to open an office in this city for an
insurance or assurance society. This is becoming most
embarrassing. They are all in competition one with the other.
They are all able to ask their field staff, to authorise their
field staff to say,. " Of course, our company has a very special
relationship to the Commonwealth Government. You know, the
Prime Minister opened our building." And that is really why
I decided that I wiould let them all come so that in the end
I could have been completely impartial.
Over on the other side of Collins Street, I made
rude remarks about the building on this side of Collins Street
and then found that I had to open the building. on this side of
Collins Street. I was just recalling this morning that in my
respectable days at the Bar, I remember appearing in a case
involving the valuation of a property in Queen Street and I ma-de
a most powerful case to show that Queen Street was a dead area
anyhow. It could never be a live place because it ran uphill and
/ 2 
2
business people didn't like streets that ran uphill. It was
a very powerful argument before the late Mr. Justice Starke.
He dismissed it. And rightly because now this great canyon
of buildings is the very heart of so much of the business and
financial life of a city which remains in so many ways the
financial leader in Australia.
I have made my policy to you; I have shown that
there is a certain embarrassment about this and having done
that, I would just like to offer you my own testimony about
life assurance. When I first became counsel at the Bar, I took
life assurance, usually prodded on by a gimlet-eyed fellow
who called into my chambers and said " Have you got enough
insurance?" AndI took what I thought I could afford to pay
for and like everybody of my generation in this room today,
I have put in a number of years now regretting that I didn' t
take more. It seems so much at the time doesn't it? It
seems so little as you look back on it ana yet if we had all
been wise enough to take more, to go to our limit in what I
have always ca led compulsory saving, then not only would our
individual circumstances be more solid, our families provided
for more adequately, but we would through all these funds,
have made a notable contribution to national development,
because the assurance companies, the assurance societies are
tremendous investors in the development of this nation of
ours. And so I am very much struck, thinking about this
with the idea that I for one have regretted for years that
I didn't take more, and I would like to say to all the young
ones in the ountry, " don't you fall into that error." After
all, you must be better than us in some respects, otherwise
there is no hope in life.
Compulsory saving, Sir, I said, yes, it's more
than that-it's a joint saving for investment capital all
policy-holders being in that sense joint investors in the
investments that have been made by the Society, and this in
a country which is capital hungry, this in a country which
imports capital, and so far as I can judge, will need to go
on importing capital for a considerable time to come, a
country whose immense resources for development are so great,
whose population is so relatively small, whose normal savings,
even though they are not too bad are quite inadequate for the
task of providing capital for investment, capital for
industrial growth, capital for national growth. In a country
like this, the function of the assurance societies is, I
think, beyond praise, a tremendous contribution.
Some of you may say, " Yes that doesn't protect
the assurance societies from occasionally being given orders
by the government." No, that's quite right. " Whom the Lord
loveth he chasteneth...." ( Laughter) But I want there to be
no mistake about my own belief that in our country, placed as
we are now with all the opportunities in the world at our
doorstep, one of the great deficiencies, apart from some
shortage of manpower, apart from pressures of all kinds one
of the great deficiencies is a deficiency in capital. And one
doesn t like to become too dependent on capital from overseas,
valuable as it is.
I wouldn't want to see a state of affairs in
Australia in which, chronically, over decades, the deficiency
on our trading account was made up by capital importation. 
3
This would not in the long run, be healthy, though that capital
today, and so far ahead as one can see, is of immense importance
and is tremendously welcome in Australia. This makes it all the
more important that these great instruments of mutual saving and
mutual investment should be encouraged, should go on and should
succeed and it is in that sense, Mr. Chairman that I want to
say that I am delighted to be here, delighted to free myself
for the moment of any Scottish bias, delighted to wish you well,
and also to hope as you would hope, that the growing prosperity
of this society will be matched by the growing success of other
societies of the same kind because in the total, this is of immense
national significance. Sir, I have very great pleasure in declaring the
building open. 



DEPARTMENT OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS,
CANBERRA.
FOR THE PRESS -PR 117
( Released only in Canberra) 2nd December, 1965.
DIPLOMATIC APPOINTMENTS TO THE NETHERLANDS AND PAKISTAN
The Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies, in his capacity as
Acting Minister for External Affairs, has announced the appointment of
two Heads of Australian Diplomatic Missions abroad.
Mr C. T. Moodie has been appointed Australian Ambassador to
The Netherlands and Mr T. W. Cutts, Australian High Commissioner in
Pakistan. Mr Moodie will succeed Mr A. R. Cutler, who was
recently appointed Governor of New South Wales. Mr Moodie was educated
at Saint Peter's College, Adelaide, and the University of Adelaide. He is
a barrister and solicitor. Mr Moodie is a senior officer of the Department
of External Affairs, which he joined in 1937. He has served in New Delhi
and Washington and in London as External Affairs Officer. He was
Minister, and later Ambassador to Burma from 1954 to 1957. Since 1957
he has served in the Department of External Affairs. Mr Moodie is married
with one son and two daughters, and is expected to take up his new
appointment in January.
The new High Commissioner in Karachi, Mr Cutts, will succeed
Mr D. W. McNicol, who recently left Karachi to take up a new appointment
as High Commissioner in New Zealand.
Mr Cutts, who was educated at Melbourne High School and the
University of Melbourne, is a career officer of the Department of External
Affairs which he joined in 1946 after wartime service in the Navy. He
has served overseas in Singapore; Ottawa; the Australian Mission to the
United Nations in New York; Moscow; and San Francisco, where he was
Consul-General from 1960 to 1962. Since 1963 he has been Australian
Ambassador in the Philippines.
Mr Cutts is married, with two sons. He is expected to take up
his new appointment in February. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 93/ 1965
ROYAL VISIT 1966
It was announced in Canberra today that Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother had been pleased
to approve the appointment of Mr. D. R. Colquhoun, a
senior member of the editorial staff of the Adelaide
" Advertiser", to act as Commonwealth Press Liaison
Officer for her visit to Australia next year4
Mr. Colquhoun is 34 years of age. He has
had overseas experience in London and has been associated
as a journalist with many Royal functions.
PRIME MINISTER'S DEPARTMENT,
CANBERRA. 3rd December, 1965. 



HANDING OVER OF THE PAPERS OF ALFRED DEAKIN
TO THE NATIONAL LIBRARY. CANBERRA 3RD DECMEBE1R. 1965
Speech by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Thank you very much. I have great pleasure in
accepting these papers, of which we have a token here, on
behalf of the National Library.
I don't quite understand how you accumulate
papers. Mine, such as I have, are always in a state of chronic
disorder, but every time I see ir. ', hite, the Librarian, he
looks at me with a gleam in the eye and refrains, just, from
saying to me, " Who will get your papers when you are gone?" and
I always disappoint him by saying I have none" for then I
don't compare myself with Alfred ieakin. I am betraying n4
secret. I have said it almost time after time that in my opinion
Alfred Deakin was the greatest Prime Minister this country ever
had and if we ever have one as good in the future, we will be
doing very well. It's a very curious thing looking back on his
work, to realise how frequently immense talents can be obscured
by the possession of one, and he had a great talent for speech
and this to many people obscured his other talents. There is
a rather cbmmon disposition to believe that a man who could speak
as he could, who had the touch of eloquence that he had must
have nothing else, as if it were vox et praeterea nihil. This
is a common error. Whereas, of course the truth was that in
constructive thinking, in fundamental thinking, he did things
for Australia, of which most people today are unconscious,
which still affect every day of our lives. All the foundational
policies, not only in the fiscal field in the defence field
in the industrial field, the pattern of national policy which
we have come to accept so much in Australia was laid down by
this remarkable man. And of course, as one of the fathers of
the Constitution, he has his monument all around him, particularly
in this city. I heard him speak only once and that was when I
was a boy, a schoolboy in Ballarat. I don't remember anything
about it except that I did hear him speak. It wasn't a very
intellectual phase of my life. I was about thirteen, I think,
but he was the Member for Ballarat and I wa6 at school in Ballarat.
But ever since I came to man's estate, I've been fascinated by
him, by his personality and by his work, and for years I felt
there was something missing in Australia beoause we had not had
beyond ,' alter Murdoch's monograph a definitive life, some
substantive volume about Deakin, based on all the information
that has accumulated about him.
I am glad this error has now been repaired. In
fact this is a sort of heyday because not only has Professor
La Nauze enriched us with his two tall volumes but Rohan has
written a fascinating book, Mrs. Bookes, on your most distinguished
husband and therefore this is, in a sense, a vintage Deakin
year. And I am very glad that after this great interval of
time it should be happening, but I suppose it is part of ordinary
fate that men of great note should fade away for a period in the
memory of people; should be critcised, should be denigrated
in many ways. / 2 
-2-
I remember one night in England saying to
Winston Churchill, " You know, by the time you have been
dead for ten years, an event which I hope will be long
postponed clever young men at Oxford and Cambridge will
write books about you explaining that never once in the
whole of your life were you right." He said, " Do you think
so?" And I said, " I'm sure of it but don't worry about
it because twenty years after that, they will all be
forgotten and you will still be up there in the history of
the nation." This is occurring in the case of Alfred Deakin.
These events all help to recreate hi. m in the public imagination
and in the minds of readers and thinkers in years to come,
and thinking as I do about that I am delighted I think
it is a wonderful stroke of luck to be here as Prime
Minister at a time when these papers are being handed over
and to be able to say something from my heart in the presence
of his family. 


NATIONAL LIBRARY&nbsp;PRESENTATION OF DEAKIN PAPERS&nbsp;
Papers of critical importance to the record of Australian history were received today by the Prime Minister for the National Library in Canberra. They are the personal papers and records of Alfred Deakin, one of the major figures in the Federation Movement, three times Prime Minister and the dominating personality of the early Commonwealth.&nbsp;
They were presented by Deakin’s eldest daughter, Mrs. Ivy Brookes who, along with her husband, the late Herbert Brookes, preserved and added to them. Deakin's other daughters, Lady Rivett and Lady White also took part in the ceremony.&nbsp;
The mass of papers, filling 20 large cartons, cover in great detail political developments from Deakin's entry into Victorian politics in 1879 to his retirement from the Commonwealth Parliament in 1913.&nbsp;
Correspondence between Deakin and many of the prominent figures of his day is there; so are his private diaries and note books on issues and personalities of the day.&nbsp;
Trained in the law and a practising journalist, Deakin was something of a compulsive writer who possessed as well the ability to describe events and people with a stark clarity.&nbsp;
Despite the tempo of the events in which he was involved he was able to set down, also in manuscript, the text of a number of books. These included his brilliant Federal Story, published after his death and republished in 1963.&nbsp;
He also found time to contribute regularly to the Morning Post in England over a considerable number of years a surprisingly impartial account, preserved in the papers, of Australian politics including those events in which he was a principal.&nbsp;
The great value of the papers is that the extent of them is allied with a detailed record which he alone could provide to clarify many apparent mysteries of the political events of his period. They formed the basis of the recently published biography of Deakin by Professor La Nauze and will interest scholars for all time.&nbsp;
CANBERRA,
3rd December, 1965&nbsp;
MEMORANDUM: This ceremony took place in the Prime Minister's office today, and pictures of the presentation are available from my office. Alttached is the text of Sir Robert Menzies' remarks at the ceremony.&nbsp;A. EGGLETON&nbsp;Press Secretary to Prime Minister&nbsp;


In formally moving a motion for the appointment of a Joint Select Committee to inquire into a permanent Parliament House, the Prime Minister made the following remarks in the House of Representatives today:
"This is the first step in the direction of establishing a new and permanent Parliament House in the capital of the nation. This obviously will be a requirement of the future. . e propose to establish a committee so that the first steps in that direction may be taken, on an all party basis and a basis of representation of both Houses of the Parliament.
&nbsp;This building was designed as a temporary building. It has been added to; it has been cobble. in various ways, but we all know that it has many grave defects'. One of them is that the accommodation for private members, whose work becomes increasingly heavy year by year is most inadequate. It must be extremely difficult for members, sitting two or three or whatever the number may be in a room, to attend to their proper constituency work, or to make their preparation for affairs in the House.
It is also unsatisfactory to have a state of affairs in which the Executive arm the Ministers is interwoven with other people and, indeed, immediately subject to the transit of the newspaper representatives in the House. This is not very satisfactory. It gives rise to a lot of-strange speculation. I do not need to labour the point. That is needed in a new building must be carefully considered by people who are competent to consider it."
&nbsp;Mr. Calwell -" Who will appoint the officers to the Committee"
Sir Robert Menzies &nbsp;"The Committee itself; certainly. it will be the master of its own proceedings and of its own arrangements of a secretarial or clerical kind. I would have thought that was clear. Anyhow, if it is not clear, I make it clear. That is the design of this matter. I think it is hardly necessary to point out that the terms of the motion are not inviting the Committee to design a Parliament House. ; e do not profess to be experts in that field-but we do have knowledge superior to that of other people of the requirements in a House, the needs in a House and in many ways, how the various aspects of parliamentary life should be disposed of in a geographical sense where they are to be placed in a parliamentary building."
Mr. Clyde Cameron "And we know more about getting in."
Sir Robert Menzies &nbsp;" We know a great deal more about getting in and getting out. I have not tried that one yet. Therefore, the operative portion of the motion is that the
….Joint Select Committee be appointed to inquire into and report on


the accommodation needs of'


the Senate, the House of Representatives and the Parliamentary staff in the Parliament building;


&nbsp;members of the public visiting the Parliament building.




Sir, this is really quite a problem which is not solved in this building. I mean, people have to wander around Kings Hall and a lot of interviews have to occur out there. Ni is all rather odd. Je really need in Parliament House some definite areas in which there are interview rooms. The motion continues


Library facilities, and catering and other facilities and services in the Parliament building for members of the Parliament and others.


That is orthodox


whether, and, if so, to what extent or in what manner, the following. should be accommodated in the Parliament building


the Executive




It will not have escaped the notice of honourable members that this was a most curious building. The designers of it appeared to believe that the Prime Minister ought to have some rooms in one corner and that the President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and presumably the Leader of the Government in the Senate should have rooms in other corners, but that all other Ministers would be available in their'&nbsp; Departments. Of course this was ludicrous. If Ministers were established in their departmental buildings they would never be able to attend a division in the House at all.
&nbsp;The inevitable facts of political life made it essential as time went on that other Ministers should have a room each in the House available reasonably close to the chamber. As a Minister must have a secretary and a stenographer, or whatever it may be, then he had two rooms and, sometimes, in the case of a very heavy portfolio three rooms. The result was that all those rooms that might have been available for other purposes were taken up. This has led to a certain amount of tension in the past. I can very well remember that I humbly begged of one your predecessors, Mr. Speaker that I might be allowed to have two small rooms because I was going to appoint another Minister. This was not frightfully well received.
As a matter of fact, the Executive Department in the new Parliament House ought to be under the control of the Executive and not of the presiding officers of the House. It ought to be physically contiguous to the House but certainly not under the control of the presiding officers or of the Joint House Committee.
Similarly, there is the problem of the Press and how they are to be accommodated. I do not provide the answers to these matters at all. The Press themselves, and certainly we would all agree that the present arrangements are most unsatisfactory. I do not need to go into details about them. They are very familiar to every member of the House.
I come now to communication services. 4e are living in a new age now &nbsp;- the television age &nbsp;- heaven knows what other marvels may follow on the heels of television. No facilities are provided in this place for television interviews. I am not suggesting that we ought to make a provision that we be televised in the course of debate. I would fear the turnover each election would be much too great. But I do believe that there are many occasions when some leader or some significant member of the Parliament has to be interviewed or wants to make a television statement. It would be vastly convenient to have facilities for these things in a new Parliament House. We are living in a modern world. We ought to keep up with it.
On top of these matters we have provided in the motion -


matters incidental to the foregoing matters.


There is just one other matter I want to mention. This has been discussed between the Leader of the Opposition &nbsp;(Mr. Calwell) and myself. The question of the site of the new Parliament House has not been made one of the formal terms of reference. Then I remind the House of earlier announcements on this point and of the subsequent planning of the National Capital Development Commission, I am sure this will be understood. The Leader of the Opposition has made a useful suggestion to me. I would like to say that I accept it. That is that I should make it clear in my speech that any member or members of the Committee in the Committee’s report will be free to make such observations on the question of the site of the new Parliament House as he or they may desire.
3rd December, 1965.
&nbsp;



STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE SIR ROBERT MENZIES, M. P.,
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, TUESDAY 7TH DECEMBER, 1965.
DROUGHT ASSISTANCE
In reply to a question by the Honourable Member for
Bendigo on 30th November I said that I hoped to be in a position
shortly to let the House know of the results of the Commonwealth
Government's consideration of recent approaches we have had from
the States of New South Wales and Queensland for financial
assistance to enable them to undertake additional relief measures
for primary producers who are suffering because of the present
unfortunate drought in those States. The Premier of New South
Wales and the Premier of Queensland both wrote to me on 26th
November advising me of relief measures in those States.
I had previously advised both of the Premiers that they
could take it that Commonwealth financial assistance would cover
whatever deficit they ultimately might have in their budgets as a
result of drought measures that might be taken. Both Premiers have
instituted schemes to help relieve the situation. In both States
there are schemes of concessional loans of up to œ 3,000 for
essential carry-on purposes for drought affected primary producers
who are in necessitous circumstances and are unable to finance
their essential carry-on requirements from their own resources
or through ordinary commercial channels. These loans will be
at 3% interest per annum and advances are repayable over
a maximum period of seven years with repayment of interest
and principal deferred for the first two years. In addition,
the States have instituted other schemes which include such
; measures as advances through the banks for fodder purchases,
grants to local councils for special purposes associated with
drought problems in particular areas, local unemployment relief
work and rebate and subsidy schemes for the carriage of fodder
and stock by road and rail. 
I can now inform the House that the Premiers have been
advised that the additional measures will come within the scope
of the Commonwealth's undertaking to provide financial
assistance in respect of the cost to their States of drought
relief measures. I have also informed the Premier of Queensland that
the Commonwealth agrees to a request his State has made for an
immediate interim advance of œ 1million to Queensland on account
of drought costs. The request was made in accordance with a
previous assurance by the Commonwealth Government that it would be
prepared to consider making interim payments if the States so
desired. The Premier of New South Wales had previously told me
that he considers that it would be preferable for his State to
wait until the results of the first half of the financial year are
available before making formal application for an interim payment.
As I have said previously, the Commonwealth's undertaking
to provide financial assistance to the two States in respect of
the cost of their drought relief measures is unprecedentedly
generous. The additional relief measures now being taken by the
two States will, I am sure, be of great assistance in enabling
drought affected primary producers in necessitous circumstances
to carry on. 



STATEmeNT BY THE PRIfE MINISTER, SIR ROBERT
iV IL116, iN T1M HUME U? I | i. 1 i \ TATI VI2X U
8TH DECEMBER, 1965
RHODESIA
I wish to inform the House of measures in the financial
and economic fieldwvhich the Government has decided to take
against the illegal administration in Rhodesia. These measures
are additional to those that I announced on 16th November.
They are taken in the belief that peaceful measures are
preTerable to military measures ana that, in order to minimise
the ultimate damage to Rhodesia, the sooner the sanctions
become effective and normal constitutional administration is
resumed, the better for that country.
This is not an easy decision to take because sanctions
can hurt very deeply. Of course, sanctions are designed to
impose disabilities, but a system of sanctions which stops
short of being effective could easily go on operating for a
long long time, creating irritations, not solving the roblem
and perhaps provoking extreme action on the part of other
people. Therefore we have come to the conclusion that, falling
in line with the U. K. and various other countries we should
to some extent intensify our economic measures. In what I say
it must always, of course, be remembered that our trade with
Rhodesia is a small one not quite œ 2 million worth of imports
altogether annually.
In relation to financial measures, we will recognise
the Board of the Reserve Bank of Rhodesia, which the British
Government has appointed to replace the previous Board. T1e
will recognise it as the only proper authority. Following from
this decision, it may be necessary for us to consider introducing
restrictions in respect of financial transactions between
Australia and Rhodesian residents comparable with the restrictions
introduced by Britain. Also, we have decided to suspend the
money order service between Australia and Rhodesia.
In relation to economic measures, it will be recalled
that we have already placed a ban on the importation of tobacco
from Rhodesia. e now propose to prohibit also the importation
of ferro-alloys chrome-ore and asbestos. The ban on imports of
tobacco meant tat approximately three-quarters of our total
imports from Rhodesia were suspended. The inclusion of ferroalloys,
chrome ore and asbestos will mean that we have prohibited
imports from ' Rhodesia affecting more than 90 per cent. of the
total. The British have banned approximately 95 per cent. cf
their imports from Rhodesia.
Honourable members will, of course, recognise that in a
relatively small field these measures are severe. However, the
unhappy situation with which-weare'alinP is of grave proportions,
involving as it does not only the cessation of lawful rule in
Rhodesia but also the arousing of emotions in Africa and elsewhere.
In all these matters it is our hope that the result of the
me3sures now being applied by this and other countries will mean
a return to sanity ana negotiation and that Rhodesia will see
reason and find a return Yo a legal and constructive relationship
with the British Government. 



FOR PRESS P. 1i,. No. 94/ 1965
THE CUEIN MOTHER'S VISIT
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert MIenzies
I am glad to announce the engagements which Her
Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother has been pleased
to accept during her visit to Canberra from 2nd to 7th
April next year. In the course of her visit to Canberra, Her
Majesty will visit the Snowy Mountains Scheme from Monday,
4th to '. ednesday, 6th 1pril, 1966. The details of the
Canberra and Snowy itinerary are attached,
Her Majesty's complete Australian itinerary is
Tuesday, 22nd March
Monday, 28th March
Saturday, 2nd April
Monday, 4th April
Wednesday, 6th April
Thursday, 7th April Arrive by air at Adelaide
Leave Adelaide by air for
Western Australia
Leave Perth by air for Canberra
Leave Canberra by air for
Cooma Airport
Leave Cooma Airport by air
for Canberra
Leave Canberra by air for
Nadi, Fiji.
The air journeys to and from Australia will be by
QAKTAS Boeing 707 aircraft, and internal flights will be by
aircraft from No. 54 Squadron, Fairbairn.
CAN'. BERRA,
9th December, 1965.
BkCKGROUND NOTE The Premier of South Australia and the Premier
of Western Australia will release separately the programme of
engagements for their respective States. 
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
and
SNOWY MOUNTAINS HYDRO-ELECTRIC AUTHORITY
SATURDAY, 2nd APRIL, 1966 ARRIVAL AT CANBERRA
7.00 p. m. Arrive at R. A. A. F. Fairbairn and leave for
Government House
Arrive No engagements.
SUNDAY, 3rd APRIL, 1966 CANBERRA
Morning Attend St. John's Church, Reid
Luncheon at Government House
Afternoon No engagements
Evening Attend Dinner at The Lodge
MONDAY, 4TH APRIL, 1966 CANBERRA/ SNOWY MOUNTAINS
Morning Visit Dr. Barnardo Home at Downer
Luncheon with Commonwealth High Commissioners.
Afternoon Leave Fairbairn for Cooma Airport
Arrive and leave for Island Bend
Remain overnight at Queen Elizabeth Cottage
TUESDAY, 5TH APRIL, 1966 SNOWY MOUNTAINS
Morning Leave Island Bend and travel to Cabramurra via
Khancoban
Afternoon Arrive at Cabramurra
Remain overnight at Edinburgh Cottage
WEDNESDAY, 6TH APRIL, 1966 SNOWY MOUNTAINS/ CANBERRA
Morning Leave for Cooma Airport via Lake Eucumbene
Afternoon Arrive and leave for Canberra
Dinner at Government House
THURSDAY, 7TH APRIL, 1966 DEPARTURE FROM AUSTRALIA
12.45 p. m. Leave Fairbairn by Qantas Boeing
707 for Nadi. 



EMBARGO NOT TO BE RELEASED OR CABLED ABROAD BEFORE 10 PM ( EST)
TUESDAY, 14th DECEMBER, 1965.
FOR PRESS P. M. No. 95/ 1965
APPOINTMENT OF SIR MACFARLANE BURiET AS CHAIRMAN
UF ' THE COGUMMUMNEALT'H FUUNDA'I-U
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
A statement is being released in London tonight
concerning the Commonwealth Foundation. Commonwealth Governments
have appointed Sir IvMacfarlane Burnet, to be the first
Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Foundation. The
statement is as follows
" At their 1965 meeting, the Commonwealth Prime
Ministers approved proposals for the establishment of a
Commonwealth Foundation.
The Foundation is to administer a fund for
increasing interchanges between Commonwealth oranisations
in professional fields throughout the Commonwealth.
The Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations,
Commonwealth High Commissioners in London and the
Commonwealth Secretary-General held a meeting at the
Commonwealth Relations Office on 9 December in order to
consider aopointments and other preliminary measures
necessary to the establishment of the Foundation.
Commonwealth Governments have agreed that Sir
Macfarlane Burnet F. S SC. D. F. R. C. P.,
shall be the first Chairman of the Board of Trustees.
This is an honorary appointment.
It was also agreed that Mr. G. V. St. J. Chadwick,
C. M. G. should be the first Director.
Sir Macfarlane Burnet is one of the most
distinguished of living Australians.
He is a world figure in the treatment of virus
diseases and a winner ( jointly with Professor Sir Peter
Medawar of London) of the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1960.
He retired this year from the Directorship of the
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute and Prefessorship of
Experimental Medicine in the University of Melbourne, pcsts
which he held from 1944.
He is a Fellow of the Royal Society, President of
the Australian Academy of Science, a member of the Medical
Research Advisory Committee of the World Health Organisation,
a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and
a member of the Swedish Royal Academy of Sciences.
He was knighted in 1951, and awarded the Order of
Merit in 1958.
Mr. G. U. St. J. Chadwick is an Assistant Under-
Secretary of State at the Commonwealth Relations Office. / 2 
-2
He has served in London Ottawa and Paris and is at
present concerned with Lfrican affairs.
He has also made a special study of the professional
links in the Commonwealth.
He is being seconded to the Foundation for ani
initial period of two years.
During this period he will be a servant,' not of the
British Government, but of the Foundation and the
Commonwealth as a whole.
A Board of Trustees is being established by
Commonwealth Goverments.
Details of this will be announced later.
It will now be for the Chairman the Board of
Trustees and the Director to consider together the
detailed arrangements for the setting up of the
Foundation." I am delighted about this appointment which is a great
honour for Australia. The Commonwealth Foundation is one of
the new initiatives in Commonwealth co-operation which has
been agreed on by Commonwealth countries. There are already
a number of useful interchanges between professional orgaisations
in the Commonwealth and it has been demonstrated that these are
an effective way of sharing knowledge and achieving ag-reement and
co-operation. The Foundat--on will serve a useful and important
purpose in furthering these interchanges.
The Foundation will have a permanent Director in
London who is to be Mr. St. J Chadwick formerly of the
Commonwealth Relations Office. Sir Macfarlane as Chairman,
will be required to attend meetings periodically in London.
There will also be a Board of Trustees and Australia?' s representative
on the Board will be the Australian High Commissioner in
London, Sir Alexander Downer.
On behalf of the Commonwealth Government and all
Australians I wish Sir Macfarlane great success in his chairmanship
of this new enterprise.
CANBERRA, 14th December, 1965. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 96/ 1965
DEAMTH OF VICE-ADMIRAL SIR HASTINGS HARRIEGTON
Tribute by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The death of Sir Hastings Harrington, so
unexpected, is a great loss.
After distinguished service in the Royal
Australian Navy, Admiral Harrington entered upon his duty
as Australian Commissioner-General to the Montreal Exposition.
This, I know, he found tremendously interesting, and in my
last discussion with him little more than a week or ten
days ago, he was in his usual acute frame of mind, and
there was certainly nothing to suggest what lay ahead.
His service to Australia will be his lasting
memorial. To his widow and family, I extend the sympathy
of every member of the Government,
CANBERRA, 17th December, 1965. 



FOR PRESS: P2. L No. 97/ 1965
SOUTH VIET NAM. CLASP FOR AUSTRALIANS
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Her M; 1aj esty The Queen has approved the award of
a special clasp to the General Service Medal 1962 for
Australians serving in South Viet Nam.
The award will be made in recognition of
operational service in Viet Nam and terms and conditions
for the South Viet Kami Clasp will be similar to those for
the recently-announced Borneo Clasp. In most cases, the
qualification for the General Service Medal and appropriate
Clasp is a minimum of thirty days' service in the relevant
theatre. I am sure all Australians will share my satisfaction
at the approval of these awards, recognising the
distinguished service which our men are giving in Viet Nam
and Borneo.
CANBERRA, 17th December, 1965. 



AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVE~ RSITY BILL, 126.,
Second Reading Speech by the Prime Minister,
the Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Meniies WHouse
ofRepresentatives. December, 1965.
This Bill proposes several amendments to the Act under
which the Australian National University operates. Some of
these -amendments meet the desire of the University Council,
agreed to by the Government, to abolish the office of Principal
of the School of General Studies when Professor Herbert Burton
retires at the end of this year. Professor Burton has, of
course, rendered long and meritorious service bothas Principal
of the School and before that as Principal of the former C3nberra
University College. The other amendments, largely of a technical
character, have also been proposed by the Council and accepted
by the Government. The University Council, when seeking to have the position
of Principal of the School of General Studies abolished, felt it
desirable to have in its stead a part-time position of Deputy-
Chairman of the Board of the School. The Government agreed.
This position will not be occupied for a long period by any one
person. Over the years its responsibilities will be shared by
several. The new arrangement will give the School the same
relationship to the Vice-Chancellor and the Council as the
Institute of Advanced Studies now has through the existing office
of Deputy-Chairman of the Board of the Institute. We have deemed
it desirable to reco.-_ aze the status of the School of General
Studies within the University by requiring the position of Deputy-
Chairman of its Board to be chosen from among the Professors of
the School. As the office of Principal of the School is a statutory
one, it is therefore now necessary to delete from the Act all
references to it and to insert, where necessary, references to
the new office of Deputy-Cheirman of the Board of the School.
This operation accounts for many of the clauses in this Bill.
Associated -with this change is provision to relieve the
Vice-Chancellor of his present obligation to preside at meetings
of the Boards of the Institute end of the School ; vhen he is
present. It is intended that the Deputy-Chairman of each Board
should be empowered to preside aDt a meeting of that Bo~ rd at
which the Vice-Chancellor is present, if called upon the
Vice-Chancellor to do so.
A further amendment deals with provision for securing
representation of the University's undergraduzates on the Council.
At present the undergriduates elect a member, but the person
elected is required to be a student of the University being
aged at least twenty-one and a graduate " of at least two years
standing". Time has shown tiiat very few such eligible candidates
are available. In cases where they gre available they tend to
be out of touch with current undergraduate opinion. It has
therefore been decided to remove the requirement th3t candidates
have two years standing as a gradu~ te, with a consequent increase
in the field of eligible candidates for election to the Council
as the students' representative. 
The opportunity has also been t! 3ken to insert a
provision which will permit the University to enter into
certain types of contracts without being obliged to use its
common seal. This obligation has proved cumbersome in the
University's more routine day to day business operations.
The terms of this Bill would permit the University to dispense
with the use of its common seal when entering into contracts
which, if entered into by private persons, would not be reqUired
to be under seal. A similar provision applies to certain other
statutory bodies, for examn-le the Australian National Airlines
Commission. A further provision is that which empowers the University
to waive fees in the case of State Forestry Scholarship holders.
N. hen the University undertook to establish a Department of
Forestry, and to take over the work of the Australian Forestry
School, which it did from the beginning of the 1965 academic
year, it faced with doubts concerning its power to remit
the tuition fees of Forestry students undertaking training on
the nomination of various St3te Governments. By long standing
Commonwealth-State agreement, no tuition fees have been paid
by the States in respect of their nominated students at the
Australian Forestry School. This amendment would permit this
arrangement to apply without doubt in the new circumstances.
It is Government policy for it to do so.
In connection with the transfer of the responsibility
for advanced forestry education from the Australian Forestry
School to the Australian National University, legislative
action is required to ensure that the provisiorp of the
Officers' Rights Declaration Act, 1928-1959, apply to permanent
Commonwealth Public Servants who were on the staff of the
Australian Forestry School and have now acce,-ted ap-,., ointment
with the Australian National University. Provision has
accordingly been made in this Bill for the purpose, as a result
of which those officers transferred will have to opt :% ithin a
period of three months for employment under either Australian
National University or Commonwealth Service conditions.
Finally the opportunity is being taken in presenting
the Bill to the House to repeal cartain sections of the
Australian National Univarsity Act, 1960, the operation of which
is now exhausted. The 1960 Act incorporated transitional
provisions which wero re-! uire d as part of tae process of merging
the former Canberra University College with t he original
Australian National University. The sections for repeal are of
a technical nature only.
Mr. Speaker, I commend the Bill to the House. 



65/! 49
FOR FIdESS P. M. Np. / 1965
2EPLY TO NIGFRIA'S INVITATION TO CONFENCE ON iH0DESIA
( The t. H Ti.
I have written to the Prime Minister of Nigeria, the 1-t. Hon.
Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, informing him that, under the existing
circumstances, Australia is not in favour of the convening of a special
Commonwealth Prime Ministers' Conference on -Ihodesia.
I told Sir Abubakar that, because of our deep respect for him,
and for his high character and motives, we had given careful
consideration to the invitation to the Conference. I then outlined
the reasons for our attitude to the proposed conference.
I pointed out that we have publicly stated that we regard the
Unilateral Declaration of Independence by the Smith Government as
illegal. . ie have refused diplomatic recognition of the new regime.
de continue to believe, and to say, that any constitutional
settlement in Rhodesia must be on the basis of a steady progress
towards majority rule and the removal of measures of racial
discrimination. Jie believe that in preparation for the achievement of an African
majority there should be an active educational programme, to which
many of us might contribute.
Je have strongly supported the financial and economic sanctions
imposed by Britain, and have ourselves imposed sanctions covering
93% of our jihodesian imports.
' W7e believe that, if extensive economic measures are adopted by a
sifficient number of nations, the persuasive pressure so generated
will induce a return to the Conference table.
But we are deeply and publicly opposed to the proposals, made by
some Commonwealth members, for the use of armed force. *, Jc are not
aware of any evidence that Rhodesia contemplates any armed attack upon
any other country. , e would regard the assembling of non-Rhodesian
forces on the fr6ntiers of Ihodesia as needlessly provocative and
dangerous. The vital interests of Zambia, for example, can be protected only
if peace is maintained.
It is necessary to ask what the purposes or likely results of a
special conference would be.
The Australian Government believes that the government of Britain
has behaved with firmness, expedition, and good sense; and that its
resistance to the use of arms to enforce a constitutional settlement is
sound. 
a 2.
But several Commonwealth countries are publicly demanding that
armed force be used, and by Britain. Some of' these countries seem
to have deeply and passionately committed themselves.
Under these circumstances, a Prime M1inisters' Conference would
in our view be unlikely to do more than record and emphasise differences.
No unanimity of view could be achieved, and considerable bitterpness
would be disclosed. This would be a terrible zrice to pay for the
convening of a conference upon a problem in relation to which, as
the la,-st Prime Ministers! Conference unanimously re-Yaffirned, " the
authority and responsibility for leading her remaining Colonies,
including Southern 1hodesia,. to independence miE t continue to rest
wiith Britain."
My Government has consistently opposed the giving of any Commonwealth
orders to Britain as to how she should exercise that authority and
discharge that responsibility. To have her, in effect, attacked and
threatened at a special conference, would be a grave departure from
proper practice in a Commonwealth g~ athering. Tt would also op'en the
door to a new era in Commonwealth rel. c. tions, the abandonment of the
old sound rules of non-intervention in the affairs of other Commonwealth
countries, and the encouragement of those outside nations and
groups which are ever ready to fish in troubled waters.
My government does not, as it now sees the matter, wish to
involve itself in a process which would prove so disastrous, not
only to the Commonwealth but to Australia, Which would run a grave
risk of having its views distorted or misinterpreted.
CANBERiLI December 28, 1965. 



FOR P1~ NEoS. 9S9P/. 1916% 5!
M1ESSAGE FROM TH{ E PRflE MINISTER, SIR ROBERT IENZIES
December, 1965
NE~ iv YEAR DIESSAGE
I extend New Year greetings to all of my fellow Australians.
We wish for, and expect, a continuation of prosperity at
home; but at the same time we recognise that our domestic prQsperity
can be substantially influenced by events abroad.
So. in this New Year greeting, I would like to take a quick, 4
but not, I hope, a superficial look, at three immediate problems
which affect peace, and therefore have some relationship to our own
security and progress, and the kind of New Year we may expect.
I take our neighbouring problems first.
Indonesia's " confrontatio'of Malaysia and Singapore continues.
This is an unhappy state of affairs, Australia is directly involved
because of our commitments to aid the defence of Malaysia, whose
right to independent existence we firmly uphold,
I hope that in 1966 Indonesia, with which country we desire to
live at peace and with mutual understanding, will not pursue policies
which create quite unnecessary hostilities and which are inconsistent.
with the great principles of non-aggression and the mutual recognition
of the sovereignty of lawfully established government. The major
interests of both Indonesia and Australia are in peace, a common
understanding, mutual aid, and the raising of living standards.-4
In South Vietnam we are supporting the resistance of the
Government and of the United States and other nations to what is,
quite clearly, armed aggression from Communist North Vietnam and
subversive action inspired and directed and supplied from the ot,-
The Vietnam camp: aign is complex, difficult and costly in both
lives and money. I warmly share the feelings of those who would
like to see it brought to an end by genuine negotiations for peace.
But negotiations must be conducted in good faith on both
sides. The only statements that have been made by the Government
of North Vietnam show clearly and consistently that it will not
negotiate for peace except on conditions the most important of which
are that ' foreign" troops in South Vietnam should be withdrawn, thus
abandoning the South Vietnamese Government and people, and that the
future government and institutions of South Vietnam should be decided
by the so-called " Liberation Front", a creature of the Communist
Government of North Vietnam. In short, they wish the future of
South Vietnam to be decided only by the Communists.
We believe, as do the U. S. A. and other non-Communist nations,
that these conditions are unacceptable. So far as Australia is
concerned, a Communist victory in South Vietnam would strike a
deadly blow at every now free nation in South-East Asia, and bring
international Communist aggression ever nearer to our own shores.
2/
FOR PRESS 
While passionately desiring peace based upon the abandonment
of aggression, vwe in Australia must therefore, in 1966, stand firm
in our alliances, while always hoping that there may be a genuine
recourse to the conference table.
Our third problem, though we are geographically remote from
it,. and are in no sense a party principal, is that of Rhodesia.
On behalf of the Australian Government, and I believe on your
behalf also, I have stated these principles.
The first is that the declaration of Independence by the then
Government of Rhodesia was an unlawful act, and cannot be legally
recognised by us,
The second is that we think it proper, by economic and
financial means, to support the Government of Britain in its attempts
to persuade Rhodesia to abandon its course of action and return to
proper negotiations for a steady progress towards general adult
suffrage, with a proper educational programme to ensure that before
too long the ultimate majority will be reasonably qualified to assume
the powers and responsibilities of self-government.
The third is that a new constitutional settlement should be
sought without the employment of armed force.
A good future for Rhodesia, whose eople have worked hard for
the growth and prosperity of their own country, cannot be built upon
a. foundation of hatred and bloodshed. Racial differences can always,
among sensible people, be settled by negotiation and co-operation.
But racial hatreds, expressed in acts of war, could write a terrible
chapter in the history of Africa: could bring dissolution to a
multi-racial Commonwealth; and could serve to destroy that
international understanding which, since the Second War, a hundred
nations have been struggling to achieve.
This is a much longer New Year message than I have issued
before. But my desire is to make it clear that while we wish each
other the greatest possible happiness, we would not want to have it
at the expense of the unhappiness of millions of other human beings.
" Je Mistralians are not war-mongers. -Je love peace, and
desire it for all. But what we believe in, we will help to defend.
I have referred to three problems. ' Ply New Yeai-wish, and
yours, is that 1966 will see tlaose problems solved in an atmosphere
of peace, justice and goodwill.
CANBERRA December, 9 1965: 



EMBARGO: NOT FOR PUBLICATION, BROADCASTING OR CABLING BEFORE 2 A. M.,
6TH JANUARY, 1966.
FOR PRESSCA pi4 Miij. 1/ 1966
TALKS WITH THE BRITISH SECRETARY OF STATE
FOR D ; FENCTStatement
by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
The British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Stewart, and the British Secretary of State for Defence,
Mr. Healey, will be visiting iashington on 27th January for
talks with the American Government.
These talks are in connection with the British Defence
Review which is now proceeding and follow discussions which the
British Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Hililson, had in '-ashingtan
recently with President Johnson. After.: ards 1r. Healey will
fly on to Canberra for discussions with Australian and New
Zealand Ministers. Mr. Healey is expected to arrive on 31st
January The Governments mentioned, all being interested in
the Far East, have been keeping one another continuously
informed of their thinking on the security problems of the
region. CANBERRA, January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 2/ 1966
RHODESIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Cabinet yesterday, after a complete review of
the proposals of the Prime Minister of Nigeria for a special
Commonwealth Conference on Rhodesia, reaffirmed its view,
which I had already announced, that such a conference should
not be attended by Australia as a participant. We will ask
Sir Abubakar Balewa to permit our High Commissioner to Nigeria,
Mr. Cumes, to attend as an observer only.
ire have taken our decisions on this matter on a
ground of important principle adherence to which is in our
opinion of the greatest importance to the long-term future
and interests of Australia and of the Commonwealth. We put
them in this order because
1. Our prime duty is to Australia.
2. If the modern Commonwealth, on the initiative
of some or many of its members, begins to claim
the right to intervene in and give orders in
relation to matters which are the proper concern
of some individual member of the Commonwealth
good relations cannot long continue, nor can the
present Commonwealth structure long endure.
As I have previously pointed out the last Prime
Ministers' Conference in 1965 unanimously declared ( not for the
first time) that " the authority and responsibility for leading
her remaining colonies, including Southern Rhodesia, to
independence must continue to rest with Britain."
Britain having the sole authorit and ility,
is it for the rest of us to give instructions to ritain
as ohow she is to use her authority and discharge her
responsibility? My Government strongly believes that it is not.
For if Britain can be instructed or coerced by the Commonwealth
or most of its members in a matter which is by concession,
hers and hers alone to deal with, then Australia can some day
be instructed or coerced on some matter in which the sole
jurisdiction resides with Australia.
We emphasise this. It is the essence of our
case, and the basis of our attitude. g7e state it not simply
as something affecting the present Australian Government; it
will be of continuing importance for all future Governments in
our country. There need be no misapprehension about our attitude
towards the events in Rhodesia. V'e have not given either
orders or advice to Britain. We have supported her actions
by similar actions in the fields of non-recognition, in economic
and financial sanctions. We are opposed to the use of force
for compelling a constitutional settlement. . e wish to see
by proper degrees and with reasonable preparation, a majority
of African voters in Rhodesia. ' e hope that Rhodesians themselves
will become , illing to reopen negotiations with Britain to
achieve this result. / 2 
2-
We are not a party principal in this matter
our prime responsibilities and problems are nearer home. With
great respect to the distinguished convener of the Special
Conference, we cannot see any useful result flowing From it.
If all the Commonwealth countries take the same view as Britain
does ( and as we do), there is no occasion for a special conference
to record that fact. If, as seems painfully clear, there are
Commonwealth countries which will be satisfied by nothing less
than armed force directed against Rhodesia, with all its
dreadful consequences for Africa and for the relationship of
the races in that country, the conference could not do more than
expose great differences and create much bitterness, with all the
distortions and even misrepresentations which such a ' tate of
affairs would inevitably produce.
It will then be seen that we base our decision
upon what is to us a gTeat principle, and also upon the immediate
practical considerations which I have endeavoured to state.
CANBERRA, 6th January, 1966 


FOR PRESS:
PM No.3/1966
The Secretary of the Department of Supply, Mr. J. L. Knott, C.B.E.,has been appointed Deputy High Commissioner for Australia in the United Kingdom.
The new Deputy High Commissioner will take up his post in London shortly, succeeding Sir Allen Brown, C.B.E., who is now Australian Ambassador to Japan.
In offering this appointment to Mr. Knott, tHe Government took the opportunity of expressing its admiration for hia outstandingly successful work as Secretary of the Department of Supply during the past six years. In that time the Department has had to deal with a number of important developments in the scientific and defence fields. Mr. Knott has led the Department most capably, and on his record the Government has full confidence in appointing Mr. Knott to this important position in London.
CANBERRA,
7th January, 1966.



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 4/ 1966
VISIT BY GOVERNOR LIRIMAN
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
1,1r. Averell Harriman, United States Ambassador
at Large, will visit Australia during the course of his
current visits to a number of world capitals.
i. Lr. Harriman is expected to arrive in
Canberra on Sunday evening and , ill have discussions with
senior members of the Government on Monday.
ie had close and intimate talks with M'r.
Harriman on the occasion of his last visit to Australia
in June, 1963. The Government values the opportunity
afforded by H. r. Harriman's visit to have his first-hand
impressions of developments in relation to Viet Nam and to
exchange views on the situation generally.
CANBERRA, 7th January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 5/ 1966
JOINT ME~ ETING OF U" OVERMNT PARTIES
Statement by the Prime Mvinister, Sir Robert Menzies
I have convened a joint meeting of the
Government Parliamentary Parties in Canberra on Thursday,
January. By this date I will be in a position to
clarify my own intentions, and I feel that whichever way
my decision goes, the members of the Government Parties are
entitled to be told first.
CA1NBERRA, January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 6/ 1966
COMMISSIONER-GENERAL FOR CANADIAN EXPOSITION
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
Air Marshal Sir Valston Hancock, C. B.,
will succeed the late Vice Admiral Sir Hastings
Harrington as Australian Commissioner-General for the Canadian
International Exposition ( Expo 67).
Sir Valston, who retired as Chief of the Air
Staff in May of last year, will be in charge of the special
arrangements for Australia's participation in the exhibition,
to be held in Montreal in 1967.
Sir Hastings Harrington had been Commissioner-
General for only three months when he died suddenly last month.
CANIBERRA, 11th January, 1966.
BACKGROUND Extract from Who's Who in Australia, 1965
HANCOCK Air Marshal Sir Valston Eldridge cr. 1962,
C. B. 1958, C. B. E. 1953, Chief of Air Staff, R. A. A. F.
1961-65 ( retd.) A. O. C. Operational Command, R. A. A. F. 1959-61,
A. O. C. Malaya 1957-59; Head Australian Joint Services Staff,
London, 1955-57; son of R. J. Hancock, Perth born
My 31, 1907; Perth: Educated Hale School, Perth, R. M. C.
Duntroon transferred from Army to R. A. A. 1929; Imperial
Defence College 1950; Director, Jorks and Buildings R.. A. F.
Headquarters T937-39; Commanding Officer, No. 1 Bombing and
Gunnery School 1939-41; Director, Postings 1944; Commanding
Officer 71 ( beaufort) ing New Guinea 1945; Director Air
Staff Plans and Policy 194w-47; Commandant R. A. A. F. College
1947-49; Deputy Chiel Air Staff 1951-52; Air Member for
Personnel Air Bo-ird 1953-54. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 7/ 1966
DEATH OF THE PRIE, MINISTER OF INDIA
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
I have learned with shock and deep regret of the
death today of Lal Bahadur Shastri, the Prime Minister of
India. He took office at a testing time, having to succeed
the late Jawaharlal Nehru who had been Prime Minister for a
long while and had made a particular place for himself in
Indian and international affairs. Lal Bahadur Shastri
established himself as a leader in his own right, and in his
all too brief period as Prime Minister he had to grapple with
many acute problems, some involving the international relations
and security of his country, and some the continued economic
and social progress of India. At the time of his death he
had just concluded negotiations with the President of Pakistan
designed to ease the tension between the two countries and to
open the way to further agreement. In domestic affairs, his
government was faced with a most severe drought and the great
shortage of food which had resulted.
I was in touch with Lal Bahadur Shastri at various
times during his term as Prime Minister, and I had the great
pleasure of meeting him and working with him in London at the
Commonwealth Prime MIinisters' meeting last year. I had the
most cordial relations with him throughout his term. Like all
the people of Australia, I deeply regret his passing and
express my sympathies for his family and all the people of
India.
CANBERRA, 11th January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 8/ 1966
FLAGS AT HALF MAST FOR INDIAN PRIME MINISTER
Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Mciuzies
The Prime Minister announced today that flags
will be flown at half mast all day tomorrow, Uednesday, 12th
January, on all Commonwealth buildings throughout Australia
as a tribute to the late Prime Minister of India, Shri Tal
Bahadur Shastri.
CANBERRA, 11th January, 1966. 



FOR PRESS P. M. No. 9/ 1966
BUST OF SIR Y; INSTON CHURCHILL
Statement by the Prime Minister. Sir Robert Menries
A bust of the late Right Honourable Sir 77inston
Churchill is to be displayed at Parliament House in Canberra
as a tribute to the great British statesman.
The Australian Government commissioned the work
from Oscar Nemon, the noted sculptor.
The bust, which is in bronze and slightly larger
than life size has been completed and it is hoped that it
will soon stana in King's Hall at Parliament House.
Her Majesty The Queen also commissioned a bust of
Sir ' iinston Churchill from Mr. Nemon and this is now at
Windsor Castle. However, the sculpture to be displayed in
Canberra would not be a replica of an existing work but has
been specially commissioned for Australia,
Ma-iy eminent people have sat for the 59-year-old
Yugoslavian-born sculptor. A:. ong them were Her Mijesty The
Queen, Mr. Harold Maclill~ n, Lord Boaverbrook, Sigmund Freud,
Sir Max Beerbohm, Lord Montgomery and President Eisenhower.
CANBERRA, 14th January, 1966.
BACKGROUND NOTE
Oscar i omon s born in 1906 in Yugoslavia. He
was educated in Oisjek, Brussel anLd Priz. He married
Patricia Villiers-Stuart in 1959 and has one son and two
daughters. Mr. Nemon has held exhibitions in the principal
capitals of Europe. 


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 10/ 1966
With the consent of His Excellency the Governor-General, I announce that Senator Sir Shane Paltridge,&nbsp;Minister for Defence, has tendered his resignation as Minister&nbsp;and as Leader of the Government in the Senate.As is well-known, Sir Shane has been very seriously&nbsp;ill for some time. His medical advisers concur in the&nbsp;decision which he has now made.&nbsp;
Shane Paltridge has been for ten years a really&nbsp;magnificent Minister notably in Shipping and Transport,&nbsp;Civil Aviation, and befence. He has been a tireless worker,&nbsp;with a great grasp of principle as well as a mastery ofdetail. His colleagues have extended to him their good&nbsp;wishes, and their appreciation of his high character,&nbsp;integrity, and ability. His services will be greatly&nbsp;missed.
CANBERRA,19&nbsp;January, 1966


FOR PRESS P. M. No. 11/1966
I have given careful thought to my future in the light&nbsp;of what seems best for the Government and the country. In the&nbsp;result, I have decided to resign from the Prime Ministership&nbsp;forthwith.
It is my duty to my colleagues and to the Australian&nbsp;people whose acceptance of me as leader for so many years has been&nbsp;a great source of strength to me to state as plainly as possible &nbsp;my reasons for this decision. It is also my duty to the electors&nbsp;of Kooyong, whose generous loyalty to me, in spite of my rare&nbsp;appearcnces in my own constituency, has enabled me to perform my&nbsp;public duties without personal electoral anxiety. I shall always&nbsp;be grateful to them.
I have been Prime Minister for a total of over 18&nbsp;rears. Two of these years were in the war period. Sixteen have&nbsp;been consecutive since 1949. Prior to 1949, I led the Opposition&nbsp;for six years, during a period in which we were heavily outnumbered,&nbsp;and my own responsibilities and labours were both intense and&nbsp;sustained.
During the last 16 years I have never taken a real&nbsp;holiday; on a few occasions a fortnight or more, mostly only a&nbsp;few days.
Since I became Leader of the Opposition at the end of&nbsp;1943, I have been responsible for the conduct of no less than eight&nbsp;general elections, in addition to two separate Senate Elections.&nbsp;The strain of election campaigns is something that the onlooker&nbsp;cannot be expected fully to understand.
Meanwhile the complexities of government, both domestic&nbsp;and international, have grown enormously.
It would be idle for me to pretend that all these years&nbsp;and tasks have not affected me. There is an accumulating wear&nbsp;and tear of which I have been increasingly conscious for some years.&nbsp;The thought of going through another election campaign would depress&nbsp;me. Speech-making has become a burden, since every speech presents&nbsp;its own problems. Though I still work long hours, I&nbsp;can no longer&nbsp;sustain the very long hours of work which once delighted me.
In short, I am tired; my pace has slowed down; I&nbsp;could not properly continue in office for very much longer and at&nbsp;the same time do justice to the growing problems of the nation.
By the normal date of the next election in December&nbsp;of this year&nbsp;I would be 72 years old. Feeling as I&nbsp;do, I would&nbsp;not be justified&nbsp;in asking the people to re-elect me for a further &nbsp;term. It would not be fair to them, or, for that matter, to&nbsp;myself. For I would not be willing to contest such an election&nbsp;without having decided that, if successful, I would remain for about&nbsp;two years at least after the election. To do otherwise would be unthinkable and electorally deceptive.&nbsp;
So my choice has narrowed down to this. Should I&nbsp;continue to make myself available for the next three years or&nbsp;thereabouts, or go now, at a time when my succesor will have the&nbsp;better part of a year in which to establish his own leadership,&nbsp;Cabinet, and policy. Our people have become accustomed to me, for&nbsp;better or worse, for so many years that it would be grossly unfair&nbsp;to my successor to give him insufficient time to make his own mark&nbsp;in his own way. I&nbsp;am sure that the right thing for me to do is&nbsp;to make way now. There are extremely able people in and supporting&nbsp;the Government. They will continue to have my confidence and, I hope and believe, that of the electors.
As for my own future, in such years as I may hope to&nbsp;have, I would like to say this. Thirty-seven years of Parliamentary&nbsp;life, both State and Federal, twenty-six of them as a Minister or&nbsp;Prime Minister, have given me little if any&nbsp;private life as most &nbsp;people know it. I would like a period of freedom, without strain;&nbsp;not,&nbsp;of course&nbsp;abandoning my interest in world and Australian&nbsp;affairs, but without the constant pressures which public political&nbsp;office inevitably entails.
I am more grateful than I can ever say for the generous&nbsp;support which I have enjoyed so long, both inside and outside&nbsp;Parliament. Even in defeat there was much to learn, and many&nbsp;personal encouragements to appreciate.
I hope that the people, not only in the Government&nbsp;parties but all over Australia, will accept my announcement as one&nbsp;of a decision taken after deep and anxious thought, weighing my&nbsp;duties properly, and with the interests of cur country, in a&nbsp;period of rapid changes and acute problems, much in my heart and&nbsp;mind. Beyond doubt, the affairs of&nbsp;the world at large, and of &nbsp;Australia in a period of dramatic development, are increasing in&nbsp;weight and complexity. They demand the services of men and women&nbsp;of ull vigour and flexibility of mind, feeling at their best and&nbsp;able to do their best.
Before I " sign off" I would wish to say how much I have&nbsp;owed over the years to&nbsp;my wife, who has made great sacrifices of&nbsp;family life in what both she and I have believed to be the public&nbsp;interest. You have our thanks and our good wishes.
CANBERRA,20&nbsp;January, 1966.


SIR ROBERT : Would it be agreeable to you if' I began by a short narrative, not very long, but a little narrative of' the day's&nbsp;events, because this morning I told both Government parties that I was proposing to retire and I told them the reasons in terms with which you are now familiar, and then this afternoon, Mr. Holt having been elected to be the Leader of' the Liberal Party, and Mr. McMahon the Deputy Leader, I went to Government House and told the Governor-General that I was resigning. I produced the document in such English as I could command and advised him t" send for Mr. Holt, which as I know he did. Oddly enough, this doesn't mean that I am now the I spoke to one of' my old friends who is an ex-Minister and an ex-Ambassador the other day, and he said, " You know, there is nothing so ' ex' as an ' ex"' Well, I am not yet because following the normal practice, I act as a sort of' " caretaker" Prime Minister until, what, Wednesday morning, perhaps it depends on when Mr. Holt feels that he can assemble his Government, but I would anticipate about Wednesday morning. So until then, as I said to my party this morning, I am Prime Minister but with no obligations on your part for either obedience or respect a caretaker.
Well, that in short is the story of' the events of' the day.
There are very many people who are looking in tonight I am told it is almost compulsory, this! but, as there are so many people looking in that perhaps they might like to know, as you already know, why I have taken this decision. It is not an ordinary decision. This is something that doesn't happen very frequently for a man to go out of' office under his own steam. I've gone out of' office before today under somebody else's steam but this time under my own. The answer is quite short and simple. I am now 71, as you all know. By the due date of' the next election, and I'm assuming that it will occur at the due time, I would be 72. I couldn't see myself at 72 after, by that time, seventeen years of' Prime Ministership and six years leading the Opposition and a lot of' history behind that, couldn't see myself' saying to the people of' Australia, " I want you to give me another term.'" I don't think it would be fair to them and I don't think it would be fair to me, for what that matters. And therefore I said to myself, ' Well now, if I'm to go out, should I go out now or should I battle on, assuming the people voted for me and my party in 1966 ( the end of' 1966) should I go out now or should I see it through?" And quite frankly and I am now speaking as an expert on a matter of which nobody else either listening to me or looking at me knows as much as I do 16 years of accumulated Prime Ministership in this country with national problems, with massive problems and international problems, they take their toil or as some of the cricket commentators will say, they take their toll but anyhow I in an old-fashioned way call it " they take their toll". One becomes tired. One becomes not quite 100 per cent. in efficiency. And I have an old-fashioned belief that the Prime Minister of this country ought to be 100 per cent efficient at all times.
&nbsp;Well, what was my choice: to go on for three years conducting a struggle which would become more and more difficult every month and every year, or leave this year? And, if this year, when? Now, or in six months' time? N~ ow, gentlemen, I have seen from a distance, and sometimes not so distantly, a well-know Prime Minister retire from office too late, so that his successor had no hope of creating if I may use the blessed word his own image and being himself and being a leader and having his own Cabinet and his own policy, his own individuality. I wouldn't have that. In my opinion, my successor must have the better part of a year in which to establish himself, not as Menzies' lieutenant, but as himself. And therefore I have decided that the choice being now, or subject to the will of the electors, in three years’ time, it must be now. And that's why I have gone.
&nbsp;I am very happy to tell you that my wife, who is well known to you all as a wife and a mother and a grandmother, and is probably lurking somewhere in the premises I don't know but on this occasion I am happy to tell you that she thinks I am right, this is a good decision, and indeed if she hadn't thought it was a good decision then I, having regard to what I owe her, would have had great hesitation. Anyhow, that's the decision, and that's why I made it, and in the result my successor, Mr. Holt, elected today and subsequently seen by the Governor-General, will in the next two or three days assemble his own Government. I will not choose it, he will. Every Prime Minister has his own responsibilities on these matters, and all I can say is that just as I have had the most loyal service from people associated with me in politics, in Parliament, in Cabinet, in Parliament in the organisations outside in both parties, let me emphasise that immense loyalty from both the Liberal Party and the Country Party - so I would hope and believe that my successor will enjoy the same benefit.
It is not always understood that over these years the stability &nbsp;of Government, the continuity of Government, these things have. been based upon an alliance between my Party and the Country Party. which in all these years has never been broken and in the whole of which I have been profoundly indebted to members of both parties. Who, * 1Jthh-ooug, h they may be critical and of course undoubtedly are from time to time, have been staunch and loyal, and so in bowing out I want to say to them " thank you".
&nbsp;I want to say to my own people in Kooyong &nbsp;- people forget about Kooyong you know. I sometimes do. I am greatly indebted to my wife because she pays more attention to Kooyong than I do. But they are very wise people and very understanding. On the whole they would prefer to see her than to see me and anyhow, they have all taken the attitude that if their Minister, their Member, is a Prime M1inister or a senior Minister well, that's good enough, and so as I look back on it, I would say that for every one letter I get from our own electorate, I get 25 from other people's electorates, and I am greatly indebted to Kooyong. Talking of that I must tell you-I have not made as yet a decision about retiring from the Parliament because I owe it to my own committee in my own electorate to go down to Melbourne, which I will do tomorrow afternoon to have a talk with them about this matter, and when I have had that then I will have more to say.
&nbsp;This has been a terribly interesting period of time 16 years plus 6 before that as Leader of the Opposition not easy and therefore very stimulating, but very strenuous. I am delighted to think, and I say this without claiming any personal credit because I don't claim it I am delighted to think that after all these years I can look around my own country and say,' This is a strong country; its people are prospering, its population has grown; it does matter in the world and is listened to with respect in the world," and if in the slightest degree one can have made a contribution to that, that's very good.
&nbsp;Anyhow, I am not leaving a sinking, ship. Do you remember Winston's famous remark when a member of Parliament who had been elected in the Labour interest decided to join the Liberal Party for some obscure reason? In England, I mean. The old man said, "That's the first time I ever heard of a rat swimming towards a s Un ship." I mention that with reminiscent pleasure about the Great Old I-an. But I'm not moving out because the country is in great difficulties. It seems to me that if ever there was a time at which a man could do something sensible and logical and reasonable and make way, it is this time in the history of Australia. Now there it is, for _ 7 perfectly certain, knowing how you have been accumulating your questions over the last few years, that you would like to put some to me.
QUESTION: Sir Robert, I cannot envisage you after all this time going quietly what do you intend to do?
SIR ROBERT: I am going to devote my time to the three R's reading, writing and arithmetic. Do you follow me? I must say that some earnest gentleman the other day told me in the press that I had already written two volumes of memoirs oh, I thought, what a pity I haven't. But I may yet. I will do a little writing I hope, but I am not putting down a programme in front of myself. You know, much as it may surprise you, for the next two or three months I would like to be quiet and private I might even go to a Test March, without anybody sitting next to me and saying, " What are your views on the political questions of the day?"
QUESTION: Sir, you say in one of your later paragraphs of your statement this morning that after your period of of freedom you would now wish to abandon your interest in Australian or world affairs. Would it be too much to suggest, reading between the lines, that you propose after you have had your rest that we may see you as some sort of roving ambassador?
SIR ROBERT: Oh dear me. Look, the answer to that is that I don't know. It's unreasonable I think to suppose that a man who has been in the middle of every argie bargie in Australia and almost all of those out of it for so long will suddenly become indifferent. I won't of course. I'm not anticipating, indeed I would view it with horror, being asked to accept some political office of some kind. I haven't it in mind. But of course I'll continue to have an interest in such matters and, if the results of my arithmetic as apart from reading and writing are such as to enable me to move around the world a little, then I would hope, as President Johnson was kind enough to say today in a message to me, to keep in contact with him, to keep in contact with the Government in Great Britain. And you never know.... You know these people are infinitely charitable. They might occasionally say to me, " What do you think?" And, without prejudice, I might make a reply.
QUESTION: Sir Robert, have you any plans to go abroad this year?
SIR ROBERT Oh, I haven't thought of that. You know, the only immediate plans in my household are the plans of getting into this house in " Have-a-look" Avenue in Malvern which is a very much smaller house than has been my wife's and mine for the past 16 years, and she has plenty of ideas. She's very good in these matters and I have one or two. I want to become almost literate once more because for many years now half my library has been in store and when it comes out it smells intolerably of moth balls. You know? And so, give -is a little time give us a little time. a
QUESTION: Talking of a sinking ship, would you care to forecast the success of your old friend, Arthur Calwell
SIR ROBERT No, I would not. You know Arthur Calwell I opened the Melbourne" Herald" tonight and I see that he has written an article about me and some of the remarks in it are very friendly as I would expect. I'm not a personal enemy of Arthur Calwell. I wish him long life and happiness.
QUESTION: Sir Robert, you spoke of problems facing Australia. How do you, from your strategic point, see the problems confronting Mr. Halt? What are the major problems facing Australia?
SIR ROBERT Well, I think they will continue to be, as they have been, they will change their weight and intensity of course, but our great problems are to keep on developing the country, to keep on building up a greater and greater population in the country, and the two things go together, and to have this population growth and this development growth the development of resources side by side with a reasonable degree of stability in the currency so that people will continue to find that it is desirable to invest because we're always short of capital in Australia. And all those things have to be done side by side with the defence of the country which is not a narrow coastal defence but a defence which involves our association with our friends and our allies and therefore tends to put increasing burdens on the defence vote. And therefore there will be this great problem. It's by no means an insurmountable one; if we all look at it unselfishly we'll see it quite clearly. Increasing defence burden, increasing demands for national development, for growth, for a strong immigration programme all of these things put burdens on the individual. But really you know, our own country we are, putting it broadly, so well off, aren't we, that we can carry the burdens without pretending that something is happening to us that doesn't happen to other people. Now this is the broad task and I'm perfectly certain that Mr. Holt and John McEwen and the boys in the Cabinet will pursue these lines with great vigour and determination.
QUESTION: Sir Robert, will we see you in the Parliament again?
SIR ROBERT : I think not. But I must first of all, as I said, talk to my supporters andmy Committee in Kooyong who usually see me once in three years delivering a policy speech and then perhaps once a year thereafter. They're marvellous people, but as I have said, if my wife hadn't paid a little courtesy to them, they might have forgotten who I was. e a a ./ 6
QUESTION: Sir Robert, in axing yourself, if not ex-ing yourself, have you been influenced by any medical advice?
SIR ROBERT None whatever.
QUESTION: Any other influences, Sir?
SIR ROBERT None whatever.
QUESTION: Did you delay your decision because you thought you were the only member of Cabinet who had experience in the African situation with regard to Rhodesia?
SIR ROBERT No. My only reason for well you say delaying my decision well, I've never been quite receivable of the idea that when somebody in a paper tells me that this is bedecision I ought to say " Hooray, this is it." I always like to make my own. And this was a decision as you know, because you've read what I have had to say, not easily arrived at. This is a very difficult decision and really almost unique in its own fashion and I've always belonged to the school of thought which says, " I must make this decision by early in 1966 and until then I go on with my business."
QUESTION: It was not related to Rhodesia.
SIR ROBERT : Oh no, not in any way. Oh dear no.
QUESTION: Sir, in an interview today, Mr. Holt spoke largely of his wife and in another interview Mr. McMahon spoke largely of his wife and tonight you've done something similar, Sir. How do you feel about retiring at the very moment when the first woman Prime Minister in the world is appointed? Is this a trend?
SIR ROBERT : Well, I'll convey to Mrs. Ghandi your ideas on this matter. I know her. She's an extraordinarily able woman and I wish her well. But she's not my wife. I have one of my own. Harold has one of his and Bill McMahon, God be praised, has one of his. Vie are not answerable for our wives. They, poor dears, are answerable for us.
QUESTION: Do you think Dame Pattie might turn up again, say, in politics somewhere in Kooyong for instance?
SIR ROBERT: I don't think so. I've never detected in her any desire to go down into my circuit. She's much too wise for that.
QUESTION: What do you see as your most lasting, achievement of these sixteen years?
SIR ROBERT: That's a very difficult question, isn't it? Because one doesn't want to be claiming credit for things unnecessarily. On the political side, looking at it as a political problem, I think I look back with most satisfaction on two things &nbsp;- one the creation in 1944 of the Liberal Party out of about fourteen fragments, and this was a highly individual task. I look back on that with great satisfaction. And again on the political side, I look back with great satisfaction on the fact that there has been a fruitful and constant alliance with the Country Party in the Federal Parliament. We have for all these years been a joint Government. I have had the most tremendous loyalty not only from Country Party Ministers, in particular Mr. McEwen, who is a most distinguished man, but also his private members. Now it is not always easy to have a marriage of this kind sustained and whether it is through blank stupidity or insensitivity or whatever it may be, I'm rather pleased to remember that this alliance has continued so fruitfully all this time.
Then, externally, I think that our relations with the United States have improved enormously. If I were asked which was the best single step that had been taken in the time of my Government I think I would say the ANZUS Treaty because the ANZUS Treaty has made the United States of America not perhaps technically, but in substance our ally. In other words, we have a species of alliance. Don't hold me to it as a technical expression we have a species of alliance with the United States. And placed as we are in the world, that is tremendously important.
And internally, inside Australia, well, I need to try to remember all the things that have been done about social services - but I do know that when I sit under my own vine and fig tree and look back, I would like to remember what has been done about education, about the universities, about It may interest you, when I came back into office in 1950, the total Commonwealth expenditure in the field of education was œ 8M, of which the better part of œ 6M. had to do with post-war rehabilitation training, and this year it is œ 55M., and each time I have a look at a few demonstrators from a-university, I look at them and say to myself, " I wonder how many of you boys would be at a university at all if it hadn't been for this revolutionary change in Commonwealth policy." I look back upon that with I hope you will allow me to say so some pride. Yes I'm sorry, I cut somebody off over here.
QUESTION. Looking back on that same era of your successes, what would you see as your mistakes or blunders that you have made in that same time?
SIR ROBERT Oh, don't ask me that. Look, perhaps I might put it this way. Every time I open some journal, I read of some of my blunders. Twenty five per cent, of them are right, the other seventy five per cent, were not blunders 0 0 0 0
QUESTION. Is Canberra blunder?
SIR ROBERT Canberra is my pride and joy. It is indeed. Look, this is something, it will continue beyond all question.
QUESTION. Was the Communist referendum a blunder, Sir?
SIR ROBERT No , the vote was. ( Laughter)
QUESTION. Sir Robert, you were speaking of' your alliance with the Country Party. Do you foresee the day vhen the Liberal Party may govern in Australia without the assistance of the Country Party?
SIR ROBERT I don't. If you are asking me, at any time over these years if I had come back with an absolute majority for the Liberal Party on the floor of the House, I still would have said to the Country Party, " I want you to be in" because I believe it is in this alliance, this conjunction of affairs that a great deal of strength has existed.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, going back over the sixteen years of your ministry and your mention of the ANZUS pact, would you say that the Viet Nam problem was the most dangerous situation facing Australia in those years, ever greater than Korea?
SIR ROBERT When you say "dangerous", I don't know quite what you mean. The Viet Nam position has tremendous problems in it but I have never had any doubt that we were right and that the United States was right because I have never had any doubt that what the problem is there is an attack, externally and internally, on a free people by a Communist organised power, and the thing that has to be remembered all the time I would like to say this because this is of immense importance to us the thing that is important all the time is that in the Western European zone, the old conflict between the Soviet Union has become a species of stalemate. One begins to think that the Soviet Union does believe in peaceful co-existence. That doesn't mean that the Communist problem has ended. In point of fact it has been transferred to South-East Asia with the other great Communist power, and we will make a cardinal blunder in our country and so will other countries in the West if we fail to remember that the South East Asian problem is not just a regional problem, it is a global problem. This is a problem in which the challenge of aggressive Communism has to be met here in this part of the world, instead of there in Western Europe. This is tremendously important. I know there are all sorts of people, including some so-called intellectuals which is a very broad and comprehensive word I used to be one myself when I was an undergraduate. But I know there are all sorts of things being said about this matter, but believe me, ladies and gentlemen, if w-- fail to understand the significance of what goes on in Viet Nam, our failure will be to our danger. My Government has been entirely in favour of what the United States of America has been doing, and we are jolly lucky to have a great Western power like the United States which is prepared in an area that may appear to have very little to do with her, prepared to put in forces so large that nobody ever thought of them since the Second World War.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, would you like to comment on the opinion that you rode the wave rather than controlled it during your term and do you subscribe to the tiger's back theory on foreign investment rather than the Australian quarry theory?
SIR ROBERT Well, I find that question somewhat incoherent but fascinating. If you are asking me whether I have been a good surf rider, I can tell you NO. The only time I ever stood in a surf on a Sydney beach I was hit by a dumper and had to go and have my face attended to.
QUESTION. Do you envisage, as time goes by, the occasional twinge of regret?
SIR ROBERT I haven't got to the stage yet of having regrets. They tell me that all old politicians when they go out of Parliament die of sheer misery and regret. I don't expect to. I hope not and if you discover any symptoms that I am suffering from regret, I wish you would call on me.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, what do you think you will miss most about having given up the Prime Ministership?
SIR ROBERT Oh, I don't know. You know there is a great theory in the world that people like myself who become Prime Ministers go around blowing out their bags and feeling a great sense of power. I have never had any feeling of that kind. All my life as Prime Minister I have been too busy beginning each day saying, " How many things must I deal with today?" and I think, on the whole, when I am out I will get up in the morning and read the papers by that time they will have given up writing about me so I can read them with some calm and say to myself, " How lucky you are"
QUESTION. Will you listen to the Parliamentary broadcasts in the evening, Sir?
SIR ROBERT Well, Harold, I would like to be able to say " yes", but the only three times I have ever listened to the Parliamentary broadcasts I have had a painful experience because each time I was listening, I said, " Now that fellow is pretty good. This is a pretty good speech," and when I got back to the House and discovered who it was, I then realised how wrong I was. On the whole, no, don't put me down as a listener.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, could we just say this that having successfully 22 years ago at Albury founded the Liberal Party, how would you see that party and its future in the immediate years to come. Would you say that it would have a good future, it having been your own baby?
&nbsp;SIR ROBERT Well, I would hope so and I would believe so, but that is up to the Liberal Party. They are not to live under the dead hand of somebody &nbsp;- morte main, is it? - &nbsp;no, I have no reason to believe that with all these people, and in particular the vast number of young men and women, I have no reason to have any scepticism about the future of the Liberal Party. I have a great belief in it.
QUESTION. Can we beat the Pommies in Adelaide?
SIR ROBERT : I don't think that's a question that ought to be put to me, although now you remind me, I….. would any of you fellows write rude remarks if I went to the Test Match in Adelaide, being out of office? I think it might be amusing because with those two short boundaries, you know, there might be a lot of runs made. But I have a great respect for this English team that's here. I think it is a jolly good team, and all I can say is that it will take beating, and it is up to us.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, a few minutes ago you mentioned young people. Mr. Holt also laid emphasis on young people today. Do you think that there is going to be a very special effort for the vote of the young people who have grown up and who have known no other Government other than the Liberal and Country Party Government.
SIR ROBERT I would hope so. I think that you have put your finger on something that is quite important an-d if I were remaining and had to determine my own approach to another election, I would face up to the very fact that you have referred to, that there are so many people, younger people now some of them verging on middle age, who have never known any other Prime Minister. Now this is something that has to be coped with.
QUESTION. Do you think that conscription will influence this youthful vote?
SIR ROBERT : I think on the whole in our favour.
QUESTION. With the benefit of hindsight, Sir, do you think that in the past Sixteen years, you may have paid a little too much attention to national and not enough to international developments?
&nbsp;SIR ROBERT No, I don't think so. I think I have devoted a very high percentage of my time to international matters. Very high. And I don't have any regrets.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, as the elder statesman of the Commonwealth, would you care to comment at this stage on the situation in the Commonwealth?
SIR ROBERT No, the only thing I want to say about that is that I am deeply shocked and grieved about what has happened in Nigeria because Nigeria has always seemed to me to be the perfect example of the country that got self government in a steady way, and of course Sir Abubaka Balewa is one of the great men of Africa, a very great man, I have a great respect for him, a great affection for him. And what has happened -there just horrifies me and of course it could have the most tremendous effect on the whole racial position in South Africa, but I don't want to say any more about it than that.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, for the last sixteen years your Government has faced a series of very difficult international crises which have fortunately fizzled out. Do you think we are moving towards the stage when we are going to settle things amicably, whether we are moving towards Tennyson's ideal federation in the world?
SIR ROBERT Well, if you don't mind, I doubt it. I think we have a long way to go yet. Every now and then somebody has said to me, " What about a scheme of world federation" and I say, " Well, we have/ trying one in Australia for sixty-odd years and we haven't solved all the problems and yet we all speak the same language and we all have the same basic political structure. I don't think that it is as easy as some people think to set up some international federation and expect it to work. What is needed is an immense amount of tolerance and we have to get it out of our minds and so have a lot of Americans, that all you have to do with a new country is to give it a constitution and say, " Well now you are a democracy and everything will work. It doesn't happen that way. Democracy as you and I understand it, grows from the grass roots. It starts down below. Vie have beer. so accustomed to democracy in Australia that we take it for granted, but it has grown from beneath, hasn't it. In a number of these new countries, it is created from above. You create a Parliament, you create a council, you do something of that kind, and then you expect that like what that's tree the banyan tree that puts its roots down it will ultimately become rooted in the ground. Now there is very little proof of that in a number of the African countries. Democracy is a name but not a matter of substance, and we have to be patient. A number of these countries will go through periods of dictatorship, of autocratic rule, of bureaucratic rule and ultimately, as people develop, and as they are educated, they will become, as we understand it, democratic people. But you don't just assume that it is going to happen tomorrow morning. This is one of the blunders that has been made by well-meaning people in my time in more countries than one. 1
QUESTION. Sir Robert, do you expect to go to England this year to be installed as Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports?
SIR ROBERT I haven't even begun to think about it yet. I think I will have to go sometime this year.
QUESTION. They are building a flat in the castle.
SIR ROBERT : Oh, I read about that, yes. Well, we will discuss that. My wife will have valuable ideas on that matter, more valuable than mine. Will you be averse to an occasional visit to the House of Lords, Sir?
SIR ROBERT What as a guest? Oh, as a guest, yes. Otherwise, no. Or is it the other way around. I mustn't get your question the wrong way round but you understand me.
QUESTION. You stressed that South Viet Nam was a matter of global conflict; does it disappoint you that apart from America, only Australia, Korea and New Zealand have got combat troops there?
SIR ROBERT Well, I don't know how many people have got combat troops but there must be a very large number of countries that have something, whether they are medical people or engineering people, or whatever it may be, a very large number who have something, but in my experience if you have to deal with a problem of that kind, you just don't sit down and say how many other countries are going to do so and so, you have to sit down and say, " Is this the right thing to do" and after all, if we start we weren't the first if we start, other people may follow the example. I don't believe very much in the statistical theory of international relations. I think that every country has to make up its mind as to whether there is something here that matters, something that we ought to be doing something about, something on which we ought to associate ourselves with the greatest physical power in the world, and when we do it, we do it. I would like to see a dozen countries finding troops, yes. Perhaps some of them will.
QUESTION.. Sir Robert, looking back again on your own record of achievement, Sir, what have you left undone that you would have liked to have done?
SIR ROBERT : Oh, that is a very tempting question, but since you put it to me, I would like to have some something to guarantee perpetual life to your newspaper. (Laughter)
QUESTION. Sir Robert, you have had the honour of being in the Australian Federation, the longest serving Prime Minister. Could you tell the Australian people something about who you may think, before yourself, has been the best Prime Minister?
SIR ROBERT Look, I don't think that is a proper question to put to me at this stage, but in any event, I came out of my shell, what about a year ago, and went down and made a powerful speech to the Press Club a very respectable body about thirty years in Canberra, and I ventured then to make a few observations about people. I won't try to repeat them now. If I ever get to that stage where I write..... Somebody said the other day that I had written two volumes of memoirs. I wish that were true. But if I ever get down to writing one volume of memoirs, I will give consideration to what you have just put to me.
QUESTION. Sir Robert, on your return recently from your London visit, you spoke of the old Commonwealth and the new.
SIR ROBERT : Did I?
QUESTION. Yes, sir.
SIR ROBERT: Did I?
QUESTION. Yes Sir.
SIR ROBERT : I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I didn't. I have never used that expression.
QUESTION. Is your opinion of the Governor-Generaship " not for me"?
SIR ROBERT : Are you asking me whether I want to be Governor-General some day? The answer is no, no, no. Peace to my friend, Allan Fraser NO, NO, NO.
Now I think perhaps we have had enough haven't we? We are getting down now to these strange questions.
QUESTION. Sir Robert,before you go, could I ask you a question on your opinion of Australia's future role in South East Asia?
SIR ROBERT Look, I don't think this is a very appropriate occasion for delivering a long speech on our international position. I think that our role in South East Asia is important and will become more and more important because I think that we are a developed country, we are a growing country. We are not without power of our own. We are not without influence in the councils of the world and therefore we must increasingly become important in South East Asia, but don't let us get on to matters of comparison because there are other countries much more important than our own and some of them have problems of their own but we must continue to exercise the most helpful influence that we can and maintain the closest possible association with other great countries like India and so on on the Asian mainland. e 4
MR. ALAN REID Sir Robert, many of us in this room, particularly my colleagues of the Federal Parliamentary Press Gallery have had a very long association with you. This for us also has been an historic day as you yourself say. It is unique when a man steps down from a position of supreme authority, after sixteen years, of his own volition. I hope that there will be a future opportunity to ventilate this further, but in the interval on behalf, I am sure, of everyone here, I would like to wish you &nbsp;and Dame Pattie a long, prosperous and happy retirement and may your memoirs when you produce them, Sir, be as controversial and I hope successful, as your own long and successful career. ( Applause)
SIR ROBERT Thank you very much, Mr. Reid, and thank you very much gentlemen. You have been very patient and tolerant with me. Looking at the clock I see that we have had 50 minutes on this business and some of you might say with great justification, " Well he ought to give us 50 minutes; he has given us mighty few press conferences." Anyhow, thank you and good luck to you.
&nbsp;


FOR PRESS P.M.&nbsp;&nbsp;No. 12/1966
The death of Sir Shane Paltridge is a great blow&nbsp;to the Government, Parliament, and people. It is a deep&nbsp;sorrow for me, for he honoured me with a close personal&nbsp;friendship, and by his character and achievements, together&nbsp;with his unsurpassed integrity, inspired in me a very real&nbsp;affection for him. He has left behind him an honoured name.
Shane Paltridge had a fine record as a Minister.&nbsp;He tackled no problem that he did not master. He was a very&nbsp;good administrator, and an unfailing source of wisdom and&nbsp;good humour in Cabinet.We are sad for his wife and family, and extend&nbsp;our sympathy to them.
CANBERRA,21st January, 1966.


FOR PRESS: P. M. No. 13/ 1966 State Funeral for the late Senator Sir Shane Paltridge - Statement by the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
A State Funeral will be accorded the late Senator Sir Shane Paltridge, former Minister for Defence.
A Requiem Mass will be held at St. Columba's Church, Forrest Street, South Perth at 10 a. m. on Tuesday, January, after which the cortege will leave for Karrakatta cemetery, where interment will take place. Flags will be flown at half-mast on Commonwealth buildings throughout Australia on the day of the funeral.
CANBERRA, 21st January, 1966.


FOR PRESS P. M. Io. 14/ 1966 Tribute to Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa&nbsp;
Statement by&nbsp;the Prime Minister, Sir Robert Menzies
I have sent the following message today to the Australian High Commissioner in Nigeria :-
" I had a very warm regard for Sir Abubakar as a man whose company I always enjoyed at conferences of Prime Ministers. I also had a great respect for him as a leader clear minded, sagacious, tolerant and just.
"His death has come as a great shock to many of us who had come to believe that the principle of constitutional government and of peaceful rule were especially illustrated in Nigeria.
I would like to extend to the Nigerian people my most profound hopes for a happier future."
CANBERRA, 24th January, 1966.


